

CIA May Come In From the Cold
The Associated Press
September 28, 1993, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 603 words
Byline: By RUTH SINAI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The details of 11 covert operations conducted by the CIA during the Cold War may soon be made public as part of the spy agency's effort to widen access to U.S. intelligence.
CIA Director James Woolsey told the House Intelligence Committee on Tuesday that he had ordered the declassification review of several covert operations that were undertaken by the CIA 30 years ago or more.
These included U.S. activities to block communism in France and Italy; support for Indonesian rebels in 1958; support to Tibetan guerrillas in the 1950s and early 60s; operations against North Korea during the Korean war; and operations in Laos in the 1960s.
Woolsey said the intelligence-sharing effort includes such projects as providing spy satellite data for Midwest flood relief efforts.
The CIA gave the U.S. Geological Survey computerized drawings, based on satellite imagery, showing the areas affected by the recent flooding. Last year the CIA shared its highly sensitive satellite information with disaster relief operations after Hurricane Andrew.
The agency doesn't provide raw footage in order to protect the exact capability of its satellites, and also because the images are harder to interpret, said an agency official who spoke on condition of anonymity.
Still, the spy satellites provide far sharper imagery than that available to the government from commercial or weather satellites.
The voluminous satellite archives could soon have another civilian use.
A joint commission of scientists, CIA and Pentagon officials is about to complete a report recommending ways in which spy satellite data can be made available for environmental research. The report is due in a few weeks.
But most of the CIA's planned secrets sharing relates to the past. Still, several lawmakers expressed concern that releasing records of 30-year-old covert operations could strain relations with foreign nations.
But Woolsey assured the committee that the administration would take foreign-policy implications into consideration before releasing such records.
David Gries, the director of the review process, told the panel that the operations have all been written about, sometimes by former agency officials.
The governments involved as well as the State Department knew the documents were planned for release, he said.
The review is likely to take at least two years, said an agency official, because of a backlog of other historical documents slated for declassification.
Work was only recently started on the declassification ordered by Woolsey's predecessor, Robert Gates, of records pertaining to CIA support for coups in Guatemala and Iran in the 1950s, as well as on the Bay of Pigs and other agency operations in the Dominican Republic and the Congo.
In addition, the agency is in the process of releasing almost 300 intelligence estimates about the Soviet Union, written from 1947 to 1983. And it is reviewing some 350 other estimates, 30 years or older, on such subjects as the 1947 Greek-Turkish crisis, the Korean War and U.S. involvement in Vietnam.
Woolsey said work on these estimates is likely to take less time because he had ordered a "block review" of these records rather than the line-by-line process used to review documents of less analytical and more operational nature.
The declassification projects have been made possible by the end of the Cold War, and they are expected to be of great help to historians writing the annals of that period.
"When the protection of certain information is no longer required," Woolsey said, "then we owe it to our citizens to work hard to disclose as much of that information as we can … warts and all."
 Load-Date: September 28, 1993

 

End of Document
