

Clinton: Iraq and the Senate on the Same Night
The Associated Press
June 27, 1993, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 726 words
Byline: By RON FOURNIER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




As if a decision to bomb Iraq's intelligence headquarters wasn't enough, Bill Clinton had a problem as he huddled with aides late Thursday night in a small room just off the Lincoln bedroom.
His economic package was in trouble in the Senate.
The decision to retaliate against Saddam Hussein for an alleged plot on George Bush's life had been simmering for months, and now Clinton the night owl was going over final options with a small group of aides.
The telephone rang with word that his economic package was in jeopardy. Senior adviser George Stephanopoulos, who took the call, whispered in his boss' ear.
Nodding his head, Clinton excused himself and slipped into an adjoining room to telephone Sen. Patty Murray, recuperating in a local hospital from surgery.
"We may need to call you if we need your vote," Clinton said, according to an account provided on condition of anonymity by aides on Sunday. "Go to bed. If we need you, we will wake you up."
Clinton, who had interrupted the Iraq meeting several times to call lawmakers, hung up and returned to his national security team. He said an order would not be issued until Friday, but he left no doubt that he wanted to bomb Iraqi intelligence headquarters in Baghdad.
It was a clean-cut decision on a busy night. Aides were eager to make that point Sunday to counter perception that Clinton is indecisive and often adopts the zigzag approach that marked his first choice for the Supreme Court.
"As soon as President Clinton got the definitive reports from the FBI and the CIA on Thursday, as commander-in-chief, he gave the order to attack the facilities that planned that attempted assassination," Vice President Al Gore said on CBS.
Other officials said the decision, like most made by Clinton, came after a lengthy investigation into all alternatives and a series of free-flowing debates with his staff.
The process began in April when Kuwaiti authorities thwarted the terrorist plot. Clinton ordered the FBI, the CIA and the Secret Service to investigate Kuwaiti reports that Iraq was behind the plan.
Several lawmakers demanded immediate action against Iraq, but Clinton insisted on waiting for U.S. investigators to complete their work. Meanwhile, Gen. Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, began pulling together a list of military options.
On Wednesday night - Clinton loves nighttime meetings - CIA Director James Woolsey and Justice Department officials briefed the president on their findings: Iraq was behind the bombings. Their final report was sent to the White House on Thursday morning.
The three-hour meeting Thursday night was a gathering of Clinton's top political, national security and military aides, including Gore, Stephanopoulos, adviser David Gergen, National Security Adviser Tony Lake, his deputy, Sandy Berger and Powell.
Clinton listened to the options outlined by Powell, including the one he chose. Some suggested dropping the bombs from planes, a more precise attack, but Powell and Clinton worried about putting pilots' lives at stake.
Although Clinton made up his mind Thursday night, the decision was not final until Friday morning when he told Lake, who told Aspin, who told Powell.
Clinton decided to delay the strike until Saturday, out of respect for the Muslim Sabbath which was Friday.
Some allies were contacted Friday, but the White House kept the decision secret. The media was focused on the passage of the economic plan in the wee hours of Friday morning. Asked once about Iraq, Clinton called the standoff between the U.N. and Iraq "quite serious."
On Saturday, Clinton jogged along the Potomac River and then played a leisurely game of golf. He gave no clue that he had already ordered an attack against Iraq and that the missiles would be fired within hours.
The strikes were launched about 4:30 p.m. EDT. A few minutes later, Clinton called President Bush and talked about his decision.
With the missiles in the air and the attack still a secret to the general public, Clinton settled down in the residence to study a draft of his address to the nation.
Among those watching in the White House was Gore - who had a more prominent role in the Senate drama. The vice president had cast the deciding vote in favor of the economic package when the Senate deadlocked at 49-49 at 3:15 a.m. on Friday, ending one of the most harried nights of Clinton's presidency.

 

End of Document
