

Comments on the Gulf War From U.S. Newspapers
The Associated Press
January 18, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 918 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Here are editorial comments on the war from U.S. newspapers.
 
 Chicago Sun-Times:
That first strike at Iraq was from all accounts a wondrous demonstration of courage and daring, of professional skill and technological marvel - and, on the other side, of frightful and devastating consequence. …
But the war is not over. And the going may get tougher over there. …
What is over now is the debate over whether to go to war in the Persian Gulf. We are there. Those who disagree with the course the president and the country have taken have, of course, the right to express and sustain their dissent in peaceful protest. …
But with the war under way and more than 400,000 Americans in harm's way, it is also time to pull together, to hope that Saddam Hussein will see the light and to pray that the war will be short and the number of lives lost, on both sides, low.
---
Chicago Tribune:
For generations, Arab-Americans have enriched this nation with their enterprise and energy. Their multifaceted cultural heritage is awesome. Yet let some brutal tyrant or terrorist act up in one of the countries they left behind, and many of them have to suffer the scorn or the mistrust of other Americans.
Saleh Abu-Ali, a Chicago grocer who has been berated by customers, (said), "I don't think people make the distinction between Saddam Hussein and Arabs."
That is as un-American as it is ignorant. Like Poles and Germans and Koreans and Irish and Mexicans … Arab-Americans came here to be Americans. Anyone who abuses them for what goes on someplace else doesn't know what the word means.
---
The Seattle Times:
When Iraqi missiles landed in Israel 24 hours after an allied bombing raid on Baghdad, the second of two prewar threats had been carried out.
President Bush promised to use force to dislodge Saddam Hussein's army from Kuwait, and the Iraqi foreign minister had said, "yes, absolutely yes," that Israel would be attacked in response.
We can be shocked at the horror of the missile attack, but no one should be surprised that it happened.
Operation Desert Storm is booby-trapped with what policy analysts might call "unintended consequences," but the Iraqi missile launch was predictable from the start.
Saddam's surest means to shred the gossamer Arab alliance with the United States was to involve Israel. It was one thing for Arab states worried about Saddam's regional intentions to support an embargo. They might not fight alongside U.S. troops in a ground war, but they'd be studiously neutral.
That was before the Scud missiles fell in Tel Aviv and Haifa. Attacking the Jewish state and inviting - hoping for - an Israeli counterattack changes the equation.
How long will the coalition hold together if an Arab colleague is assaulted by what they would view as the Zionists and their imperialist patron? …
Attacking Israel is one way Saddam wins in the eyes of his Arab brethren even if he is soundly whipped on the battlefield.
This is one way the U.S. loses even if it prevails by military definitions. U.S. relations in the region could be poisoned for decades. Presumably these are risks the Bush administration weighed and can explain and defend.
---
Atlanta Constitution:
Israel, a non-combatant more than willing to stand on the sidelines in the gulf war, has been struck an ugly sneak punch by Iraq.
No doubt it was too much to expect that the conflict could be contained within Iraq and occupied Kuwait. The near-euphoria experienced by many in the West over the initial successes of the anti-Iraqi alliance went a-glimmering with word that Iraqi Scud missiles hit populated areas in Israel.
It is no surprise that Saddam Hussein would stoop to attacking innocent bystanders - not Saddam the godfather of terrorists, keeper of hostages, scourge of the Kurds and now aggressor against three neighboring countries. We know what sort of man he is. …
… The alliance may have staggered Saddam early in this fight, but he still throws lethal blows. Tragically, the man may have to be pounded into submission.
---
The Buffalo News:
"So far, so good." That was the way a pleased Defense Secretary Dick Cheney summed up the successful opening phase of the war against Iraq. And that cautious attitude is correct in view of the uncertainties of war - even a war in which such tremendous American might has been sent into action. …
It would be foolish to jump to the conclusion that the war is virtually over. …
We should remember that in the Vietnam War, B-52 bombers pounded enemy cities and installations for years without affecting the outcome of the war. In World War II, thousands of bombers attacked Germany day after day, virtually leveling some cities. And still the Nazi armies fought on. …
Judging by the financial markets, where stocks soared and oil prices plummeted, the Iraqi war must be almost over. Let's hope so, but let us also look at the situation soberly and realize that we have seen only the successful beginning of the operation.
---
The Sedalia (Mo.) Democrat:
Saddam Hussein made good on his vow to hit Israel on Thursday with more than a half-dozen missiles landing in Tel Aviv and other points along the Mediterranean coast.
While casualties and damage were minimal, Saddam doesn't really care about that. His goal is to bring Israel into the war in hopes of splitting the Arab portion of the coalition that is fighting him.
As difficult as it is for Israel, we hope it will resist the urge to retaliate massively. Its long-term interests would be better served by allowing the multinational force to deal with Saddam.

 

End of Document
