

Commander: Stealth Was the Star of the Air War
The Associated Press
March 6, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 443 words
Byline: By JEFFREY ULBRICH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia
Body




The star of the air war was the sneaky stealth fighter-bomber. The "poetry" came when surrendering Iraqis asked allied troops what took so long, the Air Force commander said Wednesday.
Lt. Gen. Charles A. Horner said initially he was among those who had doubts about the plane, which looks like a flying cockroach.
"It exceeded my expectations, how efficient it really was, the amount of targets we were able to destroy with a limited number of sorties," he said.
The F-117A stealth is a single-seat aircraft designed to fool enemy radar and penetrate heavily defended areas to attack targets with great accuracy. It was built and tested for years in great secrecy.
It was first used during the December 1989 invasion of Panama, and had come under some criticism after a pilot bombed a hillside, missing a target.
The 54-year-old general, sitting in a portable office in central Riyadh, also gave a tip of the hat to the venerable B-52 bomber, the giant bird that pounded Iraq day-after-day from high altitude.
"The B-52s were great, particularly against large, built-up areas, the Taji storage area comes to mind. Very effective."
One of the disappointments was for fighter pilots. Because the Iraqi air force chose to stay on the ground or flee to Iran, Americans got little chance to shoot down five enemy planes and win the designation "Ace."
"Well, they got a chance," said their gray-haired boss. "There just weren't enough to go around. We had several guys got two. I can tell you this, there's a bunch of F-15 pilots who are all (teed) off, but there is one three-star general who's happy as hell."
Throughout the campaign against Iraq, military spokesmen declined to provide bomb damage assessments. Horner was not much more forthcoming now the war is over, but he pointed to the results.
"I kind of like the 100-hour ground campaign as a good bomb-damage assessment," he said. "Those are the kinds of bomb damage assessments that really count. Too often, we live in a data-hungry world. There's no poetry left."
Asked for an air commander's poetry, he said:
"We had a force that had a lot of different capabilities. We took the F-16s and the A-10s and laid the foundation using ballistic bombs, primarily during the daytime. We took the high tech and used it discreetly against unique targets. It really crippled them.
"Every time he tried to get initiative going, rolling out his long-range aviation, the next thing that happened is the airplanes would blow up on the ramp. His forces in the field were hit 24 hours a day, seven days a week for six weeks. You saw the effect on them when they said: 'What took you so long?' as they surrendered.
"That's poetry."

 

End of Document
