

Comments On The Gulf Crisis From The World's Press
The Associated Press
January 12, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 626 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Here are editorial comments on the Persian Gulf crisis from newspapers around the world.
 
 The Independent, London (independent):
"Within a week, the nations making up the allied force in the Gulf could well find themselves at war with Iraq. … It is important that the allies define their aims, and the methods by which those aims will be pursued. .. The war the allies fight must be seen as just and focused, and the methods employed must be proportionate to the aims.
"...It will not be appropriate for the allies to use nuclear weapons, or deliberately to bomb dams, factories or centers of civilian population using conventional weapons, or to attempt the defoliation of the country.
 
 L'Humanite, Paris (newspaper of the French Communist Party):
"Hour by hour, the danger increases. The whole world recognizes that the looming war will be an apocalyptic massacre with incalculable and prolonged consequences. All the signs underline that the conflict won't have foreseeable limits, neither geographic nor technological."
Yomiuri Shimbun, Tokyo (independent):
"… The world is at a crossroads between war and peace. The world should united behind U.N. Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar's efforts to avoid war in the Gulf.
"With Japan dependent on the Middle East for the majority of its oil imports, it cannot afford to be a mere spectator.
"Even if the crisis is resolved peacefully, there will be a number of issues that will require immediate action, including monitoring the Iraqi pullout from Kuwait. Japan will have to stand by other nations of the world in taking a role in the aftermath of the crisis and must begin preparations for such a role.
 
 Publico, Portugal (independent):
"The tension aroused at the beginning of August by the unacceptable annexation of Kuwait, carried out by the troops of Saddam Hussein, in now concentrated in a simple and dramatic question: will there be a war or not. … The great unknown that Perez de Cuellar will face tomorrow is the same as ever: how high will Saddam Hussein raise the stakes in the dangerous game of poker he has played masterfully for five months. Does the dictator of Baghdad want just to prolong the game until the last minute or has he already accepted that the devastation of his country and a good part of the Middle East will make up his historic legacy. War depends on the answer to this unknown."
 
 La Stampa, Turin, Italy (independent):
"There remains one last question: is the clock unstoppable, is disaster inevitable? All those responsible, from President Bush to the officials of the State Department and the Pentagon, respond that five days remain until the end of the ultimatum, that the United Nations secretary-general and many statesmen are at work on an extreme mediation, that some hope is always justified until they begin shooting. But all warn that at this point America has done its part and can't do more. The hope therefore points wholly on the possibility that Saddam Hussein at the end chews the apple of reason that the whole world offers."
 
 South China Morning Post, Hong Kong (conservative):
"Next Tuesday's deadline for Iraq's withdrawal from Kuwait is set to live up to its name - casualties by the thousands now seem inevitable following the failure of the Geneva talks to break the deadlock in the Gulf. Although efforts are still being made to avert war, there should be no going back on the timing of the ultimatum delivered to Iraq with the full authority of the United Nations.
"Fear of the unknown is not … a good reason to hold off from delivering a dreadful penalty for Iraq's failure to meet next Tuesday's deadline. If Saddam Hussein is not made to answer for his murderous mistakes in Kuwait, the world will be a darker, more dangerous place for everybody."

 

End of Document
