

Comments on the Outbreak of War From U.S. Newspapers
The Associated Press
January 17, 1991, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 2372 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Here are editorial comments on the U.S.-led attack on Iraq from Thursday's U.S. newspapers.
 
 Houston Chronicle:
The measure of this war is that, even as he attacked, George Bush was appealing to Saddam Hussein to make it unnecessary.
A strange war. A war no one wanted but no one seemed able to stop. How could that be?
It could be because of one person and an unlikely confluence of circumstances. The person: Saddam Hussein. The circumstances: a world so hopefully freed of fear of superpower Armageddon suddenly finding its euphoria shattered by a simple thug, and so outraged by that as to unite against him, against all odds that such a coalition could ever be. …
In plain language, Saddam was given whatever one might wish to call it: linkage, reward for aggression, appeasement. He refused. He asked for the war he has gotten. May his god forgive him; we won't.
---
The Deseret News, Salt Lake City:
With the U.S.-led attack on Iraq and Iraqi outposts in conquered Kuwait, much of the Free World has embarked on a historic test.
It is a test of some new military weapons and tactics plus an old strategic principle - the notion that the combatant that controls the skies has a much better chance of controlling the ground and seas, too.
It is a test of international military manpower, including many Americans who were civilians only a few days ago and who have never before fired a shot in anger.
And it is a test of the ability of the allies, particularly the ones with democratic governments, to persevere and prevail in the face of the tendency for public support to erode as a war wears on.
Though President Bush's brief TV talk Wednesday night told the world little it didn't already know about the need for this grim test, his calm demeanor and measured tones should help steady the jittery and stiffen the irresolute.
---
Times Union, Albany, N.Y.:
The fighting that no American wanted, and all wished would never come, is now a part of history in the making. Sadly, it comes as no surprise. …
Let no one mistake: This is a war Saddam Hussein brought upon himself. He scorned one attempt after another to find a peaceful solution. He was defiant even up to the last moment, as Iraqi forces began to move chemical weaponry closer to allied forces massed in Saudi Arabia. He was unresponsive to one entreaty after another. …
President Bush, mindful of Saddam Hussein's penchant for gross miscalculation, vows that no American or allied soldier will be asked to fight with one hand tied. That, too, must be a priority concern, along with removing Saddam Hussein from the world scene. Victory will come not only when Iraq's army is forced out of Kuwait, but also when Saddam is stripped of power.
Whether a long war or a short one, there will be a high price to pay in human life. Yet the cost has to be weighed aginst the much higher toll that surely would have been exacted had Saddam Hussein managed to build a nuclear arsenal. Civilized nations cannot abide vainglorious despots who would menace the world with weapons of annihilation.
---
Star Tribune, Minneapolis:
It was a composed, somber, intense President Bush who addressed the nation Wednesday night to explain his decision to go to war. Conflict will not stop the blaming and the praising, the protests and the applause. Nor should it. At peace or at war, in support of the president or in opposition, Americans would be remiss to conceal their disagreements. But in another sense this is a time for unity.
One illustration of what unity means came last week from Sen. Sam Nunn, D-Ga., who opposed the resolution that authorized President Bush to use force against Iraq and ultimately passed. But in his argument Nunn underscored, too, a principle that draws Americans together despite their differences.
Do not mistake debate now, Nunn said in effect, for disunity later. He meant his message for Iraq's Saddam Hussein. But if war starts, Nunn promised, there will be no stinting of support "for our troops as they engage your forces on the field of battle." Melodramatic? Yes, but appropriate at the time to the seriousness of the issue, and now more important as war becomes reality.
Bush in his speech argued strongly that time had run out; that Saddam Hussein must be repelled by force and his military weapons crushed; that Iraq must be forced to comply with U.N. resolutions. Such arguments were challenged before. They will be challenged again.
But for now, war is in the saddle. Hussein has proved immune to appeals. Diplomacy has failed. Bush and Congress have acted. For better or worse, leaders in Washington have turned from sanctions to arms, and leaders in other world capitals have made similar decisions. It is a grim time. It is a time for unity.
---
The Patriot, Harrisburg, Pa.:
Now that the fighting has begun, one hopes that Americans, regardless of their personal views on the war, will come together as a nation in support of our men and women in the Persian Gulf. Our troops are confronting their fear and horror of battle because their president and country have asked them to, not out of choice. They and their loved ones deserve no less than our full support in this moment of personal and national trial.
However perilous the path down which we have inexorably ventured, and whatever the recriminations and second-guessing to come, the first reports from the front indicate a strong reason for hope - hope that the operation will succeed quickly, with a minimum loss of life on both sides.
---
Chicago Tribune:
The attack was in one sense a profound relief. The waiting had become excruciating, like the vigil at a prison before an execution. War had become inevitable, and time had become almost unbearable.
And yet there were human beings under the bombs, and many of them surely died horrible deaths. It was exhilarating to witness the success of the U.S. and U.N. air strikes, and yet what lingers is less the excitement than a pall of regret at what Iraq's tyrant has brought down upon his people.
---
The Lansing (Mich.) State Journal:
Peace is the wish of the vast majority of humankind, those without power to send bombs and missiles into foreign lands. From the horror of war, the powerless ranks of humanity must again cry out that the lessons of mortal combat teach the leaders the means to lasting peace.
There are so many tragedies in war. Lives end. Cities shudder and crumble under the bombs. Families grieve.
It is tragic that the United Nations confederation of nations had to take this kind of action.
Yet, Saddam Hussein offered no alternative. He did not budge. He did not blink. In flouting the deadline, in dismissing repeated attempts to negotiate a peace, he challenged the world.
Now, the world has answered.
---
The Charlotte (N.C.) Observer:
President George Bush repeatedly warned Saddam Hussein that refusal to withdraw from Kuwait would mean war. Saddam Hussein scoffed. Now the war has begun, with swarms of aircraft from the anti-Iraq coalition soaring through the night sky to rain death and destruction on Iraq. …
While it is true that the U.N. coalition launched this attack after months of uneasy inaction, it is Saddam Hussein who must bear responsibility for this war. Karl von Clausewitz, the German philosopher of war, observed wisely that the aggressor is always a man of peace; nothing would please him more than to march into a neighboring country unresisted. It is the victim, and the victim's friends, who must choose to fight. …
Still, America fights this war at great risk - not only to the sons and daughters, fathers and mothers, who are doing battle, but to the nation's long-term interests as well. Would further reliance on the embargo have made Iraq yield without so much loss of life? Will a war, even a victorious war, stir the anti-American passions of the volatile region? …
These are the risks President Bush must have considered in his months of pondering the options. Ultimately, he judged those risks to be less than the danger of allowing Saddam Hussein's aggression to go unchallenged.
We can only pray that events will prove his judgment sound, and that history will record the war with Iraq as a wise action, as well as a just one.
---
The Florida Times-Union, Jacksonville, Fla.:
At this time, if we had one single immediate way to communicate directly with the American forces on the sands of Saudi Arabia and those on Navy ships within range of Iraqi missiles, we would say:
We are in full support of your efforts and so are the vast majority of the American people. We are proud of you and you are in our prayers.
And if we could communicate directly with President George Bush in this time when he carries the burden of an awesome decision, we would say:
All of your critics have one thing in common. They do not serve as president of the United States of America and commander in chief of its armed forces. You have heard plenty from them, but be assured that there are also many of us who strongly support what you are doing. We join you in prayer for the innocents on both sides and agree with your goal which is "not the conquest of Iraq. It is the liberation of Kuwait."
---
The Arizona Daily Star, Tucson, Ariz.:
War has begun, and now that it has, Americans can only pray it will be swift, effective and short.
This is a war that didn't have to happen, a war that resulted from a series of poor judgments in Washington and Baghdad, but the time to debate those failings has ended.
The entire nation joins the president in hoping that his "clear objectives" are accomplished with a minimal loss of life. The president, in announcing that the battle had started, said the United States would force Saddam Hussein from Kuwait, destroy his chemical warfare facilities and atomic capability, and then welcome Iraq back into the community of nations when it is in compliance with all U.N. resolutions.
"The liberation of Kuwait has begun," Bush announced. The world's most powerful air power can be expected to prevail in the allied Operation Desert Storm. After decades of costly buildup in sophisticated technology, Americans have to believe that.
No one knows now how the Middle East will look after war, but it must be hoped, as Bush hoped last night, that Iraq will be chastened by the united actions of the 28 nations standing shoulder to shoulder against him.
How nations will line up, where allegiances will lie and what standing the United States will have if the liberation succeeds are unknown, but it is certain that a short war that focuses the power of the alliance against Iraq without drawing in other issues is preferable to a protracted battle.
It must also be recognized that the U.N. forces could liberate Kuwait without achieving the goal of peace in the region. A huge Iraqi death toll in a region with millions of Arabs may make us heroes to the Saudis and a few other nations, but it's sure to make us blood enemies of others. A terrifying military blow that kills troops and civilians alike may stop Saddam and nullify his claims to Kuwait, but there's no guarantee his followers will surrender their allegiance to him or slacken their rage against the U.S. and its allies.
Everyone's hope was that at the last minute Saddam Hussein would offer some settlement, some way to avoid all-out war. But it didn't happen. Now, for the third time since World War II, the United States is in full deployment for war.
The president said he was convinced "that out of the horror of combat will come the recognition that no nation can stand against a world united, no nation will be permitted to brutally assault its neighbor."
While few wanted war, all Americans must now set aside their differences. The nation must back the efforts of its troops, and offer them and their families every expression of comfort and support.
---
Argus Leader, Sioux Falls, S.D.:
Overnight air attacks took a massive toll on Iraq's military potential. But don't look for this to be a two-day skirmish.
Iraq, although not a superpower, has one of the largest military forces in the world, and it is battle-hardened from an eight-year war with Iran.
The United States and its allies must maintain their willingness to strike hard and fast rather than allow fighting to drag out.
This is not an easy war to justify. The United States was not attacked. But it was threatened.
A new world order is due and, as President Bush says, may be coming. But it may not come without considerable pain. The United States must be willing to endure.
---
The Spokesman-Review, Spokane, Wash.:
No war is cause for rejoicing. But when an unrepentant international rogue makes war inevitable, a forceful, decisive response is in order - and to be celebrated.
By all accounts, (Wednesday) night's attack on Baghdad by American forces and their allies was both massive and precise. It was just what Iraqi President Saddam Hussein deserved.
For that matter, it was just what Saddam had been promised, time and again, that he would get. It was just what Saddam had been reminded, up to the last minute, and by an impressive array of international leaders, that he could avert had he wished.
And, significantly, it was just what was needed to maximize the chances that this conflict can be ended as expeditiously as possible and with the fewest casualties.
Make no mistake. Saddam Hussein is to blame for this conflict; all he had to do to avoid it was comply with international rules of behavior. Curiously, to the Western mind at least, he ignored every warning, every entreaty. He thumbed his nose at a world aligned against him.
Never has war come as less of a surprise than this one.
---
Bangor (Maine) Daily News:
The president observed that the Desert Storm sweeps in a new world order. Along with the rockets, the blood and the sand, the storm brought by the 28 nations aligned against Saddam carries Syria into the dominant position of Arab power in the region. Its president, Hafez al-Assad, has a reputation for support of terrorism and invasion of helpless neighbors exceeding even that of Hussein.
Saddam Hussein may fall quickly under the heat of Desert Storm, but his own defeat epitomizes a region that lives by the law of the jungle. The victorious new world order, which President Bush says will enforce the rule of law, still has its work cut out for it.
---

 

End of Document
