

Concerns About Credibility Carrying the Day
The Associated Press
September 15, 1994, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 749 words
Byline: By GEORGE GEDDA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




In the end, the most persuasive voices in the administration were those that argued vigorously that Haiti had become a test case for American reliability, nudging President Clinton into a military course.
Anthony Lake perhaps made the strongest case for the viewpoint that a superpower too timid to follow up on its threats will not be a superpower for long.
As Lake sees it, American adversaries would no longer take the United States seriously if it failed to take on Army Lt. Gen. Raoul Cedras and his friends.
Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, anti-American terrorists, drug traffickers and nuclear proliferators - all were watching to see if Clinton backed off under pressure to stay out of Haiti.
As Lake, the White House national security adviser, said in a speech Tuesday evening, "Our actions in Haiti will send a message far beyond our region, to all who seriously threaten our interests."
Another forceful advocate of invasion has been Strobe Talbott, No. 2 at the State Department and a longtime friend of Clinton. He is said to have stressed a U.S. moral duty to rescue the Haitian people from their oppressors.
The argument that the nation needed to back its threats with action has been publicly soft-pedaled by the administration, mindful that most Americans find it arcane and unconvincing. Thus Clinton has sought to make his case on the basis of issues he believes Americans can identify with - protecting democracy and human rights, and avoiding refugee flows.
Clinton cited all three issues Thursday night in suming up the rationale for his invasion policy.
"The United States," he said, "must protect its interests: to stop the brutal atrocities that threaten tens of thousands of Haitians; to secure our borders and preserve stability in our hemisphere; and to promote democracy and uphold the reliability of our commitment around the world."
Clinton minced no words in describing the rights situation, accusing the military regime of carrying out a "reign of terror."
Support within the bureaucracy for an invasion was much smaller months ago when the administration was attempting to negotiate the return of exiled President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
But now, many career diplomats for whom an invasion never would have been a first choice have concluded that if military action is bad policy, doing nothing is worse.
The Pentagon clearly still has grave reservations about the Haiti policy. Military officials are said to be wary about becoming bogged down in a situation where public support is scant, the prospect of casualties is strong and American security interests are murky at best.
The latter arguments are being echoed these days in the Congress and public opinion polls, neither of which offer Clinton any comfort.
Former Secretary of State James A. Baker III summed up the reservations of many during an NBC interview on Thursday.
"We can still pursue the objective of restoring democracy in Haiti, but we really ought not to be doing this in this case at the risk of loss of American lives. That's where we differ with the Clinton administration."
But, sounding much like Lake, Baker added: "No American president should ever, ever, ever threaten the use of force unless he's prepared to follow up."
When the Haitian military reneged on a promise to step down last fall, virtually the only proponents of force were some members of the Congressional Black Caucus along with the head of the TransAfrica lobbying group, Randall Robinson.
For months, these were mere voices in the wilderness. The turning point came last May when the administration stopped trying to negotiate a settlement and opted instead to try to bring Haiti's generals to their knees through severe economic sanctions.
At the time, few beyond the foreign policy establishment realized the risks entailed by the new policy. Reliance on tightened sanctions could only be a short-term option because of the catastrophic economic conditions they would cause.
Some officials saw the peril in that policy, recognizing that invasion was the only option left if it failed. Thus far, it has.
Clinton appears to have decided it's time to draw the line in the sand, perhaps aware of the criticism he has received for having made threats earlier in Bosnia and elsewhere, only to retreat.
Because of these unfilled threats, Baker charged, "40 years of credibility built up under Republican and Democratic administrations was eroded."
 
 ---
EDITOR'S NOTE - George Gedda has covered foreign affairs for the Associated Press since 1968.
 Load-Date: September 15, 1994

 

End of Document
