

Convoys Travel At Night Down the Road to Nowhere
The Associated Press
January 28, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 602 words
Byline: By FRED BAYLES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ABU HADRIYA, Saudi Arabia
Body




During the day, lines of trucks sit parked and silent, like bats awaiting dusk. At night they roll into the darkness, unbroken convoys heading north along a road with many names.
Most of the names range from unprintable English to unpronounceable Arabic. Highway to Hell, is a milder form; Highway to Nowhere is another given by American drivers who travel 10 or more hours, mostly at night, to deliver tanks, gas, ammunition and other supplies to allied forward positions in the desert.
The travel is at night because of nagging concerns about Saddam Hussein's battered but still sizable air force. Since last week these concerns have translated into less traffic during the day and more convoys by night, when the Iraqi air force is less able to find targets.
But while the distant threat of attack worries allied planners, it is the monotony of the road that weighs upon the drivers.
"We've made the trip six times now and it all looks the same," said Cpl. Gerry Campbell of New Matanoris, Ohio, who was hauling a 109mm howitzer to the front.
Campbell and the Army's other long-haul truck drivers are getting to know this six-lane highway across the desert floor. Even at night the landmarks have become familiar.
There are the beacons of orange fire from the refineries scattered along the road and the ghostly glow from "Gotham City," a towering petro-chemical plant that rises in the hazy distance like the menacing city in the movie "Batman."
In the half-moon and starlight of this week, even the wrecks along the side of the road have become mileage markers. They range from horribly smashed cars dragged to the roadside years ago to new wrecks of military vehicles, including two smashed buses and a tank transporter.
Another roadside attraction this past week has been an M1 tank that overturned when it tumbled from the truck bed it was riding. Many GIs stopped to pose next to the tank.
"The road isn't big enough for all this traffic. There isn't room for all these wide loads," said Sgt. Harvey Briggs, who was driving his empty rig back to base for another run.
There are other complaints. The Americans say the British hog the road; the British have the same complaint about the Americans. Both are contemptuous about Saudi driving skills.
"The rule here is the biggest vehicle has the right-of-way," said Campbell.
At night the road is also dangerously hypnotic. The long lines of truck headlights, some stretching over a mile, can put you to sleep. The only break comes from the occasional flyover of helicopters, their red lights pulsing.
If you're lucky, you might pick up country music on Desert Shield radio, the sometimes elusive station manned by military personnel that is the only familiar sound amidst static, Saudi commentators and Middle Eastern music.
The chance to get out and stretch comes at the spaced gas stops, half oasis, half semi-convenience stores, whose sodium vapor lights cut the darkness after long intervals.
These gas stops are like frontier towns with a varied cast of characters. British troops, the "Desert Rat" emblem on their uniforms, jostle with Pakistani and Sengalese troops at phone booths to make calls home.
Inside the stores U.S. troops carrying soda, candy and baked goods stand at cash register lines with Bedouins, in from the desert for provisions, and a polyglot of East Asians contracted to drive locally owned freight haulers.
Saudis who fled from towns on the Kuwait border sleep in the small attached restaurants, waiting for a sign it is safe to go home.
"A 7-Eleven this isn't," said one soldier as he carried his food back to the darkness and his waiting truck.

 

End of Document
