

Day-by-Day Chronology of the Gulf War
The Associated Press
January 26, 1991, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1525 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Here is a day-by-day summary of the Persian Gulf war:
 
 Day One, Jan. 16:
Less than 19 hours after time ran out on a U.N.-mandated deadline for Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait, allied warplanes streaked north on a moonless night from Saudi Arabia.
About 90 minutes later the skies over Baghdad were alive with the flashes of anti-aircraft fire.
At 7:06 p.m. EST (3:06 a.m. Thursday, Persian Gulf time), White House news secretary Marlin Fitzwater announced in President Bush's words: "The liberation of Kuwait has begun."
In a 9 p.m. EST address, President Bush described the marshaling of American and allied forces into Operation Desert Storm. He said no ground assault was launched.
Day Two, Jan. 17:
"Things are going well," President Bush said before dawn. Allied warplanes continued hammering Iraq.
Crude oil prices had their biggest one-day fall in history. New York's stock market swept to its second-largest point gain ever.
Iraq hit Israel with at least eight Scud missiles. None of the missiles were armed with chemical warheads, and casualties were limited.
 
 Day Three, Jan. 18:
U.S. warplanes struck at Iraqi missile launchers, acting in the stead of an Israeli government that was still considering vengeance for the rocket attacks on Tel Aviv and Haifa.
President Bush extended reservists' tours to up to two years. He said it "will take some time" liberate Kuwait.
CNN reported that an Iraqi official claimed that American pilots had been captured.
Four American aircraft were reported lost in the first 48 hours of the war. The Pentagon said 11 of an estimated 700 Iraqi warplanes were destroyed.
Anti-war protests continued worldwide.
The Dow Jones average ended the week at 2,646.78, up a record 145.29 from the previous Friday. Oil prices took a beating.
 
 Day Four: Jan. 19
Israel's anti-missile force was boosted by additional Patriot missile batteries and U.S. crews.
Israeli nerves were frayed by a false alarm when air raid sirens sounded again in Jerusalem and Tel Aviv. The alert came about 14 hours after a second Iraqi missile attack caused 29 injuries in the Tel Aviv.
Twelve Iraqi prisoners of war were captured. Bombardment began on Iraq's Republican Guard making up about one-fifth of the 545,000 Iraqi troops.
 
 Day Five: Jan. 20:
Iraqi missiles were shot down by Patriot rockets as they approached Dhahran, Saudi Arabia.
Iraqi TV showed two blindfolded POWs being paraded through Baghdad streets. Later, the TV broadcast interviews with the downed pilots. The POWs were identified as three Americans, two Britons, one Italian and one Kuwaiti.
A total of 15 allied warplanes were reported lost, including nine American aircraft.
 
 Day Six: Jan. 21:
Much of America awoke Monday to videotape broadcast of captured American pilots making forced statements criticizing the allied war effort.
U.S. Patriot missiles thwarted Iraq's early-morning missile attack aimed for Saudi Arabia.
Iraq said it scattered prisoners of war at targeted areas.
Air Force Maj. Gen. Burton Moore said 8,100 sorties had been flown since the start of the war, though allies were "nowhere near" their objective of knocking out Iraq's Scud ability.
The financial markets reflected growing pessimism about the war's length; oil prices rebounded and stock markets dropped. High-tech and war-related stocks rose.
 
 Day Seven: Jan. 22:
Iraqis fired six Scud missiles into Saudi Arabia before dawn. All were either intercepted or fell in unpopulated areas.
On Tuesday night an Iraqi Scud missile eluded the U.S. Patriot anti-missile defense system and struck Tel Aviv, leaving three people dead of heart attacks and wounding at least 70.
Iraq set some Kuwaiti oil facilities ablaze.
Two more men named as captive American fliers were displayed on Iraqi television. Twenty-three Iraqis were reported held as POWs. Total U.S. aircraft losses stood at 14 - nine of those in combat.
There were 24 allies missing in action, including 13 Americans, eight Britons, two Italians and one Kuwaiti.
Oil prices jumped sharply. Financial markets retreated.
 
 Day Eight: Jan. 23
Early-morning skies cleared, and U.S. warplanes thundered off on more bombing runs against Iraq.
Two Americans were wounded in a clash with an Iraqi patrol just inside Saudi Arabia. Six Iraqis were captured.
Forty-one Iraqi aircraft, out of an estimated 700, were reported destroyed.
After some 12,000 sorties, the nation's top general, Gen. Colin Powell, said allied forces had achieved air superiority and now intended to focus air fire on the Iraqi ground forces around Kuwait.
At about 10:30 p.m. Israeli time, for the fourth time since the Gulf war started, Israel came under an Iraqi missile barrage. No one was reported injured. Air raid sirens also sounded at about the same time in Saudi Arabia, and Patriot missiles were reportedly fired both in Riyadh and on an air base near Dhahran.
Fire continued to rage at an oil field in southern Kuwait.
U.S. stocks rose while prices overseas turned mixed. Oil prices were little changed.
 
 Day Nine: Jan. 24
A brief skirmish high above the Persian Gulf marked a series of firsts in the war: the first Iraqi combat jet attack, the first air-to-air kill by a Saudi pilot and the first double kill by any coalition flier. The skirmish at 12:35 p.m. (4:35 a.m. EST) involved a Saudi pilot who shot down two Iraqi jets carrying Exocet missiles capable of sinking allied shipping in the Persian Gulf, the military said.
Kuwait's news agency claimed that allied forces drove Iraqi troops from a Kuwaiti island, the first piece of emirate territory reported freed from Iraqi occupation. A U.S. military spokesman said 51 Iraqis were taken prisoner and three were killed in a battle at the island but declined to confirm that the island of Qurah was captured.
The stock market staged a broad advance. The dollar was down and gold prices also were lower.
 
 Day 10: Jan. 25
Military officials announced that Iraq sabotaged Kuwait's main supertanker loading pier, dumping millions of gallons of crude oil into the Persian Gulf. The spill was expected to devastate the gulf environment and posed strategic concerns. In Washington, President Bush pledged "every effort" by the allied forces to halt the oil slick. Pentagon spokesman Pete Williams said Iraq's crude oil dumping was "clearly an act of environmental terrorism." He said it may be more than a dozen times bigger than the 11-million-gallon Alaska oil spill from the Exxon Valdez in 1989.
Missiles fired from western Iraq struck in the Tel Aviv and Haifa areas Friday (after 6 p.m. or 11 a.m. EST), killing one Israeli and wounding more than 40 others. It was the first Scud that directly caused a death in Israel.
A Patriot missile destroyed one Iraqi-launched Scud above the capital of Saudi Arabia, Friday night, but another Scud apparently was not intercepted and hit the ground about 10:30 p.m. (2:30 p.m. EST), witnesses said.
A U.S. military spokesman said Friday many Iraqi captured soldiers were covered with lice when taken prisoner. The POWs said they had been receiving only one a meal a day in Iraq. Allied forces say they are holding about 60 Iraqi POWs.
The Pentagon said the past 24 hours allowed for the busiest day of the air campaign, with 2,707 sorties flown in good weather in the skies above Iraq and Kuwait.
The exiled government of Kuwait gave $$13.5 billion to the Persian Gulf war effort.
In New York, the stock market finished the week with a net gain of about 13 points. The Dow Jones industrial average closed up 16.34 to 2,659.41 Friday. Bond prices fell. The dollar was lifted in cautious trading. Oil futures were mixed.
 
 Day 11, Jan. 26:
Israel and Saudi Arabia came under Iraqi missile attacks again and fired Patriot missiles at the incoming rockets. Air raid sirens sounded throughout Israel at 10 p.m. (3 p.m. EST), warning of a missile attack. About the same time in Saudi Arabia, a U.S. Patriot missile was fired at an Iraqi Scud, apparently hitting the Iraqi missile, witnesses said in Riyadh.
Anti-Iraq coalition planners searched for ways to stop the colossal "black tide" drifting toward Saudi water plants. "A solution is close," a military spokesman said, but part of the crude oil spill blamed by the U.S. on Iraq was already reported ablaze.
Coalition jets kept up a furious bombardment of Iraqi positions in Kuwait and southern Iraq. The U.S. command said its aircraft shot down three Iraqi warplanes. Seven other Iraqi pilots were reported to have made emergency landings at airfields in neighboring Iran, one exploding upon landing. Tehran said it would keep the planes until war's end.
Along the northern front lines, Iraqi forces and troops of the U.S.-led coalition exchanged harassment fire. Marines unloaded their heaviest barrage yet on forward Iraqi positions, from a battalion of 155mm howitzers, and the Iraqis fired off short-range missiles that fell harmlessly, the allies said.
In Johnston, Iowa, NBC's top news chief said the military floods journalists with facts, but censorship denies Americans news they need to understand the war. NBC News President Michael Gartner, who is also editor of The Daily Tribune in nearby Ames, spoke during taping of an Iowa Public TV show to air Sunday.

 

End of Document
