

Day-by-Day Chronology of the Gulf War
The Associated Press
January 22, 1991, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1335 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Here is a day-by-day summary of the Persian Gulf war:
 
 Day One, Jan. 16:
Less than 19 hours after time ran out on a U.N.-mandated deadline for Irag to withdraw from Kuwait, wave after wave of warplanes, in hundreds of sorties on a moonless night, streaked north from Saudi Arabian bases to punish Iraq for its five-month defiance of the rest of the world.
About 90 minutes later the heavens over Baghdad were alive with the flashes of anti-aircraft fire as Iraqi gunners tried to ward off the allied air attack that ended five months of suspense.
At 7:06 p.m. EST (3:06 a.m. Thursday, Persian Gulf time), White House news secretary Marlin Fitzwater walked grimly into a frenzied press room and announced in President Bush's words, "The liberation of Kuwait has begun."
In a 9 p.m. EST Oval Office address, President Bush described the marshalling of American and allied forces into Operation Desert Storm against Iraq. Bush said no ground assault was launched immediately against the dug-in Iraqi army in Kuwait.
Iraqi President Saddam Hussein, in a Iraq radio speech, vowed to crush "the satanic intentions of the White House."
 
 Day Two, Jan. 17:
"Things are going well," President Bush told a White House reporter before dawn. Allied warplanes hammered Iraq again Thursday in what one American commander vowed would be war "24 hours a day" to expel the Iraqis from Kuwait.
Crude oil prices had their biggest one-day fall in history. New York's stock market swept to its second-largest point gain ever, with the Dow Jones average of 30 industrials jumping 114.60 points to 2,623.51.
Iraq hit Israel with at least eight Scud missiles. None of the missiles were armed with chemical warheads, and casualties were limited. Israel reacted with the threat of retaliation.
 
 Day Three, Jan. 18:
Allied tanks rumbled north toward the Kuwait border. U.S. warplanes struck at Iraqi missile launchers, acting in the stead of an Israeli government that was still considering vengeance for the rocket attack on Tel Aviv and Haifa.
President Bush extended reservists' tours to up to two years. He expressed cautious optimism, saying that it "will take some time" liberate Kuwait. He said he appreciated Israel's restraint in not retaliating for Iraqi missile attacks overnight.
CNN reported that an Iraqi official claimed that American pilots had been captured.
Four American aircraft - carrying a total of seven crewmen - were lost in the first 48 hours of the war, the U.S. military command said. Four other allied aircraft were said to be lost.
The Pentagon told Congress that just 11 of an estimated 700 Iraqi warplanes could be confirmed destroyed and that Iraq had about 30 mobile missile launchers left.
Anti-war protests directed against the United States continued worldwide.
War news brought some surprises to Wall Street. The Dow Jones average ended the week at 2,646.78, up a record 145.29 from the previous Friday. Oil prices took a beating.
 
 Day Four: Jan. 19
Israel's anti-missile force was boosted by additional Patriot missile batteries and their U.S. crews.
Israeli nerves were frayed by another false alarm. Air raid sirens sounded briefly again in Jerusalem and Tel Aviv, but no attack was reported. The alert came about 14 hours after a second Iraqi missile attack, with conventional warheads, caused 29 injuries in the Tel Aviv area, which has more than 1.6 million residents.
Twelve Iraqi prisoners of war were captured in an operation against Iraqi anti-aircraft units on nine Kuwaiti oil platforms. Five Iraqis were reported killed. No U.S. casualties were reported.
Lt. Gen Thomas Kelly confirmed the bombardment of Iraq's Republican Guard making up about one-fifth of the 545,000 Iraqi troops in and around Kuwait.
 
 Day Five: Jan. 20:
Iraqi Scud missiles streaking into a key allied military site were destroyed by U.S. Patriot air defenses. The Iraqi missiles were shot down by Patriot rockets as they approached Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, from the north, officials said.
Iraqi TV showed two blindfolded men, identified as American POWs, being paraded through Baghdad streets. Later, the TV broadcast interviews with several men said to be downed pilots. CNN, which monitored the broadcast, said the POWs identified themselves as three Americans, two Britons, one Italian and one Kuwaiti.
Since the war's start, one American has been killed and 12 were missing in action, the military said. Nine members of the other allied forces also were reported killed or missing in action.
Allied air losses mounted. A total of 15 warplanes were reported lost, including nine American aircraft.
Iraq's four primary nuclear research facilities were crippled by alliance air raids, General H. Norman Schwarzkopf said.
It was reported that the USS Forrestal in Mayport, Fla., would be dispatched "in the near future" to the eastern Mediterranean.
 
 Day Six: Jan. 21:
Much of America awoke Monday to videotape broadcast of captured American pilots. The POWs made obviously forced statements criticizing the allied war effort.
U.S. Patriot missiles thwarted Iraq's early-morning shower of missiles ticketed for Saudi Arabia. Iraq fired another missile late Monday and was reported to have hit the water off the Saudi oil and industrial complex of Jubail.
Iraq said it scattered prisoners of war at "civilian, economic, education and other targets" - a move that recalled its prewar strategy of using foreign hostages as "human shields."
President Bush accused Iraq of treating the POWs brutally, adding, "it's not going to make a difference in the prosecution of the war."
Air Force Maj. Gen. Burton Moore said 8,100 sorties had been flown since the start of the war, though the allies were "nowhere near" their objective to knock out Iraq's Scud launching ability.
The financial markets reflected growing pessimism about the war's length; oil prices rebounded Monday in London and Tokyo, and markets in Tokyo and the United States dropped. High-tech and war-related stocks rose.
 
 Day Seven: Jan. 22:
The Iraqis fired six Scud missiles into Saudi Arabia early Tuesday before dawn, and all were either intercepted or fell in unpopulated areas.
On Tuesday night an Iraqi Scud missile eluded the U.S. Patriot antimissile defense system and struck in the Tel Aviv area, wounding at least 60 people and damaging several buildings, army officials said.
Israel continued to observe its right to retaliate. The Los Angeles Times, quoting government sources, said Israel had not previously retaliated in part because Israeli military lacked electronic codes to prevent an accidental attack on its sorties by allied planes. The Israeli Embassy and the State Department would not comment.
Navy planes sank two Iraqi ships, officials said, and also reported that Kuwaiti oil facilities were set ablaze by Iraqi forces. The fires spread black smokescreens across the sky in what some saw as an Iraqi tactic to shield troops from air attack. Others suggested it might be a prelude to an Iraqi withdrawal.
The relentless allied air war passed a new mark - 10,000 aircraft sorties in the six days since President Bush ordered the attack to drive the Iraqi army from the oil-rich emirate it invaded last Aug. 2.
By one measure, it may be history's greatest concentration of airpower. During six days of raids on German aircraft-industry cities in February 1944, often cited as the most intense bombardment of World War II, Allied bombers flew 6,151 sorties.
Two more men named by Iraq as captive American fliers were displayed on television. There were 23 Iraqi reported held as POWs.
There were 24 allies missing in action, including 13 Americans, eight Britons, two Italians and one Kuwaiti.
Pentagon spokesman Pete Williams said it will delay announcements about American planes being downed, because such announcements could make it more difficult for airmen to escape.
Oil prices jumped sharply while the financial markets retreated in worldwide trading Tuesday over heightened anxiety about a protracted war following reports of more Iraqi missile strikes against Israel.

 

End of Document
