

Day-by-Day Chronology of the Gulf War
The Associated Press
January 20, 1991, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1011 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Here is a day-by-day summary of the Persian Gulf war:
 
 Day One, Jan. 16:
Less than 19 hours after time ran out on a U.N.-mandated deadline for Irag to withdraw from Kuwait, wave after wave of warplanes, in hundreds of sorties on a moonless night, streaked north from Saudi Arabian bases to punish Iraq for its five-month defiance of the rest of the world.
About 90 minutes later the heavens over Baghdad were alive with the flashes of anti-aircraft fire as Iraqi gunners tried to ward off the allied air attack that ended five months of suspense.
At 7:06 p.m. EST (3:06 a.m. Thursday, Persian Gulf time), White House news secretary Marlin Fitzwater walked grimly into a frenzied press room and announced in President Bush's words, "The liberation of Kuwait has begun."
In a 9 p.m. EST Oval Office address, President Bush described the marshalling of American and allied forces into Operation Desert Storm against Iraq. Bush said no ground assault was launched immediately against the dug-in Iraqi army in Kuwait.
Iraqi President Saddam Hussein, in a speech broadcast by Iraq state radio, vowed to crush "the satanic intentions of the White House."
 
 Day Two, Jan. 17:
"Things are going well," President Bush told a White House reporter before dawn. Allied warplanes hammered Iraq again and again Thursday in what one American commander vowed would be war "24 hours a day" to expel the Iraqis from Kuwait.
Crude oil prices had their biggest one-day fall in history. New York's stock market swept to its second-largest point gain ever, with the Dow Jones average of 30 industrials jumping 114.60 points to 2,623.51.
Iraq retaliated, as promised, by hitting Israel with at least eight Scud missiles. None of the missiles were armed with chemical warheads and casualties were limited. Israel reacted with the threat of retaliation.
 
 Day Three, Jan. 18:
Allied tanks rumbled north toward the Kuwait border. U.S. warplanes struck at Iraqi missile launchers, acting in the stead of an Israeli government that was still considering vengeance for the rocket attack on Tel Aviv and Haifa.
President Bush extended reservists' tours to up to two years. Bush signed an order late Friday extending the maximum length of the reserve callup - now 180 days. There are 450,000 U.S. forces in the gulf region, up 25,000 from when the war began.
Bush expressed cautious optimism, saying that it "will take some time" liberate Kuwait. He said he appreciated Israel's restraint in not retaliating for Iraqi missile attacks overnight.
CNN reported that an Iraqi official claimed that American pilots had been captured.
Four American aircraft - carrying a total of seven crewmen - were lost in the first 48 hours of the war, the U.S. military command said. No American prisoners of war were reported. Four other allied aircraft were said to be lost.
The Pentagon told Congress that just 11 of an estimated 700 Iraqi warplanes could be confirmed destroyed and that Iraq had about 30 mobile missile launchers left.
Anti-war protests directed against the United States continued worldwide.
 
 Day Four: Jan. 19
Israel's anti-missile force was boosted by additional Patriot missile batteries and their U.S. crews. The sophisticated Patriots, dispatched from Europe, were "fully operational," the Pentagon said. A senior military man said Israel would "wait and see" whether the Patriots were the shield it needed before retaliating against Iraqi attacks.
Israeli nerves were frayed by another false alarm. Air raid sirens sounded briefly again in Jerusalem and Tel Aviv, but no attack was reported. The alert came about 14 hours after a second Iraqi missile attack, with conventional warheads, caused a few slight injuries and damage in Tel Aviv residential areas.
The first Iraqi prisoners of war were captured. The military said the 12 POWS were taken in an operation against Iraqi anti-aircraft units on nine Kuwaiti oil platforms in the northern Persian Gulf. Five Iraqis were reported killed. No U.S. casualties were reported.
Coalition bombers - including B-52s - pounded elite Iraqi ground troops, the Pentagon said. Lt. Gen Thomas Kelly confirmed the bombardment of Iraq's Republican Guard making up about one-fifth of the 545,000 Iraqi troops in and around Kuwait.
War news brought some surprises to Wall Street. The Dow Jones average ended the week at 2,646.78, up a record 145.29 from the previous Friday. Oil prices took a beating.
 
 Day Five: Jan. 20:
Iraqi Scud missiles streaking into a key allied military site were destroyed by U.S. Patriot air defenses. The Iraqi missiles were shot down by Patriot rockets as they approached Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, from the north, officials said.
Iraq might be holding two Americans as prisoners of war, said H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the U.S. commander of Operation Desert Storm. Iraqi TV showed two blindfolded men, identified as American POWs, being paraded through Baghdad streets, the news agency in neighboring Iran said. Later, the TV broadcast interviews with several men said to be downed pilots.
Since the war's start, one American has been killed and 12 were missing in action, the military said. Nine members of the other allied forces also were reported killed or missing in action.
Iraq's four primary nuclear research facilities were crippled by alliance air raids, General Schwarzkopf said. Meanwhile, the Iraqi government confirmed that allied air raids struck the city of al-Qu'im, site of a nuclear and chemical weapons research and development center.
A seventh aircraft carrier was being sent to the region, a source said. The administration source, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the USS Forrestal in Mayport, Fla., would be dispatched "in the near future" to the eastern Mediterranean.
Polls found Americans upbeat about the war's progress, but two out of three were worried fighting will spread. In a poll by the Gallup Organization for CNN Thursday and Friday, 29 percent said they were very worried and an additional 38 percent were somewhat worried war could spread. At the same time, 73 percent said they thought the alliance was winning.

 

End of Document
