

Day-by-Day Chronology of the Gulf War
The Associated Press
February 15, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1184 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Here is a day-by-day summary of the Persian Gulf War:
 
 Day 26, Sunday, Feb. 10:
 
 Defense Secretary Dick Cheney gauged the damage done to Iraqi ground forces by non-stop bombing raids. "I'm sure you could find some divisions that may be down by as much as 40 percent," he said after consulting with field commanders in Saudi Arabia.
The Americans lost their first jet in combat in more than a week. A Marine Corp AV-8 Harrier was downed over southern Kuwait Saturday, and the pilot was missing, the U.S. command said.
Allied pilots flew 2,800 sorties, including 650 in Kuwait, for a war total of nearly 60,000 missions. The air over Iraq and Kuwait sometimes is so crowded with allied jets, it's harder to coordinate than air traffic over Los Angeles, Atlanta and Dallas combined, a U.S. military briefer said.
President Saddam Hussein praised what he called Iraqi strength and steadfastness in the face of more than three weeks of allied bombing, Baghdad's news agency reported.
Bombing runs on Baghdad damaged several government departments, including the Ministry of Industry and Military Industrialization, and hit two major bridges over the Tigris River.
 
 Day 27, Monday, Feb. 11:
 
 U.S. and allied jets stepped up the air war Monday with hundreds more bombing runs against Iraqi targets. The city of Basra, strategic heart of Iraq's defense, was believed all but cut off.
Following a White House meeting with Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and joint chiefs chairman Gen. Colin Powell, both just back from Saudi Arabia, President Bush said the air war "will continue for a while."
As for a ground offensive, Bush said, "We're not talking about dates."
The Iraqi government announced it will begin drafting 17-year-old students previously exempt from military service.
A Scud missile was fired at Israel and another at Riyadh, the Saudi capital. Israeli authorities said the Scud there fell into a deserted area in the central part of the country. Patriot interceptor missiles destroyed the incoming Scud near Riyadh. No damage or injuries were immediately reported in either place.
A British navy helicopter caught a 75-foot Iraqi patrol boat on the move under cover of darkness off Faylaka Island and blasted it with two air-to-sea missiles, leaving it ablaze and sinking, the British reported.
The Martyrs Bridge, already partly damaged, was destroyed in an air raid - the third of six Baghdad bridges to be brought down.
 
 Day 28, Tuesday, Feb. 12:
 
 An Iraqi missile destroyed a house in a prosperous urban neighborhood in Israel, slightly injuring six people, including a man buried to his neck in rubble, authorities said.
Marine and naval gunners combined their fire with U.S. air strikes Tuesday to pound Iraqi tanks and artillery massed in southern Kuwait. Below the border, battle-ready American units shifted and maneuvered as they readied for ground war.
Allied warplanes blasted an Iraqi convoy of armored vehicles and trucks in Kuwait, and demolished a government ministry in Baghdad that is led by Saddam Hussein's cousin.
American pilots on "Scud patrol" claimed they destroyed up to four Iraqi missile launchers in western Iraq, U.S. officials said.
Eight Iraqi soldiers walked through their own minefields and surrendered to an Egyptian armored division after crossing the border from Kuwait.
President Bush conferred in Washington with the defense chiefs of Britain and France. Britain's defense minister said there was still "work to be done" in air attacks weakening Iraqi forces before the allies launch a full-scale ground war.
Despite the non-stop air raids, Iraq retains its "lethal developed weapons," the Iraqi Parliament speaker said in an apparent reference to chemical and biological weapons.
 
 Day 29, Wednesday, Feb. 13:
 
 Allied warplanes destroyed an underground shelter in Baghdad and officials there said 500 civilians were killed. The United States called it a military command center, not a bomb shelter.
The Bush administration declared that Saddam Hussein "kills civilians intentionally" and suggested he allowed Baghdad residents to use the structure hit by U.S. bombs in hopes of shielding a military bunker.
Jordanian refugees said allied warplanes last Saturday attacked their bus as it left Kuwait, killing 30 of their countrymen.
A Saudi F-5 Tiger 2 was lost on a mission over Iraq and the pilot was missing, said Saudi military briefer, Col. Ahmed al-Robayan. It was the second Saudi plane lost.
Iraq's foreign minister, Tariq Aziz, will fly to Moscow this weekend to meet with Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, a Soviet spokesman said. A Soviet envoy's talks Tuesday with Iraqi President Saddam Hussein in Baghdad "give cause for hope," the spokesman said, without elaboration.
Diplomats in Riyadh said the Saudis, facing a budget deficit because of the war, are seeking more than $$3 billion in international loans.
The United Nations Security Council voted 9-2, with four abstentions, to hold its first formal session on the conflict behind closed doors.
The non-televised debate Thursday will be the first formal council session held in private since a November 1975 debate on the Western Sahara.
 
 Day 30, Thursday, Feb. 14:
 
 Two crewmen of a U.S. Air Force EF-111 were killed when their plane went down in northern Saudi Arabia, apparently after being damaged in combat, and a British Tornado bomber was lost while attacking Iraqi airfields. Its two crewmen were listed as missing.
The U.S. command, in response to the death of hundreds of civilians in Wednesday's Baghdad bombing, said it was looking for new ways to limit such casualties - possibly including advance announcements of its targets.
The Iraqis said it was only a civilian bomb shelter. But U.S. officials said they had indisputable evidence, from radio intercepts, reconnaissance photos and other sources, that the concrete facility was being used as a military command-and-control center. They said they were unaware it harbored any civilians.
The Americans have blamed President Saddam Hussein and the rest of the Iraqi leadership for the tragedy, saying they deliberately put civilians "in harm's way."
Two Iraqi Scud missiles fell on the isolated town of Hafr el-Batin, demolishing an auto-repair shop and house, and slightly injuring four Saudi civilians. Allied officers said the missiles apparently broke up in flight.
Marine Brig. Gen. Neal said air strikes have destroyed at least 1,300 of an estimated 4,200 Iraqi tanks in the battle zone, 1,100 of 3,200 artillery pieces, and 800 of 3,000 armored personnel carriers.
About 50 protesters tried to block entrances at the Pentagon, and splashed a side entrance with a liquid they said was blood and oil, symbols of their opposition to the Persian Gulf War. Thirteen were arrested.
The U.N. Security Council opened debate on the Gulf War in its first closed-door session in 15 years. Iraq's envoy condemned the U.S. bombing deaths of civilians in Baghdad and gave no sign Iraq would vacate Kuwait.
The council adjourned after 3 hours of debate and was to reconvene Friday morning. At least 30 speakers were on the list for a debate that could continue for days.

 

End of Document
