

Day-by-Day Chronology of the Gulf War
The Associated Press
February 21, 1991, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 834 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Here is a day-by-day summary of the Persian Gulf War:
 
 Day 33, Sunday, Feb. 17:
An American Apache attack helicopter firing Hellfire missiles destroyed two American military vehicles, killing two soldiers and wounding six, during a pre-dawn skirmish, the U.S. Command said. Since the war started, a total of 35 allied troops have been killed in action, including 16 Americans.
A U.S. F-16 fighter jet was downed 40 miles north of the Saudi border but the pilot parachuted out and was rescued.
Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz passed through Iran, traveling overland rather than flying through allied-dominated skies. He was headed for Moscow and a meeting with Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev.
American and Iraqi patrols clashed along the border with Saudi Arabia in seven separate engagements, the military said. In two of the clashes, 20 Iraqi troops surrendered. More than 1,200 Iraqis have surrendered or been taken prisoner in the war.
Allied commanders increasingly believe Iraq has limited data on U.S. troop locations and was sending patrols into Saudi Arabia to get facts on its opponent.
 
 Day 34, Monday Feb. 18:
 
 Iraq's foreign minister, Tariq Aziz, met for 3 hours in Moscow on with Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev in a last-ditch effort to avert a full-scale ground war. He headed back to Baghdad with a new peace proposal the Soviets said included a call for an "unconditional withdrawal from Kuwait."
President Bush's spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said the Soviets did not ask Bush to hold up any war action while Soviet President Mikahil S. Gorbachev's proposal was considered in Baghdad - but just not to comment on the plan.
Earlier, the White House said the best hope for forcing Iraq out of Kuwait was "conflict in the air and on the ground."
Two U.S. warships moving north in preparation for a possible Marine invasion struck floating mines about 10 miles apart in the northern Persian Gulf. Both the USS Tripoli and USS Princeton were in no danger of sinking; seven servicemen were injured, U.S. officials said.
 
 Day 35, Tuesday Feb. 19:
 
 Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz returned home Tuesday, carrying a Soviet peace proposal that Moscow hoped would fend off an all-out ground war to oust Iraqi troops from Kuwait. Baghdad Radio reported Aziz' arrival, but did not say if he had met with Saddam Hussein to deliver the Soviet proposal.
At the United Nations, the Soviet U.N. ambassador told the Security Council that Moscow's Persian Gulf peace plan seeks rapid pullout of Iraqi forces from Kuwait, with full compliance of U.N. resolutions. He also said Aziz would come back to Moscow Wednesday to deliver Iraq's response.
President Bush on rejected the peace proposal, saying there must be no negotiations and no concessions to gain Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait.
The allied air assault continued against Iraq. Baghdad came under repeated bombardment during the night, the heaviest onslaught in several days, AP correspondent John Rice reported from the Iraqi capital.
The U.S. command reported one plane newly lost in the attacks in Kuwait and southern Iraq. The status of the pilot of the A-10 "tank killer" was unknown.
 
 Day 36, Wednesday, Feb. 20:
 
 One American soldier was killed and seven others were wounded in a ground engagement, an allied command spokesman said. Somehwere north of the Saudi border, U.S. helicopters attacked an Iraqi bunker complex, the U.S. command said. Up to 15 bunkers were destroyed and as many as 500 Iraqis were taken prisoner, Gen. Richard Neal said.
The allied air war went on without letup. In a dispatch from Baghdad Wednesday, Iran's Islamic Republic News Agency reported four hours of intense allied air raids and said bombs were going off every five minutes. It was the capital's second straight night of heavy bombing.
 
 Day 37, Thursday, Feb. 21:
 
 Iraq and the Soviet Union agreed on steps that could lead to an Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait and an end to the Persian Gulf War, a Kremlin spokesman said early Friday. The Kremlin spokeman, Vitaly Ignatenko, made the announcement after more than two hours of talks between President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Iraq's foreign minister, Tariq Aziz, on the terms of a Soviet peace plan proposed earlier this week.
Gorbachev immediately telephoned President Bush to lay out the proposals, and the U.S. chief executive "raised serious concerns about several points," said White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater. Bush had no immediate response, and would be studying the plan, the spokesman said. "The war itself continues," Fitzwater added. "There's no change at this point in our prosecution of the war."
Seven American soldiers were killed Thursday when an Army medical evacuation helicopter crashed in Saudi Arabia, U.S. officials reported. The U.S. command said two Americans were killed in the crash of an Army OH-58 scout helicopter overnight while returning from combat operations along the border. Two other U.S. aircraft also were lost, the command said Thursday in a briefing in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

 

End of Document
