

Day-by-Day Chronology of the Gulf War
The Associated Press
February 27, 1991, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 739 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Here is a day-by-day summary of the Persian Gulf War:
 
 Day 40, Sunday Feb. 24:
 
 The Screaming Eagles of the 101st Airborne Division, with more than 300 attack helicopters blasted deep into Iraq. Officers called it the largest helicopter assault in military history. It was aimed at cutting Saddam Hussein's supply lines. There were no initial reports of American casualties and the 101st encountered only minimal Iraqi fire, officers said.
Two columns from the U.S. 2nd Marine Division pushed 35 miles north from the frontier, the AP's Denis D. Gray reported from the front, putting them in near-linkup with airborne troops.
By day's end, U.S. paratroopers were reported holding outer edges of Kuwait City. A U.S. military official cautioned that despite the early reports of success, more than a week of tough combat - including street-to-street fighting for Kuwait City - may lay ahead.
President Bush heard prayers for peace at service at St. John's Episcopal Church across Lafayette Park from the White House.
 
 Day 41, Monday Feb. 25:
 
 Saddam Hussein of Iraq ordered his forces early Tuesday to withdraw from Kuwait, Baghdad radio reported. It said the order to withdraw was taken in accordance with a Soviet peace proposal that the allies had rejected before the start of the ground offensive.
The White House reacted icily to the Baghdad radio dispatch. White House press secretary Marlin Fitzwater said, "We've heard the radio reports. … The war goes on."
The Iraqis scored a direct hit with a Scud missile attack on a U.S. barracks in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia. The missile demolished a barracks housing about 100 American soldiers. The U.S. military said 28 servicemen were killed.
The U.S. command said 18,000 Iraqi troops were taken prisoner in the first two days of the all-out ground offensive to free Kuwait of Iraq's control. U.S. losses were "extremely light" - four Americans killed and 21 wounded, the U.S. command said. It also reported the loss of four U.S. aircraft, three of whose pilots were rescued.
 
 Day 42, Tuesday Feb. 26:
 
 Kuwaiti resistance leaders declared late in the day they were in control of their smoke-filled capital following nearly seven months of Iraqi occupation. They said fleeing Iraqi troops had taken thousands of Kuwaiti captives with them and left behind an armory of tanks and loaded weapons.
Hundreds of surrendering Iraqis shouted "Salaam! Salaam!" - "Peace! Peace!" - as they raised their hands to advancing troops. More than 30,000 Iraqis have now been taken prisoner, the U.S. command said.
A majority of U.N. Security Council members insisted that Baghdad accept all 12 council resolutions on the Persian Gulf crisis before a cease-fire can be considered, diplomats said. Iraq has announced it was withdrawing all its forces unconditionally from Kuwait in accordance with Security Council Resolution 660.
President Bush declared the war would go on. "Saddam is not interested in peace, but only to regroup and fight another day," Bush said in a tough statement to the press.
 
 Day 43, Wednesday Feb. 27:
 
 Baghdad announced it was willing to drop all claims to Kuwait if the allied assault would only stop. But deep inside rain-darkened Iraq, U.S. forces and Saddam Hussein's best troops were locked in a fierce tank battle.
The effort to retake Kuwait City was in its final stages. American tanks vanquished an Iraqi unit at the city's airport, and the Marines said all organized resistance had been halted. Some snipers reportedly remained.
Abdul Amir al-Anbari, Iraq's ambassador to the United Nations, said his country was prepared to "abide and implement all resolutions" after all hostilities cease.
In Iraq, the "largest tank battle since World War II" raged, pitting more than 700 American tanks and armored vehicles from the VII Army Corps against the 250 to 300 tanks of a Republican Guard division, a Pentagon source said.
The fighting, he said, was fierce, and the Guard's escape had been blocked.
The allies have reported relatively light casualties for such a huge operation, but deaths were mounting. At a briefing this evening, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, commander of the U.S. forces, said there had been 28 Americans killed in the ground war, not counting the 28 killed by Monday's Scud attack.
The extent of Iraqi casualties was not known, but they certainly were far greater.
Baghdad radio claimed today that the withdrawal from Kuwait was completed "by the first light this morning."

 

End of Document
