

Differences Emerge at Conference on How to Aid the Republics
The Associated Press
January 23, 1992, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 731 words
Byline: By DONALD M. ROTHBERG, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The world's wealthiest nations agree on the need to provide massive help to the states struggling to emerge from the wreckage of the former Soviet Union. But clear differences emerged after a day of closed meetings.
A final conference session today is expected to focus primarily on coordinating the international effort to provide humanitarian assistance and set the former Soviet republics firmly on the path to democracy and free market economies.
At a news conference Wednesday, German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher made clear his country's disagreement with Japan's insistence that Russia return the Kurile Islands occupied at the end of World War II.
"These questions are very important for Japan," he said. "But the downfall of the Soviet Union is also important."
Japanese Foreign Minister Michio Watanabe told Genscher during a private meeting that Japan was "not in a position at the moment to embark on larger-scale assistance to the republics of the former Soviet Union."
Japanese government spokesman Seiji Morimoto said Watanabe's position was based on the territorial dispute and the fact that the Soviet Union never signed a peace treaty with Japan after World War II.
"As long as this issue - dispute - is not solved, we see some differences in the political situation compared with that in Germany," said Morimoto.
During the meeting Japan said it was prepared to offer an additional $ 50 million in aid. Japan announced in October it would provide $ 2.5 billion worth of fuel and medical supplies, and a $ 500 million export loan.
Several governments participating in the conference came forward later in the day with offers of new assistance, said U.S. officials who spoke on condition of anonymity. The prospective donors and amounts weren't disclosed.
At a luncheon, Secretary of State James A. Baker III singled out oil-rich Saudi Arabia, Australia and New Zealand for private consultations.
Meanwhile, U.S. sources disclosed that Richard Armitage, a veteran Pentagon and State Department official, would be named coordinator of the American aid program.
Appointment of the internationally known Armitage was seen as part of the U.S. effort to underscore its commitment to the relief effort.
President Bush told the 47-nation meeting the United States would pledge an additional $ 645 million in aid, a move obviously designed to encourage other nations to increase their pledges.
According to figures put out by the European Community, more than $ 78 billion in aid has already gone to the former Soviet republics. Nearly $ 45 billion of that came from Germany, its total including $ 10 billion paid to help relocate Soviet troops stationed in East Germany.
The German foreign minister said the opening day was "a great conference" but warned that it "runs the risk of drowning itself in beautiful words and nice sounds. But we had a serious debate, a substantial debate, the result so far is a good one, and the perspective is a positive one."
Genscher also restated his disagreement with the U.S. decision to exclude the former Soviet republics from the conference. They had no presence at the meeting although they clearly were watching it from afar.
"Humanitarian and other forms of assistance by the international community will no doubt help alleviate the difficulties our population is facing as we move to a market economy," Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin said in a statement to the participants.
Genscher said the successor states of the Soviet Union should be briefed "as soon as possible" on the discussions at the Washington meeting.
Major nations also agreed that another conference on large-scale aid to the former Soviet republics should be held in Lisbon, Portugal, probably in May, said Elizabeth Guigou, French minister for European Affairs.
By then, she said, the problem of immediate help may be less important.
"There is a problem infinitely more vast - the total reconstruction of these countries' economies," she said.
Yeltsin will come to the United States for a Jan. 31 summit of the leaders of the 15 U.N. Security Council members.
Bush and Yeltsin will meet Feb. 1 at the presidential retreat at Camp David, Md.
The sense of urgency also was conveyed in a parallel two-day conference here of about 200 non-profit organizations sponsored by Citizens Democracy Corps, a group initiated by Bush in 1990 to mobilize assistance by American corporations.

 

End of Document
