

Dispatches From the Field
The Associated Press
January 23, 1991, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 823 words
Dateline: WITH U.S. FORCES, Saudi Arabia
Body




The fog hung heavy over the desert and once again helicopter pilots spent the morning waiting impatiently for the skies to clear so they could get on with training.
"I can't believe we're in the desert and still the weather is too bad to fly," Lt. Hal M. Hinton, an OH-58 helicopter pilot in a cavalry unit of the Army's 1st Armored Division, said Monday.
The desert has turned wintry in the interior near the Saudi-Iraqi border, and Army troops preparing for a ground attack are finding that damp, chilly weather combined with dust and sand can hamper operations.
On recent mornings commanders in the cavalry who usually fly aboard OH-58s across the desert to a morning briefing at division headquarters have had to drive instead.
They navigate with boat compasses and high-technology position finders across sands shrouded in an impenetrable mist.
In an aviation brigade, commanders insist that even the densest fog would not ground the Army's top attack aircraft, the tank-killer Apache helicopter, which relies on an infrared sighting system.
But in battle, they acknowledge, an attack in heavy fog would force the Apaches to venture dangerously near Iraqi tanks and anti-aircraft positions.
"As the fog gets thicker, we can't see the target," said Lt. Col. Daniel J. Petrovsky, commander of the division's Apache-dominated aviation brigade. "You'd start putting your crew in harm's way."
---
NEAR THE IRAQI BORDER, Saudi Arabia (AP) - The moonless desert nights that provided the backdrop for the allies' air war are worrying the Army's Black Hawk helicopter pilots.
The pilots rely on night-vision goggles, and moonlight could help them identify critical landscape features in the largely flat desert as they fly supplies, including food and fuel, to troops fighting on the front lines.
"You can't tell if you're 10 feet off the ground or 100 feet off the ground," said Army Chief Warrant Officer Bruce Bramblett, 40, of Athens, Ga., who flies Black Hawks. "All the pilots are really concerned."
Since the United States began its air attack on Iraq last Thursday, the Black Hawk pilots have been training for missions at low altitudes that leave little margin for error.
"With the desert being so flat, there's nothing to break up the horizon and the ground," said 1st Sgt. Bill Anderson, 35, an administrator of a squadron assigned to the Army's 11th Aviation Brigade.
"You can be flying along and before you know it, you're in the dirt."
---
WITH U.S. FORCES, Saudi Arabia (AP) - Soldiers of the 1st Armored Division have begun changing their forest-green uniforms of Europe for desert camouflage.
The change began Tuesday and was a relief for the soldiers shipped in from Germany because their green gear stood out like a beacon in the washed-out brown expanse of the desert.
The division is only now moving into place, but its commanders are nearly finished preparing for an overland attack.
Commanders have begun to slow the pace of maneuver training, saying their top priority now is to keep soldiers rested and equipment maintained in anticipation of what could be a prolonged ground battle.
"I expect they'll probably fight very hard," said Lt. Col. Bill Reese, commander of the division's cavalry squadron. "I expect that we'll have to destroy the enemy, his tank platoons, all his armored units, one by one."
For now, the division remains spread out across an assembly area a good distance from the Iraqi border. Soldiers are relaxing as much as possible, juggling small beanbags with their feet for recreation and lining up for two hot meals a day.
---
DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia (AP) - Saddam Hussein and his Scuds have spooked the allied troops and the frequent chemical-attack alerts warning of missile attacks are causing sleepless nights in the desert.
"Everyone here can probably handle clean, quick death," said Marine Maj. Jack Carter. "But there is something horribly dirty and alien to human nature about poison gas. It sends a shiver up my spine."
Saddam has never proven that his Scud missiles can deliver chemical or biological warheads. But he says they can, and for safety's sake, the allied troops are inclined to believe him.
Pentagon officials say the Patriot missiles that have destroyed most of the Scuds fired toward Saudi Arabia would not be effective if the Scuds had chemical warheads.
Every time a Scud is launched from Iraq or Kuwait - or everytime allied radar suspects such a launch - troops throughout the region are ordered into their chemical suits. Since most of the Scud firings come in the predawn hours, sleep can be hard to come by.
Sleeping soldiers with the 1st Infantry Division were awakened Saturday by cries of "gas, gas, gas." It turned out to be just one of many false alarms. But that didn't stop the men from grumbling.
"I put my mask on and just waited to see what would happen," said Lt. George Smith of Lakeland, Fla. "It definitely gets everyone's blood going, then it takes a while to get back to sleep."

 

End of Document
