

Dispatches From the Field
The Associated Press
January 22, 1991, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1354 words
Dateline: IN THE NORTHEAST SAUDI DESERT
Body




Fighter pilots may get all the glory, but the success of Operation Desert Storm could depend in large part on the toil of the Army's engineers.
As tanks, armored personnel carriers and countless artillery guns and other weapons head north toward Saudi Arabia's borders with Iraq and Kuwait, Army engineers are leading the way by clearing new roads, improving airstrips and building ammo dumps.
At one site, the 937th Engineer Group is building an emormous supply base for the Army, including a petroleum terminal to hold more than 5 million gallons.
Lt. Mike McGuire of Sheboygan, Wis., said the engineers don't mope over their overlooked role.
"If a guy knows that a mission depends on him and his equipment, he's going to make sure he keeps it running," McGuire said.
The engineers realize they might be around long after the tanks and artillery fall silent.
"After the war, somebody's got to go clean up all the ordnance that didn't go off when it was supposed to," said Capt. Reynold Hoover, 29, of Windsor, Conn., commander of the 38th Explosive Ordnance Detachment.
---
THUNDERDOME BASE, Saudi Arabia (AP) - Until a few months ago, Air Force Capt. Robert Dooley was flying F-16s. Now he sits in the Saudi desert, watching them fly overhead.
"It hurts every time one of those fighter planes goes flying by," says the 33-year-old Dooley, who now is assigned to help an Army unit by serving on an observation helicopter.
Dooley's new job: directing Air Force A-10 "Warthhog" tank killers if they are called in to assist Army Apache helicopters.
He expects some action soon.
"I have a feeling we'll be in the thick of it," he said.
---
ABOARD THE USS WISCONSIN (AP) - It's a high-tech war and the weapons used so far include robot cruise missiles and "smart" bombs. Now comes the robot-spy-in-the-sky.
The USS Wisconsin battleship has five "remotely piloted vehicles," unmanned drone aircraft that can loiter over battlefields and enemy vessels in the dead of night and inclement weather.
The cameras aboard these tiny robot planes with 17-foot wings can read the names off ships at 2,000 feet.
Petty Officer Neil Wood, a technician who cares for the planes, said he once used the robot to watch the crew of an Italian tanker play soccer on their deck.
"It was pretty neat," he said. "They had set up nets so they wouldn't lose the ball."
If the Wisconsin is ordered to bring its big 16-inch guns to bear on enemy land positions, the robot planes will serve as forward fire observers.
The slow-moving planes only travel 70 mph and are often ignored by enemy radar operators who mistake them for birds. Heat-seeking missiles cannot lock onto the small, quiet engines that power the planes.
All this could be bad news for Iraqi troops. The robot planes can look down from their silent vantage point and sniff out enemy troops in the dark of night and call in accurate fire from the battleship.
---
WITH U.S. MARINES, EASTERN SAUDI ARABIA (AP) - Iraqi forces positioned across the Kuwait border are apparently reinforcing their positions in anticipation of a ground battle.
Col. Ron Richard of the Marine 2nd Division intelligence says there are reports of "increased movement back and forth from the border" in southern Kuwait.
"Discounting enemy ability is just wishful thinking," Richard said. "He still has a lot of firepower and a lot of willingness to use it."
His pessimism is underscored by the failure of expected mass surrenders of Iraqi troops. Ground commanders now doubt there will be any significant numbers of enemy defectors.
"This is not an enemy that is going to go easy," Richard said.
That was evident on Monday when Iraqis once again fired mobile missiles at Marines along the Saudi side of the border. U.S. forces responded by pounding Iraqi positions with fighter-bomber raids. Secondary explosions were reported, indicating a direct hit.
The Marines and Iraqis have been trading harassing fire nearly every day since the war began.
The message is scrawled in air bases across the Persian Gulf and the 4th Tactical Fighter Wing Provisional is trying hard to obey the order: "Kill Scuds. Come Home!"
The Iraqi missile, the terror weapon of the Iran-Iraq war, has become the prime target for allied pilots.
"It represents a difficult targeting dilemma, but one that we are on big time and one that we will stay on big time," Lt. Gen. Thomas Kelly, director of operations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said Monday.
The redoubled efforts came after Sunday night's mini-blitz on the Saudi cities of Dhahran and Riyadh. Ten missiles were fired from Iraq or Kuwait. Nine were destroyed by U.S. Patriot air defense missiles, and a 10th fell harmlessly into the gulf.
Additional pressure to destroy the missiles comes from Israel, hit last week by Scuds. The attacks raised fears the Jewish state would retaliate and thereby rupture the allied coalition against Iraq.
But the hunt for the Scuds is a difficult one, complicated by bad weather and the elusive tactics of the Iraqi military.
Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, commander of U.S. forces in the gulf, said he believes allied pilots have managed to "neutralize" all of Iraq's estimated 30 fixed Scud launchers.
He estimated the Iraqis have another 20-plus mobile launchers that fire the 30-foot missiles, some with an estimated range of up to 600 miles.
Once a missile leaves the rail of its mobile launcher, the launcher is on the move to a new hiding place.
Kelly said the Iraqis have been setting up vehicles to look like the mobile launchers. "They do use decoys and they use them well," he said.
British pilots had some success over the weekend, pinpointing two key missile sites with low-flying reconnaissance missions.
"We are delighted that our missions have been so successful," said Brian Robinson, a Tornado pilot. "The Scuds have to be found and that's it."
---
ABOARD USS GUNSTON HALL (AP) - The men aboard America's newest amphibious assault vessel are the latest to enter the war zone, and they plan on fighting for months.
The USS Gunston Hall is in a gulf port for a week of routine maintenance before joining the amphibious assault team already assembled for a possible landing on the beaches of Kuwait.
Cpl. Robert Hildenbrand, 21, from Essexville, Mich., told reporters he believed the war would take longer than originally expected.
"At the beginning, they said weeks. Now I'm going to say months instead."
Another young officer, Steve Lahti, 32, of Minnesota said he saw no reason to hurry. "The longer the air war, the better," he said.
Gunston Hall, which carries 375 crew and 600 Marines, is one of the newest ships in the U.S. Navy, commissioned in April 1989. Its mission is to land Marines on enemy beaches.
Officials said Iraq appeared to have mined the beaches of Kuwait, and many of them had come loose from their moorings and were drifting south.
On board the Gunston Hall are three state-of-the-art hovercrafts never used before in combat, capable of traveling up to 50 knots an hour.
The ship also has been built to withstand nuclear and chemical attack. Air is filtered and pressurized.
"It's like being in a giant gas mask," said the captain of the Gunston Hall, Cmdr. William Marshall of Norfolk, Va.
---
WITH THE 82ND AIRBORNE (AP) - He has an Airborne patch, a camouflage desert scarf, a name tag, the rank of command private 1st class, marching orders and a place to sleep in the back of a vehicle.
His name is Dick, a rawboned hound dog adopted three months ago by Alpha Battery, 2nd Battalion of the 319th Airborne Field Artillery Regiment.
"He's been living with us so long he's one of us," said Sgt. 1st Class Philip Lemon, 33, of Denver.
"Everybody calls him, knows him, feeds him," said Lemon, who found the skinny mutt three months ago. "He lends an air of normalcy to the place."
Dick is a saluki, a cousin of the greyhound. His orders were signed by the commander of the artillery regiment, Lt. Col. Gerald Cummins. The dog has a place on the Air Force manifest for the flight north to a tactical assembly area near the border.
Dick travels light. He has a rubber ball and a food dish for leftover Spam and "Meal, Ready-to-Eat."
His favorite is leftover chicken a la king.

 

End of Document
