

Eighth of the 15 Soviet Republics Declares Independence
The Associated Press
August 30, 1991, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 603 words
Byline: By BRIAN FRIEDMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Azerbaijan declared its independence today, becoming the eighth of the 15 Soviet republics to announce it wants to secede.
The action means that more than half the Soviet republics - comprising about 80 million of the Soviet Union's population of 290 million - are now seeking independence.
Preceding today's independence declaration by Azerbaijan were the Baltic states of Latvia, Estonia and Lithuania and, since the failure of last week's hard-line coup, the Ukraine, Byelorussia, Moldavia and Georgia.
Some of the republics declaring independence may be doing so to gain bargaining leverage with Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Russian Federation President Boris Yeltsin, whose power has soared since he led opposition to the coup that briefly toppled Gorbachev.
However, Azerbaijani nationalists have long been agitating to unite with the Azerbaijani region across the border in northern Iran. The Iranian government vehemently opposes this.
Azerbaijan is engaged in a bloody ethnic conflict with the neighboring republic of Armenia over the jurisdiction of Nagorno-Karabakh. That mountainous region inside Azerbaijan is populated predominantly by Armenians.
Azerbaijan, a mostly Muslim area between the Caucasus Mountains and the Caspian Sea, has been a major oil-producing center with large refineries in the republic's capital, Baku.
The Supreme Soviet legislature of Azerbaijan - meeting in Baku - passed the independence measure unanimously, according to the Turan independent news agency. The Assa new agency, also independent, said there were two abstentions.
The legislature also adopted a decree to establish its own army "to defend the territorial integrity of Azerbaijan," Turan reported. Under the decree, the Azerbaijani Defense Commission is to develop a draft law on the structure of the forces within two weeks.
The lawmakers also lifted a state of emergency in effect in Baku since Jan. 20, 1990 - a week after Azerbaijanis attacked ethnic Armenian residents there. Scores of people, including Soviet troops, were killed in the unrest.
Azerbaijani President Ayaz Mutalibov last week was accused by members of the Popular Front nationalist movement of supporting the coup.
Since then, however, Mutalibov has taken actions against the Communist Party. He issued a decree Wednesday taking over a building in Baku that housed the local Lenin Museum and ordering it converted to another use. His government also took control of the building used by Baku's party committee and ordered it handed over to the city's fine arts museum.
The moves amounted to a wholesale neutralizing of party influence in the region that Communists ran like fiefdoms before the failed coup against Gorbachev.
Turan quoted the declaration as saying Azerbaijan was "restoring" its independence.
"Considering that from 1918 to 1920, Azerbaijan was recognized by the international community as a sovereign state, we declare the restoration of state independence, on the basis of the Constitution of the Azerbaijani Soviet Socialist Republic and the constitutional law on republic sovereignty," Turan quoted the resolution.
The declaration guarantees full equality to all people who live on the territory of the republic, irrespective of their ethnic or religious background, Turan reported.
The declaration also states the desire to "maintain friendly relations with all republics that are members of the Soviet Union" and a wish to establish equal relations with other countries.
The action represented the latest bid by a Soviet republic to take advantage of the weakening central authority following the coup and declare independence.

 

End of Document
