

Even If the Arabs Meet With Israel, What Can They Talk About?
The Associated Press
July 25, 1991, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 881 words
Byline: By RUTH SINAI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




When the flashbulbs stop popping and the handshakes subside, what will the Arabs and Israelis talk about?
So far, organizers of a Middle East peace conference haven't focused much beyond the huge task of getting both sides to sit down in one room, around one table, after facing each other on the battlefield for 43 years.
"We will break at least one major taboo in the sense that we will have Arab states sitting down and negotiating with Israel," said Secretary of State James A. Baker III, who doggedly promoted the peace conference plan on five trips to the Mideast this year.
Syria, Israel's most implacable enemy, has agreed to come to a peace conference. The acceptance by Syria, the main regional power broker, cleared the way for a "yes" from Israel's other neighbors, Jordan and Lebanon.
Saudi Arabia, which sweetened the pot for Syria's decision with badly needed financial aid, also will attend, but only as an observer. The Palestinians will be there, although the nature of their representation is still unclear. And Israel appears to be edging, albeit grudgingly, toward acceptance.
"This is a symbolically loaded step for both sides," said William Quandt, a former White House aide who helped formulate the only Arab-Israeli peace agreement ever reached - the 1979 treaty between Israel and Egypt.
"But once you get into details for the talks, it's really hard to imagine what they'll discuss," he said.
In fact, as regards substance, the sides appear as intractable as ever.
Israel's government, the most right-wing in the country's 43-year history, is adamantly opposed to giving up lands it captured in the 1967 Mideast war: the West Bank from Jordan, the Golan Heights from Syria and the Gaza Strip from Egypt.
Syria is equally determined to get back the Golan, which it used until 1967 to attack Israeli villages below the strategically located heights.
"There's very little indication that anyone has thought what the two have to negotiate about," said Quandt.
One idea that might be promoted to prevent the talks from breaking down, he suggested, is an interim agreement that would create buffer zones on the Golan and in southern Lebanon - where Israel maintains troops and an allied Lebanese militia.
Discussing the question of sovereignty over the Golan is a sure recipe for failure at this stage, Quandt and other Mideast scholars said.
Another sensitive topic that likely would be avoided is the question of Jerusalem. Israel captured and annexed the eastern part of Jerusalem from Jordan in 1967, and regards the unified city as its capital. The Arabs view Jerusalem as one of Islam's holiest sites and many see it as the capital of a future Palestinian state.
As envisioned now, the conference will start with a formal session under U.S. and Soviet auspices, at which each party will state its position.
On the following day or several days later, the sides will meet directly in so-called working groups: Israelis and Syrians; Israelis and a Palestinian-Jordanian delegation; Israelis and Lebanese; Israelis and Jordanians.
Soon after - maybe 10 days - another group consisting of all the parties as well as the Persian Gulf states and possibly Turkey, will convene to debate regional issues: sharing water resources, stemming arms proliferation and easing refugee problems.
The clearest agenda at the conference is the Israeli-Palestinian one. Under a proposal that Israel appears inclined to accept, the 1.7 million Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza would be granted self-rule for a period of three to five years, with the question of future sovereignty over the territories to be decided in later negotiations.
The Palestinians regard the self-rule arrangement as a way station on the road to an independent state in the West Bank.
But Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir has made clear he views some form of self-rule arrangement as a permanent one - in his words, the final solution will be "less than a state but more than autonomy."
That vague vision is one that appears characteristic of all the sides' views of the conference, its agenda and results.
For instance, will Jordan cede the West Bank to Palestinian rule? And how does it envision the future of east Jerusalem which it controlled from 1949 to 1967? Will Israel demand the withdrawal of Syria's 40,000 troops from Lebanon? Will Syria and Lebanon insist Israel pull its forces out of Lebanon where they are stationed to intercept Palestinian guerrillas?
What role for the Americans, Soviets, the European Community and the United Nations? The U.N. will likely only act as a silent observer. But despite Israel's insistence on direct, face-to-face talks, U.S. officials likely will be called upon often to break logjams and offer compromises.
All these questions have yet to be comprehensively addressed.
The Bush administration doesn't have the answers, but it wants to avoid a repeat of the only other Arab-Israeli peace conference ever convened.
It was December 1973 in Geneva. The session was heavy with Egyptian, Jordanian and Soviet demands that Israel withdraw from captured territories. It resulted in Israeli-Egyptian talks to stop the shooting war in the Sinai Peninsula. Syria boycotted the session.
It lasted one day.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Ruth Sinai reports on foreign affairs for The Associated Press.

 

End of Document
