

Excerpts of Statements Wednesday on Iraq Before The Security Council
The Associated Press
March 11, 1992, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 693 words
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Here are excerpts of statements Wednesday to the Security Council on demands for Iraqi compliance with U.N. cease-fire resolutions ending the Gulf War:
---
British Ambassador David Hannay:
The list of Iraqi non-compliance is … a long and sorry one … It is through full compliance with all relevant Security Council resolutions and by that route alone that peace and stability can be brought again to the Gulf region.
A year ago Iraq was expelled from Kuwait by force of arms under authority of the United Nations. The use of force was required because Iraq miscalculated and believed that this Council was bluffing. There was an opportunity then for Iraq to comply, which she failed to take. There is an opportunity again now for Iraq to comply. I hope she will not again miscalculate.
---
Chinese Ambassador Li Daoyou:
At the very beginning of the Gulf crisis, China stated in unequivocal terms its resolute opposition to the Iraqi armed invasion of Kuwait. We have all along stood for the peaceful coexistence among all countries and the peaceful resolution of disputes. This constitutes the basic starting point of China's proposal for the establishment of a new international political and economic order.
China, like other members of the Security Council, believes the resolutions adopted by the Security Council remain essential to the restoration of peace and stability in the Gulf region and must be fully implemented.
---
French Ambassador Jean-Bernard Merimee:
It is time for Iraq to submit to us a precise and full accounting of its military program … The balance sheet clearly shows Iraq's failure to abide by the resolutions of the Security Council. My country today cannot accept a lifting or a mitigation of the resolutions.
As long as Iraq hides documents and materials, on what basis can we establish that destruction of missiles has been carried out 100 percent … and not to the proportion of the liking of the Iraqi officials..
---
Japanese Ambassador Yoshio Hatano:
Japan does not want to see Iraq remain an outcast of the international community; Iraq and the Iraqi people have suffered enough. I remember how Japan suffered at the end of the last world war but I still remember how Japan was helped by the international community represented by the United Nations. It is Japan's earnest hope that Iraq will soon be welcomed to the world community as a responsible member, but the only way, the only way toward that goal is Iraq's compliance with all the relevant Security Council Resolutions.
---
Hungarian Ambassador Andre Erdos:
After the end of hostilities in the region, the council in its numerous resolutions clearly and unambiguously stated those demands Iraq would have to meet … The resolutions of the council cannot be viewed as grounds for negotiation.
---
Belgian Ambassador M. Paul Noterdaeme:
Throughout the Gulf crisis, Belgium's policy was motivated by objectives based on respect for international law. Kuwait was liberated and our council itself laid down the conditions for the cease-fire. The Iraqi government must respect all of its international obligations … Iraq must fully dismantle its weapons of mass destruction.
---,
Indian Ambassador Chinmaya Gharekhan:
Resolution 687, as we all know, is a landmark decision of the council. It is important to note that Iraq and the international community as a whole … have accepted that resolution.
Today's opportunity of a dialogue with the deputy prime minister of Iraq should open the door to peaceful resolution of all problems in the Gulf. My country fervently hopes we can work together to put the grim chapter of the Gulf conflict behind and strive to achieve what the U.N. Charter seeks to achieve.
---
Zimbabwean Ambassador S.S. Mumbengegwi:
Of great concern to us is the humanitarian situation in the region. Following the adoption of Resolution 687, we'd had hoped that democracy would be speedily restored to the Gulf region. But almost a year after the end of the war, the serious humanitarian situation shows no signs of abating.
We are deeply concerned about the still unresolved question of missing Kuwaiti persons. Resolution 687 clearly imposes on Iraq to release all Kuwaiti nationals.

 

End of Document
