

Extravaganza and Nightmare Both: The World Descends on New York
 The Associated Press
October 22, 1995, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1071 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Presidents and premiers from around the world sat down together to dine and offer toasts to peace Saturday night in a citadel of American finance, kicking off a four-day celebration of the 50th anniversary of the United Nations.
"Many in America are questioning the role of the United Nations," master of ceremonies Henry A. Kissinger said, but "The United Nations has played a useful, sometimes decisive role in maintaining the peace."
The former secretary of state joined dozens of world leaders and U.S. business executives at the opening-night dinner hosted by Mayor Rudolph Giuliani.
But all was not harmonious. Yasser Arafat was not invited to the dinner and had to make do on his own - at a banquet across the street with his Palestinian friends. The gathering raised at least $ 350,000 for the benefit of two hospitals in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank.
"We promise you a democratic Palestinian state!" Arafat declared joyously to about 1,000 Palestinian-Americans who interrupted him repeatedly with such patriotic chants as "We sacrifice ourselves for Palestine!"
The Saturday-to-Tuesday diplomatic jamboree of meetings, speechmaking and motorcades through chaotic city streets is history's greatest gathering of world leaders - and New York's biggest security nightmare.
"It will probably be the largest security force ever implemented in the city," said the local FBI chief, James Kallstrom.
Outside the World Financial Center, site of Saturday's gala dinner, hundreds of city police and federal agents wrapped a security blanket around the downtown Manhattan district. They had rooftop anti-sniper teams, bomb-sniffing dogs and police boats on the nearby Hudson River at their disposal.
Inside, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the U.N. secretary general, told New Yorkers that their city and his organization "have had a love affair. … There are many divorces, but we will not let this happen to us."
Beneath the vaulted, 120-foot-high glass ceiling of the financial center's Winter Garden lobby, the guests sat down to a main course of chicken, lamb or vegetable timbale.
Settling on a menu for dignitaries from more than 170 lands wasn't easy. Chief caterer Liz Neumark had to cross beef, veal, pork and shellfish - the politically or religiously incorrect - off the list.
The setting, in a headquarters complex for major Wall Street companies, was both monumental and mundane.
Tables were arrayed before a vast, 42-step marble stairway that served as a speaker's podium, and beneath a dozen 50-foot-tall California palms. But the diners also were surrounded, in typical lobby "mall" fashion, by shops selling everything from shoes to art to cosmetics.
Across the street, at the Vista Hotel, Arab-American groups organized a dinner to honor Palestinian leader Arafat and to raise money for causes connected with the emerging Palestine "entity" in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Giuliani's "uninvited" list also included Fidel Castro, but the Cuban president won't be idle. Business leaders are flying in by corporate jet from around the country to meet with Castro to explore economic opportunities in Cuba if the U.S. embargo is lifted, said John Kavulich of the U.S.-Cuba Trade and Economic Council.
"By Wednesday, he will have seen close to 200 business executives," he said.
Castro also will travel to Harlem and its landmark Abyssinian Baptist Church on Sunday to address American activist supporters of improved U.S.-Cuban relations. He can expect to hear loud contrary voices from Cuban emigre protesters, including his defector daughter Alina Fernandez Revuelta.
Castro arrived in New York on Saturday, as did Russian President Boris Yeltsin and Chinese President Jiang Zemin. Arafat arrived Friday night.
Security concerns may have prompted one last-minute cancellation: by Egypt's President Hosni Mubarak, who escaped assassination four months ago in Ethiopia, apparently an attempt by Islamic extremists. Another Islamic target, Algeria's President Liamine Zeroual, is still scheduled to attend.
In faithful U.N. fashion, the half-century-old Middle East conflict has dominated even the anniversary celebration.
Arabs were still wrangling with the Americans and British on Saturday over wording in the three-day special session's final declaration, particularly a paragraph reaffirming peoples' rights to "self-determination" under "foreign occupation," phrases long linked to Israel's occupied territories.
The declaration, a recommitment to U.N. ideals, will be adopted Tuesday, the anniversary of the Oct. 24, 1945, ratification of the U.N. Charter. It will climax an unprecedented marathon of five-minute speeches by more than 200 kings, presidents, prime ministers, foreign ministers and other leaders of U.N. member states and international organizations.
The visiting heads of state and government also will attend a black-tie Clinton reception Sunday evening in the marble-columned New York Public Library, and a New York Philharmonic performance of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony on Monday night at Lincoln Center.
But the nitty-gritty business of this diplomatic extravaganza will be conducted in numberless "bilats" - one-on-one meetings between government chiefs to discuss bilateral concerns.
Clinton tops the list with his summit sessions with Russian President Boris Yeltsin on Monday in upstate Hyde Park and with Chinese President Jiang Zemin back in New York on Tuesday. But all in all, probably more than 500 bilateral meetings will take place, as cavalcades of armored limousines and black security vehicles race - or crawl - across midtown Manhattan.
City officials issued a "full gridlock alert" for Monday and Tuesday, warning motorists to stay away.
Lost among the sirens and photo opportunities will be what was once considered an ideal opportunity to enact major U.N. reforms.
As recently as last year, some diplomats saw the 50th anniversary as a time to restructure the Security Council, for one thing, to give the developing world and such powers as Germany and Japan a greater role on the U.N. "board of directors."
But a draft of the final declaration calls only vaguely for "expanding" the Council, with no specifics.
The draft also declares that "the United Nations must have adequate resources." But scores of those paying tribute to the world organization this week are official deadbeats, owing a total of some $ 3 billion in assessments. The biggest of all is the United States, which owes $ 1.3 billion.
 Load-Date: October 22, 1995

 

End of Document
