

Famine Conquered, Yanks Turn Over Command To The U.N.
The Associated Press
May 4, 1993, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 853 words
Byline: By PAUL ALEXANDER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOGADISHU, Somalia
Body




Marine Lt. Gen. Robert Johnston proclaimed the U.S.-led relief effort in Somalia a success Tuesday as he handed over control to the United Nations, telling his successor "It's all yours."
That simple comment signaled the end of Operation Restore Hope and the start of Operation Continue Hope, a reconstruction period aimed at helping war-ravaged Somalia struggle back to its feet.
The U.N. military commander, Lt. Gen. Cevik Bir of Turkey, called the new aid project "historic and unprecedented" in its scope.
Thanks in part to Operation Restore Hope, Somalia is recovering steadily from a civil war that devastated the countryside and led to lawlessness and famine.
Bandits once roamed haughtily in weapons-mounted vehicles, and an estimated 350,000 people died last year from conflict, starvation and disease.
A U.S.-led military coalition came ashore Dec. 9 to safeguard the food shipments that were being looted from aid agencies.
Today, starvation has virtually ended. Aid agencies like the Red Cross are phasing out food programs and focusing more on vaccinations and other health care. Daily death rates in cities like Bardera and Baidoa have dropped from hundreds a day to less than a dozen each.
Markets are thriving, and other than the wooden canes used widely for everything from parental discipline to traffic control, the only visible weapons on the streets belong to the military.
But the threat of violence persists, and Somalis worry that their country could easily slip back into the quicksand of clan violence.
"Let there be no doubt, we are ready … to enforce the peace as necessary," declared Bir, who will command a force that is projected to peak at 28,000 troops, including 4,000 Americans.
Just to drive that point home, there was a show of force after Johnston and a contingent of more than 200 U.S. troops left for home Tuesday.
Blackhawk helicopters, part of the 1,300-strong U.S. quick-reaction force that will be called on to extinguish any brush fires of unrest around the country, circled the city all afternoon and into the night. Tanks and armored personnel carriers roamed on patrols.
Earlier, Johnston and Bir began their low-key handover ceremony - typical of the effort for a 'seamless transition" - by inspecting an honor guard from coalition countries.
The Americans' floppy camouflage hats mingled with the Pakistanis' green-feathered berets, the Australians' slouch hats and the blue U.N. berets. A Pakistani bagpipe-and-drum band provided the music.
Johnston described encountering the starvation, devastation and disease when the troops first arrived and began seeing the magnitude of the problem as they deployed across the countryside.
"It was one thing to see it on TV and see it in the newspaper, but quite another thing to witness the effects of famine first-hand, to feel it, smell it, to look into the eyes of children who were completely emotionless, instinctively struggling to survive," he said.
"Now the famine is behind them. They have learned to smile. It's a good feeling to have been part of that, to make it so different."
He described the changes in Mogadishu.
Only a few hundred of the thousands of refugees have abandoned their stick-and-plastic huts to try to return home and eke out a living.
But there are few other visible reminders of how bad things became: fields littered with shallow graves, artillery-damaged buildings, children defecating by the roadside due to lack of sewage disposal.
"It's like night and day," Johnston said. "We've given the city back to the Somalis. You can see it as marketplaces begin to grow. Somalis are painting and rebuilding their houses.
"I am also aware that while this is a successful mission, it will not be truly successful until UNOSOM II (U.N. Operation in Somalia II) takes over and continues to demonstrate we have the capability and will to make sure that Somalia has the will to get back on its feet for the long haul."
There were stark reminders Tuesday of the lingering dangers.
U.N. special envoy Adm. Jonathan Howe began his address with a moment of silence for the eight Americans and 10 soldiers from other countries who lost their lives during Operation Restore Hope.
Cpl. Michael David Abel, 27, of Sidney, British Columbia, became the 18th fatality when he was accidentally shot Monday by a fellow Canadian soldier cleaning his rifle in Belet Huen.
And the Dutch branch of Doctors Without Borders said it has suspended its aid project in Baidoa and removed its 10 relief workers there because of frequent death threats. A Somali nurse working for the group was killed two weeks ago.
"The increasing danger in Baidoa is a direct result of the fact that the … U.N. intervention operation until now has not been able to lay a groundwork for peace in Somalia," the group said, citing the lack of a court system or effective police force.
Johnston admitted a lot of work remains for the U.N. force, but that it will take a lot of cooperation from the populace.
"Yes, there are still bandits out there," he said. U.N. forces "will continue to make them disappear." But, he added, "The future of Somalia is in the hands of Somalis."

 

End of Document
