

Fighters Witness 'History in the Making'
The Associated Press
January 17, 1991, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 593 words
Byline: Associated Press Writer
Dateline: IN CENTRAL SAUDI ARABIA
Body




The first of two squadrons of F-15E fighter-bombers broke the night silence with the blast of afterburners as they headed north to targets in Iraq and Kuwait.
The thunder of the departing planes sent many servicemen and women bolting from their cots at this airbase. Some left their tents and talked in small groups.
"This is history in the making," said Col. Ray Davies, 44, of Saddlebrook, N.J., the wing maintenance chief, who watched the first planes roar into the blackened night, where the stars were masked by clouds. "The object was to achieve the ultimate surprise that we could."
It was 12:50 a.m. local time. The F-15E's took off for the next five hours; even as the last four of the planes departed at 5:50 a.m., just as the sky was breaking into a pink-tinged dawn, some of the planes that had left in the first wave were returning.
As the planes taxied down the flight line to their parking spaces, many of the air crews waved and gestured to ground crew on the side. One weapons officer in the back seat vigorously raised both arms with thumbs up.
All had returned safely. There was hardly a pause in operations, however; four F-15C air superiority fighters took off at about 6:05 a.m. Lt. Leroy Williams, 35, of Sumter, S.C., hoped that "The guys who went in first took out the SAMs" - anti-aircraft missiles.
As the F-15C's disappeared into the dawn sky, F-16A pilots from the Air National Guard 157th Tactical Fighter Squadron based in Columbia, S.C., came out of the squadron ready room and headed towards their waiting planes, already loaded with fuel, air-to-air missiles and a 2,000-pound bomb under each wing.
Tech. Sgt. James Turner, 30, of Columbia, led the media pool to one of the F-16As. He pointed proudly to the bomb hanging under its right wing, inscribed in white chalk with the message addressed to Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein: "This is from my mommy and me for sending my daddy away for such a long time. Love, Austin!"
Turner said he received the message in a birthday card from his 7-year-old daughter Austin Shaun on Jan. 15, his 30th birthday.
As the F-16A squadron pilots headed across the tarmac in their green flying suits, one said, "See you in about two hours." Another shouted "Godspeed!" Many wore lapel pins, each depicting a guardian angel.
"My mom sent them out to the squadron. We need all the help we can get," said Capt. Dean "Dawg" Pennington, 32, of Columbia.
Looking down from the cockpit of his F-16A, as he prepared for action, Capt. John Richardson, a 35-year-old American Airlines pilot from Chapel Hill, N.C., said he was "looking forward to getting it over with."
Tech Sgt. George Martin, 49, of Blythewood, S.C., watched the blue-grey planes with bubble canopies start their engines, and worried aloud about the pilots.
"I hope we did everything we had to. You don't know all their names, but you know they are all the same family," said the burly maintenance technician. "I'd like to see them all come back - not all shot up, messed up.'
Then the three dozen F-16's took off, one every 15 seconds.
It reminded Staff Sgt. Doug Wilson, 39, of Neismith, S.C., of a time 18 years ago, back at Korat airbase in Thailand in the spring of 1973, watching 173 U.S. warplanes lift off in one single massive strike.
"It's amazing. It's almost 22 years to the day the Tet offensive started," said Tech Sgt. Edward Ott, 44, of Bamberg, S.C., another Vietnam veteran.
"I hope it's not in vain," Wilson said.
And as the last F-16A disappeared into the sky, Leroy Williams expressed only resignation. "We can't stop it now," he said.

 

End of Document
