

Flame, Smoke and Anxious Armies Along the Kuwaiti Border
The Associated Press
February 13, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 627 words
Byline: By MARK FRITZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: AT THE KUWAITI BORDER
Body




Geysers of fire spew from the ground to form a massive black cloud that fills the horizon, an apocalyptic panorama of darkness and light. From the ouside looking in, this is Kuwait.
To travel the Saudi side of the Kuwaiti border is to witness a battleground in the sky. Huge brown puffs burst from the sand with each percussive crash of a B-52's bomb. Patrolling helicopters skim low, churning up snaking sandstorms that take several minutes to disperse.
But even those curling clouds of smoke and sand pale next to the greatest spectacle in the sky over southern Kuwait, where burning oil fields have created an almost volcanic, primordial skyscape that spans the field of vision.
Roaring from the ground at one vantage point are at least 20 huge columns of flame, some of them appearing as close as 2 or 3 miles and others as far as 30 or 40. The blazes send thick ropes of smoke into a low, dense shelf of black cloud that cloaks the barren countryside.
There are two distinct oil fields on fire, one of them apparently the Umm Gadir field. The U.S. military contends that Iraqi soldiers set some of the wells on fire, presumably to create a cloud cover from the relentless allied air attacks.
U.S. officials also acknowledge that allied bombing may have set some of the wells ablaze. U.S. Marines say allied air strikes ingited some of the fires.
The nightmarish scene is the most vivid image along the road that runs parallel to the Saudi-Kuwait border, which is also the frontier of the war.
The road begins at the evacuated Saudi city of Ruqi and runs 60 miles to the apex of the right angle formed by Kuwait's southern border. It is here that a "road closed" sign and the gargantuan oil fires signal that something is terribly wrong in Kuwait.
The rest of the road is one long military encampment dominated by Saudi, Egyptian, Syrian and some American forces. To drive down the road is to drive past the best tanks, trucks and camouflage clothing that the money of several nations can buy.
Security is extremely tight. A U.S. Army intelligence officer, speaking on condition of anonymity, said there have been instances where Iraqi soldiers have attempted to infiltrate by donning the uniforms of allied Arabs.
The Marine patrol said it received reports that terrorists may be driving four-wheel-drive trucks similiar to the one being driven by a reporter.
The usually affable Egyptian forces became extremely agitated by one unexpected visitor. Captains and majors buttoned their shirts, slapped on their helmets and grabbed their guns.
Soldiers scrambled to their positions in the sand. One climbed a large berm mounted with a rifle and prepared to fire. He squeezed off a shot while the intruder drew nearer.
"Stay here," a captain barked to a pair of journalists he had invited into his armored personnel carrier for soda pop and cigarettes.
The cause of the drill? An Egyptian television camera crew was out in the field, ready to record the home army's state of readiness.
The action was much more intense at a Marine post at a narrow part of the frontier, where officers said they were in range of artillery fire. A captain pointed at a small Saudi village just a few hundred yards off the road.
"We took the town not too long ago," he said. It had been overrun by Iraqi soldiers shortly after the war began, and the captian said the Marines called in artillery fire and drove the Iraqis out, taking some prisoners.
The Marines also said they pick up Iraqi deserters almost daily, as do other units along the border.
Mohammed Magdi, a 23-year-old Egyptian soldier, said he watched Monday as two Iraqi soldiers walked to the border and gave up. The deserters said they fled from their own positions under a hail of bullets.
"When I saw them I thought, 'We win,"' he said.

 

End of Document
