

Following in the Footsteps of Weary American Diplomats
The Associated Press
April 16, 1991, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 744 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Only 10 months ago, James A. Baker III, the politically savvy secretary of state who does not like to waste time, offered the White House telephone number to Arabs and Israelis.
"When you are serious about peace, call us," Baker said about what he even today describes as the most intractable of all the problems on the world scene: the Arab-Israeli dispute.
But today Baker will fly to Luxembourg for talks with European foreign ministers and then to Israel to begin on Thursday his third Middle East mission in a little more than six weeks.
The detachment that enveloped Baker 10 months ago has given way to Mideast fever. It's the same disease that infected three of his predecessors, Henry Kissinger, Cyrus Vance and George Shultz, with mixed results.
Kissinger managed to pull off a couple of partial agreements between Israel and its two toughest Arab foes, Egypt and Syria.
But he also had a mission end in failure, and it took more than a month of shuttling between Jerusalem and Damascus to pry the Israeli and Syrian armies apart on the Golan Heights.
Vance paved the way for President Carter's virtuoso performance at Camp David in 1978, which produced the Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty a year later - the first between Israel and an Arab state.
Carter gambled that if he could be alone with Egyptian President Anwar Sadat and Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin in Maryland's Catoctin Mountains he could narrow the differences between them.
Carter won the bet.
Shultz tried as hard and as sincerely as anyone. "What am I saving myself for?" he asked reporters who questioned why he was piling up so many miles for so little result.
His strategy was to listen patiently to all sides. He had some brickbats hurled at him. Palestinian Arabs did not show up for a meeting in East Jerusalem. Shultz went ahead with a speech to his invisible audience anyhow.
When Jordanian authorities did not like his favorable remarks about Israel in an interview in Amman they simply did not publish the interview. But Shultz did not tailor his approach to suit King Hussein.
He plodded on, taking into consideration everyone's views, and he put together a plan for a Middle East settlement.
No one said no. But no one said yes.
And now there is Baker, heading for the Middle East only about 100 hours since his return from the region last Friday night.
Why is he going back?
"No one knows how long this opportunity will exist," Margaret D. Tutwiler, the State Department spokeswoman, said Monday in announcing the trip.
As is customary from the press room podium, she carefully balanced some mildly optimistic cliches with the caveat that "there is much work to be done … and a long way to go."
Baker, himself, said last week the conflict could not be resolved with just a couple of trips by the secretary of state.
The expectation was that he would return sooner rather than later. But why is he going back this quickly?
"I don't know anything major has changed," one diplomat said Monday after the trip was announced. "I think the idea is if you keep up the pace it will move."
Indeed, the glass is half-full and also half-empty.
On the one hand, Baker now has agreement in principle from Israel, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Syria and Jordan for negotiations on an Arab-Israeli settlement.
Palestinian Arabs would participate. One of the main goals of the talks would be peace between Israel and the Arab states. The other goal would be resolution of the Palestinian problem.
The Soviet Union would participate.
Those are the main ingredients of the part of the glass that is half-full.
The other half is empty, and that is the part Baker is working on.
Who would represent the Palestinians? Would they have their own delegation or share a delegation with Jordan? Could Palestinians from East Jerusalem participate? How about Palestinians who were deported from the West Bank?
Would the Soviet Union be a co-sponsor of the peace talks with the United States? Would the Soviets be an active participant or an offstage presence?
And would the conference be a regional one, as Israel prefers, or more or less on an international scale, involving, for instance, Britain, France and China?
Baker will search for answers to these questions.
The betting is he will go home in about a week with some answers and with some questions remaining.
And that could only lead to more Middle East diplomacy.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Barry Schweid has covered U.S. diplomacy in the Middle East for The Associated Press for 18 years.

 

End of Document
