

For Dissidents, Uncertainty Lurks Behind The Welcoming Euphoria
The Associated Press
May 13, 1994, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 656 words
Byline: By DONNA ABU-NASR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GAZA CITY, Gaza Strip
Body




While most Palestinians danced in the streets to celebrate self-rule, several thousand opponents of the peace accord gathered in a sports stadium Friday to pledge their continued fight against Israel.
"Hamas will not abandon the path of holy war until all of Palestine is liberated," read a banner by the outlawed Islamic Resistance Movement, which dominated the gathering.
The rally of Islamic and secular protestors was the first since the Palestinian police began deploying in the Gaza Strip Monday - a show of defiance by activists who have dedicated their lives to eliminating Israel.
But the organizers do not seek open confrontation. A few minutes after the 2,000-strong crowd had vowed to fight and not give up, Israeli troops threw a few rounds of tear gas outside the stadium at stone-throwers.
Hamas organizers quickly canceled the remaining speeches and told the crowd not to provoke the Israelis, promising them "other chances to do it." The youths marched to Palestine Square, where they prayed and dispersed peacefully.
The opposition groups have a dilemma. Few think they could garner more than 20 percent against the mainstream PLO Fatah group in an election, yet they want to influence the future government without actively participating in it. They want the experiment to fail, so that they can be seen as the only viable alternative.
Their main vehicle for attracting followers has been attacks against Israelis. But that would stir the ire of the new authority and possibly the public, eager for stability after years of occupation violence. Attacks against fellow Palestinians would also prove unpopular, and they have vowed to avoid them.
Hamas, Islamic Jihad and the secular groups, Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine and Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine, have voiced fears that the Palestinian police will act as a surrogate occupier, cracking down to appease the Israelis. The agreement demands that the Palestinians stop any violence against Israelis.
Dr. Omar Farwaneh, a Hamas sympathizer, said he feared the Palestinian police would prevent attacks that opponents still consider legitimate while occupation exists elsewhere in the territories.
"I'm very scared that in the next few months we will be caught between two fires, the Israeli fire and the Palestinian fire," he said. "The new police force should realize that we have suffered a lot under occupation and that we cannot put up with a new one."
Even supporters of the accord, like Fatah Hawks, a militant wing of the PLO that has enforced a certain kind of law and order in the streets, are worried because the presence of the police will strip them of their powers, leaving them jobless and with no education to make a living.
The top PLO police officer, Maj. Gen. Nasser Yousef, has said the autonomy government would seek a quiet dialogue with its opponents.
Sheik Abdullah Shami, leader of Islamic Jihad, said no one can cancel God's given permission for jihad, or holy war, adding that the Palestinian police "would become a target for all revolutionaries" if they tried to impede the militants.
Critics believe the deal to start self-rule in the Gaza Strip and Jericho gave up too much to the Israelis, doubting that future talks can resolve major issues like the presence of more than 120,000 Jewish settlers in the occupied territories or Jewish control over Jerusalem, also holy to Muslims.
"They have sold our towns to repair the sewage in Gaza, to pave the roads for their luxurious cars and to fill the bellies of those who will drive them," said Sheik Ahmed Nimr, a Hamas preacher, at the rally.
In the Sheik Radwan neighborhood, a Hamas stronghold, there is little manifestation of joy. There are no Palestinian flags hanging from balconies and no welcoming banners.
"How can anyone be happy when the Israelis will remain in control even after they disappear from our streets?" said Sheik Ahmed Bahr, a leading Hamas cleric.
 Load-Date: May 13, 1994

 

End of Document
