

For The Kuwaiti Woman: The Message Was Brief
The Associated Press
January 22, 1991, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 618 words
Byline: By JOHN POMFRET, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MANAMA, Bahrain
Body




For the Kuwaiti woman, the message was brief: Your brothers, fighters in the Kuwaiti resistance, are dead.
The woman said one brother, a 26-year-old student, was shot in the head in front of his family's house after Iraqi soldiers found a cache of arms in his garage. Her 40-year-old brother died of a heart attack after troops uncovered a machine gun in his car - a ticket to the firing squad, the message reported.
Saltoon Gholoom said the news that traveled along a well-worn but secret pathway from Kuwait did not shake her or even make her sad.
Instead, she said the message, received over the weekend after allied forces began a war for Kuwait, filled her with pride.
"I prayed for their souls," said Mrs. Gholoom, 38, a mother of six. "I used to think fighting wasn't necessary. Now I know to die like that is glorious. It was no waste, no nothing. I'd be happy to die like that."
Around the room of her temporary shelter - an unfinished concrete dwelling in a unfinished Bahraini neighborhood - her husband and fellow refugees nodded Monday, murmuring over their tea.
"The martyrs will go straight to heaven," said a family friend, Ali Juhail. "Death is good sometimes."
The war to free their homeland is being interpreted as a hard lesson for the refugees from Iraqi-occupied Kuwait.
Pampered for years by an oil-rich economy, educated in Western universities and tended to by Third World manual laborers, the Kuwaitis say the fight is teaching them the meaning of freedom.
"We will never be the same," said Hisham Rahman, 28, an official in the now-closed Ministry of Finance and a graduate of San Diego State University.
Iraq's invasion of Kuwait on Aug. 2 forced hundreds of thousands to flee spacious homes and a comfortable life.
Now thousands of them live as refugees, existing on handouts and hope in Bahrain, Saudi Arabia and other countries in the Persian Gulf.
Many of Bahrain's 12,000 Kuwaitis inhabit a dusty development of semi-detached concrete houses called Hamad Town. At night, the air fills with the roar of U.S. Marine Corps jets, fighting the Iraqi occupation.
Kuwait's contribution to its own defense has been minimal. About three brigades of questionable military effectiveness, 15 Mirage F-1s fighters, 20 Skyhawk fighter bombers, some helicopter gunships and 30-40 tanks escaped the country after Iraq's lightning invasion.
Indeed, most of the blood spilled for Kuwait will not be Kuwaiti. It will be from larger armies among the U.S.-led alliance of 28 nations.
But among many refugee families and among Kuwaitis as a whole, what one Western diplomat called "a willingness to die," appears to be emerging.
"People said we were weak but after this crisis we will emerge stronger," said Abdul Rahman, a 66-year-old father of seven boys who has two sons in the army. "It's a lesson to pass to all of our children and for the rest of our history."
Kuwait's history as an independent country goes back only 30 years - the export of oil, the mainstay of its economy, only 45.
It's independence wasn't won; it was a present from London, which had controlled the kingdom's defenses and foreign relations since 1899.
With booming oil profits during the 1970s and shrewd investments, per capita gross national product for its 650,000 citizens jumped to more than $$27,000 a year by 1989.
By that time only an estimated 40 percent of the country was Kuwaiti. Palestinians, workers from India and Pakistan, South Korea and the Philippines made the country work.
But when the Iraqi invasion came, only the Kuwaitis were left to defend their country.
"We realized we have to do things ourselves," Mrs. Gholoom said.
Looking at video of American pilots on her television set, she added: "But we still need help."

 

End of Document
