

For West Bank Settlers, It's Peace Plan vs The Bible
The Associated Press
September 4, 1993, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 795 words
Byline: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAT AYIN, Occupied West Bank
Body




Looking out over terraced vineyards and white, rocky hills that disappear into the haze of the Mediterranean, Dani Hoffman sees not Israel, but a promise from God.
"The country is here to be the beginning of the kingdom of the Jewish people," he said..
And if the state no longer follows that goal?
"We will fight," said Hoffman, a 43-year-old dentist.
An agreement Israel approved this week, which would grant some autonomy in the occupied territories under the guidance of the Palestine Liberation Organization, came as shock to the 120,000 settlers in the West Bank.
The shock may be transformed into violence if they are convinced the agreement crosses the line between following the law of the government and following Biblical laws about reclaiming the entire Land of Israel.
"There will be some groups - and it's enough to have two or three groups - who will organize to do something to stop the process," said Menachem Friedman, a religious affairs professor at Bar Ilan University near Tel Aviv. "That might include assassinations of figures in the government."
In a poll of settlers published by the newspaper Yediot Ahronot last week, 70 percent said they would never leave. Two percent said they would take up arms, even against the Israeli army, to retain the land.
"For an underground, you don't need 98 percent," Friedman said. "What you need is a society that will cover. I am afraid of the others that will know and will say to themselves, OK."
The last time a violent Jewish underground emerged was in the 1980s, when settlers believed the government was turning a blind eye to Arab attacks on them.
Members were jailed for firing at random on students at Hebron University, killing three, and maiming two Arab mayors with car bombs. Some also plotted to blow up the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem, one of Islam's holiest sites.
The secular and religious currents of Zionism have maintained an uneasy alliance since Israel was founded in 1948, based on the strong taboo against shedding Jewish blood and the common goal of a Jewish homeland.
"Now one current is wrecking the other's dream," Yehoshua Bin-Nun, a settler leader, said on television last week.
Trouble between the two branches of Zionism has arisen before. In 1983, a grenade thrown by Jewish extremists at a peace demonstration killed a high- school teacher.
This time it will be "much worse," Hoffman predicted. "Now, you are speaking about the heart."
Friedman said words could create the atmosphere for violence.
"If people define the situation as threatening the existence of the Jewish state, if you say some ministers are traitors, if you say it is a death sentence for the Jewish future," he said, "those kinds of words are the essential step toward organizing a group that will act accordingly."
Such language already can be heard. Elitzur Butvia of the Kiryat Arba settlement said on Israel television he would shoot any soldier who tried to remove him from the town, even his own son.
"The laws of the Torah override the laws of the government. They override the laws of the army," said Shlomo Goren, a retired chief rabbi of Israel, also speaking on Israel television. He was justifying his statement that killing PLO leader Yasser Arafat would be acceptable, but Jews are not necessarily exempt as potential targets of settler violence.
"If there is a situation where the existence of hundreds of thousands of Jews is in danger, their families, themselves, it could bring about a civil war," said Rabbi Eliezer Melamed of the Beit El settlement. "In such a situation, grave outbursts will be unstoppable."
Experts believe the first violence will occur between Jews and Arabs, carried out by settlers and such militant Islamic groups as Hamas.
"Hamas will do what they can to provoke the government to react, and the settlers will do the same thing," Friedman said. "So the government and the PLO have a difficult job."
Last week, Israeli newspapers quoted security officials as saying they were aware of the problem, and that suspected members of underground organizations were being followed and questioned.
"The ability of a small group to try to torpedo a process with this or that kind of action exists," Reuven Hazak, former deputy head of the Shin Bet security police, told Israel radio.
Opponents have said they will try to stop the agreement through legal means if demonstrations fail. On the night it was approved by Israel, police used water cannons to drive a chanting mob away from Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's office.
Some experts believe even a little violence will make the government timid about taking further steps, but others disagree.
"The most they can do is slow it down or slow down the next stage" of the plan, said Gerald Steinberg of the strategic studies center at Bar Ilan.

 

End of Document
