

Foreign Trade Balance Plunges Back into the Red
The Associated Press
December 10, 1991, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 778 words
Byline: By MARTIN CRUTSINGER, AP Economics Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




America's foreign trade balance, after posting two rare surpluses on the strength of Persian Gulf military payments, plunged back into the red during the July-September quarter, the government said Tuesday.
Analysts said the $ 10.5 billion deficit in the current account, the broadest measure of foreign trade, could very likely worsen further in coming months, adding one more burden to an already stagnant U.S. economy.
That would represent another setback for the Bush administration, which is pinning a good deal of its hopes for stronger growth next year on further gains in American export sales.
The third quarter deficit followed the first quarterly surpluses in nearly a decade. The current account surplus totaled $ 10.5 billion from January through March and $ 3 billion from April to June.
Those surpluses came as a result of $ 35 billion in payments from Japan, Saudi Arabia and other countries to reimburse the United States for the Persian Gulf war.
However, the allied payments shrank to $ 4.6 billion in the third quarter and this was not enough to offset a giant 33 percent increase in the merchandise trade deficit.
The current account, also known as the balance of payments, is considered the most important trade statistic because it measures not only trade in merchandise but also in services such as banking and tourism and investment flows between nations.
President Bush visited the Chicago Board of Trade on Tuesday to highlight the impact that world trade has on the domestic economy.
The president conceded that the economy at present is in a slump but he said there were "some encouraging signs. … Now we just have to give it a kick, get it started up again."
However, analysts said the $ 10.5 billion third quarter deficit served to underscore ominous trends in trade. U.S. exports, which had been one of the few bright spots for the economy, have turned weaker as economic growth has faltered in some major markets for American goods.
"Our exports are slowing down because the rest of the world is slowing down," said David Wyss, senior financial economist at DRI-McGraw Hill. "Germany has suffered two quarters of negative economic growth and the rest of Europe is slowing as well."
Economists forecast that this year's current account deficit would dip to around $ 20 billion, far below last year's $ 92.12 billion imbalance. But they predicted that it would shoot up again in 1992 to between $ 50 billion and $ 60 billion.
"We can't look to the foreign trade sector to support the economy in 1992," said Bruce Steinberg, senior economist at Merrill Lynch in New York.
Robert Reischauer, director of the Congressional Budget Office, warned lawmakers Tuesday that they could end up making the economy, including the trade deficit, worse in their pursuit of tax cuts and other short-term fixes to lift the country out of recession.
"Increasing the deficit to fight the current economic downturn could well end up costing the nation dearly by further reducing long-term prospects for growth and by keeping the balance of payments deficit at high levels," Reischauer said.
Economists have long warned that huge federal budget deficits have been a major factor making the trade deficit worse because it increases America's dependence on foreign capital.
Reischauer told the House Budget Committee that he expected the economy to begin growing weakly next spring, with or without a tax-cut package and said such a package, if passed, "wouldn't make much difference with respect to the timing of when we expect sustained growth to begin."
The $ 10.5 billion third quarter trade deficit was the biggest since a $ 23.4 billion deficit in the final three months of 1990.
The department said that one of the factors making the third quarter deficit worse was $ 2.9 billion in debt forgiveness awarded to Poland and other countries.
The 33 percent jump in the merchandise trade deficit, to $ 20.5 billion, reflected a 4.5 percent surge in merchandise imports, which climbed to $ 125 billion, swamping a tiny 0.3 percent rise in merchandise exports, which edged up to $ 104.5 billion.
America's surplus on services, such as tourism and banking, climbed to $ 9.46 billion in the third quarter, a 5.8 percent increase over the second quarter.
The balance on investment income rose 6.8 percent to $ 2.5 billion in the third quarter while unilateral transfers, the category that includes the foreign military payments and debt forgiveness, fell into a deficit of $ 1.94 billion in the third quarter following a surplus of $ 7.13 billion in the April-June quarter.
The current account deficit is the sum of the merchandise, services, investment and unilateral transfer payments.

 

End of Document
