

Forsyth Book Gives Scenario For The 'Real' Gulf War
The Associated Press
May 13, 1994, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 734 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Like millions of couch potatoes, Frederick Forsyth watched in fascination as the Gulf War unfolded on his television screen. But when the war ended, the thriller-writer had a head full of unanswered questions.
How did Saddam Hussein get to be so heavily armed? What about the Scud missiles that kept hitting Israel? Why didn't the allies topple Saddam or take Baghdad? How come Saddam never used chemical weapons?
"The more I asked, the weirder became the answers," the 55-year-old author said in a recent interview at the Montcalm Hotel, a favorite haunt used in several of his novels. "Either there were no answers, or those that there were just seemed to be absolutely extraordinary. So, I finally decided there was a story here."
The result is "The Fist of God," a novel which Forsyth believes is a possible scenario of what really happened off-camera in the Gulf War.
In Forsyth's version of the war, Saddam is on the threshold of producing a nuclear weapon and the U.S.-led allies have a high-level spy in Saddam's Cabinet. The plot revolves around the Iraqi leader's doomsday weapon - "The Fist of God" - concealed in the mountains.
Forsyth said he started to suspect a mole when he tried to find out how the allies discovered some highly camouflaged Iraqi military facilities, such as the mound of wrecked cars welded into a single block that, when raised by a hydraulic jack, revealed a ramp to an underground factory.
During a long series of sessions with experts who worked in the allies' "black hole," the photo analysis nerve center in Saudi Arabia, he said "they conceded quite openly that they'd missed a lot because Iraq was extremely skilled" at camouflage.
It took the allies weeks to discover, for example, that the wrecked cars were fake, he said.
"That was where I ran into the wall," he said.
The analysts insisted they discovered the sham and other camouflaged military facilities with their magnifying glasses. But Forsyth insisted otherwise. "We could not have known certain things just from aerial photography."
When he tapped sources at Britain's Secret Intelligence Service and the CIA about a possible spy within Saddam's inner circle, all he got was "a benign smile and no comment."
Forsyth said he believed Saddam was "very, very, very close" to producing a bomb because U.S. intelligence experts kept dropping their estimates of how long it would take him to build one. After the Iraqi invasion they said four to five years, then halfway through the 39-day air war they said as little as six months.
The former foreign correspondent's forte is his ability to mix fact and fiction, with a journalist's dedication to the tiniest detail and a storyteller's talent for hooking his reader.
He has written a host of best-sellers, including "The Day of the Jackal," and his latest offering is No. 1 on the British fiction book charts. It was on the best-seller lists in the United States even before its official May 10 publication.
Many characters are well-known to couch potatoes who watched the U.S.-led allied forces oust Iraqi occupation troops from Kuwait in January and February 1991.
There's Saddam, hardly sleeping in the same bed twice, driving a taxi with just a bodyguard, and sending out two look-alikes and 12 identical convoys to confound the allies who initially were intent on assassinating him, Forsyth said.
There's George Bush, who was meeting with Margaret Thatcher in Aspen, Colo., on Aug. 2, 1990, the day Iraq invaded Kuwait. According to Forsyth, when Thatcher thought Bush was starting to waver on taking action, "she put a broom handle so far up the president's left trouser leg that it came out near the collar line."
How close does Forsyth think he got to the truth?
"In some areas I know I'm right. In other areas I think I'm right."
Forsyth said that, according to his information, Iraq did not use chemical weapons because then-Secretary of State James Baker warned Iraq that if it did, the United States would destroy Baghdad with a small nuclear weapon.
A U.S. official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said there was no nuclear threat.
At the end of the book, Forsyth added "A Final Note" on lessons which the Gulf War should have taught the allies.
One is that despite the most advanced Western technical wizardry, which he marveled at on television, "there is still no substitute for the oldest information-gathering device on earth: the Human Eyeball, Mark One."
 Load-Date: May 13, 1994

 

End of Document
