

Freedom Ends Ordeal for Terry Anderson - and the Nation
The Associated Press
December 4, 1991, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 700 words
Byline: By DONALD M. ROTHBERG, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The image of haggard and helpless American hostages tore at the nation's soul and shaped its politics through three presidential elections. Today, journalist Terry Anderson was freed, the last and longest held of the Reagan era hostages.
Anderson's release marked the end of an ordeal both personal and national. It also suggests the beginning of an era in which Iran, the principal sponsor of Middle East hostage-taking, will break out of its self-imposed isolation.
There will be no rush to resume diplomatic ties between the United States and Iran. But the warming of relations between the U.S. and Syria could offer a model for the future.
The hostage experience brought home to Americans the agony and cruelty of Middle East politics and reaffirmed the Vietnam lesson of the limits of American power.
It began not with the kidnapping of Associated Press correspondent Anderson in March 1985, but with the takeover of the U.S. Embassy in Tehran on Nov. 4, 1979.
Americans watched with horror and anger television pictures of blindfolded U.S. diplomats held at gunpoint. Sixty diplomats were captured, 52 of them held until Jan. 20, 1981, the day Ronald Reagan was inaugurated president.
The Tehran diplomats were Jimmy Carter's hostages. Ironically, their ordeal assured Carter's renomination over the challenge from Sen. Edward M. Kennedy, but doomed the president's chances to prevail over Reagan in the general election.
Reagan understood the frustration of the American people over the nation's inability to demand and win the freedom of the Tehran hostages. He hammered home his belief that America needed to rebuild its military power to make clear to any potential challenger that they would act at their peril.
Reagan ran for re-election in 1984 on the theme that the nation had recovered from the malaise of the Carter years. The economy had rebounded from the inflationary shocks of 1980 and the recession of Reagan's first two years in office.
And the Democrats could not shake the memory of the Tehran hostage ordeal, of the image that somehow under their stewardship the nation had become weak and vulnerable to terrorist acts.
But by the time Reagan turned over the White House to George Bush in January 1989, there was a new group of Americans held captive. These, including Anderson, were Ronald Reagan's hostages.
No more than Carter, was Reagan able to win the freedom of Americans held by Moslem extremists convinced that hostage taking was a way to change the political power balance of the Middle East.
This time the setting was ravaged Lebanon. Buy the key sponsor of the kidnappers remained Iran.
Like Carter, Reagan vowed not to negotiate with terrorists while doing just that.
A skillful politician with an uncanny sense of the public mood, Reagan made an extraordinary miscalculation that deeply scarred his presidency when he approved the sale of arms to Iran as part of an effort to win the freedom of Americans held in Lebanon.
The disclosure that the White House had sold arms to Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the bearded Iranian cleric who was the villain of the Tehran hostage ordeal, generated new waves of anger among Americans.
George Bush's dream of succeeding Reagan was threatened as he was confronted with demands to disclose his involvement in the affair. He admitted knowledge of the arms sales to Iran but denied any role in diversion of funds from the those sales to the Nicaraguan Contra rebels.
Bush survived through a combination of the skill of his campaign and the ineptitude of the Democratic challenge. Nearly a decade after the Tehran hostage taking, the Democrats were unable to shake the image that they couldn't cope with foreign challenges.
Now, the hostages are free.
But is the nation free of the hostage experience?
Questions linger. Congress is preparing an investigation into allegations that Reagan campaign officials interceded with Iran in 1980 in an effort to prevent early release of the Tehran hostages.
And the 1992 campaign is likely to revive the questions about Bush's role in the Iran-Contra affair.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Donald M. Rothberg, who now covers diplomatic affairs for the Associated Press, covered the 1980, 1984 and 1988 presidential campaigns.

 

End of Document
