

Friendly Fire: A Tragic Mistake in the Iraqi Desert
The Associated Press
June 30, 1995, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 587 words
Byline: By JOHN DIAMOND, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Two figures barely visible in the Iraqi night crept into the gunsights of the U.S. attackers. "Can I fire at their feet?" the gunner asked. Permission granted. A burst of 50-caliber machine-gun fire, and an American lay dead.
The fatal blast of "friendly fire" four years ago during the Gulf War echoed in a Senate committee room Thursday as lawmakers tried to sort out how five stranded U.S. soldiers were mistaken for Iraqis and how the Army came to award medals to the men who fired the shots.
First, the Senate Governmental Affairs investigations subcommittee heard from the tearful mother of Sgt. Lance Fielder, the victim.
"The search for the truth has been a heartbreaking four-year journey through thickets of deceit, delay, bureaucratic incompetence, and callousness," said Fielder's mother, Deborah Shelton.
Initially, Fielder's parents were told their son died in combat. Only two months later did they learn it was a friendly fire incident. Shelton has doggedly pursued the case since then, prompting a congressional investigation.
Then, the panel heard from the lieutenant colonel who ordered his Bradley Fighting Vehicle gunner to open fire on the shadowy figure in the distance who turned out to be Fielder.
"The meaning of the phrase 'fog of war' has no better example than the confusion that took place in the Iraqi desert four and a half years ago," said Lt. Col. John Daly Jr. "However, I firmly believe that I acted as any reasonable commander would have acted had he been in this situation, as regrettable as the outcome was."
Daly said he believed he was facing a hostile Iraqi force, that his men had reported being fired upon, and that whoever was out there in the darkness was refusing to surrender.
The General Accounting Office presented a different picture, GAO investigator Richard Steiner told the panel. The GAO report noted that Daly had been given outdated information about enemy troop positions. But it also reported that Daly had information indicating the troops in front of him might be Americans and that he was ordered to confirm that the troops were Iraqis before firing on them.
One of the witnesses Thursday, Lt. Kevin Wessels, saw the incident from the perspective of the fired-upon.
"I was awakened by the sound of gunfire and one of my men screaming, 'Sir, the Americans are shooting at us!"' When desperate radio calls failed to stop the attack, Wessels walked out into the open with his hands up. By that time, one of his men was dead and another wounded.
"You better be American," Wessels quoted one of the gunners as shouting. He said the soldier was "stunned" to find out he was right. The Army later issued Wessels a letter of reprimand saying he had endangered his men by walking into the open.
"Your receiving an admonition in light of what you did is an absolute disgrace," Sen. Fred Thompson, R-Tenn., told Wessels. Thompson organized the hearing on behalf of Fielder and Shelton, who lives in his home state.
Daly's Army attorney told lawmakers that Daly faces possible criminal charges for his role. A member of his unit, Capt. Bo Friesen, said that after the incident Daly approached him and said, "We have to keep this under our hat."
Daly said he could not recall making the remark and insisted he did everything he could to encourage a thorough investigation.
Sara Lister, assistant secretary of the Army for manpower, said the Army has suspended any awards for valor associated with the incident. She said the Army's own investigations into the matter "were seriously flawed."
 Load-Date: June 30, 1995

 

End of Document
