

Friendly Fire: A Tragic Mistake in the Iraqi Desert
The Associated Press
June 29, 1995, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 659 words
Byline: By JOHN DIAMOND, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




In the dark of the Iraqi desert came the whine of tank engines, a burst of gunfire and then a U.S. soldier screaming, "The Americans are shooting at us."
A Senate panel heard details Thursday of a chain of errors that led to the friendly fire incident that killed one American and wounded another. And it heard testimony an Army officer tried to cover it up.
At the hearing of the Governmental Affairs Subcommittee on Investigations, Deborah Shelton and Ronald Fielder returned the Bronze Star the Army awarded posthumously to their son, Sgt. Lance Fielder. He was killed by fellow Americans who thought they were shooting at Iraqis.
"It would have offended his honor to accept a medal he didn't feel he deserved," Fielder said of his son.
In fact, the parents said, Fielder had acted bravely. But they were outraged that the Army failed to tell them for two months that the death was the result of friendly fire and then awarded Bronze Stars to several soldiers in the attacking unit.
The hearing produced dramatic moments, as when two Army officers who had been on opposite sides of the shooting sat at the same witness table, when Ms. Shelton displayed a framed photograph of her son, and when the officer who ordered the machine gunner to open fire, killing Fielder, took the witness stand, a few feet from the victim's parents.
"We made a tragic error and I am eternally sorry," said Lt. Col. John Daly Jr. He said that he believed he was facing a hostile Iraqi force, that his men had reported being fired upon, and that whoever was out there in the darkness was refusing to surrender.
"I was responsible for more than 1,000 men spread across miles of desert. I did what I thought best to protect those men," he said.
The incident occurred at about 2:30 a.m. on Feb. 27, 1991, during the fast-moving sweep of U.S. and allied forces across the Iraqi desert in the climax of the Persian Gulf War.
An investigation by the General Accounting Office found that the incident resulted from a series of errors and mishaps, beginning with the breakdown of Fielder's ammunition-hauling vehicle. Daly's group had been given orders, based on outdated intelligence, to advance into that area and expect to encounter Iraqis.
Once the shooting started, the ammunition in the broken-down vehicle caught fire, blinding the men in Daly's outfit who were using night-vision goggles. Daly then ordered a cease-fire and brought up a vehicle that played surrender orders in Iraqi over loudspeakers.
Seeing two of the men running, Daly then ordered a machine-gunner to open fire. Those turned out to be the shots that killed Fielder.
One of the witnesses Thursday, Lt. Kevin Wessels, saw the incident from the perspective of the fired-upon.
"I was awakened by the sound of gunfire and one of my men screaming, 'Sir, the Americans are shooting at us!"' When desperate radio calls failed to stop the attack, Wessels walked out into the open with his hands up.
"You better be American," Wessels quoted one of the gunners as shouting. He said the soldier was "stunned" to find out he was right. The Army later issued Wessels a letter of reprimand saying he had endangered his men by walking into the open.
"Your receiving an admonition in light of what you did is an absolute disgrace," Sen. Fred Thompson, R-Tenn., told Wessels. Thompson organized the hearing on behalf of Fielder and Shelton, who live in his home state.
Daly's Army attorney told lawmakers that Daly faces possible criminal charges for his role. A member of his unit, Capt. Bo Friesen, said that after the incident Daly approached him and said, "We have to keep this under our hat."
Daly said he could not recall making the remark and insisted he did everything he could to encourage a thorough investigation.
Sara Lister, assistant secretary of the Army for manpower, said the Army has suspended any awards for valor associated with the incident. She said the Army's own investigations into the matter "were seriously flawed."
 Load-Date: June 29, 1995

 

End of Document
