

From Africa to Asia, France Battles the Onslaught of English
The Associated Press
October 14, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 607 words
Byline: By DAVID CRARY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




France has lost its share of wars the past two centuries, and now fears losing another one - in the schoolrooms of West Africa, on the streets of Cambodia, over the airwaves of Western Europe.
It is a defensive struggle, aimed at maintaining the status of French as a global language in the face of advances by English. At stake are France's national pride and international business prospects.
On Saturday, France gets a chance to rally its troops at the biennial summit of French-speaking nations. Representatives of 44 countries where French is widely spoken gather on the Indian Ocean island of Mauritius to plot economic, cultural and linguistic strategies of mutual benefit.
Most of the nations coming to the summit are African, but other participants include Lebanon, Romania, Haiti, Laos and Canada.
"Francophonie can and must be an alternative to the cultural and linguistic uniformity that threatens the world," French Culture Minister Jacques Toubon said in previewing the summit. "Who doesn't see the threat today of a planet invaded by a single cultural model - the Anglo-Saxon model - under the cover of free trade?"
Some people, however, see the threat coming from the other direction. In Cambodia and Cameroon, protesters have taken to the streets in recent days to protest official use of French.
At a key command post in Paris, the office of the High Council of Francophonie, the outlook is gloomy.
The council's annual report on the status of the language, released last month, said developments worldwide threatened to "break the spirit" of those promoting French.
Stelio Farandjis, the council's secretary-general, cited three "huge black holes" that pose the greatest dangers to French: the dominance of English in the international scientific community; the scarcity of French-speaking multinational companies in the entertainment industry; and the "grave crisis" of French instruction in African schools.
"Education in sub-Saharan Africa is collapsing," Farandjis wrote.
Ardent francophones depict the world's French-speaking community as 475 million strong, the total population of all the participating countries.
However, language experts estimate only about 150 million people actually speak French. Even in African countries where French is the official language, often only the educated elite use it.
Africa, where French is entrenched in 24 countries, is perhaps the key battleground. France has extensive economic ties to most of these nations, and its shaky stature as a global power hinges in large measure on its influence there.
Southeast Asia is another battleground. France hopes the linguistic and cultural legacy of its colonial occupation there will give its businesses the inside track as Vietnam and Cambodia open up to foreign investment.
Thus it was unwelcome news to francophones when hundreds of Cambodian students marched through Phnom Penh last week, u 0 ed" French.
Some of the front lines are close to home. French authorities battle constantly to limit American programming on European television and to keep French equal with English in various European organizations.
One current target of indignation is the International Olympic Committee, which is officially committed to using French and English equally.
But IOC President Juan Antonio Samaranch spoke only English on Sept. 23 to announce the choice of Sydney, Australia, as host for the 2000 Summer Games, and the French complain about Olympic documents that use bad French.
Responding to the complaints, IOC spokesman Michelle Verdier said: "We try our best to have equality between the two languages, even though the world is going the other direction."
 Load-Date: October 14, 1993

 

End of Document
