

From the Halls of Montezuma to the Beaches of Bangladesh
The Associated Press
May 21, 1991, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 783 words
Byline: By SUSANNE M. SCHAFER, AP Military Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Marines who didn't storm ashore in Kuwait have hit the devastated beaches of Bangladesh to disperse food, medicine and even road-building equipment. In Iraq, soldiers cradled babies - and guns - to help refugees in the wake of the Persian Gulf War.
The massive disaster relief operations undertaken in recent weeks by U.S. combat forces reveals how the Pentagon has quietly honed its ability to use the military to extend a helping hand in recent years.
In the past, the U.S.-Soviet rivalry made America's military forces unwelcome in many parts of the world, particularly Third World nations that viewed any presence of U.S. forces as an invasion of sovereignty.
Some officers are concerned that humanitarian efforts will detract from the military's primary mission of defending the nation.
But many inside the Pentagon now realize that "it's in our national interest" to become involved during times of need, says Lt. Gen. Michael Carns, who over the past two years has helped manage U.S. military involvement in several relief efforts.
The military "is structured to be self-sufficient" and function amid the chaos of war to provide such essentials as food, water and shelter, Carns said.
"It's not our primary purpose, but we have the capabilities," he said. "In the case of Bangladesh, our ability to help was fortuitous."
Carns, interviewed on his final day as director of the Pentagon's joint military staff, has added a fourth star and now serves as the Air Force's deputy chief of staff.
He said the U.S. military has a big advantage over most international relief organizations in that it has the manpower, communications systems and the huge aircraft that can respond quickly, even in the worst conditions.
But the military can't be dispatched to faraway regions without the permission of the president or defense secretary, and at the invitation of the host country, Carns noted.
"We generally are most welcome," he said. The Kurdish aid situation in northern Iraq is "unique," he said, given the country's post-war condition.
Carns said that when the request for aid from Bangladesh came in, his staff looked at computerized maps and saw "a big, blank space in the Indian Ocean" and few U.S. ships nearby that could help out.
So the Marines from the 5th Marine Expeditionary Brigade, en route home to Camp Pendleton, Calif., after months in the Persian Gulf, were diverted to Bangladesh.
The Marines' amphibious task force disgorged helicopters and hovercraft - war machinery normally used in a beach assault - to ferry supplies among the remote islands and coastal settlements left devastated by the cyclone.
Although the U.S. effort in Bangladesh was geared to move supplies provided by the local government, the Pentagon also has a separate office that finds, organizes and then ships excess military supplies to needy nations.
"Military involvement in humanitarian relief goes back as long as Americans have been in uniform," said Robert Wolthuis, the Pentagon's point man for organizing the dispersal of the excess material.
Wolthuis, who is the deputy assistant secretary of defense for global affairs, heads an office that began organizing the effort in 1984.
The office has coordinated donations to more than 50 countries and works with the State Department in arranging the supply transfers, he said.
Wolthuis said the supplies must be non-lethal and things the military can no longer use. It usually includes such items as cots, clothing, furniture, food supplies or even vehicles.
Wolthuis said things such as vehicles or furniture may be range in age from a few years to decades old, but they can be put to good use.
"Uncle Sam is getting a very good return on his investment," the official said. "Normally, it would just be sold for scrap, but it's not scrap. … We donate it to countries that can use it very, very efficiently."
Wolthuis said it would be impossible to figure out the worth of the material, given its excess status. The only costs registered are for transportation.
Most of the supplies go to nations in Africa, Central America and Asia, but Poland also has become a large recipient, Wolthuis said.
The office's longest-running effort has been to fly supplies into Pakistan for transfer to aid Afghan refugees, he said. There have been 99 flights since 1986. The flights were halted during the Gulf War but are expected to resume this summer.
With a laugh, Wolthuis recalled his most memorable effort involved airlifting 1,140 mules to Pakistan from 1987 to 1989. The animals were needed to move supplies to the Afghanis over rough terrain, he said.
"We vaccinated 'em, loaded 'em up at Fort Campbell (Ky.), got 'em aboard the C-747s. Twenty-four hours later they were there," he said.

 

End of Document
