

From Neighbors, Dealers, Big Powers, the Weapons Flow
The Associated Press
April 3, 1994, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 893 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Three dozen small wars flicker and rage around the world, fed by a small-arms market that in turn feeds on conflict.
The combatants usually look for sponsorship and arms from a larger power, or turn to international weapons traffickers to fill their needs. Up-front cash may come from wealthier ethnic cousins abroad, or from drug trafficking or other criminal activity.
A look at the arms supplies fueling some of the small wars of the 1990s:
 
 SOMALIA
Thousands of weapons survive from supplies given the old government by the Soviet Union and later the United States. But Somalia's civil war factions also continuously replenish their hardware.
Dealers in Mogadishu's open-air gun market, where M-16 and AK-47 assault rifles are on display, say Ethiopia is a prime source.
Ex-soldiers from the Ethiopian army, which disintegrated when that country's previous government collapsed in 1991, apparently are shipping arms across the border. Somalis in neighboring Kenya are believed to have arranged other shipments. Drug traffickers are among the arms intermediaries.
Arms deals also range farther afield. In March 1993, a freighter was intercepted in the Indian Ocean carrying Somalia-bound arms from Serbia. A trading company in Cyprus arranged the shipment.
 
 NORTHERN IRELAND
Since the 19th century, Irish nationalists have smuggled arms from the United States for their anti-British uprisings, often with Irish-American financing. A U.S. government report says the network carries on today in a "sophisticated," "very effective" way.
So far in the 1990s, U.S. agents have broken up rings that sought to buy Stinger anti-aircraft missiles for the Provisional Irish Republican Army and that allegedly conspired to ship detonators to the IRA.
The Irish guerrillas have other sources. In the mid-1980s, British intelligence reported Libya shipped hundreds of AK-47 assault rifles to the IRA.
Today, British authorities are guarding against smuggled eastern European arms. The first such shipment intercepted was bound for a rival Protestant extremist group, not the IRA. The 300 assault rifles and other Polish-made munitions, identified as "ceramics," were uncovered last November at an English port after they were unloaded from a Polish freighter.
 
 KASHMIR
The Muslim revolt against Indian control of the Kashmir region has intensified in the 1990s, fed by a supply of modern automatic weapons.
The freewheeling arms markets of Pakistan's Northwest Frontier Province are a major source. Satellite photos confirm the weapons traffic across the border, U.S. officials say.
India accuses Pakistan's intelligence service of shipping the weapons cross-country to the Kashmir border, an allegation Pakistan denies.
The Northwest Frontier Province overflows with arms from the Afghan war, both munitions captured from Soviet forces and arms shipped to anti-Soviet rebels in a covert U.S.-financed program in the 1980s, when up to 400,000 Kalashnikov assault rifles may have been sent in.
About 7,000 Kalashnikovs were reported confiscated in Kashmir in 1990-92.
 
 COLOMBIA
Colombia's leftist guerrillas depend on large arms shipments from international traffickers.
In 1989, Italian authorities broke up a Belgian ring as it prepared to deliver a shipload of Czech-made weapons, 173 tons, to Colombian guerrillas.
In 1992, in a deal brokered by Central American dealers, a Greek freighter delivered a large weapons shipment from Libya to Colombian guerrillas, Colombian military intelligence said. Officials said Central American suppliers also sell arms left from that region's civil wars.
A law-enforcement source told The Associated Press that a deal was detected in recent months involving a major movement of black-market arms from eastern Europe to Colombia. It could not be learned whether the shipment was blocked.
 
 BURMA
As Cambodia's civil war wound down, weapons poured from Cambodia into Thailand. The Thai military says many are being sold to insurgent groups in Burma, including the Karen guerrillas in Burma's southeast and drug lord Khun Sa's forces in the northeast.
Thai traffickers reportedly can buy assault rifles from impoverished Cambodian guerrillas for as little as $ 8 and resell them for many times that in timber, opium or other goods offered in barter by guerrillas in Burma.
Burma's military government, internationally isolated because of its suppression of democracy, also relies on secretive arms deals.
China, in officially unacknowledged shipments, is selling the Burmese weapons ranging from grenade launchers to warplanes. Singapore and Pakistan also have supplied arms to the Burmese military.
 
 RWANDA
A shaky 8-month-old peace could collapse at any time in the conflict between the government of this central African nation and guerrillas of the Tutsi minority.
The Washington-based Human Rights Watch Arms Project has determined that the guerrillas received their AK-47s and other basic arms from the Ugandan army. Later, with money contributed by Tutsi exiles abroad, they bought weapons from independent arms dealers.
The Arms Project also determined that the Rwandan government, which is accused of human rights violations, obtained arms through secretive contracts with Egypt - with French financial backing - and South Africa, in violation of the U.N. embargo on South African arms imports and exports. The government also uses private arms dealers.
 Load-Date: April 3, 1994

 

End of Document
