

GNP Report: The First and Last of Really Bad News?
The Associated Press
January 24, 1991, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 724 words
Byline: By MARTIN CRUTSINGER, AP Economics Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Analysts are awaiting Friday's release of what they hope will be the beginning and the end of the really bad news during this recession - a report they expect will show that America's total output of goods and services shrank precipitously during the last three months of 1990.
The Commerce Department will provide the first look at its broadest measure of economic health - the gross national product - for the October-December period.
Economists both in and out of government are expecting the GNP figure to show a sharp drop in the October-December quarter.
"This is the most definitive number that says the recession is underway," said David Wyss, an economist with DRI-McGraw Hill. The GNP totaled an inflation-adjusted $$4.17 trillion in the third quarter, and Wyss said he expected that figure to contract by $$35 billion in the fourth quarter.
The consensus of 50 top economists surveyed by Blue Chip Economic Indicators called for a GNP decline of 2.5 percent during the fourth quarter.
In the economic outlook being used by the Bush administration to prepare its 1992 budget request, the White House is projecting an even more severe fourth quarter decline of 3.4 percent.
That figure is steep, but not out of line for the beginning quarter of a recession.
The last recession in 1981-82 recorded a 5.5 percent GNP drop as it got underway. That downturn turned out to be the most severe of the post-World War II slumps - in terms of the number of people thrown out of work - although its length of 16 months wasn't much worse than the 11-month average.
The brief 1980 recession registered an even steeper 9.1 percent drop in GNP as it got under way, but the downturn only lasted six months.
In addition to defining how fast the economy was shrinking in the fourth quarter, the GNP report will also tell economists what sectors of the economy have been especially hard hit.
Analysts are expecting widespread weakness, led by a huge drop in purchases by consumers as nervous Americans cut back their spending, especially for big-ticket items such as cars.
Wyss said his forecast expected $$22 billion of the $$35 billion drop in total GNP to come from the spending cutback.
Other major areas of weakness will be in residential construction, which has been weak for some time, and business investment, which suffered because of the uncertainty following the Iraq's Aug. 2 invasion of Kuwait, Wyss said.
Analysts will also be watching to see how much in unsold goods piled up as inventories during the fourth quarter. Many analysts are forecasting a brief recession based on a belief that businesses reacted quickly at the first signs of a downturn and have managed to keep inventories at manageable levels and thus limiting the need for future production cutbacks.
Both the administration and the Congressional Budget Office hold to this view as well, forecasting that the current recession, the country's ninth since the end of World War II, will be short and mild, lasting only six months.
The OMB and CBO are predicting that the economy will resume growing in the April-June quarter although both private and government economists agree that the course of the Persian Gulf war and its impact on consumer sentiment will play a major role in determining the length of the downturn.
Some private economists contend that an even bigger drag on the economy at present than the uncertain situation in the Persian Gulf are the pressures being faced by the nation's banks.
As real estate prices have plummeted and loan defaults have soared, many banks have cut down sharply on their lending practices, forcing what has been referred to as a credit-crunch.
David Jones, an economist at Aubrey G. Lanston & Co., said he believed the current recession could last until the spring of 1992 as the Federal Reserve found that its normal antidote for weakness, lower interest rates, does not have sufficient power to boost economic activity.
"We are in a financial recession, not the typical inventory recession," Jones said. "The current problem is a clash between debt-heavy consumers and businesses and banks that are too afraid to make loans because of their precarious financial position."
But Jones concedes he holds a minority view of the length of the downturn with most analysts expecting growth to resume by mid-1991, especially if the Persian Gulf war ends quickly.

 

End of Document
