

Grasping for Hope, Finding the Photo of a Little Girl
The Associated Press
December 4, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1602 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, Associated Press Writer
Body




Through 2,000 nights of tragedy, he lay hidden offstage, in the shadows and in chains. But Terry Anderson and the other Lebanon hostages never lay far from the heart of the Middle East's life-and-death dramas.
From the Iran-Iraq War to Desert Storm, through the terrorist turmoil of the mid-1980s, to the dawn of a Beirut peace in 1991, Anderson bore the pain of unjust imprisonment at the hands of kidnappers with an ever-changing agenda of demands.
The American journalist lost in Lebanon's rubble found solace in his Bible and his fellow hostages, in daydreams of home, in the careworn photo of a little girl, the daughter he never held. Blindfolded and abused, he grasped for hope and found little.
"There is a limit for how long we can last," Anderson said on a videotape released in 1987. "And some of us are approaching their limit."
Now the long ordeal has ended for the 44-year-old Anderson, chief Mideast correspondent of The Associated Press. And his release today - as the last U.S. hostage in Lebanon - signals the final act, too, in America's long Beirut captivity.
In the end, history itself may have forced the kidnappers' hand.
Today's Middle East is a different land from the Mideast of the mid-1980s. Its power balances have been upended by war and turmoil, and the Lebanon into which Anderson emerged a free man is itself a renewed nation, rising from the ashes of civil war.
It was in the midst of this Lebanese turbulence, on a Saturday morning in March 1985, that the cool-headed Anderson managed to get in a game of tennis with AP photographer Don Mell.
He was dropping Mell off in west Beirut when a green Mercedes-Benz pulled up, four armed men leaped out and the correspondent was shoved inside.
As Anderson was driven off, Mell later recounted, "His look said, 'Do something.' Mine said, 'I can't."'
Anderson, whose AP career took him from Kentucky to the Far East to the racial upheavals of South Africa, had reported from Beirut for two years. He knew first-hand the dangers around every corner in that city of warring Christians and Muslims, leftists and rightists.
But "I like where I'm at," he told a nephew who interviewed him for a school assignment.
The abducted journalist disappeared into Beirut's black hole, joining six other Americans and Britons held hostage at the time, victims of a kidnap spree that began a year earlier.
The roots of Muslim hatred for the West lay both in history and in yesterday's news - in the Crusades, colonialism and the founding of Israel, in the injection of Marines into Lebanon's intramural conflict, in a U.S. battleship's off-target shelling of Lebanese villages.
In the 1970s and early 1980s, diplomats and other Americans in Beirut became prey to assassins and kidnappers. In the deadliest attacks, in 1983, suicide bombers destroyed the U.S. Embassy and a Marine headquarters, killing more than 250 Americans.
In early 1984, Shiite Muslim and Druse militiamen chased the weak Lebanese army from west Beirut, the seaside city center where diplomats, journalists and other Westerners worked and lived. Soon breakfast-time abductions, like the nighttime chorus of mortars and rockets, became part of Beirut's bizarre, bloody life - the squeal of brakes, the flash of guns, the unspoken commands, the unresisting victim.
Almost 100 foreigners were abducted in Lebanon in the 1980s, and at least eight eventually were slain, including three Americans - CIA officer William Buckley, university librarian Peter Kilburn and Marine Lt. Col. William R. Higgins.
Extremist groups known and unknown claimed responsibility for the kidnappings. Most seemed linked to Hezbollah, or Party of God, a Lebanese Shiite movement aligned with Iran and its style of Islamic fundamentalist rule.
The hostage-holders took on such shadowy identities as Revolutionary Justice Organization, Organization for the Oppressed on Earth, and Islamic Jihad (Islamic Holy War), Anderson's kidnappers.
Their language was chilling. "We are prepared to strike with an iron fist," Islamic Jihad warned in 1985. And their demands were a kaleidoscope, turning with events.
Islamic Jihad stressed a key condition: release of 17 terrorists, mostly Shiites, convicted in the bombing of the U.S. and French embassies in Kuwait in 1983.
President Reagan vowed "no concessions … no deals" in the hostage situation. But when American hostage David Jacobsen was released in November 1986, it became clear the Reagan administration had, indeed, been negotiating.
It was disclosed that the White House had secretly shipped arms to Iran via Israel, and the arms sales apparently led to hostage releases. The unmasking of the clandestine operation, in which profits were funneled to Nicaragua's Contra guerrillas, touched off a political firestorm in Washington and paralyzed U.S. efforts to free the hostages.
Down through the months and years, as diplomats and mediators probed back channels, life in captivity became life itself for the hostages, a life of interminable stretches of boredom, punctuated by flashes of terror.
They were shuttled often from place to place to discourage any attempt by commandos to free them. They were held alone or in small groups, sometimes chained to walls or radiators, and they rarely saw sunlight.
They were kept in the dark in other ways, too. For long periods they heard no radio, learned no news except for what their kidnappers told them.
When possible, they did sit-ups and other cooped-up calisthenics. They read from battered Bibles, argued politics, played makeshift chess and slept on mats, according to those who were released.
"It's like being a blind rabbit," Jacobsen recalled, "trapped in an elevator, without fresh air or sunlight, denied every freedom and isolated from everything you love and need. Death is your constant companion and memories your only hope."
From his memories, Anderson fantasized about building a farm, a house, a restaurant, freed hostages said.
The American journalist also could imagine holding daughter Sulome. His captors allowed him a photo of the child, born to his fiancee, Madeleine Bassil, three months after he was kidnapped.
Anderson's estranged wife, Mihoko, and teen-age daughter, Gabrielle, live in Japan.
Living conditions eased for the hostages in mid-1991. But the freed men also told of great brutality over the years.
Frank Reed, released in April 1990, said his nose, jaw, ribs, and feet were broken by his jailers after he tried to escape. Freed French hostage Jean-Paul Kauffman said some guards were deliberately cruel, including one who staged a mock execution of hostages.
Still, the prisoners sometimes sympathized with those who imprisoned them.
"Many of them were young men who … believed they were helping their community and country," British hostage John McCarthy said. "Many of them, I think, regretted causing us hardship - but they still did it."
By 1990, the endless impasse looked like it would end.
American hostages Reed and Robert Polhill were released 10 days apart in April 1990. In August, kidnappers freed two Swiss hostages and Irishman Brian Keenan, a captive for more than four years.
By 1991, Islamic Jihad's key demand had become meaningless. The terrorist prisoners in Kuwait had fled to freedom when that emirate was invaded by Iraq.
Still the Lebanese kidnappers clung to their human prizes. Further demands accumulated, chiefly freedom for Shiite and other prisoners held by Israel.
But then, in August, the logjam began to break again. First, McCarthy and American Edward Tracy were released. In September, Israel freed 51 Arab prisoners, the body of a missing Israeli soldier was returned from Lebanon and kidnappers freed 77-year-old British hostage Jack Mann.
Business had turned brisk in an international hostage bazaar, where U.N. mediators played broker.
In regular succession, through October, November and into early December, the kidnappers freed American Jesse Turner, American Thomas Sutherland and British mediator-turned-hostage Terry Waite, and American Joseph Cicippio. Israel, in turn, released more of its Arab prisoners.
On Tuesday, the kidnappers released Alann Steen. That left only one American - Anderson, the longest-held hostage.
Over the years he had become the symbol of the "forgotten" hostages - his name engraved on memorial bracelets, his photo the rallying point for vigils. Schoolchildren wrote "letters" to him. Congregations prayed for him. Just by enduring, the gritty journalist and ex-Marine won hearts, raised hopes.
Associated Press executives crisscrossed the globe pursuing leads and seeking help for their abducted reporter. But none worked harder than Anderson's sister, Peggy Say, who trekked across the Mideast, with AP financial support, in search of someone with the key to the hostages' freedom.
"The price in pain of his captivity has been almost unbearable for our family," she wrote once in an open letter in Beirut newspapers. Her brother's ordeal was the backdrop for other sad passages: Within four months in 1986, Anderson's father and brother both died of cancer.
But even in the darkest times, when swept along on a tide of despair, Anderson reached out for straws of impossible hope.
"When I was a little sick and dispirited," freed Frenchman Marcel Fontaine recalled, "I said to Terry that I'm not afraid to die, but I don't want to die here and have them throw my body into the sea."
Anderson thought a moment, he said, and replied, "I don't want to die anywhere."
He didn't. For 2,454 nights, this undominated man survived and defied, until today when he walked away from his chains and strode to center stage, back to the light, back into life.

 

End of Document
