

Greenspan, the Narrator, Keeps Interest Rate Story Going
The Associated Press
February 23, 1991, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 1152 words
Byline: By JAMES M. KENNEDY
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The high drama on the business stage starring airlines, automakers and retailers hasn't altered one basic storyline: the trend toward lower interest rates.
Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan keeps reappearing, like the narrator of a play, to promise easier credit terms.
Again this past week, Greenspan told congressional hearings that while the central bank didn't see any immediate need for further rate cuts, it wouldn't hesitate to act if the recession worsened.
That reaffirmed the belief dominating the financial markets over the past few weeks that rates are headed south.
At least one bank, San Francisco's Bank of America, followed Greenspan's lead and shaved another quarter point off its prime lending rate to 8.75 percent.
Bank of America, the nation's biggest bank behind Citibank, is in better shape than most institutions to offer lower rates. It was the first big bank to lower its prime to 9.5 percent on New Year's Eve after the Fed started easing credit late last year.
Its extensive branch system has kept Bank of America supplied with relatively cheap funds from depositors, reducing its need to borrow more expensive funds elsewhere.
Other large banks took several days to join Bank of America's New Year's parade, and they were expected to move equally slowly this time. Other giants, like Citibank and Chase Manhattan, spent the week trying to bolster their internal financing.
Citicorp, parent of Citibank, received a dose of fresh financing from a Saudi Arabian prince, who agreed to buy $$590 million worth of stock. The purchase by Prince Alwaleed Bin Talal could boost his stake in Citicorp to 14.9 percent. He was already the company's largest shareholder, with 4.9 percent of outstanding stock.
Citicorp also was exploring the sale of a limited interest in its credit card business to outside investors.
Chase, the third biggest bank in the country, said it had agreed to sell its institutional money-management operation to Union Bank of Switzerland, which could give Chase a one-time gain of $$100 million.
The rate cut by Bank of America and the maneuvering by Citicorp and Chase were all hopeful signs for the suffering banking industry, which is coming off one of its worst quarterly performances in history.
A private survey by SNL Securities of Charlottesville, Va., said profits of American banks sank to $$2.6 billion in the fourth quarter and problem loans rose to 3.03 percent of assets.
 
 AIRLINES: Looking for Financial Aid
 
 Two ideas emerged for helping the airline industry pull out of its financial tailspin: Get more cash from abroad or a loan from Uncle Sam.
Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner proposed that Congress ease limits on foreign investment in U.S. airlines. Skinner already had agreed to permit foreign ownership of up to 49 percent of a domestic carrier if control of voting stock were limited to 25 percent.
But he said Congress could revise federal law and allow up to 49 percent voting control to attract more capital from overseas.
Alternatively, the industry proposed a temporary loan from the government. The chief executive of Continental Airlines, operating under the protection of bankruptcy court, suggested airlines be allowed to retain a year's worth of taxes on passenger tickets.
The 10 percent ticket tax generates about $$4 billion a year that goes toward airport improvements and budget deficit reduction. Continental chief Hollis Harris said the industry only needed the money to weather Operation Desert Storm and would pay it back with interest.
Since the Gulf War began, passenger traffic has fallen off drastically, cutting deeply into airline revenues.
 
 RETAILERS: Not Much Action Except In the Movies
 
 The retailers launched aggressive Presidents' Day sales, but the drastic price reductions didn't do much to revive the moribund shopping scene.
The fictitious mall in "Scenes from a Mall," a new Woody Allen movie released Friday, was more crowded than many stores around the country.
Stern's, a department store chain in the Northeast, sold sheets for as low as $$6 and cut prices on some already-reduced items by another 40 percent. Lord & Taylor slashed prices on some merchandise by 75 percent, while Sears, Roebuck and Co. offered no-interest financing and deferred billing on appliances and jewelry.
The markdowns were expected to continue through the Easter season, when the retailers are hoping the war and recession will ease up enough to lure shoppers back.
 
 AUTOS: Slow Sales Prompt More Layoffs
 
 The Big Three automakers said they would furlough about 41,000 workers in the coming week in response to a continuing sales slump.
Combined sales of domestic and imported cars and trucks was down 28 percent last month from January a year ago.
The temporary layoffs were planned at about two dozen plants, where managers where cutting back or shutting down.
The slowdown hurts the companies more than the employees. Workers at General Motors Corp., Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. are eligible for benefits equaling 95 percent of their regular wages if laid off because of slow sales.
 
 COMPANIES: A Square Deal and Goodbye Mr. Bache
 
 The merger arena showed signs of life with a $$1.8 billion bid for Square D Co., a leading maker of electrical distribution equipment.
Groupe Schneider of France, aiming to become the world's biggest producer of fuseboxes, threatened a hostile fight to get control of the Illinois firm.
In another takeover battle, NCR Corp. announced a special dividend and an employee stock ownership plan to foil American Telephone & Telegraph Co.'s $$6.1 billion purchase offer.
On Wall Street, a famous name succumbed to hard times as Prudential Securities dropped Bache from its shingle.
The name change was aimed at tying the firm closer to its parent Prudential Insurance Co. The securities firm lost millions over the past two years, leading to the resignation of its chairman George Ball earlier this month.
The change buried a name dating to the 1880s, when German immigrant Julius Bache renamed his uncle's brokerage house J.S. Bache & Co.
 
 PEOPLE: Milken Nears Surrender
 
 Nailbiting time arrived for Michael Milken, scheduled to surrender to authorities March 4 and start serving a 10-year prison sentence for securities fraud.
Court documents showed he would be shipped to a minimum-security prison camp in Pleasanton, Calif., about 30 miles from where he attended college in Berkeley.
U.S. District Judge Kimba Wood, who sentenced Milken, had recommended a facility in Las Vegas, closer to the deposed junk-bond king's Los Angeles home.
But Milken had to be pleased with the prognosis for his parole. He may get out after three years if a recommendation from Wood to the U.S. Parole Commission holds up.
Meanwhile, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., Milken's old firm, reached a tentative agreement that would help it emerge from bankruptcy by satisfying about $$2 billion of $$20 billion in claims against the firm.

 

End of Document
