

Ground Assault - The Question is When?
The Associated Press
February 9, 1991, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 652 words
Byline: By SUSANNE M. SCHAFER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia
Body




The top two military advisers to President Bush today met behind closed doors with commanders of the Persian Gulf War and conferred on issues "across the spectrum of the campaign" to oust Iraq from Kuwait.
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and Gen. Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, were consulting with Desert Storm commander Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf and other military leaders on prospects for a ground war in the gulf.
"They talked across the spectrum of the campaign from a historical perspective of what has gone before, where we are right now and where we are going," said Marine Brig. Gen. Richard Neal.
"They have been involved in really a receive mode," Neal said of Cheney and Powell.
The consultations in Schwarzkopf's "war room" went longer than planned as military leaders provided the two with "a wealth of information" about gulf operations, Neal said.
He described the mood of the meetings as upbeat but added: "When you're fighting a war, it's not slapping everybody on the back and saying 'great job."'
In a pep talk to U.S. airmen on Friday, Cheney stressed that even in a ground war, the massive air bombardments will continue. He said Iraqis will suffer air strikes "in the days and weeks ahead."
However, he rejected the idea that the war might be won by extended bombing alone, arguing that ground and amphibious forces will be required to flush Iraqi troops from dug-in defenses in Kuwait.
"It's all one campaign," Cheney told reporters on the overnight trip from Washington. "We're thinking in terms of the situation which clearly would continue the air campaign and add to that other capabilities. … You add the amphibious element or the ground forces in the fashion that forces him to move out of his prepared positions, and it's moving out of those positions that makes him vulnerable once again to the air force."
Cheney and Powell are to return to Washington Sunday to report to President Bush on the military situation and prospects for opening a ground war.
In rousing remarks to airmen and women at an air base in western Saudi Arabia, they used their first wartime visit to the region to stress they have no plans for a drawn-out confrontation.
"We hope to get this wrapped up as quickly as possible. We don't want to go home before the job's done, and it's not done yet," Cheney told flyers and crews of an F-111 fighter-bomber wing.
At the air base - which can't be identified under restrictions placed on journalists covering the war - the troops cheered as Powell repeated his fiery prediction of how allied troops will deal with the Iraqi force in Kuwait.
"We'll get this over with a simple process - we'll cut it off and kill it," he declared.
The four-star general, clad in the desert camouflage uniform worn by some of the troops standing before him, said Saddam was warned before the war that he would have to "move it or lose it."
"He wouldn't move it and now he'll lose it," Powell said, eliciting loud cheers and handclapping that rang to the roof of the hangar.
Cheney and Powell also met the head of the exiled Kuwaiti government, Sheik Jabir Al-Ahmad Al Sabah, in the southwestern city of Taif.
After receiving an update on the war, the emir requested that Kuwaiti ground forces be included in the liberation of their homeland, something Cheney and Powell view as "essential," a senior Pentagon official said after the session.
The emir queried Cheney and Powell about the 16-inch guns from the U.S. battleships, USS Wisconsin and USS Missouri, that have been blasting Iraqi positions in Kuwait, said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
He said the query didn't indicate distress about the amount of destruction caused by the war since the Kuwaitis were eager to see the liberation of their homeland.
Powell told the Kuwaitis that allied forces were trying to spare segments of oil installations as well as civilian and religious sites, the official said.

 

End of Document
