

Gulf War Sets Off Marathon News Coverage The World Over
The Associated Press
January 26, 1991, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 754 words
Byline: By RICHARD LORANT, Associated Press Writer
Body




When the allies lit up the night sky over Baghdad on Jan. 17 with their attack on Iraq, people around the world were subjected to a bombardment of television and newspaper war coverage that goes on unabated.
Cubans, who watched the usual fare of cartoons and baseball that night, were among the few peoples in the world who did not learn of the air attack live from journalists at the Rashid hotel in Baghdad.
Television networks from Spain to Santiago cut into regular programming to report that bombs were raining down on the Iraqi capital. Newspapers from Australia to Zimbabwe rushed to put out special war editions, and many continue to print daily special sections on the war.
But some countries now want to limit coverage, saying that in many cases the reporting amounts to nothing more than a relentless barrage of unverified information.
Cable News Network, broadcast in many countries with local live voice-over translations, was the only source of spot news from Baghdad for much of the world that first night. Television stations in dozens of countries still rely heavily on CNN to fill out marathon news specials.
The Atlanta-based network has so dominated European airwaves since Iraq's Aug. 2 invasion of Kuwait that Italy's state-owned RAI network said Thursday it wants to create a 24-hour European news station to counter what it sees as CNN's American point of view.
CNN correspondent Peter Arnett, who remained in Baghdad when others were ordered to leave Jan. 19, is now a household name in countries where most people were unaware of the network before the war.
Iraqi authorities also allowed Alfonso Rojo, a reporter for the Madrid daily El Mundo, to remain. He said in a story published Friday he has had to resort to sending handwritten notes out of Iraq because Arnett will not let him use the CNN satellite connection.
Now some government agencies are trying to limit coverage of the war.
Gianni Pasquarelli, RAI general director, issued a directive Thursday asking that the Italian network dedicate extra news editions and bulletins only to "truly relevant news" - and keep them brief.
"Non-stop information is by nature non-verified information, and a type of programming that throws everything, whatever arrives, into the cauldron," RAI radio director Corrado Guerzoni said, explaining the rationale of the directives.
The government-run South African Broadcasting Corp. returned to its regular programming on Monday after viewers began demanding an end to saturation war coverage.
The country's mainstream press, run by whites, has put the war on page one every day. But black-oriented newspapers like The Sowetan have given the war less coverage and said that many black South Africans either side with Iraq or are strongly against U.S. involvement in the region.
In France, nine mainstream conservative, centrist and Socialist lawmakers joined on Thursday to create a "parliamentary observatory" of the media's war coverage.
The deputies criticized "disorder" in the coverage and said it had caused ethical problems, including the reporting of unverified information and the risk of military information leaks.
In Thailand, The Nation newspaper published an editorial Thursday titled "War As Entertainment" that said:
"The number of prisoners of war, the number of combat aircraft shot down, the number of Scud missiles destroyed have quickly replaced the government lottery in terms of waging daily bets. Even the weekly horse races have become mundane."
Many radio and television stations that once signed off late in the evening have expanded hours to broadast round-the-clock war updates.
Zimbabweans and foreigners gather daily in the Harare Sheraton Hotel lounge and the Hotel Inn's Snuffbox cocktail bar to watch live television reports.
In post-Communist Poland, where the war competes for space with the Baltic struggle for independence from the Soviet Union, military experts discuss the war on television and in newspapers.
State television offers a 10-minute nightly talk show called "War for Peace" in which two Polish air force colonels discuss developments and the types of arms used by both sides.
Cuba appears to be one of the few countries where there has been little coverage.
The night of the attack, the government-controlled media showed excerpts of a news conference by President Fidel Castro, who said war could have been prevented by further negotiations.
Cuba is one of two members of the United Nations Security Council that repeatedly opposed anti-Iraq resolutions on the invasion of Kuwait.

 

End of Document
