

Hail the New Chief: A Lovefest, But the Meter's Running
The Associated Press
November 4, 1992, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 616 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President-elect Bill Clinton - even the title sounds crisp and fresh - said in his campaign that he wanted to give the country smarter government, not bigger government, and this capital will soon swarm with people who think they have the brains to run it.
The country will have a lovefest with Clinton & Co. - Americans always swoon over a new president - but the meter will be running.
The new president, an acknowledged "policy wonk," can be expected to hustle into office with a lot of broad, splashy changes: ending the gag rule on abortion counseling, the ban on fetal tissue research, the suspension of Clean Air Act regulations.
None of these add to the budget deficit, which is at a record high and will eventually inhibit Clinton's freedom of motion.
A big style difference sweeps in, too.
After 12 years shaped by Ronald Reagan's dictum that government is the enemy, a new crew will be intent on putting government to work.
Every president from John Kennedy to Bush had been born in between 1908 and 1924, a 16-year span. Now comes a president born after World War II, for whom JFK was a boy's hero.
This president blows the saxophone. And dances to Fleetwood Mac. And marched against that war. And is married to a woman with a career.
Yet a ballot box revolution, for all its giddy excitement, is also an act of rejection.
When Pat Bartley, a voter in Harpers Ferry, W. Va., explained her vote for Clinton, she hesitated to say why she opted against Bush. "I guess," she said at last, "maybe he did the best he could."
Bush knew these last days, of course, that defeat confronted him. But still he sounded unpersuaded. "We have fought the good fight and we've kept the faith," he said.
He said he would "get very active in the grandchild business," but it rang hollow. Bush is 68, but not the rocking chair type.
In defeat, Bush joins a short list of modern presidents turned out: Herbert Hoover, incapacitated by the Great Depression, an economic disaster beyond the ken of his imagination. Gerald Ford, dragged down by his presidential pardon of his disgraced predecessor, the banished Richard Nixon. Jimmy Carter, crippled by a hostage crisis in Iran and a victim of his own malaise.
What brought Bush down? He was late in acknowledging the recession and offering to combat it, but it was not nearly as severe as Ronald Reagan's.
Was Bush too single-minded about foreign affairs, about being on a first-name basis with world leaders? Did standing up to Saddam Hussein's aggression count for nothing?
During Bush's watch, confidence in the future hit rock bottom. People began saying they did not believe they would live as well as their parents - an absolute refutation of the American dream.
In October 1932, when the hapless Herbert Hoover finally emerged from the White House to ask for re-election, he was booed and picketed. His train was pelted with tomatoes. "I can't go on with it any more," he told his wife.
Bush wasn't pelted with produce, but he complained it was an awful year. Still, he went on with it. He always ran best from behind. He would show the "Comeback Kid." He put himself in the campaign custody of James A. Baker III, debated the Oxford guy to a draw in their final encounter, called his hecklers draft dodgers. With a wink and a grin, he lashed out at his "those bozos" in opposition.
It didn't work. In the contest between "trust" and "change," the voters took a chance on change.
Steve Luckett of St. Louis said he voted for Clinton because he did not think he could do worse than Bush. "If not, he's only in for four years."
It sounded like what Ronald Reagan used to say: "Trust but verify." But for the moment, Clinton gets the benefit of the doubt. That's his honeymoon.

 

End of Document
