

HEAD: Genocide is the focus of a trio of new books
The Associated Press
June 14, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 779 words
Byline: By DAVID SMYTH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Genocide: In World War I it was the Armenians, in World War II it was the Jews, in 1991 it is the Kurds.
Why do entire ethnic groups suddenly find themselves on the endangered species list? And why at that particular time in history?
Three recent books give us some glimpses of insight into these questions.
In April 1915, says Edward Alexander in "A Crime of Vengeance: An Armenian Struggle for Justice" (The Free Press, $$22.50), Talaat Pasha, the leading figure of the Young Turk government, ordered "the deportation of every Armenian man, woman and child from Anatolia to the desert areas of Syria and Mesopotamia." On this forced march and in related atrocities, 1.5 million Armenians perished.
There had been previous massacres of the Armenians in Turkey, notably in 1893 and 1895 under Sultan Abdul Hamid (whose mother, curiously, was an Armenian slave). But this was the most ferocious, thorough and efficient killing to date. The Young Turks, a revolutionary group, had taken over the decrepit Ottoman Empire from the effete sultans. And Turkey was at war.
The Armenians, a Christian minority in a Moslem land, were suspected of treasonous collusion with the Christian enemy in World War I: czarist Russia.
The Armenian genocide did not go entirely unpunished. As Alexander's tale of vengeance relates, in March 1921, Soghomon Tehlirian, a young Armenian whose mother, sister and brother had been murdered on the forced exodus to Syria, hunted down Talaat Pasha, located him in Germany, and shot him dead in a Berlin street.
The horrifying details of the Armenian massacre brought out by the defense at Tehlirian's trial so outraged the jury of 12 Berliners that they acquitted the accused of all blame. (A free man, Tehlirian later emigrated to the United States and died in San Francisco in 1960.)
But the world's outrage did not last long. By 1939, Adolf Hitler was able to remark to his general staff on the eve of the Nazi invasion of Poland, "Who, after all, speaks today of the extermination of the Armenians?"
What Hitler had in mind was the eventual elimination of Poles, Gypsies, Jews, mentally defective German citizens and other "subhumans." And his right-hand man in this enterprise was Gestapo chief Heinrich Himmler, the subject of Richard Breitman's "The Architect of Genocide: Himmler and the Final Solution" (Knopf, $$23).
Extermination camps for the Jews apparently was not the original plan. Breitman says that as late as 1940, when France fell, Nazi leaders were still talking about setting up a reservation for deported West European Jews on French-owned Madagascar. At some point between this date and the Wannsee conference of top Nazi bureaucrats on Jan. 20, 1942, where the specific details of the "final solution of the Jewish question" were hammered out, the decision to commit genocide was made.
By this time, Himmler had millions of Eastern Jews under his control in Poland. Hitler had invaded the Soviet Union. And the German Wehrmacht was suffering its first setback in what the Nazis saw as a life-and-death struggle in the East.
In July 1941, Himmler had already told Auschwitz commandant Rudolf Hoess: "The Jews are the sworn enemies of the German people and must be eradicated. Every Jew that we can lay our hands on is to be destroyed during the war without exception. If we cannot now obliterate the biological basis of Jewry, the Jews will one day destroy the German people."
For the Jews, as for the Armenians a quarter century before, the coming of war spelled doom.
"In the Iraqi case," say Efraim Karsh and Inari Rautsi, co-authors of "Saddam Hussein: A Political Biography" (The Free Press, $$22.95), "Kurdish separatism … threatens Iraq's fragile sectarian edifice, thereby raising the fearful specter of the possible disintegration of the state into three entities: Kurdish, Shi'ite and Sunni."
The Shiite Moslems of southern Iraq are coreligionists of the Ayatollah Khomeini of Iran, against whom Saddam had launched a bloody, inconclusive eight-year war in the 1980s.
The disaffected Kurds of northern Iraq were thus doubly a threat to Saddam - a hostile ethnic minority to be bombed, deported, and exterminated with poison gas. When Saddam invaded Kuwait in 1990, the Kurds rose in revolt, were crushed, and in 1991 fled by the millions into neighboring Turkey and Iran.
So for the Kurds, too, it was war that brought centuries of persecution to a genocidal climax.
The moral of these three stories of 20th-century genocide seems to be: It is always dangerous to be a dissident minority anywhere in the world; but the peril becomes mortal when war breaks out and the minority you belong to is perceived as an internal enemy of the state.

 

End of Document
