

HEAD: Stamps in the News
The Associated Press
March 1, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 650 words
Body




---
 
 By SYD KRONISH
AP Newsfeatures
On March 15, the U.N. Postal Administration plans to issue a new stamp set with the theme "For a Better Environment." It hails the efforts of the Economic Commission for Europe, which has worked to strengthen economic relations among its 34 member states.
Among the environmental concerns of the ECE are air pollution, acid rain, water pollution and industrial accidents. The Declaration of the Conservation of Flora, Fauna and Their Habitats was adopted by the commission to maintain essential ecological processes and to preserve biological diversity for the benefit of present and future generations. The colorful stamps depict lush scenes of flora and fauna and show the rich diversity of the natural environment.
The stamps will be printed in sheets of 40 and sold in blocks of four. There will be three versions: the block of 30-cent stamps shows a forest, lake and mountains with a wild turkey and other forest creatures; the block of 90-franc stamps pictures tropical sea life and brightly colored fish and coral; and the block of 5-shilling stamps features a lake scene with a swan, a mallard, brightly colored butterflies and an array of other exotic birds.
At the same time, the UNPA will issue a souvenir card depicting the three versions of the stamp blocks; three pictorial postcards based on the stamp designs; and the UNPA's first maximum cards, three different issues that feature the stamp's nature illustrations.
For information on obtaining these new U.N. philatelic items, write to: U.N. Postal Administration, United Nations, New York, NY 10017.
 
 Honoring the Troops
The U.S. Stamp Collectors Society has prepared a cover with a U.S. Postal Service Pictorial Postmark honoring the armed forces in the Persian Gulf. The caption on the envelope reads, "Let Freedom Ring Throughout the Middle East." It is available for $$5.95.
If your patriotic fervor includes stamps from the past 60 years featuring U.S. Armed Forces, you will be interested to know that the Society is offering a collection of 100 different U.S. stamps, including commemoratives, honoring the Air Force, Army, Navy, Marines and Coast Guard.
For more information, contact the Society at P.O. Box 917, Van Nuys, CA 91408.
 
 Tips for FDC Buyers
Scott Publishing has some recommendations for collectors who buy first-day covers.
Make sure you examine the entire cover. It should be in good condition, without tears, wrinkles, stains or wear. The stamp should not be damaged or torn, and the postmark should be legible and have the correct first-day date.
When buying cacheted first-day covers, look for unusual-looking ones. Remember, if you pass up the chance to buy an unusual cachet, you may never see it offered for sale again.
 
 Counteracting Counterfeiters
Maybe they should have hired Sherlock Holmes?
When England issued the world's first adhesive postage stamp in 1840, postal officials knew that some clever forgers would try to duplicate the stamps or find ways to reuse them.
In 1858, postal officials decided to produce stamps with check letters in all four corners, which would make it impossible to piece together stamps from parts of used stamps.
Beginning in 1864, stamps were printed with the four check letters. The policy was eventually discontinued, but a few rare stamps bearing the four check letters are known to exist.
 
 Any Bonds Today?
During World War II, many stars in the entertainment field traveled throughout the country to raise funds for the war effort. They urged Americans to buy U.S. War Bonds, or Savings Bonds, and sang, "Any Bonds Today?"
On April 30, the U.S. Postal Service will issue a 29-cent commemorative stamp honoring the 50th anniversary of the U.S. Savings Bonds program. The vertical design will feature a bald eagle against a red-and-white-striped background.
Information on obtaining first-day covers will be passed along when it becomes available.

 

End of Document
