

Here's What Caused the Recession
The Associated Press
May 25, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 872 words
Byline: By MARTIN CRUTSINGER, AP Economics Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The 1990-91 recession was caused by:
(a) Alan Greenspan.
(b) Saddam Hussein.
(c) the credit crunch.
(d) the end of the Cold War.
(e) the 1981 and 1986 tax laws.
(f) all of the above.
Each of those factors, and some even more disparate, are being advanced as culprits in the country's first economic slump in eight years.
In Washington, fixing blame for the recession isn't just an academic exercise. The issue is certain to arise in next year's presidential campaign. It could also be a factor in determining whether Greenspan keeps his job as chairman of the Federal Reserve.
In addition, some people champion one cause over another to promote their own ideas - ranging from cutting the tax on capital gains to overhauling the banking system - as ways to get out of the recession.
Most economists would pick the "all of the above" answer. They argue that recessions seldom have a single cause.
But those who single out a villain advance these arguments:
 
 SADDAM HUSSEIN
Iraq's invasion of Kuwait sent world oil prices soaring, making inflation worse and cutting into purchasing power. Worried American consumers abruptly stopped spending and the recession was under way.
 
 ALAN GREENSPAN
In 1988 and 1989, the central bank was pursuing a tight-credit policy. The idea was that high interest rates would dampen demand enough to cool inflationary pressures without tipping the country into a recession.
Greenspan's critics contend the central bank worried about inflation too much and kept interest rates too high for too long, triggering the downturn.
Proponents of the Fed theory claimed support when the National Bureau of Economic Research, the official arbiter of when recessions begin and end, selected July 1990 as the starting month for the downturn. That was the month before Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.
"It is entirely possible that we would have only had a slowdown and not a recession had the invasion not occurred," said Victor Zarnovitz, an economist at the University of Chicago and one of seven members of the bureau's recession dating committee.
"But we will never know because you can't reconstruct history."
 
 CREDIT CRUNCH
A variety of economic ills dealing with financially strapped banks and the depressed real estate market are grouped in this category.
Federal regulators, sobered by the $$500 billion savings and loan bailout, began enforcing stricter operating standards for both banks and S&Ls.
Financial institutions, already stuck with mounting bad loans as real estate prices collapsed, cut back on lending even to credit-worthy customers.
Loans for new ventures dried up even though interest rates were falling.
 
 COLD WAR
Proponents of this view see two adverse economic impacts from the end of the Cold War.
The halting of Ronald Reagan's giant defense buildup cut into government spending that had helped power the economy through the 1980s.
In addition, financial markets pushed interest rates sharply higher in early 1990 over worries that the sudden need for capital to rebuild Eastern Europe, and in particular East Germany, would cause a global shortage of funds.
This run-up in long-term rates came at a particularly bad time for the already depressed U.S. housing market.
 
 TAX CHANGES
Some contend that the seeds of the 1990 recession were planted in 1981 when Congress passed the biggest tax cuts in history at the beginning of the Reagan years.
One tax benefit for real estate investors touched off a construction boom. Office buildings rose not because of demand but because investors could get tax write offs.
Congress took away those benefits in the 1986 law, but some contend Congress erred by switching course too abruptly and thus further depressing an already weakening real estate market.
Supporters of a cut in the capital gains tax rate put themselves in this camp. Advocates of lower taxes and less government go further and implicate the 1990 budget deal as a culprit as well, contending that policy-makers chose exactly the wrong time to cut government spending and raise taxes.
"Not only did last year's budget agreement play a significant role in bringing on the recession and making it longer and deeper, the agreement now poses the single biggest political obstacle to achieving a pro-growth economic policy to spur a lasting and vigorous recovery," said Richard Rahn, chief economist of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, and a leading member of the "supply side" camp.
However, many economists argue that the budget agreement passed in October had little effect - the bulk of the tax increases and spending cuts won't be felt until later, they point out.
 
 ALL OF THE ABOVE
Advocates of this position subscribe to a traditional business-cycle view of history. All expansions come to an end because the economy can't keep expanding forever. Eventually, tight labor markets and strained production facilities lead to inflation and the Fed has to step in and cool things off.
The nearly 8-year-old recovery was already the second longest in U.S. history and the country was past due for a downturn, many economists believe.
"No expansion lasts forever," said Alan Blinder, an economist at Princeton University. "Eventually some combination of economic excesses, bad luck and bad policy bring all expansions to an end."

 

End of Document
