

Highlights of Iraqi Statement to the U.N. Security Council
The Associated Press
March 11, 1992, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 641 words
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Here are the highlights of a statement Wednesday to the U.N. Security Council by Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz:
---
This is the first time for us to have been given the opportunity to submit our point of view before the Security Council at this level in respect to the Council's dealing with Iraq.
The weapons which Iraq is prohibited from possessing have been totally destroyed. Whatever remains, especially in the missiles and chemical ammunition fields, is being successively destroyed under the supervision of the inspection teams and according to a plan about which there is no argument between the Iraqi authorities concerned and these teams.
During the period from April 1991 to February 1992, 29 inspection teams visited Iraq with an overall membership of nearly 400 inspectors who spent a total of 240 days in the country; i.e. about eight months of continuous work, during which the inspection teams conducted 415 inspection operations including 127 surprise visits made without prior notice to locations spread all over Iraq.
The clear conclusion to be left with after all of this is that Iraq is no longer in possession of any weapons, munitions or major or minor systems prohibited.
---
The Council has continued, since it conducted its first review of Iraq's compliance in June 1991, to declare after each review that Iraq had not yet fully complied with the resolution (ending the Gulf War), which meant that the embargo upon Iraq remained in place and the suffering of 18 million Iraqis continued unmitigated."
We have sent many notes and letters to the council … but all these efforts have been ignored under pressure form a small, but influential and perhaps even tyrannical, number of members in the council. Now and again, storms of false allegations and ill-intended extremist conclusions were raised against Iraq's position on one subject or the other. The council was repeatedly put in an atmosphere of distortion aimed to suggest non-compliance by Iraq with the provisions of the resolution. Some members of the inspection teams visiting Iraq have been selected from people linked to the intelligence services of certain countries in order to create problems.
---
… The noisy storms … by certain elements in the inspection teams who came to serve the objectives of those countries, were exploited to issue new Council resolutions containing provisions even more extremist than those contained in Resolution 687, without regard to Iraq's difficult circumstances. The objective was to blackmail Iraq, keep the finger of accusation pointed at it, use this false and distorted climate to maintain the iniquitous economic embargo imposed upon the people of Iraq, and ultimately exploit the situation in a manner that would enable the said countries to issue, whenever they chose to, threats of the use of force against Iraq once again.
Thirteen months have now gone by since we had the cease-fire and Resolution 660 on the basis of which the economic embargo was imposed, and the people of Iraq remain deprived of their right to normal life and importing all their humanitarian needs … Indeed the Sanctions Committee has gone so far as to prevent Iraq from importing even soap and detergents …
The question asked by 18 million Iraqis is this: For how long will this iniquitous siege continue to be imposed upon Iraq? … How can the right of veto given to five member states (of the Security Council) since the founding of the United Nations be interpreted in such a way as to be used in determining whether a people should be allowed to purchase soap, printing paper or children's toys?
You, Gentlemen, ask Iraq to implement this and comply with that; and Iraq has been fulfilling its obligations month after month … What obligations has the Council, for its part, fulfilled towards the people of Iraq? The answer is: Nothing whatsoever.

 

End of Document
