

Historic Accord Is A Gamble For Both Israel and the PLO
The Associated Press
September 13, 1993, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 744 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




In careful words of Arabic, of Hebrew and English, the speeches that marked Monday's Middle East peace ceremony were largely optimistic, the soothing words of a diplomatic triumph.
But no one could gloss over the crises and complications sure to come, or the pain of the decades past.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel put it this way:
"This signing of the Israeli-Palestinian declaration of principles here today, it's not so easy, neither for myself as a soldier in Israel's war, nor for the people of Israel, nor for the Jewish people in the Diaspora who are watching us now with great hope mixed with apprehension."
It was Mahmoud Abbas of the PLO Executive Committee who signed the agreement, and embraced the concept of peaceful coexistence, and then said, knowingly, "We know quite well that this is merely the beginning of a journey that is surrounded by numerous dangers and difficulties."
Indeed, much is at stake as the two former enemies move to implement the era of Palestinian self-rule.
Israel is betting that turning over administrative control of Gaza, Jericho and, before long, much of the West Bank will cool the Palestinian ardor for an independent nation and especially for control of Jerusalem.
Yasser Arafat and those in the PLO who support this limited accord are placing an exactly opposite bet: that the experience of peaceful coexistence will induce Israel - with prodding from the United States and most of the world - to agree in two to three years to a state with its capital in Jerusalem.
Told that Arafat had predicted to reporters that the accords would lead to just such an arrangement, Rabin replied gruffly: "He can forget about it." Of course Rabin knows that isn't going to happen. "The Palestinian state is within our grasp," Arafat said recently. "Soon the Palestinian flag will fly on the walls, the minarets and the cathedrals of Jerusalem."
Nonetheless, his critics in the Arab world and within the PLO itself believe Arafat has gambled and already lost by recognizing Israel and disavowing his campaign of anti-Israeli violence.
Abba Eban, a former foreign minister and U.N. ambassador, told NBC "Our existence is not on the line. The existence of the Palestinian entity is on the line."
But Jeane Kirkpatrick, former U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, disagreed.
"It surely is a gamble for Israel and it's a fairly major gamble for Israel," she told The Associated Press. "It is not comparable to the Camp David accords (with Egypt in 1978) except it's signed with a former enemy."
She said Israel stood to gain peace from Egypt. "But the PLO today is very weak, it is weaker than it has ever been, above all because of the rising power of the fundamentalists, so there isn't as much to gain."
With a foothold now on the West Bank, and with the United States embracing the PLO with exceptional speed and warmth, Arafat has achieved momentum. Even without formal U.S. recognition, he was invited to meet Secretary of State Warren Christopher at the State Department. And in a brief private chat, Clinton urged Arafat not to make the Israelis feel insecure.
The diplomatic euphoria after nearly 30 years of bloody conflict is a celebration of mutual recognition, pledges to live in peace and Arafat's renunciation of violence.
The Clinton administration will try to shape a safe future, organizing assistance to the fledgling Palestinian authority from the European Community, Japan, Scandinavia, and Saudi Arabia and other rich Persian Gulf countries.
This has the enthusiastic support of the Rabin government. The premise is that a stable Palestinian entity is more likely to be a peaceful one.
Next, Christopher will try to broaden the agreement with the PLO and follow it with one due to be announced Tuesday between Israel and Jordan.
Then negotiators would focus on Israel's conflict with Syria. Syria wants Israel to give up the Golan Heights, a strategic enclave at the border captured by Israel in the 1967 Six-Day War. Taking over the Golan Heights, which was annexed in 1981, ended cross-border attacks.
The Rabin government has advised Syria it would consider at least a partial withdrawal. Syria is demanding a complete pullback and the talks are stalemated with Israel saying it has not been told what kind of peace Syria intends to offer.
An implacable impasse? Few predicted Monday's agreement between the PLO and Israel, even a month ago.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE: Barry Schweid is chief diplomatic writer for The Associated Press.
 Load-Date: September 13, 1993

 

End of Document
