

Holiday Inn Asks Hotels Not to Fly the Georgia Flag
The Associated Press
August 3, 1994, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 624 words
Byline: By DICK PETTYS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ATLANTA
Body




The state flag, dominated by the crossed bars of the Confederacy, has never flown outside the Holiday Inn in suburban Jonesboro. But the motel still couldn't stay out of the battle over the explosive symbol of America's divided past.
General manager Joseph Metcalf returned from vacation last week to find a stack of angry telephone messages from people upset his motel doesn't fly the flag.
"When I tell them we've never flown the state flag, they say, 'Well we're still going to boycott you,"' said Metcalf, who estimated he's gotten 100 calls. "We've even gotten calls from out-of-state from people who are mad."
Atlanta-based Holiday Inn Worldwide announced last month it would no longer fly the flag at two company-owned hotels in Georgia, and it urged its 62 franchises in the state to do the same.
Sons of Confederate Veterans, with 21,000 members across the South, responded with a call to boycott all Holiday Inns, including those that had never flown the flag.
Robert L. Hawkins III, a commander in chief of the Sons of Confederate Veterans, denounced the campaign against the state flag as "historical cleansing masquerading as sensitivity."
The group dropped plans to hold its national convention at a Holiday Inn in Mobile, Ala., this week, and will cancel plans to hold its next convention at a Holiday Inn in Nashville, Tenn.
"I don't really want any of our members staying at a Holiday Inn, I don't care if it's in Beirut," Hawkins said.
Thus was joined the latest skirmish in the war being fought from Alabama and Mississippi to Florida and South Carolina over the display of symbols of the Confederacy.
The Confederate battle flag - crossed blue bars with white stars on a red field - was incorporated into the Georgia state flag in 1956 by the Legislature to express its defiance of desegregation.
It takes up two-thirds of the state flag. The remaining third consists of a vertical blue band with the state seal in white: a gate with the three pillars of wisdom, justice and moderation.
Critics of the flag say it is racist, an offensive reminder of slavery and segregation. Its supporters say the flag is a fitting way to honor the valiant men in gray who died for the Confederacy.
A Georgia State University poll found that 58.5 percent of residents oppose changing the flag. The poll had a margin of error of plus or minus 3.5 percentage points.
"I'm delighted they decided not to fly it," said Jerry Hardee of Valdosta, Ga., as he left the Jonesboro Holiday Inn. Hardee is black and a frequent Holiday Inn guest.
Civil rights leaders have also asked the Coco-Cola Co. and McDonald's restaurants to remove the flag, but those businesses seem determined to stay out of the fray.
McDonald's does not plan to tell its 250 Georgia franchises what to do, spokesman John Fletcher said. Few of them fly the flag anyway, he said.
"We believe issues involving state flags need to be decided by the state Legislature and voters," Fletcher said.
Coca-Cola, which flies the state flag outside its Atlanta headquarters, has not taken up the issue, spokesman Randy Donaldson said.
Gov. Zell Miller tried to remove the emblem in 1993 but was rebuffed by legislators. He is up for re-election this year.
"I want the voters to know I got the message last year, and the bottom line is, I'm not going to try to change the flag again," he said.
Former Gov. Carl Sanders, a moderate who helped steer Georgia through integation, said he is worried about the state's image as it takes the world stage for the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta.
"We're going to have 200 countries coming to Atlanta from other parts of the world," he said, "and if some of them are persuaded not to participate because of a battle over what kind of flag is flying, then it would be a real tragedy."
 Load-Date: August 4, 1994

 

End of Document
