

Hostage Crisis: Turning Up The Heat in Kashmir
 The Associated Press
August 18, 1995, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 685 words
Byline: By ARTHUR MAX, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW DELHI, India
Body




The abduction of Western hostages by Kashmiri separatists comes at a curious time: India has been preparing to loosen its grip on Kashmir anyway.
The kidnappings also highlight differences among Kashmiri separatist groups, as well as conflicts between Kashmiris and Muslim militants who came to the region to help them fight India.
The separatists executed one hostage, Norwegian Hans Christian Ostro, and are threatening to kill the other four - an American, two Britons and a German.
So far, they have made no political demands, and have sought to trade the hostages for the release of 15 imprisoned guerrillas. India has refused.
Agents from the FBI's Honolulu division traveled to Kashmir this week to help Indian police, said John Pikus, the FBI spokesman in Hawaii.
The inescapable background to txe drama is the 5-year-old uprising by Kashmir's Muslims, who never felt comfortable under the rule of India's predominantly Hindu government. In recent years they have been further alienated by India's repressive measures to crush the rebellion.
Prime Minister P.V. Narasimha Rao wants to break the political inertia by holding a local election this fall, and he speaks in vague terms of giving Kashmir greater autonomy.
Derailed several times before, the proposed election could fall victim again to the escalating violence.
Moreover, the hostage crisis could feed a growing resentment by the Muslims of Kashmir against the increasing number of outsiders - mostly Pakistanis and Afghans - who sometimes seem to have hijacked the Kashmiris' rebellion against Indian rule.
For the first time, the pro-independence leadership called a general strike on Wednesday to protest an action by the militants who are supposed to be fighting for Kashmir's freedom. The strike is an oft-used tool to vent anger at India.
India claims the kidnappers, who call themselves "Al-Faran," are a unit of the well-armed Harkat ul-Ansar, a group headquartered in Pakistan.
The Harkat - who admitted abducting and holding two Britons for 17 days last year - has denied any link with the kidnappers and has joined in condemning them.
But some doubt remains whether the kidnapping is the work of a small band of renegades, or whether it reflects a tactical split among the dozens of guerrilla organizations fighting in Kashmir.
Some experts believe the abduction was aimed at undermining Rao's plan for elections to the state legislature. There has been no local government in Kashmir since the previous legislature was dismissed in 1990.
Kashmir's leaders say they do not want an election, and any autonomy package offered by India would fall short of what they seek - a complete break with India.
The Kashmir problem originated in Britain's division of the Indian subcontinent in 1947 into two countries: the Islamic republic of Pakistan and India, which is predominantly Hindu.
Both new nations claimed the Himalayan kingdom of Kashmir, over which they fought in 1948 and 1965. India held onto about two-thirds of the territory, and Jammu-Kashmir became the only one of its 25 states with a Muslim majority.
Promised a wide degree of autonomy, Kashmiris say they were instead subjected to manipulation and discrimination by Indian politicians, culminating in elections in 1987 that were transparently rigged.
Open rebellion erupted in 1989, and the Rubicon was crossed in January 1990 when Indian troops fired on a peaceful demonstration crossing the Gawakadal Bridge in Kashmir's capital of Srinagar, killing about 100 people.
India blames Pakistan for fueling the troubles. Pakistan denies supplying material aid, but it gives vocal support to the Kashmiris' struggle against India.
The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in Washington, D.C., said recently that Pakistan's attempts to draw attention to the problem have backfired.
"The Kashmir conflict has been politicized to a point where no policy is clear, no action can be clearly understood, and no government-organized political process offers enough promise to salve the wounds of spirit," the report said.
---
Eds: Arthur Max is the AP's South Asian bureau chief, based in New Delhi.
 Load-Date: August 19, 1995

 

End of Document
