

How the Gulf War Affected Business and the Markets on Friday
The Associated Press
January 18, 1991, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 334 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Here is a rundown of how the Persian Gulf conflict affected the financial markets and other business and economic news on Friday:
 
 Markets More Stable, but Panicky Emotions Mark Every Turn at the Front
 
 U.S. financial markets faced the second day of war with sobering steadiness Friday, but investors reacted nervously to every report and rumor of a change in the military conflict. A late wave of panic selling sent oil prices falling while stock prices strengthened near the close. Light sweet crude oil for delivery in February ended the session at $$19.25 a barrel, down $$2.19, the lowest level since midsummer. On Wall Street, the Dow Jones average jumped 23.27 points to close at 2,646.78. Volume was heavy for a second straight day. Foreign financial markets retreated from the buying frenzy a day earlier.
Some Strategists Argue Swift War Will Provide Economic Adrenalin
 
 Despite a more subdued mood in financial markets, private economists said they still believe that a swift victory in the Persian Gulf war would help George Bush defeat his biggest domestic foe - the recession in the United States. Analysts said that the drop in oil prices which has occurred since the war began, if it holds, should return spending power to consumers and businesses and give the Federal Reserve more leeway to reduce interest rates in an effort to fight the recession.
 
 In Europe, U.S. Multinationals Take Precautions Against Terrorists
 
 European branches of U.S. companies, fearing a surge in terrorist attacks, said they have strengthened security and imposed travel restrictions on their staffs since the Gulf war began. But few companies reported any signs of danger so far.
 
 Iraqi Missiles Raise Threat to Shippers
Iraq's use of missiles resurrected the risk of doing business among merchants in one of the world's most important, and dangerous, waterways. Oil tankers postponed loadings at two big Saudi oil terminals at the Persian Gulf ports of Ras Tanura and Juaymah on Friday, shipping sources said.

 

End of Document
