

Immigration Is Changing the Face of Canada
The Associated Press
October 12, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1209 words
Byline: By JEFFREY ULBRICH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TORONTO
Body




Immigration is changing the face of Canada.
While debate rages over whether French-speaking Quebec should have special rights as a "distinct society" and Quebeckers rail against perceived slights by "English Canada," the nation's character is being altered by newcomers, most of them from the Third World.
Canadians still speak of "the Two Solitudes" or the "Two Founding Nations": the English and French, who have fought, argued and lived in uneasy association for 3 centuries.
Today, however, "English Canada" often has an Asian face, and the French Quebecker walking down the street in Montreal might have been born in Haiti.
The largest source of immigration to Canada is Hong Kong, which reverts to China in 1997. It provides 14.2 percent of the new Canadians, followed by India with 6.4 percent. Asian, African and Middle Eastern immigrants make up 65 percent of the total, and arrivals from Europe only 25 percent.
A year-old government plan calls for 250,000 new immigrants annually, or nearly 1 percent of Canada's 26 million population.
"Immigration has changed the face of the crowd," said Gilles Pacquet, a professor of economics at the University of Ottawa. "Ten million Canadians are not from British or French stock at all."
The Economic Council of Canada, an independent think tank, wrote in its 1991 study of the economic and social impacts of immigration: "Many Canadians see their country as a nation of immigrants, extending a welcoming hand to other newcomers, including refugees from political and religious persecution.
"But at the same time, others fear that immigrants from new sources - in Asia, Latin America, the Caribbean and Africa - will change the country fundamentally, and could even lead to social and ethnic strife."
Recent outbursts of racial conflict in Montreal and Halifax, not characteristic of Canada's tolerant image, illustrate the point.
Maria, 37, a Brazilian immigrant who would not give her name, complained that her husband, a mechanical engineer who was employed by a U.S. company in Brazil for 15 years, has not found a job in Canada despite his qualifications.
"The Canadians don't give him a chance," Maria said after her English class in downtown Toronto. "They say your resume is good, beautiful. But they say you don't have 'Canadian experience.' How is he going to get that? I believe that's a pretext. It's discrimination."
It's even tougher for those who claim refugee status, like Roberto, an Argentine who would not give his name for fear of a negative ruling in his case.
"My big problem is, they never give me a permit to work or to study," said Roberto, 27, who arrived here 15 months ago. "The government gives me $ 600 a month. I pay $ 340 for rent and live with $ 260. My problem is, they never finish my case in court. I don't know why it takes so long."
The Economic Council reported that, while there are net economic benefits to immigration, "they are very small."
Except for half a million native Indians and Inuit, everybody in Canada came from someplace else, or is descended from someone who did.
There are two competing ideas of how a nation like Canada emerges, said Merle Ace, a professor of Commerce and Business Administration at the University of British Columbia.
"One is, you bring together an ethnic mix of people and they all melt down into something else," he said. "Eventually, whether you are Irish or German or Pakistani, you become what we like to consider Canadian."
Ace contrasts that with what he calls the "vertical mosaic."
"It says you put them all together and they don't all become the same thing, but in fact they retain their own identity," he explained.
This is in line with the government's policy of multiculturalism.
Many Canadians say multiculturalism officially encourages, even pays, groups to maintain their differences. Others, like Shamira Madhany, senior manager of the Ontario government's Welcome House in Toronto, describe it as not "retaining your culture, but valuing the diversity."
Pacquet, the Ottawa economist, blames former Prime Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau for "unleashing" multiculturalism on Canada in 1971.
"He said there is no such thing as an official culture in this country," Pacquet said. "You can maintain your own. That's saying you can come in, but you don't have to adjust."
The Economic Council study said some Canadians resent or misunderstand the multiculturalist approach and the policies that flow from it: "It seems to them that multiculturalism demands too much adjustment by Canadians and too little by immigrantsm."
Pacquet cited the case of a Sikh from India who joined the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, then took the government to court and won the right to wear his traditional turban instead of the usual Mountie headgear. It was an example, Pacquet said, of a national tradition being altered to suit a foreign one.
"Even though people will deny it, there is such a thing as a dominant English culture and a dominate French culture in this country around which people are de facto adjusting," he said. "That is denounced by some as racisim."
The Economic Council acknowledged that "frank, open discussion about immigration, especially of visible minorities, often seems inhibited by the fear of being accused of racism."
It recommended development of a "moral contract," in consultation with immigrant groups, outlining the responsibilities of both hosts and immigrants.
Some people are bothered by that concept.
"It would have to be broad and have lots of fuzzy edges," Ace said. "It couldn't be too legalistic. It might act as a guideline."
Walid Barake, a Lebanese who immigrated two years ago, said one of the toughest problems is becoming accepted in a new society while avoiding the tendency to stay within your own ethnic group.
Barake is fortunate because he arrived with an excellent knowledge of both French and English, and quickly found a good job. Language can be a huge initital barrier.
"I still feel isolated from Canadian society," Barake said. "Maybe that's because there is no one society.
"You wonder at times which society is the real one. There is no one homogeneous culture. The government here doesn't put a lot of pressure on immigrants to adapt. They leave them divided into their own groups."
To some, immigration is the solution to Canada's declining birth rate, aging population and emigration rate of about 60,000 a year, mostly to the United States. But a study of Canada's demographic future by the Ministry of Health and Welfare concluded there is no population crisis.
"Even if you thought there was one, you can't really count on immigration to fix it," said Andre Juneau, executive director of immigration policy at the Employment and Immigration Ministry. "The aging of the Canadian population is inevitable and it is virtually impossible to find an immigration policy that will solve it."
So why does Canada need or want immigration?
Meyer Burstein, the ministry's director of strategic planning and research, said one reason was Canada's humanitarian policy, both for refugees and for uniting the families of immigrants already in the country.
Many of those who come by selection have needed skills, good educations or money for investment, he said, "but by-and-large, immigration has a neutral effect."

 

End of Document
