

In Gulf War, Struggle to Communicate is Battle Within the Battle
The Associated Press
February 19, 1991, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 744 words
Byline: By ROBERT BURNS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




U.S. battlefield communications are so sophisticated President Bush could pick up a telephone and call a foot soldier in a foxhole.
The White House doesn't need that contact with desert frontline troops. But the advanced technology that makes it possible is an important part of the elaborate links between U.S. commanders and their troops in the field.
In a U.S.-led ground offensive against Iraq, some of the most crucial - but least visible - contests would be for control of battlefield communications. The largely electronic struggle by each side to destroy, jam, confuse or eavesdrop on the other's field communications would be the battle within the battle.
For more than a month, in fact, the allied command has put a premium on damaging Saddam Hussein's communications system, based on a simple premise: Commanders who can't communicate can't command.
The U.S. Army's war-fighting doctrine puts great emphasis on "command and control" - the capability to pass information on the battlefield, to get orders securely from headquarters to the front lines, to direct fire at crucial moments.
To strengthen this approach, the Army has been developing a new generation of battlefield communications systems, some of which are deployed for the first time in the Persian Gulf War, and some of which are not yet ready for war.
Because commanders know that in combat they must expect - even try to anticipate - the unexpected, they can't simply issue their operations orders and sit back to watch the plan unfold. They have to adjust it almost constantly, and to do so effectively they need a timely picture of the battlefield and a reliable way of getting the amended orders to the fighting forces.
The communications challenge for the U.S. Army, in the event of a ground war against Iraq, would be especially tough because the attack would probably be fast-paced and multi-pronged.
Control of ground forces in the Persian Gulf would be made even more difficult by the fact that tens of thousands of allied soldiers will be fighting alongside the Americans - not all speaking the same language. These include ground forces of Britain, France, Saudi Arabia, Egypt and possibly Syria.
The American Civil War was the last major conflict in which the main commanders could sit on horses on high points of land and personally control their forces in battle. Today's commanders rely on an elaborate network of computers, cellular telephones, microwave radio signals, facsimile machines, message switching centers, satellites and airborne radar systems that "see" the battlefield.
The flow of information during a ground war starts from the point at which one's troops are in contact with the opposition force, a point that the Army calls the "forward edge of the battle area."
A platoon leader, for example, would report information on his situation and that of the enemy force to his immediate superior, the company commander. To do this he would use a single-channel radio equipped with anti-eavesdropping devices.
For security reasons, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the commander in chief of all U.S. forces in the gulf, would be unlikely to travel to the front lines. But commanders at the corps or division level might.
"There's a great tradition of leadership from the front," said Col. John F. Back Jr., chief of command and control in the office of the Army's deputy chief of staff for operations. "Most do not want to be held at arm's length from the action."
One of the key pieces of the command and control structure of the Army is the "tactical operations center." It is the nerve center of the operation, the collection point for information about the battlefield situation, and the conduit for sending orders to the troops. Such centers are set up at each major level of the battlefield operation: the corps, the division, the brigade and the battalion.
At the tactical operations center, computer screens give "operations officers" an up-to-the-minute picture of the battlefield. It is here, for example, that an Air Force liaison officer would receive the information he needs to provide the most effective air support for Army troops advancing in the field.
Corps and division commanders can use an area communications system, called the Mobile Subscriber Equipment, that is so new it has never been used in combat. It allows the commanders to communicate on secure channels while moving around the desert. The old system, which is still in limited use, won't work on the run.

 

End of Document
