

In Iranian Camp, Fire Is the Only Incubator
The Associated Press
April 27, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 582 words
Byline: By MAUD S. BEELMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HERVI CAMP, Iran
Body




Iranian medical workers, trying to revive a 1-year-old boy nearly frozen to death, used the closest thing they had to an incubator: a large metal tray held over the campfire.
He was one of the lucky ones last week. He lived.
The boy had spent 17 days with about 50 refugees in a trek across the jagged mountains dividing Iran and Iraq.
Led by a former Iraqi agriculture official, the 13 families fled in a tractor-trailer, using only two large stones as brakes.
But the families completed the 370-mile trek from the Iraqi town of Tuz Khurmatu to this camp near Paveh with no deaths, said the group's leader.
"The brakes were very good," he said with a wry smile.
Now settled in a small tent with his wife and five children, the Iraqi Kurd asked that his name not be used for fear that friends and relatives left behind would suffer reprisals.
The man is among more than 100,000 refugees living in six sprawling tent camps on the banks of the Sirvan River in Bakhtaran province.
With a U.N.-estimated population of about 600,000 Iraqi Kurdish refugees, this western province is home to the largest number of the more than 1 million Kurds who fled Saddam Hussein's army into Iran.
In just over two weeks, the Iranian Red Crescent, the domestic equivalent of the Red Cross, erected about 10,000 tents in the rugged, breathtaking mountain valley. From the road above, Hervi's rows of tents look like a medieval battle encampment.
Relief workers from outside Iran who inspected the camp Thursday were generally impressed with what the Red Crescent had accomplished in such a short time, virtually without the supplies now starting to pour into the country.
"From the looks, I can tell you it's pretty good. Things are quite stable," said John Roche of the Irish Red Cross.
"But this needs to be kept up and it's a difficult job," he added.
One camp manager said clean water and doctors were the most-needed items. Diarrhea and dysentry are rife among the refugees.
The former agriculture official said he fled Iraq because he feared retaliation by Saddam's forces after the abortive uprisings by Kurds in northern Iraq and Shiite Muslims in the south following the Gulf War.
About 600 people in his town were taken away by Iraqi police, the man said. "What happened to them, I don't know," he said.
Fleeing with just a little money that has since been spent and the clothes they were wearing, the man and his family left behind a four-room house where they had lived nearly 30 years.
He was told by neighbors who came after him that his house and about 100 others had been leveled by Iraqi troops.
"They put TNT under it. The Arabs, our brothers, they did this to us. Look at all our things now," he said, motioning about the meager tent.
"When I return back - if I return back - I return (only) to land," said the man, looking tired and much older than his 51 years.
The only complaint the man voiced about his conditions was that the refugees were being fed outdated food. He held up an empty can of tuna packed in Iran with an expiration date of August 1985 on one end.
Other refugees in the camp had similar complaints and said many of the Kurds were getting sick on the food.
The man wanted to know why the rest of the world appeared indifferent.
"There are 6 to 7 million Kurds. Why do they not speak about us?" he asked.
Before anyone in the group offered a reply, he brushed his hands together as if he were dusting off dirt. "Because we are poor," he said. "We are a poor man and no one helps poor men in the world."

 

End of Document
