

In Iran, Clerics Ease Their Grip on the Social Code
 The Associated Press
November 13, 1995, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 810 words
Byline: By ANWAR FARUQI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TEHRAN, Iran
Body




At a cafe in the foothills on Tehran's north side, Ali Nikpasand and his two friends exchange glances and playful banter with a trio of teen-age girls at the next table.
Before long, the boys order hamburgers to go, and take the girls with them on a picnic in the Darakeh hills.
Until recently, the teens could have received public lashings or prison sentences for such behavior. Iran's strict Islamic laws forbid social interaction between unmarried men and women.
But preoccupied with a sagging economy, the country's clerical rulers seem to be easing their grip on the tight social restrictions that have dictated life since the 1979 Islamic revolution.
"The government appears to have decided not to hassle the people on trivial issues or to intrude in their private lives at a time when it can do nothing to improve their economic conditions," said Mahmoud Shams, editor of Kian, a monthly magazine often critical of the clerical establishment.
Iran's leaders also have eased up, in a limited way, in economics and politics. There has been increased room for political debate, but the state maintains tight controls on news media. More imports were being allowed until shortages of foreign currency led to a renewal of many import restrictions.
The most noticeable change has been in the social arena.
Every weekend swarms of teen-age girls and boys head up into the Darakeh hills or converge on the many tree-lined parks around the city - and the once-dreaded vice police simply look the other way.
"Young men and women now fear the vice squads only as much as they do traffic cops," said Ardeshir Shirazi, owner of a fast-food restaurant that is packed with teen-agers on weekend nights. "Things are changing slowly, but they are changing."
Women still must observe the "hejab," which requires they be covered from head to foot. But the requisite long smocks have become shapely. Head scarves that are supposed to cover all the hair often conceal very little, and make-up is back in fashion.
This past summer, for the first time in more than a decade, the Interior Ministry did not warn women against violating the dress code or wearing make-up.
There are signs some high-ranking clerics oppose any loosening of the strict social mores were dictated by the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the revered father of the revolution who died six years ago.
At Tehran's sprawling Mellat Park, a favorite meeting place for single men and women, protesters rallied to urge the government to take "serious action against social vices," newspapers reported in September.
A court in the northeastern city of Mashhad, a stronghold of Islamic purists, sentenced a bride to 85 lashes for dancing at her wedding. It also ordered 127 guests at the Western-style ceremony to be flogged, fined or jailed.
Two years ago, such rulings were common. Today, they appear rare.
For many Iranians, the top concern is the country's faltering economy. Despite government subsidies on everything from bread to medicines to fuel, most of Iran's 60 million people are squeezed by backbreaking inflation.
In Tehran, a good monthly salary of 150,000 rials ($ 50 at the present exchange rate) won't even pay the monthly rent on a one-bedroom apartment. Many Iranians have taken second jobs, but are still hard pressed.
The overriding atmosphere of economic uncertainty was heightened in May, when the United States tightened trade sanctions in an effort to dissuade Iran from what Washington says is an attempt to develop nuclear weapons.
In this atmosphere, limited social change apparently is not a top worry for many in the government.
For instance, in a move widely criticized by some of Tehran's hard-line newspapers, the government allowed a pop singer popular before the revolution to release a new tape.
Songs on the "Wheat Flower" tape by the singer Farhad sound very much like the modern music of the pre-revolutionary era, when Western music and movies were available. Iran's religious leaders have long derided such things as "corrupt."
Farhad's tape, which even contains a song in English, has sold more copies than any other tape released since the revolution, Iranian newspapers reported recently.
But as with so much else, Iran's government does not follow a straight path.
At the Bahman Center, a huge cultural complex with auditoriums and movie theaters, hugely popular music classes for children and adults were recently canceled.
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Khomeini's successor as supreme spiritual leader, declared in September that "teaching young people to read and play music makes them depraved and leads to corruption."
Amid such confusing signals, many Iranians who have lived through the ups and downs of the revolution remain skeptical about the social openings.
"No one knows how far the present freedoms extend or how long they will last," said Fereshteh Khodadad, an airline reservation clerk.
 Load-Date: November 13, 1995

 

End of Document
