

In This Place, Where The Wind Comes Sweeping Down the Plains?
The Associated Press
April 19, 1995, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 566 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Body




It was not only the horror, but the place.
Oklahoma City.
A bombing at the World Trade Center, in Manhattan, is one thing. Tragic and outrageous, but after all, New York has often been a lightning rod for extremists and maniacs. In New York, in Washington, in Los Angeles, strange things happen.
The World Trade Center bombing brought terrorism to America's shores. Oklahoma City brought it to America's heartland.
Oklahoma is where the wind comes sweeping down the plains. People are friendly, trusting, open.
Who would target Oklahoma City and destroy the calm?
"We are pursuing all leads," said Attorney General Janet Reno. Tight-lipped and guarded, she declined to speculate about who brought the massive tragedy to Oklahoma City. The governor called it an "evil, despicable act."
Whoever was responsible, whatever the motive, the message Wednesday was simple and inescapable: If it could happen in Oklahoma City it could happen anywhere. That message crossed the country as Americans watched the horrific television images from 200 N.W. Fifth St., between Harvey and Robinson.
At a federal courthouse in northeastern Tennessee, a clerk told a reporter, "I just have chills. This is just little Greeneville, Tennessee, but it could happen here."
The perpetrator could have been someone like the debt-burdened former postal worker who killed four people in Montclair, N.J., last month, or a shooter on the Long Island Rail Road in New York who killed six fellow passengers and wounded 19 three weeks before Christmas in 1993, or an unemployed man who killed 21 patrons at a McDonald's in San Ysidro, Calif., in 1984.
But Middle East terrorism came first to mind. It was two years after the Branch Davidian incident near Waco, Texas, and so there was speculation, too, that fanatics might have been seeking revenge.
But why Oklahoma City? A former White House and State Department terrorism expert, Robert Kupperman, spoke to that Wednesday.
The terrorist wants to make clear, he speculated, that there is no escape. In New York or Washington, he said, terrorists can be combatted by sophisticated intelligence and explosive detectors, but, "No one took that seriously in Oklahoma. … One figures the problem was limited to New York, Washington, maybe, Chicago, Los Angeles, San Francisco. But it's not."
In any event, it made no sense on Fifth Street.
Oklahoma's favorite son, Will Rogers, once said a purely American thought: "There ought to be a law against anybody going to Europe until they have seen the things we have in this country."
In Oklahoma, they have the scissor-tailed flycatcher. The mistletoe is the state flower. The state tree, the redbud, is blooming brilliantly these spring days.
Into this environment comes murder and mayhem.
"It is a shocking thing," said Don Nickles, the state's senior senator, who was stunned by the event. "It's not the kind of thing you would think of as happening in a place in Oklahoma or Oklahoma City."
Of course no large city is totally removed from the dynamics of modern controversy, and Oklahoma City is no exception. Steven Emerson, a journalist who produced a 1994 PBS documentary "Jihad in America," said Oklahoma City had been the site of several conferences in the past decade that featured radical Islamic speakers from around the world.
And now the images from Oklahoma City called up images of Beirut in the 1980s.
That's what scared America Wednesday.
 Load-Date: April 19, 1995

 

End of Document
