

Indictments Leave Questions and Suspicions: Is Syria in the Clear?
The Associated Press
November 15, 1991, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 810 words
Byline: By AUDREY WOODS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




The indictment of two Libyans in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 is the first tangible result of a 3-year-old hunt that has cast suspicion on extremists linked to Syria, Iran and, inevitably, Libya.
British and U.S. officials were adamant there was no evidence to link anyone but Libya to the bombing.
But others said the charges were an attempt to divert attention from Syria, whose cooperation is vital to U.S.-sponsored Middle East peace talks.
What, British lawmakers asked Thursday, about Ahmed Jibril's Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command?
Just two months before the 1988 Pan Am attack, Jibril's Syrian-based terrorists were caught in Germany with bomb-making equipment similar to the radio cassette device that destroyed Flight 103 over the Scottish town of Lockerbie.
Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd said that despite the similarities, inquiries "failed to reveal any direct link between this group and Lockerbie."
He told the House of Commons Thursday there was "no evidence to support suggestions of involvement by other countries."
"There's a Syrian involvement," countered Edward Luttwak of the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington.
"They definitely don't want to have the Syrians accused. … the Syrians are now the people to be treated nicely so that they refrain from sabotaging the peace process," Luttwag said in an interview on Britain's Channel 4 television network.
"It's not a coverup. Tom and Harry both did the crime. Tom gets indicted. Harry doesn't, because it's incovenient to indict him."
Israeli terrorism experts concurred.
"I suspect something about the timing and the Middle East peace process," said Anat Kurz, a researcher at the Jaffee Center for Strategic Studies in Tel Aviv. "The current evolving cooperation in the political arena between Damascus and Washington might explain the headlines given to these new discoveries."
Ariel Merari, a terrorism expert at Tel Aviv University, said: "Without better proof it does smell like an attempt to bury the case and declare Syria kosher, an attempt to get Syria off the list of supporters of terrorism."
Relatives of the 66 Britons among the 270 Lockerbie victims said they still believed the attack was in retaliation for the U.S. downing of an Iranian airliner five months earlier.
In the long investigations, the most widely held suspicion was that Iran hired Palestinian terrorists to avenge the 290 people killed when the U.S. missile cruiser Vincennes shot down the airliner in the Persian Gulf July 3, 1988.
On Thursday, acting U.S. Attorney General William Barr said the two Libyans - Abdel Basset Ali Al-Megrahi and Lamen Khalifa Fhimah - "planted and detonated the bomb," acting in concert with other unnamed co-conspirators.
"These men (the two Libyan intelligence agents indicted) may well have been involved in the planning and carrying out of the attack," said Ian Geldard, a British expert on terrorism. "But it still leaves the question, 'Who is behind those names? Who sanctioned the operation?' "
He said Libyan leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi could have authorized the attack, but added, "There are no grounds for assuming that Libya was the only country involved."
A year after the Lockerbie bombing, State Department sources said the United States was pressing Syria to expel the terrorist believed responsible.
In May 1989, the Washington Post reported that the CIA believed Iran had hired a Syrian-based Palestinian organization to set up the bombing, but that there was not enough evidence for an indictment.
That November, a Swedish court identified Mohammed Abu Talb, a member of another radical Palestinian faction, the Palestine Popular Struggle Front, as a suspect.
Scottish police were permitted to remove clothing from his home, reportedly to compare with shreds of clothing found in the wreckage.
But this June, the Justice Department reported "significant progress" in the investigation and little more than two weeks later the Washington Post said French and American investigators had evidence that top Libyan officials ordered the bombings of Flight 103 and a French plane almost a year later.
Two weeks ago, the newspaper said the French government had evidence the Lockerbie bombing was planned by high-ranking Libyans, including Gadhafi's brother-in-law Abdullah Senoussi, deputy chief of Libyan intelligence.
On Oct. 30, a French judge issued arrest warrants for Senoussi and three other Libyan intelligence agents, charging they conspired to blow up the French UTA airliner that was bombed on a flight from Brazzaville, Congo, to Paris.
A computer chip found in the bomb wreckage matched the configuration of electronic components of explosives seized in February 1988 from Libyan agents traveling in Senegal, authorities have said. Senegal released the Libyan agents in June 1988 without ever formally charging them.
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto LON6 Nov. 14

 

End of Document
