

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
April 23, 1993, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 811 words
Dateline: ABIDJAN, Ivory Coast
Body




Peace talks to end Angola's 18-year conflict reached a critical point Friday as the warring factions studied a compromise proposal to end renewed fighting.
"It's an indication that they are very near to signing" a cease-fire, U.N. spokesman Joao Albuquerque told reporters.
Fighting that threatens 3 million people with starvation has continued in the southern African nation since the U.N.-mediated talks began 11 days ago. U.N. envoy Margaret Anstee has been pressing for a speedy end to the fighting so humanitarian aid can be delivered.
The radio of the rebel National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, or UNITA, reported a government bombing raid on the eastern town of Caluquembe killed seven civilians and injured 18 on Thursday. It claimed the aircraft targeted a hospital and a marketplace in the attack.
Negotiations between representatives of President Jose Eduardo dos Santos and UNITA leader Jonas Savimbi have bogged down in arguments about how to carry out a cease-fire.
The talks were scheduled to resume Saturday, apparently after UNITA negotiators have a final consultation by telephone with Savimbi.
---
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (AP) - Benazir Bhutto called on the army she accused of engineering her ouster two years ago to conduct elections this summer, a party spokesman said Friday.
"There is a feeling that if the army were to hold elections people would not cry rigged elections or (say they were) cheated in the end," said Farooq Leghari, finance minister in a transitional government that took power last Sunday.
Using his constitutional powers, President Ghulam Ishaq Khan dismissed Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif's conservative government, appointed a transitional Cabinet and promised to hold elections July 14.
He accused Sharif of corruption, economic mismanagement and incompetence, roughly the same charges he leveled in August 1990 when he fired Ms. Bhutto's government.
In the elections after her dismissal, Ms. Bhutto was defeated. She accused both the army and Ishaq Khan of massive rigging.
Her center-left Pakistan People's Party was relegated to a weak opposition in the National Assembly and almost wiped out in the largest and richest province of Punjab. It scored a weak second in the other three provincial legislatures.
But Leghari said at a news conference that the political meddling that has characterized the military for much of Pakistan's 46-year history is a thing of the past.
---
BEIRUT, Lebanon (AP) - Police on Friday seized $ 10 million of raw cocaine believed smuggled from Colombia. It was the largest drug bust in Lebanon this year.
Brig. Gen. Issam Abu Zaki said 330 pounds of the drug was seized from a cargo ship in Beirut's harbor. He said the cocaine was hidden in the motor of a plastic-manufacturing machine aboard the ship Oriental Night.
He did not give the vessel's nationality or the flag it was flying, but said it made stops in the Dutch port of Rotterdam and the Egyptian port of Dumyat before reaching Beirut.
Abu Zaki said his detectives were interrogating the ship's captain and other crew members. He declined to give their names or nationalities.
---
LONDON (AP) - Britain's leading minister in Northern Ireland outlined a "framework for a settlement" Friday giving more clout to Protestants in Parliament and more influence to Catholics in a government for the province.
Sir Patrick Mayhew's address to the University of Liverpool was short on details but long on olive branches to both pro-British unionist and pro-Irish nationalist opinion.
It marked a departure from the British government's professed neutrality in the search for a political settlement in Northern Ireland, and was immediately attacked by the hardliners of both sides.
"The pieces are on the board but the endgame has not yet begun," said Mayhew, the Northern Ireland secretary. "Only those who reject political and constitutional methods stand to lose."
---
MONROVIA, Liberia (AP) - An angry mob stoned U.N. envoy Trevor Gordon-Somers behind rebel lines, where people have started dying of starvation and blame the United Nations for not sending aid.
Protesters also sabotaged the generator powering the U.N. compound at the guerrilla capital of Gbarnga, in central Liberia, rebel radio reported Friday.
It broadcast shouts from the mob: "Let Gordon-Somers sleep in darkness too!"
Two-thirds of Liberia is under the control of guerrilla chief Charles Taylor and has been without electricity and piped water since soon after he began Liberia's civil war with an invasion from Ivory Coast on Christmas Eve 1989.
Relief workers and the rebel radio said about 400 people threw stones at the U.N. special envoy to Liberia on Wednesday when his convoy arrived in Gbarnga with envoys from the Vatican, Cardinal Roger Ethchagaray, and the Organization of African Unity, former Zimbabwean President Canaan Banana.
None of the envoys was reported hit.

 

End of Document
