

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
February 22, 1993, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 794 words
Dateline: SEOUL, South Korea
Body




President-elect Kim Young-sam today appointed as prime minister an economics expert who is the governing party's chief policy-maker.
Kim's choice of Hwang In-sung, 67, showed the emphasis he is placing on the economy. Hwang was a Cabinet minister under former Presidents Park Chung-hee and Chun Doo-hwan in the 1970s and the 1980s.
But the appointment drew strong criticism from the opposition, which called Hwang an old-era politician ill-suited for reform.
Officials of the main opposition Democratic Party said they may vote against the nomination when it comes before the National Assembly on Thursday. But the governing Democratic Liberals have enough votes to kill any opposition-sponsored non-confidence vote.
South Korea's economy is stagnant with slow exports and high unemployment. Its 1992 growth rate is estimated at less than 4.5 percent, the lowest in 12 years.
The appointment of Hwang, a native of the Cholla region, an opposition stronghold, also was seen as an effort to patch up a political schism that widened in presidential elections.
 
 ---
JERUSALEM (AP) - Israel's two new chief rabbis face a huge task in rescuing the tarnished stature of their office after the dirtiest election campaign in Israeli history.
A 150-member conclave of religious and lay leaders met in Jerusalem on Sunday and elected Yisrael Lau and Eliahu Bakshi-Doron as chief rabbis of the European-descended Ashkenazi and Middle East-descended Sephardi communities of Israel.
During the campaign, there were accusations of womanizing, bribery and electronic snooping.
Lau defeated two contenders, including the chief rabbi of Haifa, Shaar Yashuv Cohen, whom Lau's supporters accused of planting listening devices in the Tel Aviv Rabbinate.
Bakshi-Doron was accused by rivals of paying bribes to assure his election as Haifa's chief rabbi in the 1980s.
"The institution of chief rabbinate, whose prestige is anyway in prolonged decline, needs a housecleaning," the daily Maariv said in an editorial Sunday.
The chief rabbinate was created by Palestine's British rulers 70 years ago to represent the Jewish population in religious matters. It continues to control Jewish marriage and dietary laws.
 
 ---
BAGHDAD, Iraq (AP) - Iraq has warned it will execute businessmen who deal in banned foreign consumer goods, a trade that is undermining government efforts to devote economic resources to importing food.
"The Revolutionary Command Council has issued a decree which stipulates that those traders who store or sell commodities that are banned … shall be punished with the death penalty or life imprisonment," the state-run newspaper Al-Thawra said Sunday.
In August, the government banned trade in luxury goods and compelled traders and retailers to clear them from their shops by Dec. 10. The idea was to push traders into using their hard currency holdings for importing much needed food, instead of luxury goods.
The traders did clear their stores, but by shifting the goods to homes and warehouses. Imports of luxury goods and consumer goods continued and they are sold on the black market.
The scarcity of food and illegal smuggling of luxury goods have driven up food prices and weakened the value of the dinar, but previous government campaigns to attack the problem have had not much success.
In July, the government executed 42 traders accused of illegally hoarding and profiteering.
A rationing system, which provides almost two thirds of food needs, has so far kept the Iraqis at subsistence level.
The U.N. embargo imposed after Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990 bars other nations from selling most consumer goods to Iraq, but food is exempt.
 
 ---
MOSCOW (AP) - Natural gas resumed flowing to energy-starved Armenia today after repairs were completed on a pipeline that was blown up last week, a news agency reported.
Roland Adonts, chief engineer of the Armenian Gas and Fuel enterprise, told the ITAR-Tass news agency that the supply of natural gas resumed early today, with about 35,000 cubic meters an hour flowing to the southern Caucasus Mountains nation.
The pipeline was blown up Friday, the third such attack in the past month, which triggered a severe energy crisis in Armenia.
The blast occurred in the Marneuli region of neighboring Georgia, the same area where the previous attacks took place. The Marneuli region is populated mainly by ethnic Azerbaijanis, and Armenians blame the explosions on saboteurs linked to Azerbaijan.
The two former Soviet republics have been fighting an undeclared war for five years over Nagorno-Karabakh, a mostly Armenian enclave inside Azerbaijan.
Even before the pipelines were attacked, Armenians had been suffering through a harsh winter virtually without heating and painfully short on electricity because of a longstanding blockade by Azerbaijan.

 

End of Document
