

International News Briefs from The Associated Press
The Associated Press
September 19, 1992, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 801 words
Dateline: NICOSIA, Cyprus
Body




Two Iranian newspapers today accused Saudi Arabia of sabotaging OPEC's attempts to bolster oil prices.
"OPEC oil producers will have little influence in the foreseeable future over the price of their precious and nonrenewable oil with Saudi Arabia in their midst," wrote the English-language daily Kayhan International.
The newspaper, quoted by the official Islamic Republic News Agency, added that because of defense agreements signed by the United States, Saudi Arabia and other Gulf Arab nations since the Gulf War, "the United States for all practical purposes became a member of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries."
The Iranian agency quoted Kayhan International as saying OPEC was "dead" as a price- and production-determining body.
The Tehran Times, which like Kayhan International tends to reflect the views of the government, wrote that Saudi Arabia "acted as protector of the Western industrial countries, and prevented OPEC from lifting the oil price to $ 21 per barrel."
An OPEC marker crude was $ 19.64 a barrel earlier this year. According to cartel calculations, inflation and the tumbling dollar have snipped about $ 3 a barrel off the recent value of oil.
The OPEC ministers, who met in Geneva, had hoped that an accord reached Thursday would push prices up a dollar or two a barrel by year's end.
Iran on Thursday rejected the latest OPEC oil agreement, saying it would instead produce oil according to market demand - although it made clear it would not flood the market with oil.
---
ZAMBOANGA, Philippines (AP) - Stripping the Philippines of its Little League World Series victory unjustly punishes the kids who played for the team, a patron of the team said today.
Cresenciano Cabanlit, a councilor of Zamboanga City, said blame should put on officials who stacked the team with ineligible players to improve it's chances of winning.
In an unprecedented move Thursday, Little League declared eight Philippine players ineligible and ordered a forfeit of their team's 15-4 victory last month over Long Beach, Calif.
Philippines officials acknowledged later that only six of the 14 players were from Zamboanga, 540 miles south of Manila. Zamboanga qualified for the World Series by winning the national tournament, from which all-star teams are barred.
Armando Andaya, Philippine administrator of Little League Baseball, resigned following Friday's decision stripping the team of its championship.
"The Zamboanga athletes are still the champion and they can defeat any baseball team in the world," Cabanlit said. "No matter what they say, the world knows that the Philippines is still the greatest as far as Little League baseball is concerned."
---
MORELIA, Mexico (AP) - Opposition demonstrators protesting a recent gubernatorial election will not be removed forcibly from their blockade of the Michoacan statehouse, Gov. Eduardo Villasenor said.
Villasenor said he would not order the removal of members of the leftist Democratic Revolutionary Party, or PRD, from their sit-in in front of the building, the news agency Notimex reported.
Several hundred demonstrators have been blocking access to the building for over a month and have prevented the ruling party governor from entering his office since he was inaugurated Tuesday.
Villasenor won the July 12 election in this Pacific coast state in a vote PRD members claim was marred by widespread fraud.
PRD gubernatorial Candidate Cristobal Arias and his party have been demanding Villasenor's resignation as governor of Michoacan state.
The governor has refused, and said Friday he will continue to carry out his duties, Notimex said.
---
PRAGUE, Czechoslovakia (AP) - Five Soviet-made military helicopters have been seized after a private Czechoslovak firm attempted to export them to Croatia in violation of the embargo on former Yugoslavia, authorities say.
The firm, identified as Ikona Frydlant, brought the first of the helicopters in April this year from Poland and the remaining four came into the country in June, Stefan Glezgo of the Foreign Trade Ministry said Friday.
Glezgo said they were destined for Croatia, which is subject to the U.N. embargo on arms exports to all of former Yugoslavia.
The helicopters, MI-8 models worth $ 8.5 million, were declared as civilian by the firm, but customs authorities said they are equipped for military use, the Mlada Fronta Dnes newspaper said in a report Friday.
"Unfortunately, the maximum penalty for such a trade in Czechoslovakia is only a seizure of the goods," Glezgo said late Thursday on national television.
He said all five helicopters have been under close surveillance of the Foreign Trade Ministry since their arrival in the country.
Two of the helicopters, carrying Aeroflot insignia, are at Prague's Ruzyne airport, the remaining three are in Liberec, some 50 miles north of Prague.

 

End of Document
