

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
January 20, 1993, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 721 words
Dateline: LEIPZIG, Germany
Body




Fifty-nine handicapped Bosnians have reached Germany after a tortuously slow journey held up by red tape.
Mustafa Kapic, one of 30 caretakers traveling with the refugees, said the group traveled in a convoy for three days to get to Germany.
Original plans called for the refugees, ranging in age from 7 to 32, to be flown to Germany over the weekend.
However, the two members of the state parliament of Saxony-Anhalt who organized the trip, Karsten Knolle and Juergen Angelbeck, failed to get official permission to bring the refugees to Germany and the weekend flight was canceled.
Knolle and Angelbeck had caused a controversy in August when they arranged to bring a group of children from Sarajevo to Germany. Two of the children were killed when snipers fired on their bus.
The government says 250,000 refugees from former Yugoslavia had been granted a haven in Germany since the war broke out.
---
TARANTO, Italy (AP) - Western inspectors have found a load of missiles and shells hidden among food and medicine aboard a ship bound for Croatia, the first interception of a vessel carrying weapons to Yugoslavia or its former republics.
The Dolphin 1, registered in the Caribbean nation of St. Vincent and the Grenadines, was stopped Monday by NATO ships and turned over to the Italian coast guard.
Search teams found ammunition, artillery shells and about 500 10-foot-long missiles, Antonio Lauriola, one of the officials conducting the search, said Tuesday. He said the ship probably loaded the weapons in Turkey.
The news agency ANSA also reported that police found 107mm artillery shells and missiles hidden under sacks containing food, medicine and clothing.
U.N. sanctions prohibit weapons and other goods from entering the former Yugoslav republics and Serbia and Montenegro, the two remaining republics in the federation.
This is the third reported violation of U.N. sanctions since NATO ships began enforcing the embargo in November. The two other ships were carrying steel rods and oil.
---
LIMA, Peru (AP) - President Alberto Fujimori has reiterated his desire that guerrilla chief Abimael Guzman be executed.
"Personally, I'd have preferred the death penalty for him. He deserves it," Fujimori told reporters Tuesday.
The 58-year-old Guzman, whose 12-year Shining Path insurgency has claimed more than 25,000 lives on both sides, was arrested in September and sentenced to life in prison in October.
Guzman is currently in solitary confinement in a prison on rocky San Lorenzo Island off Lima.
News magazine Si said the navy is building an underground prison inside its base in Lima's port of Callao to lower security costs and allow fishermen to return to the rich shellfish grounds around the island.
Navy patrols have shot and killed five fishermen and wounded four others who sailed too close to the island, Si said.
The reports in the magazine could not immediately be verified.
---
UNITED NATIONS (AP) - The Czech Republic and Slovakia are the newest U.N. members Tuesday, following Czechoslovakia's peaceful split.
"On this solemn day we have entered a new stage in the history of Slovakia," Milan Knazko, the Slovak foreign minister, told the General Assembly Tuesday after it inducted the two new nations by acclamation.
"The Czech Republic as a new member state of the United Nations … will try to contribute its modest share to the principles of human rights and freedoms which form the backbone of its domestic and foreign policy," said Czech Foreign Minister Josef Zieleniec.
---
TOKYO (AP) - Japan's latest earthquake was felt in at least 27 cities over a 1,000-mile band in Japan, but no injuries or damage were reported.
Tuesday's temblor, with a preliminary reading of 6.8 on the Richter scale, came four days after the strongest earthquake to hit Japan in a decade killed one person, injured more than 600 and caused widespread damage in the northern island of Hokkaido. It measured 7.8 on the Richter scale.
Tuesday's quake hit at 11:40 p.m. Tuesday and was centered 310 miles beneath the seabed of the Sea of Japan, which separates Japan and Korea, the Central Meteorological Agency said. The center was about 210 miles offshore from Matsue.
It said no direct link existed between the two quakes.
The Richter scale measures the magnitude of a quake at its epicenter according to ground motion as recorded on seismographs.

 

End of Document
