

International Briefs from The Associated Press
The Associated Press
December 26, 1992, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 589 words
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




One of the Soviet Union's earliest nuclear submarines nearly sank en route to its maiden war games in 1961 after a reactor overheated, the military newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda revealed today.
The article, the latest in a series on the once tightly guarded secrets of the Soviet nuclear forces, said a seal failed in one of two reactors powering the K-19. The reactor overheated, it said, and only the efforts of a repair crew kept it from exploding.
It said everyone in the repair crew died of radiation exposure after working near the reactor for two hours.
The Krasnaya Zvezda report was carried by the ITAR-Tass news agency, which originally said the sub sank and that the reactor exploded. It later corrected that version.
The newspaper said the K-19 carried a crew of 139, several nuclear torpedoes and three ballistic missiles, each with a 1.4-megaton warhead. The article did not say whether the crew was evacuated or the weapons removed.
It said only that the fate of the crew is unknown.
The accident occurred on June 18, 1961, shortly after the K-19 set sail for its first war games, dubbed Polar Circle, in the Atlantic Ocean.
---
BANGKOK, Thailand (AP) - Vietnam's premier has ordered the prosecution of officials in a Vietnamese-Russian oil joint venture who have been accused of corruption, the state news agency reported today.
The Vietnam News Agency said "a number" of officials of Vietsovpetro caused serious losses to the state by signing unlawful contracts for the purchase of materials and equipment from foreign companies.
Premier Vo Van Kiet has ordered authorities in the southern coastal province of Ba Ria-Vung Tau, the base of oil operations, to prosecute the officials, said the report, monitored in Bangkok. It gave no further details.
Vietsovpetro explores for oil and gas off Vietnam's southern continental shelf.
---
DUSHANBE, Tajikistan (AP) - Tajikistan's new leader has asked the United Nations to send a team to monitor the situation in his country, which has been wracked by civil war since May.
In an interview with The Associated Press on Friday, Emomali Rakhmonov said "The reports and rumors about the situation in Dushanbe are too numerous and mainly not true. Therefore, we have asked the United Nations to come here and observe."
He did not elaborate, but Tajikistan's parliament Friday denied reports that the government was carrying out a terror campaign against opponents in the capital.
Rakhmonov's forces, made up of a pro-Communist militia, ethnic Uzbek militants and fighters from his home region of Kulyab, took over the capital on Dec. 11 after two days of fighting ousted the Islamic Democratic Alliance, which had governed since President Rakhmon Nabiyev was ousted in September.
The war has left hundreds dead and created tens of thousands of refugees in the Central Asian republic of 5.1 million.
---
BERLIN (AP) - Up to 200,000 people carrying candles and torches lined the streets of Berlin in a Christmas vigil against neo-Nazis and other right-wing extremists.
The demonstrators stretched nearly five miles into east Berlin. Some protesters were in wheelchairs, a reminder that neo-Nazis also have attacked the handicapped.
"I'd like Germans and foreigners to live together as a family," said 28-year-old Ahmet Guenes, a Turkish Kurd. "But things are getting worse and worse."
Organizers feared Christmas celebrations and below-freezing temperatures would keep down the turnout. But police spokesman Wolfgang Schultz said about 200,000 Germans and foreigners took part in the peaceful, half-hour vigil.

 

End of Document
