

International Briefs by The Associated Press
The Associated Press
August 6, 1992, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 624 words
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




The crew of an Israeli patrol boat shot and killed four seaborne guerrillas along the Lebanese coast north of Beirut, an army announcement said Thursday.
The shooting occurred Tuesday night or early Wednesday but the announcement was only released Thursday.
The patrol boat spotted four guerrillas involved in a sea exercise and opened fire, killing all four, the army said without giving further details.
Later Thursday, the Muslim fundamentalist group Islamic Jihad in Palestine announced in Beirut that the Israeli navy killed one of its fighters and captured three others in a sea clash off north Lebanon late Tuesday or before dawn Wednesday. There was no immediate explanation of the differing accounts.
The Muslim group said in a statement the clash occurred during "routine exercises" a mile off the Nahr el-Bared refugee camp near north Lebanon's port of Tripoli.
"This act of piracy will not pass without revenge," the statement said.
The group is believed made up of Sunni fundamentalist Palestinians and maintains a small presence in Palestinian refugee camps in north and south Lebanon.
 
 BERLIN (AP) - A court on Thursday delayed until late August a decision on whether Erich Honecker should be freed for health reasons during his manslaughter case.
The former East German Communist leader remained jailed in Berlin's Moabit prison. He is accused of giving the shoot-to-kill orders that led to the deaths of hundreds of people trying to flee the former nation.
His lawyers had asked for a decision on whether the 79-year-old Honecker should be freed on mental or physical grounds as the case progresses toward trial, which is expected in the autumn.
During a hearing on Thursday, all sides in the trial agreed that the decision should be made after the medical and psychiatric evaluations are completed in the last week of August.
Honecker was brought back to Germany last month after 17 months in exile in Moscow. Besides manslaughter, he is accused of using state money for his personal use. He could be sentenced up to life in prison.
 
 MOSCOW (AP) - Belarussian leaders objected Thursday to an agreement by Russia and Ukraine to joint control over the Black Sea Fleet, saying all 11 commonwealth countries have some rights to the warships.
Belarussia, which is landlocked, said it was not claiming possession of any ships but believed the fate of the fleet should be decided by the leaders of all the former Soviet republics.
Russian President Boris Yeltsin and Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk agreed Aug. 3 in the Crimean resort city of Yalta to put the former Soviet fleet under joint Russian-Ukrainian command at least until 1995.
The powerful flotilla of about 350 ships previously had been under the command of the 11-nation Commonwealth of Independent States that was formed when the Soviet Union collapsed last December.
 
 LONDON (AP) - Former Beirut hostage John McCarthy said Thursday he has spent the year since his release at the "daunting task" of getting to know the world again.
In a statement released two days before the first anniversary of his release McCarthy said he and his girlfriend, Jill Morrell, have been working on a book and getting reacquainted.
"We have been trying to return to some semblance of normality," said the statement from the couple.
Miss Morrell campaigned for McCarthy's release during the five years the television journalist was held in Lebanon.
The couple's statement thanked everyone for allowing them the privacy "to pick up the threads of our lives again over the last year."
"John has been getting to know the world as it is in 1992 and coming to terms with both dramatic political changes and the way in which friends have moved on in their lives. It is still a daunting task," the statement said.

 

End of Document
