

International Arms Business: The Binge Ends
The Associated Press
August 12, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 1100 words
Byline: Associated Press Writer
Body




A Czechoslovak plant that manufactured rocket launchers now turns out fork-lift trucks. A British company discovered its sensors for "smart" weapons also can be used to protect the environment.
Sweden's main defense conglomerate plans to lay off at least 24 percent of its workers. Argentina has abandoned a missile project.
The end of the Cold War is shrinking the global arms industry. Governments are canceling orders, weapons manufacturers are merging and hundreds of thousands of workers are losing their jobs.
Military budgets have declined for four straight years after decades of growth, but Swedish researchers say they still totaled $ 950 billion in 1990, an increase of 70 percent in 25 years.
Trade in conventional arms fell 35 percent in 1990 to $ 21.7 billion, according to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. The Soviet Union and United States, which account for 60 percent of total military spending, reduced purchases by about 10 percent and 6 percent respectively.
"There is no way out of the need to adjust to the existing demand," said Herbert Wulf of the institute. "Closures of plants and layoffs are rather the rule than the exception."
A U.S. government survey said the Gulf War, even though it was a showcase for smart weapons, "will not reverse the downturn in defense business of the late 1980s or even significantly mitigate it."
Wulf said the United States, Soviet Union and Western Europe may spend 5 percent less on weapons this year and total world spending could drop by 15 percent to 30 percent by 1995.
In its 1991 annual report, the Stockholm institute said the "vast U.S. arms industry … is rapidly approaching a situation that will lead to fundamental structural changes and a further reduction in size."
Manufacturers and public agencies throughout the world face the problem of retraining workers and retooling assembly lines, but plowshares don't always sell as well as swords.
Czechoslovakia, an arsenal of the old Soviet bloc, declared after its democratic revolution in 1989 that it would quit the arms business, which had provided 25 percent to 50 percent of its hard currency.
New civilian products like the fork-lift trucks found few customers and up to 80,000 jobs were at stake, however, so the government approved selling tanks to Syria and rocket launchers to Iran.
Japan's comparatively low military expenditures rose steadily from $ 20.6 billion in 1981 to $ 30.5 billion in 1990 and will continue increasing in the next three years, the institute said.
India was the world's leading arms importer two years ago and spent nearly $ 17.4 billion on such imports during the five years ending in 1989, the institute said. India's imports declined to $ 1.5 billion in 1990 as its own arms industry was modernized.
"Arms exports to the Third World have been declining and are likely to continue to decline further in the near future … since Third World countries have falling currency reserves," the report said.
Disarmament treaties and demands for regional controls also are affecting the weapons trade.
"There is a lot of uncertainty," said Peter Howard, editor of Jane's Defense Weekly, a respected British publication. "Governments are unraveling what the Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty and the post-Cold War era will mean."
The treaty, signed in 1990, requires certain weapons to be destroyed in member nations of the NATO alliance and the former Warsaw Pact.
Middle Eastern oil states made 61 percent of the $ 164 billion in purchases from the 10 largest arms manufacturers in 1985-89. Saudi Arabia was the biggest weapons importer in 1990, with a total of $ 2.5 billion.
Saudi Arabia has a $ 14 billion shopping list that includes 235 M1-A1 battle tanks, 100 AH-64 Apache attack helicopters and 24 F-15F fighters from the United States.
Major exporting nations, however, have urged restraint in selling arms to the unstable region. Among them are the Soviet Union, United States, Britain, China and France.
Governments throughout the world have been dropping projects or seeking less expensive alternatives. The United States canceled the Navy's A-12 Avenger attack aircraft and Britain dropped a new nuclear submarine in favor of upgrading its existing Trafalgar subs.
France said in July it would scrap a $ 5 billion project to build mobile nuclear missiles. Argentina stopped its Condor II medium-range rocket project after seven years.
About 100,000 of Western Europe's 1.5 million defense workers have lost their jobs since 1987 and at least 300,000 more could be out of work by 1995.
Swedish Ordnance intends to lay off 1,600 or more of its 6,600 employees. In neutral Sweden, arms makers employ 10 percent of manufacturing workers.
British Aerospace plans to close two plants and lay off thousands of workers.
According to the Swedish institute, the Soviet Union's military-defense labor force of 4.25 million shrank by 500,000 in 1990. The Soviets, the leading arms exporters, have retrained 300,000 workers, but a program to convert 422 factories to civilian production by 1995 is "far from smooth and efficient," the report said.
China, the No. 3 arms exporter, also is converting military capacity to civilian production, but major state corporations continue exporting arms. Iran, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, Iraq, Thailand and North Korea have been big customers for Chinese missiles and other weapons.
Several U.S. arms makers plan to lay off a total of 74,000 people, the institute said.
Europe's main producers of jet engines, military electronics, missiles and helicopters are forming joint enterprises and some arms manufacturers are merging.
British Aerospace and the U.S. company General Dynamics agreed last year to seek ways of collaborating. Israel Aircraft Industries will cooperate with TRW Inc. of the United States on remote-controlled vehicles for the civilian market.
Arms companies increasingly seek ways to use their technology for products to protect the environment, make travel safer and improve medical care and weather forecasting, said Howard, of Jane's.
GEC-Marconi, a British electronics and optics firm, and GEC-Pilkington Optronics found that sophisticated systems developed for war could be used in environmental control and in weather satellites.
"You can plant a small circuit in the middle of a forest and it will detect threats like fire," said Carol Reed, business editor of Janes Defense Weekly. "You also can use sensor systems and radars to detect oil spillage at sea."
The arms industry may decline, but it will never disappear, Howard said, because "man will always fall out with man somewhere in the world."

 

End of Document
