

International Briefs by The Associated Press
The Associated Press
August 12, 1992, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 814 words
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Israel's government backed a proposal to decriminalize contacts between Israelis and PLO officials, a Justice Ministry statement said Wednesday.
The proposed amendment, likely to come before parliament in October, would remove a major irritant from Arab-Israeli affairs without affecting a longstanding official boycott of the PLO.
The proposal would amend a 1986 law forbidding contacts with the PLO. The law, specifying jail terms of up to three years, has led to prison terms for two Israeli peace crusaders and a third case pending before the courts.
It has also resulted in senior Palestinian peace negotiators being questioned by police each time they allegedly meet PLO chief Yasser Arafat and his aides. At one point President Bush expressed concern about the Israeli policy.
The amendment was proposed as a private members' bill by Labor parliamentarian Yael Dayan and Deputy Foreign Minister Yossi Beilin on Sunday. It would cancel bans on the meetings unless it could be shown that the meeting harmed Israel's national security.
On Wednesday, Justice Minister David Libai circulated the proposal among other government ministries, the first step in the governmental law proposal procedure. The move effectively means the government backs the proposal.
Libai promised the change soon after the Labor Party won Israel's general elections from the hawkish Likud party on June 23. The amendment has a good chance of becoming law, as Labor and parties to its left control 61 of the 120 seats in the parliament.
 
 BONN, Germany (AP) - The number of neo-Nazis and other right-wing extremists rose by nearly 8,000 last year and their acts of violence increased five-fold, acording to a new government report published Wednesday.
The mass-circulation Bild newspaper carried details of the report, showing that in 1990 there were 40,000 known right-wing extremists, 4,200 of them neo-Nazis. Cases of far-right violence - mostly against foreigners - increased from 270 in 1990 to more than 1,300, last year, according to Bild.
Most of the attacks were carried out by teenagers, and more than 30 percent of the incidents occurred in former East Germany, Bild reported. Three people died and 369 were injured in the violence last year, the report indicated.
Police sources, speaking on condition of anonymity, confirmed the accuracy of the Bild report.
According to the Berliner Morgenpost newspaper, in the past two weeks in Brandenburg state alone police had to defend refugees from attacks on seven occasions.
The Morgenpost said anti-foreign violence has become so commonplace in Brandenburg that "comprehensive protection for asylum-seekers … is impossible."
Sociologists and officials say that the militants - especially in economically backward eastern Germany - are disaffected youths with no real political motivation who commit anti-social acts to bolster their self-esteem.
 
 COLOMBO, Sri Lanka (AP) - Police fired bullets and tear gas and swung bamboo staves Wednesday to control thousands of riotous mourners at the funeral of a top army officer killed last week in a land mine explosion.
At least 10 people, including four policemen, were wounded in the clashes, according to hospital authorities. The crowds torched three buses and an undetermined number of police vehicles and cars belonging to politicians, police said.
Angry mourners pelted stones at Ratnasiri Rajapakse, the mayor of Colombo, and Sirisena Cooray, minister for Housing and Construction, who had come to attend the funeral.
The violence erupted during the funeral of Brig. Vijaya Wimalaratne, the army commander in northern Sri Lanka who was killed Saturday when a land mine exploded in Kayts Island, near the Tamil rebel stronghold of the northern Jaffna Peninsula.
Eight other top military officers, including Maj. Gen. Denzil Kobbekaduwa, commander of the anti-guerrilla operations in the north, died in the blast.
Tamil rebels claimed responsibility for the attack.
Like the mourners, the officers slain in Saturday's explosion were Sinhalese - the Buddhist-majority community that controls the Sri Lankan government and military.
Guerrillas from the predominantly Hindu Tamil community have been waging a civil war since 1983 for an independent homeland in the north and east. At least 17,000 people have died.
 
 MOSCOW (AP) - Azerbaijan's president extended the military service of all Azerbaijani soldiers on Wednesday, saying they must serve until the undeclared war with neighboring Armenia is over.
Demonstrating his resolve to intensify the war, President Ebulfaz Elcibey also recalled all soldiers who were demobilized in 1991-92, the Azerbaijani news agency Azerinform reported.
Armenians and Azerbaijanis have been waging a four-year war over Nagorno-Karabakh, a primarily Armenian Christian enclave located entirely inside Muslim Azerbaijan. More than 2,000 people have been killed in fighting there since 1988.

 

End of Document
