

International News Briefs by The Associated Press
The Associated Press
September 9, 1992, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 812 words
Dateline: BUDAPEST, Hungary
Body




The leader of Czechoslovakia's Slovak republic said Wednesday he could not halt a Danube River hydroelectric project despite Hungary's insistence that it is environmentally damaging.
"The Slovak party is unable to stop work," Slovak Premier Vladimir Meciar said during a break in talks with Hungarian Prime Minister Jozsef Antall.
Meciar said the two sides agreed to set up a joint parliamentary committee to study the Gabcikovo hydroelectric plant controversy, and that their findings should be submitted to the International Court in the Hague.
It was Meciar's first official visit abroad since his party won elections in Slovakia last June. His republic, which shares a Danube River border with Hungary, is set to become an independent state with the peaceful breakup of Czechoslovakia planned for early next year.
The former Communist governments of Hungary and Czechoslovakia signed an interstate agreement in 1977 to cooperate on of the giant hydroelectric and water diversion project affecting a 130-mile stretch of the Danube.
In June 1989 Hungary decided to halt construction on its part of the project, and last May the country's post-Communist government unilaterally canceled the 1977 treaty.
Czechoslovakia has said Hungary has no right to abrogate the agreement and has proceeded with the project, which is about 90 percent complete. Slovakia plans to put the hydroelectric plant into operation on Oct. 15.
 
 PARIS (AP) - The Cabinet banned business contributions to political parties Wednesday in a bid to defuse campaign-financing scandals implicating the highest levels of government.
Premier Pierre Beregovoy's reform package on political financing was adopted "to better clarify the relations between money and society," government spokesman Martin Malvy said.
The measures, which must be approved by parliament, are the embattled Socialist government's response to financing scandals that have reached high into the party's hierarchy.
They ban contributions by businesses to political parties, demand greater openness on the awarding of public contracts, and create an interministerial agency to investigate corruption.
The reforms limit personal contributions to 30,000 francs ($ 6,300).
Financing scandals related to President Francois Mitterrand's 1988 reelection campaign have been a major factor in the loss of popularity suffered by the president and the Socialists.
Numerous investigations have shown that the Socialists and other parties financed the 1988 campaign with payoffs from construction firms in exchange for public contracts.
 
 NICOSIA, Cyprus (AP) - Mujahedeen Khalq, the Iraq-based Iranian opposition group, said Wednesday that the paramilitary Revolutionary Guards suffered a large number of casualties in a recent clash with army deserters in north Tehran.
They said in a statement faxed to The Associated Press in Cyprus that the shootout was sparked by a rebellion in a military post near the Saadabad Palace, the former residence of the late Shah of Iran that was transformed into a museum after the 1979 Islamic Revolution.
However, two families living in Tajrish, an affluent north Tehran neighborhood where the palace is located, said they heard no shooting and detected no sign of unrest in their area on Tuesday, when the incident was supposed to have taken place.
The Tajrish residents were interviewed by telephone from Nicosia on condition they would not be named.
The Mujahedeen's statement said reports they had received from Tehran indicated that many Revolutionary Guards were killed trying to put down a rebellion at a regular army outpost next to the palace.
Mujahedeen Khalq has reported a series of incidents involving anti-government rioters in several parts of Iran this year amid economic hardships blamed on official corruption and mismanagement.
 
 TOKYO (AP) - Bar codes, one of the most visible signs of the computer age, may be going underground.
A Japanese company, Hitachi Maxwell, says it has developed bar codes that are invisible - or just slightly visible, if users prefer.
"We can make bar codes so they don't intrude on the packaging of products like cosmetics, where they can detract from the design," Hitachi Maxwell spokesman Hideyuki Noda said Wednesday.
Invisible bar codes could be used on credit cards or bank cards as a means of identification that would be difficult to counterfeit, he said.
The new bar codes are printed with a special ink containing a hard-to-duplicate phosphor made of rare earth compounds, Noda said. By varying the mixture, the visibility of the codes can be changed.
When the phosphor is exposed to infrared light, it releases light at a different frequency and the pattern can be read by special readers.
The system is not compatible with current bar codes, which are printed with ink on products so they can be identified by computers. It is likely to cost about 20 percent more, Noda said.

 

End of Document
