

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
May 6, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 725 words
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




Military prosecutors charged 14 suspected Muslim extremists Thursday with attacking tourists, placing an explosive in one of the Giza pyramids and trying to assassinate a cabinet minister.
As the violent confrontation between the government and the Muslim radicals continued, police in southern Egypt killed a suspected extremist wanted for the murder of a top police official.
The militants advocate using force to turn Egypt into an Iran-like theocracy. More than 140 people have been killed in their campaign, which escalated last year. Their targets have been police and foreign tourists.
President Hosni Mubarak has been referring extremist cases to military courts to ensure speedy trials. Military courts in three previous trials have already sentenced 16 extremists to death.
Four of the 14 defendants in the indictment are at large. The others were arrested during the past 10 days. Their trial starts Saturday.
The main charge against the suspects is that they formed an illegal organization aimed at overthrowing the government through terrorism. The 14 face a possible death sentence if convicted.
---
NICOSIA, Cyprus (AP) - Iran said Thursday it has unilaterally freed 200 Iraqis captured in the 1980-88 war between the countries.
The official Islamic Republic News Agency said the freed men were turned over to representatives of the International Committee of the Red Cross at the Khosrawi border post.
After the 1988 cease-fire, Iran and Iraq swapped hundreds of war prisoners. But international human rights groups say thousands are still held by both sides, though an exact number has been difficult to obtain.
---
LONDON (AP) - Nelson Mandela met with relatives of an 18-year-old who was fatally stabbed by white youths in the capital two weeks ago, saying Thursday that their "tragedy is our tragedy."
"We are deeply touched by the brutality of this murder, even though it is commonplace in our country," Mandela said after seeing the family of Stephen Lawrence. "It seems black lives are cheap."
The African National Congress president, on a two-day visit to Britain, has played down fears of escalating racial violence and political instability as politicians negotiate a democratic replacement for apartheid in South Africa.
Mandela also planned to visit Switzerland and Germany.
Lawrence was stabbed twice by a gang of white youths whom witnesses said made racist remarks while he waited with a friend for a bus in late April. He was the third victim of a racial killing in south London this year.
---
LIBREVILLE, Gabon (AP) - Police searching for a missing child discovered remains of bodies that may have been sacrificed in fetishist rituals, a newspaper reported Thursday.
Four elderly men have been arrested, The Union said.
Police investigating the disappareance of a child from a bush camp in Gabon's southern Nyanga province, near the border with Congo, searched a house where they found skulls, tibias, femurs, rib cages and other human remains, it said.
Police and medical experts were examining them to determine whether body parts were used in rituals.
The missing child, whose grandmother has been arrested on charges of neglecting the infant, was not identified among the remains, it added.
The discovery generated so much anger that armed police were guarding the courthouse in the provincial capital of Tchibanga, where those arrested are being held in cells, The Union said.
---
JERUSALEM (AP) - Ultra-Orthodox rabbis have declared Israel's planetarium off limits, saying its light show is a heresy because it dates the world's creation to billions of years ago.
Jewish belief says God made the world 5,753 years ago, with the date based on the generations cited in the Bible.
The controversy erupted even though the planetarium offers two versions of the creation - one for secular audiences saying it was about 15 billion years ago, the other for the religious saying it happened "a long, long time ago.'
The dispute underscores the deep gulf between Israel's secular majority and the tens of thousands of ultra-religious Jews, or haredim (Hebrew for "God-fearing"), who try to avoid contact with modern life.
Haredi rabbis don't permit their followers to read secular newspapers, go to movies or watch television. A rabbinical ruling even bars videotaping weddings for fear it would tempt people to buy a VCR and watch other films too.

 

End of Document
