

Iraq Says it Attacked Israel 'For the Sake of Palestine'
The Associated Press
January 23, 1991, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 828 words
Byline: By WALTER PUTNAM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NICOSIA, Cyprus
Body




Iraq said today it struck the Tel Aviv area with a missile "for the sake of Palestine" and also announced that it was suspending gasoline sales for a short period.
Iran, meanwhile, reported that Iraq claimed its ground forces had launched an attack on allied forces in Saudi Arabia early today. Iran's official Islamic Republic News Agency reported that Iraqis seized Saudi territory along the border and captured a group of allied soldiers.
But at a briefing in Saudi Arabia, U.S. Air Force Lt. Col. Mike Scott said an American regiment clashed Tuesday evening with an Iraqi patrol just inside Saudi Arabia. He said two U.S. soldiers were slightly wounded and six Iraqi soldiers captured. Scott said he had no information about Americans being captured by Iraqi troops or any Saudi territory being seized.
Iraqi radio also claimed today to have shot down four allied planes, but Scott said no U.S. aircraft had been lost in combat in the past 24 hours. He said two U.S. aircraft crashed, bringing the total U.S. aircraft losses to 14 - nine of those in combat.
Iraq's report about the suspension of gasoline sales as early as today suggested official concern about fuel supplies in the wake of the allied air attacks and the U.N. trade embargo imposed before the war began.
"We request everyone's full cooperation in the service of our dear country," Iraq's Oil Ministry said in its announcement.
Also today, Iraqi radio called President Bush, French President Francois Mitterrand and British Prime Minister John Major war criminals.
The radio said the Western leaders had deliberately ordered their forces to attack civilian targets, civilian factories, food and medicine warehouses, houses and religious sites, including mosques and churches. It said the attacks had killed civilians across the country.
"It is very clear that the criminal attacks waged by the U.S. aggressors and their British, French, Zionist and other allies are criminal and vengeful acts," the radio said.
On Tuesday, Iraq sought to link treatment of allied war prisoners to the Arab-Israeli dispute, saying it will abide by the Geneva Conventions "provided the same is applied to the people of Palestine."
In a statement released by a spokesman for President Saddam Hussein, Iraq said "imperialist ambitions and Zionist intrigues" created a double standard on POWs, Baghdad radio reported.
Western leaders protested when Iraq paraded captured allied airmen on Baghdad television, where they made pro-Iraq statements that appeared to be coerced.
Baghdad also has scattered POWs at potential targets, in a replay of the "human shield" tactic that followed Iraq's Aug. 2 invasion of Kuwait. The United States called Iraq's use of POWs a "war crime."
Saddam has tried to tie the occupation of Kuwait to the Arab-Israeli conflict, saying all Middle East problems including the Palestinian issue must be settled together. The United States rejects the linkage.
The Iraqi leader has made good on threats to attack Israel if he was attacked by the U.S.-led alliance. A third missile attack on the Tel Aviv area on Tuesday night injured about 70 people. Three others died of heart attacks.
"For the sake of Palestine … and in revenge for the crimes of Zionism, our missiles slammed against the city of Tel Aviv, the city of vice and usurpation," said a communique read today on Iraqi radio.
The military communique also claimed Iraqi missiles on Tuesday set fire to a Saudi oil complex at Abqaiq and hit the Saudi city of Dhahran and the nearby allied air base. It also claimed Iraqi missiles hit Riyadh and the Saudi city of Jubail on Monday.
Allied officers have said Patriot anti-missile rockets intercepted all the Iraqi missiles fired at Saudi Arabia except for ones that fell harmlessly in the sea or unpopulated areas. Oil industry sources said the complex at Abqaiq was undamaged; a missile landed in a nearby, uninhabited area.
In a later commentary, Iraq radio noted that the Patriot anti-missile rockets deployed in Israel had failed to intercept Iraq's al-Hussein missile, a modified Scud.
"The reason for this is that the superior creativity of the Iraqi mind was a component in the manufacture of these missiles," Iraqi radio said.
Iraq's military communique said allied warplanes carried out three bombing raids on Baghdad, two others on targets in Saddam's hometown of Tikrit, two on the city of Al-Nasiriyah and two in Al-Anbar province in western Iraq.
But it said: "With the help of God, (Iraqi) men shot down four air targets - missiles and planes."
Maj. Gen. Alex Harley, the deputy director of the British defense staff, said in London that Iraqi oil refining capacity had been reduced by 50 percent. He said it had been targeted in an effort to reduce Iraq's ability to make war.
In Britain, the newspaper The Guardian quoted Abdul Aziz al-Hakim as saying Iraqi security forces killed seven men on Friday as they tried to occupy the main television station in Baghdad to urge an uprising against Saddam.

 

End of Document
