

Iraq Says POWs Injured; Casts U.S. As Spoiler Of The Environment
The Associated Press
January 28, 1991, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 844 words
Byline: By DAVID CRARY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NICOSIA, Cyprus
Body




Iraq claimed Monday that some captured pilots have been injured in air raids by allied warplanes. It also charged that U.S. warplanes, not its own forces, had caused an oil spill in the Persian Gulf.
Iraqi radio, in a terse broadcast monitored in Nicosia, said "a number of captured pilots were wounded" in air raids Sunday and Monday on "populated and civilian targets in Iraq."
"The responsible military quarters did not indicate whether any of the injured pilots have died," it added. It gave no further details.
Iraq claims to hold 20 allied airmen as prisoners of war, and said last week that it would hold some of them in sites that might be targeted by the allies for air strikes.
In its other claim, Iraq depicted the United States as a spoiler of the environment, saying that U.S. warplanes had caused an oil spill by attacking a Kuwaiti oil facility.
It appeared, however, that Iraq was not referring to the giant oil spill that is spreading through the Persian Gulf from a Kuwaiti supertanker terminal. The United States and its allies blame Iraq for that spill.
Iraqi Health Minister Abd Al-Salam charged in a letter to the World Health Organization that allied attacks on Iraqi tankers and the suspected presence of U.S. nuclear warheads posed a "serious environmental threat" to the region, according to Iraqi radio.
The radio appealed to environmental organizations to prevent U.S.-led forces from "forging ahead on this evil road, disregarding our national property and our clean environment..."
In a scathing letter to U.N. Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar, Iraq charged that U.S.-led allies had killed more than 320 people and wounded nearly 400 others in attacks on civilian, economic and religious targets.
The letter alleged that the highest number of civilian casualties occurred on Jan. 21 when 144 people were killed and 24 wounded in the bombing of residential neighborhoods in the holy cities of Najaf and Kufa, about 90 miles south of Baghdad.
It blamed Perez de Cuellar personally for the deaths, noting that the U.N. Security Council had authorized the use of force against Iraq.
Iraqi opposition radio, meanwhile, on Monday reported devastating allied bombing raids in northern Iraq, causing "heavy casualties and material losses." The radio, run by Kurdish rebels, said Iraqi troops in the north were forcing civilians at gunpoint to donate blood.
Iran's official Islamic Republic News Agency also carried eyewitness accounts of allied air raids Monday on the Iraqi cities of Badra and Zorbatiya.
"Every 15 minutes, planes of the U.S.-led Western forces shelled Iraqi border cities," the agency said. "After each explosion, a mushroom-like column of smoke rose. ..."
Later, Iran's state radio reported that Iraqi television, which normally can be received in much of western Iran, was not broadcasting on Monday night and had been off the air since Sunday. The report gave no further details.
Iraqi state radio, quoting a military spokesman, claimed that a U.S.-led attack on Kuwaiti oil installations started a fire Sunday night and spilled oil into the gulf.
The United States said its warplanes attacked a Kuwait oil facility Saturday in an attempt to halt the flow of crude that had created the world's worst oil slick.
U.S. military officials said at a briefing Monday in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia that the bombing had apparently stemmed the oil flow into the gulf, estimated at 460 million gallons.
The Iraqi radio broadcast did not mention the giant oil slick, which U.S. officials maintain was begun by Iraqi forces in Kuwait. It appeared to be referring to a different spill.
"Once again, the USA and its allies demonstrated their unrestrained desire to waste the enormous Arab wealth and to prevent our people and nation from benefiting from this wealth," the radio said.
Al-Salam, the health minister, complained in his letter to WHO about attacks on Iraqi tankers. The United States has confirmed hitting at least one tanker, but said it was not loaded.
Al-Salam also expressed "deep concern" about the reported presence of nuclear warheads aboard allied warplanes in the region. He did not specify the source of the report.
U.S. military officials have routinely refused to comment on the deployment of nuclear weapons.
In a separate communique, the Iraqi military command claimed that 50 Israeli warplanes had landed in Saudi Arabia to boost the allies' air power. Similar claims in the past have been denied by Israel and the U.S.-led coalition.
There was no official Iraqi response to reports by allied commanders that at least 69 Iraqi aircraft and possibly up to 100 have flown to sanctuary in Iran.
Iran said Monday that six more Iraqi planes has flown into its airspace, four landing safely and two crashing. One Iraqi pilot was killed and one missing, the Iranian news agency said.
Iran reiterated its position that any allied or Iraqi warplanes landing there would be impounded for the duration of the war.
On Saturday, Iraq acknowledged that some of its warplanes were in Iran, and said it was seeking the return of planes and pilots.
 Graphic



 
LaserPhotos AMM3,6,10

 

End of Document
