

Iraq Back In The Air, But No Encounters In No-Fly Zone
The Associated Press
August 30, 1992, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 842 words
Byline: AP Photo BAH102, By NEIL MacFARQUHAR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ABOARD THE USS INDEPENDENCE
Body




U.S. Navy pilots flying over southern Iraq Saturday detected the first Iraqi air activity near the "no-fly" zone imposed to protect Shiite Muslim rebels, but reported no encounters.
U.S. Air Force pilots also had their first radar contact with aircraft flying north of the exclusion zone, and one locked onto the radar of an unidentified plane, an Air Force officer said.
"There is some activity on our radar. … They could be playing. They could be training. We can't tell," said Navy Lt. Cmdr. Bob Playfair, 35, a fighter-bomber pilot from Chewelah, Wash., who spent more than six hours patrolling above Iraq's southern marshlands.
Government-run Baghdad radio reported that the Iraqi Cabinet met Saturday under Prime Minister Mohammed Hamza al-Zubaidi to discuss the flight ban below the 32nd parallel, where Iraq's Shiites are concentrated.
The radio said the Cabinet was treating the "new evil aggression with all the contempt it deserves." It reiterated that Saddam Hussein's government would "choose its own time and method for retaliation."
Since the Persian Gulf War ended last year, the Iraqi president has been trying to suppress a rebellion among the Shiites, who comprise 55 percent of the 17.5 million Iraqis.
A U.S.-led coalition began patrolling southern Iraq below the 32nd parallel on Thursday and says it will shoot down any Iraqi planes in the area. The United States, Britain and France have pledged aircraft to Operation Southern Watch.
The Navy has 70 warplanes aboard carrier USS Independence in the gulf. The Air Force hasn't disclosed the size of its force, which is largely based at Dhahran air base in eastern Saudi Arabia.
A Pentagon source, speaking on condition of anonymity, said Saudi AWACS radar planes are also participating. Egypt and Syria, the other main Arab coalition members, are not believed to have committed any forces.
Many Arab governments have expressed fear that the protected zone could result in Iraq's division into a Kurdish north, Shiite south and a center dominated by Sunni Muslims loyal to Saddam Hussein.
The Washington Post reported Saturday that President Bush's administration is considering air strikes and a more aggressive security zone that would ban any kind of Iraqi military activity in the Shiite stronghold.
Iraqi forces have bombarded the southern marshlands with heavy artillery and attacks by helicopter gunships and warplanes. The proposed safe haven would be modeled after the sanctuary the allies created for rebellious Kurds in the north.
In Washington, Pentagon spokesman Bob Hall, asked to comment on the newspaper report, said: "I wouldn't speculate on any future operations."
Meanwhile, in Gushtepe, a Kurdish town in northern Iraq, witnesses said Saturday that Iraqis trucked away Shiites living in northern Iraq and drove off their livestock as the "no-fly" zone was imposed.
An Iraqi government statement read over Baghdad radio Saturday accused the allies of trying to provoke a new conflict to destroy what they missed during the war. A Cabinet member said Iraq would not be drawn into a confrontation.
"They want us to shoot down their aircraft as they wanted us to do in the north, but we will not be provoked," Omid Medhat Mubarak, the health minister, told The Associated Press in Baghdad. He referred to a safe haven for the Kurds that the allies established in northern Iraq last year.
Senior officers said they do not expect Saddam to lash out at the U.S. air patrols because the situation could escalate quickly beyond his control.
Air Force Lt. Col. Dennis Krembel, 41, of Rochester, N.Y., said an F-15C fighter's radar locked on to an unidentified aircraft before dawn Saturday, but the aircraft did not respond.
Krembel, speaking from aboard the USS LaSalle in the Persian Gulf, estimated the plane was flying 60 to 80 miles north of 32nd parallel.
The Pentagon source said the F-15C was using its radar for search purposes, not to guide a missile toward the unidentified aircraft.
Pilots from the USS Independence said they detected activity within 30 miles of the no-fly zone. The Navy would not identify any of the planes spotted.
Navy pilots said that from their altitude they could spot vehicles moving in the zone but no military traffic.
The pilots also said no aircraft were visible on the ground. The U.S. Department of Defense has said there are three major and nine minor airfields below the 32nd parallel.
The pilots said there appeared to be extensive reconstruction of the airfields, such as Al-Tallil, which were major targets during the Gulf War.
"It's not the smoking rubble we left it after the war," said pilot Lt. Cmdr. Allen Baker, 34, of Long Beach, Miss.
About 100 missions were launched from the Independence in the 24-hour period ending 5:30 a.m. Saturday (10:30 p.m. EDT Friday). The number was expected to increase by Sunday morning to 105 missions.
Krembel said six British Tornado reconnaisance and fighter-bomber jets were in Dhahran preparing to start operations, but he had not seen any of the 10 French Mirage 2000 fighters Paris was expected to deploy.

 

End of Document
