

Iraq Opens Military Sites for Limited Tour to the Media
The Associated Press
October 18, 1994, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 957 words
Byline: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MUSAYYIB, Iraq
Body




Desperate to have international sanctions lifted, Iraq opened a missile test site and an explosives factory for a limited tour by the media Tuesday.
The tour of two munitions plants run by the secretive Military Industrialization Corp. is part of Iraq's campaign to press the U.N. Security Council to begin testing the U.N. surveillance system in Baghdad and other Iraqi sites.
Once the Security Council determines that the weapons-monitoring system works, Baghdad wants the United Nations to rescind the debilitative economic sanctions it imposed on Iraq for invading Kuwait in August 1990.
"We have an important objective: to lift the sanctions to end the suffering of our people," said Hussam Amin, a missile engineer who directs the liaison office with U.N. monitoring teams.
The tour occurred during the latest crisis over Saddam Hussein's military actions - Iraqi soldiers flooded southward toward the Kuwaiti border last week before U.S. forces were sent to Kuwait and the Gulf region.
Saddam's weapons of mass destruction have been dismantled since the Gulf War but many in the West believe Iraq provoked the confrontation mostly in hopes of getting the sanctions dropped.
Rolf Ekeus, head of the U.N. Special Commission charged with dismantling Iraq's military programs, says the monitoring system needs a six-month testing period, after which it can be considered operational.
At that point, Iraq asserts, it will have complied with all U.N. requirements about the weapons and should be allowed to resume oil sales, lifeblood of its economy.
Iraq last month cut government rations by almost half because of shortages and poor harvests. The U.N. agency providing humanitarian aid in Iraq warned a health and food crisis could worsen, the official Iraqi News Agency reported.
The agency, monitored in Cyprus, quoted Mohammed Zejjari, representative of the U.N. Development Program in Baghdad, as saying the agency needs $ 288 million to pay for humanitarian aid through March 1995.
Baghdad has rejected an offer to sell $ 1.6 billion worth of oil under U.N. supervision to buy food and medicine, claiming U.N. conditions infringed on its sovereignty.
Still, Iraqi cooperation with U.N. demands has improved in recent months as sanctions bit deeper. Because of this, Russia and other countries owed money by Iraq have been pressing for sanctions to be lifted.
But the United States and Britain say Baghdad is still cheating. They allege it has hidden missiles and other hardware and is building underground bunkers to revive its military programs. Baghdad denies that.
The U.N. Security Council demanded Saturday that Iraq pull elite combat units back from Kuwait and unequivocally recognize the emirate's borders before lifting sanctions could be even considered.
Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev met with Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz at the United Nations on Tuesday. Kozyrev said he told Aziz Iraq's recognition of Kuwait must be ratified by the Iraqi parliament.
The Iraqi parliament met Monday, but gave no public sign it was prepared to accept Kuwait's borders.
"Obviously Tariq Aziz will have to report back to his people the procedure as requested by the Security Council," Kozyrev said. "I think they will carry out this procedure of ratification."
The sanctions have destroyed the value of Iraq's currency, made medicine and other essentials hard to get and is paralyzing industry. Amin said some munitions factories were dormant for lack of raw materials.
He showed reporters cameras installed next to a machine that makes solid rocket fuel and near a laboratory where small engines are tested at Al-Qaaqaa, a sprawling explosives production facility 25 miles south of Baghdad.
He also pointed out cameras installed at the Yom al-Athim ballistic missile test site, 35 miles southwest of the capital and just outside Musayyib.
The Yom al-Athim facility manufactures missiles with a maximum range of 90 miles, which are allowed for defensive purposes under the U.N. cease-fire terms.
The sites were not in use during the tour. Amin said both were heavily bombed during the war and partially rebuilt. Bomb damage was visible.
The United Nations has installed 58 surveillance cameras at 12 sites, most of them around Baghdad. It also has "sniffer" sensors designed to detect the presence of chemicals for weapons and infrared devices to detect heat from rocket engines.
The systems are dormant until triggered by activity, when they begin transmitting pictures and other data back to a tower at the monitoring headquarters in Baghdad.
Iraqi technicians say they have gotten used to the systems. There has been no sabotage, although rats have gnawed through some wires.
Jaakko Ylitalo, Finnish chief of the U.N. center, said it would probably take a day to get a technician into any site where a camera malfunctions. But he said he was confident that the system, finished Aug. 1, will work.
He cautioned that Iraq still has the scientists to reconstruct the tremendous munitions manufacturing it had before the war, and that biological weapons could be made in medical laboratories far from U.N. eyes.
"You can't take the knowledge away, they still have the capacity to do it. But I don't think anything can be done in massive amounts," Ylitalo said.
Apart from the cameras, about a dozen specialists in chemical, nuclear, ballistic and biological weapons make random checks several times a week.
Ylitalo said that since the war, the United Nations has virtually dismantled Iraq's system for producing weapons of mass destruction.
It has destroyed 400 tons of mustard and nerve agents in 20,000 shells. The nuclear fuel needed to make two or three bombs was shipped to Russia and the destruction of missiles and launchers was finished in 1992.
 Load-Date: October 18, 1994

 

End of Document
