

Iraqi Media Blast Bush, Pilots Report Silence in the Skies
The Associated Press
August 29, 1992, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 725 words
Byline: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ABOARD THE USS INDEPENDENCE
Body




U.S. Navy pilots flying patrolling the skies of southern Iraq today reported Iraqi air activity north of the exclusion zone set up to protect Shiite rebels, but but no encounters in the "no-fly" area.
"There is some activity on our radar," said Lt. Cmdr. Bob Playfair, 35, a fighter pilot from Chewelah, Wash., who spent six hours flying over marshes in the zone.
He added: "They could be playing. They could be training. We can't tell."
The activity was detected within 30 miles north of the no-fly zone, pilots said, and were the first reported since Operation Southern Watch began on Thursday evening.
Allied air patrols of southern Iraq began after President Bush warned Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein to keep his warplanes and helicopter gunships north of the 32nd parallel and stop attacking Shiite Muslim areas to the south.
Iraqi opposition leaders say more than 200,000 Shiites are believed hiding in the swampy area, protected by about 10,000 lightly armed rebels. There has been no independent confirmation of the numbers.
Many fled there after Saddam brutally suppressed an uprising by the Shiites following the Gulf War last year.
It is not known what effect the allied patrols are having on the ground. The Baghdad government bans access to the area, and it can take days for travelers to send information across the border to Iran.
Before the exclusion zone was declared, Western intelligence sources said Iraq was averaging some 30 sorties a day in southern Iraq, with as many as 100 on some days. Some of the overflights were reconnaissance for artillery bombardment of the Shiite hideouts.
Pilots from this aircraft carrier in the Gulf flew about 100 missions between 5:30 a.m. Friday and the same time today, ship officers said.
Some of the flights escorted British Tornadoes flying out of Saudi Arabia, but no other allied activity was reported here. French jets also are participating in the mission.
Government-run Baghdad radio reported that the Cabinet met today under Prime Minister Mohammed Hamza al-Zubaidi to discuss the air exclusion zone.
The radio said the Cabinet was "treating it with all the contempt it deserves."
Saddam's government has threatened unspecified retaliation, hinting it would not cooperate with U.N. weapons inspections, U.N. humanitarian efforts or the presence of U.N. guards for relief work.
Pentagon spokesman Bob Hall in Washington, D.C., said some planes dropped Arabic-language leaflets warning Iraqi pilots they would be shot down if they flew into the zone, and threatening Iraqi radar operators they would "suffer the consequences" if they aimed at the planes.
A Baghdad government newspaper attacked Bush, calling him a "cursed criminal seeking to dismember not only Iraq but the entire Arab world."
Al-Thawra, the daily newspaper of the ruling Arab Baath Socialist Party, warned Arab leaders who backed the exclusion zone that they would "not survive the wrath of your subjects."
Arab support for the air ban has been cool, unlike the active participation in the coalition that fought the Gulf War last year and ended Iraq's seven-month occupation of Kuwait.
Only the Kuwaiti government has openly backed Bush's ultimatum, which also stressed that the allies wanted Saddam removed from power.
Saudi Arabia has provided bases for some of the aircraft flying patrols over southern Iraq.
But Kuwait and Saudi Arabia joined Syria and Egypt - key partners in last year's coalition - in expressing fear that a protected zone for Shiites could lead to the partition of Iraq.
The U.S.-led coalition intervened to stop Iraqi suppression of a Kurdish rebellion in the north after the Gulf War. Now the Kurds have declared themselves autonomous.
The Washington Post reported today that the Bush administration is considering a more aggressive security zone that would ban any Iraqi military activity in the Shiite stronghold. The no-fly zone bans aerial activity, but does not explicitly forbid ground operations in the south.
A Russian news agency, meanwhile, said Bush and Russian President Boris Yeltsin discussed a possible peacekeeping role for Russia in Iraq.
ITAR-Tass reported Friday that the two leaders discussed Iraq and other issues by telephone the night before. ITAR-Tass gave no other details and the Russian Foreign Ministry would not comment today. U.S. spokesmen could not immediately be reached for comment.

 

End of Document
