

Iraqis Feel Their Lives, Not The Government, Is Crumbling
The Associated Press
October 11, 1994, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 693 words
Byline: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAGHDAD, Iraq
Body




The counters at Iraqi Airways offices are staffed every morning despite a complete lack of flights since the 1991 Gulf War.
Traffic hums across rebuilt bridges, but dirt and garbage collect on streets that once were pristine. A chicken costs an average month's salary.
Iraqis, exhausted by keeping up the facade of normalcy, said Tuesday that the country is crumbling under the weight of an international blockade that has little chance of toppling President Saddam Hussein.
"People want to eat. People want to live in peace. They don't care about the regime. They don't care much about educating themselves. They have lost their ambition," said a schoolteacher named Walid.
There is a sense of relief that a looming confrontation, brought about by last week's deployment of Iraqi troops near the Kuwaiti border, may be ebbing. After the United States vowed to confront might with mightier, the Iraqis declared they were pulling their forces back. The United States, however, is unconvinced.
Foreign diplomats in Baghdad doubt that Saddam is about to repeat his 1990 invasion of Kuwait, a seven-month occupation that was ended by a U.S.-led military coalition during the Gulf War.
Iraq has sent an estimated 80,000 troops - one-fifth of its entire military - to the Kuwaiti border region. Even if Saddam isn't pulling them back, that's not enough to oppose the U.S. force of 63,500 slated for the area.
Iraqis and foreign diplomats say Saddam's threats to use his army again were a desperate ploy that worked: It grabbed the world's attention, pushing the United Nations trade sanctions back into the spotlight.
Iraqis feel their country has been complying with U.N. conditions for lifting the sanctions, which were imposed after the 1990 invasion of Kuwait.
Iraq met one of the main conditions by allowing the U.N. to destroy its weapons of mass destruction and to set up a monitoring system. It hopes an upcoming report by the U.N. Special Commission will lead to a lifting of the sanctions, which cut off oil exports, Iraq's main source of revenue.
In a sign of the chaos that has seeped across the country since the war ended in February 1991, highway robbers grabbed tens of thousands of dollars in equipment and cash from journalists who traveled by bus to Basra Monday night.
Tuesday's newspapers pictured some of the 4,000 antiquities they said were pilfered from local museums "during the acts of terrorism in the aftermath of the aggression against the country in 1991."
Three years ago, Iraq was rife with reports of uprisings against Saddam's regime. Now the talk is mostly of organized crime with only a whiff of anti-regime undertones.
The trade embargo "is not really a blockade. It is a form of slow murder," said Mohammed, a trader at a tawdry sidewalk bazaar where Iraqis sell personal belongings like stuffed animals and silverware to raise a bit of cash for food.
"They tried to topple the government of Iraq. But they only succeeded in toppling the people," he said.
Mohammed, like most people, gave only his first name. In this country of 18 million, people are suspicious of strangers and fearful of the mukhabarat, the dreaded secret police.
Iraqis say they no longer have the energy to oppose the rule of Saddam Hussein. They are too busy trying to survive.
A chicken costs 750 dinars, about the average monthly wage of a government worker. That's $ 2,490 at the official rate, which hasn't changed since the war. But at the widely used market rate, it's only $ 1.20.
Government food rations recently were cut about 40 percent. Before the cut, the rations of rice and flour were considered the minimum needed to survive.
Medicine is scarce. The U.N. sanctions allow Iraq to import food and medicine, but it doesn't have the money to pay for them. One woman wanted a painkiller before undergoing a mastectomy. Friends scoured the town for days and finally came up with one ampule just hours before operation.
At the Iraqi Airways office, employees report to work in their uniforms, take their stations behind the counters and drink tea. They're just trying to continue to collect their salaries - and to hope that the U.N. ban on flights will be lifted soon.
 Load-Date: October 11, 1994

 

End of Document
