

Is This the End of the Go-It-Alone Swiss?
The Associated Press
July 25, 1994, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 563 words
Byline: By ALEXANDER G. HIGGINS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LAUSANNE, Switzerland
Body




Such icons as William Tell and the tale of the nation's birth, even Swiss neutrality, are taking some knocks as Switzerland gropes for its proper role in a changing world.
Angered by nationalism they say distorts Swiss history, scholars have dusted off a 3-year-old exhibit that debunks popular myths like Tell, the legendary archer, and the story of how Swiss democracy began.
The Three Musketeers-like oath among three forest states on alpine Ruetli meadow Aug. 1, 1291, that led to the Swiss Confederation was pure invention, the scholars say.
Werner Meyer, a history professor at Basel University, assembled the anti-Tell exhibit for Switzerland's 700th birthday celebrations in 1991. He brought it out again with Olivier Pavillon, curator of the Historical Museum of Lausanne.
Pavillon said some right-wing politicians had created "a giant ideological flea market, where historical errors on the origins of the confederation were jumbled with patriotic symbols essentially forged for the end of the 19th century."
At the exhibit's entrance is a cardboard caricature of Tell that offers real apples to visitors, spoofing the legend that an Austrian overlord forced him to shoot an apple from his son's head. Tell succeeded, was jailed, and later killed the overlord, inspiring a revolt against Austrian rule, the story goes.
Researchers found mention of the apple-shoot in a 15th century chronicle, but the reference to defying Austrian imperial power was added later and the modern view of Tell is based largely on an 1804 drama by Friedrich Schiller, Meyer said.
He also said Switzerland evolved over centuries and was not created at a stroke on the Ruetli meadow. "On that pasture, nothing happened in 1291 that could possibly be linked to the birth of the confederation," the exhibit declares.
The Tell tale isn't alone in its vulnerability.
Debates on neutrality, banking secrecy and the economy have challenged a go-it-alone tradition that has kept Switzerland from joining even the European Union, let alone the United Nations.
And in recent referendums, the people voted against closer trade links with Europe and against sending soldiers on U.N. peacekeeping missions.
But traditions such as banking secrecy are being challenged. Banks in other countries have begun offering numbered accounts, cutting in on the Swiss practice of luring customers with the promise of anonymity.
And unaccustomed as this wealthy nation is to economic problems, it encountered them in the 1990s. Inflation has reached as high as nearly unheard-of 6 percent. Unemployment had been practically nonexistent since World War II but now is above 4 percent.
Neutrality, which many Swiss believe kept them safe while two world wars raged around them, also has been modified. Switzerland has joined international embargoes against Iraq, Libya, Serbia and Haiti.
However, opponents of plans to supply U.N. peacekeepers won a June referendum on the issue by arguing it would damage Switzerland's neutrality and cost too much.
Not all has been disquieting for the 7 million Swiss.
The national soccer team reached the second round of the World Cup tournament in the United States, its best showing in decades. And it didn't seem to matter that a British coach, Roy Hodgson, was behind the soccer renaissance.
Fittingly, perhaps, the Sports Information news agency called Hodgson the "William Tell of the new age."
 Load-Date: July 25, 1994

 

End of Document
