

Islam and the Crisis
The Associated Press
January 14, 1991, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 914 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




The crisis that has gripped the world since August unfolded in a region of Islamic fervor and sectarian friction. Here is a look at the crucial role of religion in the Muslim heartland:
 
 IRAQ
Saddam Hussein told a conference of hand-picked international Islamic leaders Jan. 11 that he is preparing a "jihad," or holy war, against the U.S.-led military alliance trying to force Iraq out of Kuwait.
Trying to portray the conflict as a battle between faithful Muslims and infidel intruders, the Iraqi leader has struck hard at Muslim concerns about the presence of foreign troops in Saudi Arabia, where Islam's holiest shrines are situated, at Mecca and Medina. He said King Fahd of Saudi Arabia deserved the title of "Traitor of the Two Holy Mosques."
But Saddam's religious credentials are disparaged by most of the Muslim world. As leader of the secular Arab Baath Socialist Party, he has cracked down on Shiite fundamentalists in his own country, and said one rationale for the 1980-88 war against Iran was to stop the spread of fundamentalist Islam.
A Sunni Muslim, Saddam must hold together a fragile religious coalition in his country, where more than 60 percent of the 17 million residents are Shiite.
Shiite Muslims revere the martyrdom of the prophet Mohammed's grandson Hussein in 680 in an Islamic factional war from which the Sunni and Shiite branches of the faith developed.
Sunnis make up about 80 percent of the world's 850 million Muslims, but Shiites have become a potent political force internationally since the 1979 revolution in Iran, which is overwhelmingly Shiite.
A Shiite fundamentalist movement, the Iran-backed ad-Dawa Islami, or Islamic Call, has assassinated scores of Iraqi diplomats and senior officials. Saddam in turn has refused to give the majority Shiites greater authority, and has executed hundreds of members of the Dawa party, including the former Shiite spiritual leader of Iraq, Imam Mohammed Baqr Sadr.
Christians, including Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz, comprise up to 10 percent of Iraq's population. The Christian community persuaded Saddam to moderate some of his earlier rhetoric comparing the U.S. intervention to the Crusades in the Middle Ages to recover the Holy Land from the Muslims. But Christians still remain fearful of reprisals in the event of war.
 
 SAUDI ARABIA
Islam is the official state religion in Saudi Arabia. The religion was first revealed to the prophet Mohammed 1,400 years ago in Saudi Arabia, and the faith's holiest shrine is in the Saudi city of Mecca, his birthplace.
The desert kingdom of 13 million is ruled by a monarch whose official title is, first, "guardian of the holy places," and only after that, "king." Saudi leaders are followers of a puritanical Sunni sect, the Wahhabis, which adheres strictly to the Koran, the holy book of Islam.
The Koran in general forbids the presence of armed non-Muslims on holy land, but some Islamic scholars have ruled the presence of U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia is permitted under an exception allowing outside help to repel an aggressor.
Still, the continuing presence of foreign troops is distressing to conservative Muslims who worry about the influence of forbidden Western cultural and religious practices. Even liberal Muslims find it hard to accept that non-Muslims are needed to defend the faith's holiest land.
The tension will increase as the annual pilgrimage to Mecca and Medina begins in the spring. Two million Muslims normally visit the shrines during the pilgrimage known as the "hajj," which every Muslim is expected to make at least once.
In addition, deep suspicions divide the ruling Saudi sheiks and the Shiite minority, who live in relative poverty and contend they are discriminated against out of fear of their sympathies with revolutionary Iran. In Saudi Arabia's eastern province, site of much of the desert kingdom's oil installations, almost half the population is Shiite.
 
 IRAN
Iran's spiritual leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, has called for a holy war against the United States because of its military presence in Saudi Arabia. But hatred also runs deep between Iran and Iraq, who recently fought an eight-year war that left an estimated half-million dead on each side.
In Iran, where Shiite Islam is the state religion, religious leaders have long called on Iraq's Shiites to overthrow their secular government. During the war, Iran was host to a dissident Iraqi government-in-exile headed by fundamentalist clerics.
But Iran, with a population of 54 million, also has its religious differences with Saudi Arabia, where Sunni Muslims rule over a Shiite minority. Iranian leaders have long demanded that Mecca and Medina be wrested from the control of the Saudi royal family and put under an international commission. For the past decade, the Saudis have been grappling with Iranian-inspired terrorism, including attempts by Iranian Revolutionary Guards disguised as pilgrims to smuggle explosives and weapons into the kingdom.
 
 KUWAIT
In judging who could properly call a holy war in the conflict, the Muslim World League, based in Mecca, agreed in September that the exiled Kuwaiti leadership had the right "from a religious point of view" to declare a jihad to oust Iraqi troops. Fourty-four Muslim countries and the Palestine Liberation Organization are members of the league.
Before the invasion, 78 percent of Kuwait's almost 2 million people were Sunni Muslims. About 14 percent were Shiite Muslims and 6 percent were Christian.
 
 End Adv for Use Anytime

 

End of Document
