

Islamic Fundamentalism Isn't All the Same
The Associated Press
March 7, 1992, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1077 words
Byline: By WILLIAM C. MANN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




Five times a day, metallic voices blare from hundreds of loudspeakers in mosques across Cairo, calling the Muslim faithful to prayer by extolling Allah.
It is a ritual repeated across half the globe, from tiny mosques in the Philippine jungles to sand-blown ones in the Moroccan desert, and 1 billion Muslims respond.
The sheer number of Muslims, combined with more than a decade of political agitation by "Islamic fundamentalists," have conjured up in the Western mind a menacing monolith of Islamic fanaticism out to terrorize unbelievers.
Vast differences by country, sect and clan among fundamentalists as well as Muslims in general has kept such a monolith from forming, but the concept is fed by headlines:
-Algeria in Turmoil After Fundamentalist Political Gains.
-US, Turkey Agree on Aid to Counter Iran-Sponsored Fundamentalists in Former Soviet Republics.
-Muslim Militants Seek Independent, Islamic Kashmir.
-Fundamentalist Sudanese Government Forces Women Into Veils, Out of Jobs.
Few fundamentalists are like the Iranians of a decade ago, who enforced a stern interpretation of Islam at home and were determined to spread the faith abroad by whatever means. But strong movements exist in nations as disparate as Algeria and Malaysia, Sudan and Pakistan, Lebanon and Bangladesh.
All the fundamentalist movements add politics to Muslim piety, said Hussein Ahmed Amin, who watched Algeria's crisis develop when he was the Egyptian ambassador there in the late 1980s.
"The main difference between an observant Muslim and a fundamentalist is that, to the latter, Islam is both religion and politics," he said. "It covers all aspects of life, including politics."
Sheik Mohammed el-Ghazaly, a moderate Egyptian fundamentalist who has taught in Algeria, has reservations about that view.
"We ask to be ruled according to what God has decreed," he said. "If you call that politicization, then Islam is political, at the same time politics and piety. But this is not extremism. Fundamentalism is a word the West made up."
A Jewish-born American Muslim, Abdullah Schleifer, said that, "in the West, people are so secular they can't tell the difference between a traditional Muslim and a fundamentalist."
"The basic problem is that, when people from the post-Christian, secular culture look at a guy who fasts at Ramadan and prays five times a day, they say, 'My God, a fundamentalist!' " said Schleifer, a native of Forest Hills, N.Y. He lectures at The American University in Cairo.
Mainly because of television, the Western image of fundamentalism is a bearded man and a veiled woman. Those are signs even for Muslims.
Sherif Abdel-Hamid, a 16-year-old Muslim student, said he recognizes an Egyptian fundamentalist in two ways: "First I look for the special kind of beard - a beard that's neat, but has grown for a long time - and then the black spot on the forehead" that indicates years of touching the floor in prayer.
Jihan Sadat, widow of President Anwar Sadat, who was slain by Muslim extremists in 1981, said she realizes the veil in its many forms has come to mean Islamic zealotry. She feels that is wrong.
"The woman who puts on a veil for personal reasons is a woman to be respected," she said in a speech last year. "It's not a bad sign if it means moderation, but I feel sad when I pass a school and all the girls are in veils, which is increasing."
Schleifer contends that "Islam's silent majority wants Islamic values, but democracy as well. The mainstream believes personal piety is overwhelming."
For a Muslim, the main religious requirement is to testify: "There is no God but Allah, and Mohammed is his prophet." He also must pray, give alms, fast in the holy month of Ramadan and, if he can afford it, make a pilgrimage to Mecca in Saudi Arabia.
Those are the "fundamentals" of Islam, which was founded in the seventh century by an illiterate Arab merchant named Mohammed, the prophet to whom Muslims believe Allah dictated the sacred Koran. In its early years, the religion sowed seeds of its modern diversity by expanding east and west from Arabia in its early years.
Many peoples the Arabs conquered could not make clean breaks with existing faiths or wholeheartedly accept the new one, according to Amin, the former ambassador, a noted writer on Islam.
Therefore, he wrote, they reinterpreted the religion "to make it fit in with their beliefs while appearing at the same time to be devout Muslims. Thus alien beliefs came to be mingled with Islamic tenets."
In Egypt, Pharaonic customs remain in Islam.
Saddam Hussein of Iraq, which was ancient Mesopotamia, fought the Gulf War in the name of Islam but considers himself the modern Nebuchadnezzar.
In the Indus River Valley, now Pakistan, traditions, culture, language and heritage remain south Asian despite an active movement seeking to create an Islamic theocracy.
Islam's earliest, most obvious and perhaps most enduring schism is between the predominant Sunnis and the Shiites, involving the succession after Mohammed's death in 632. Many scholars say the split effectively precludes a unified "fundamentalist force."
True fundamentalists have little use for governments. For them Islam - the Koran, the sayings and actions of the prophet, a body of traditions - is all that's needed.
Some in Algeria, for instance, equate democracy with blasphemy. The main slogan of the dominant Islamic Salvation Front is, "No laws. No constitution. Only the laws of God and the Koran."
The front, nevertheless, ran in the December elections. It was denied almost certain victory by a military takeover.
In Lebanon, the fundamentalist Shiite Hezbollah, or Party of God, refused to name representatives to the 108-seat parliament.
"We are Muslims," said Hussein Musawi, a member of the collective leadership. "We think and plan in line with our Sharia (Islamic) law. The parliament doesn't apply Sharia law."
Hezbollah's mentor, Iran, has become less active since Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini died in 1989 after 10 years of radical control.
Iran still believes Islamic countries should be ruled by its brand of Shiite Islam, but now preaches conversion through example, not force. In December, President Hashemi Rafsanjani caused frowns in Washington with a swing through the five predominantly Muslim republics of the former Soviet Union.
Iran's clearest success has been in Sudan. The military government that took power a few days after Khomeini died has moved steadily closer to the Iranian model of strict Islamic government.

 

End of Document
