

Israeli, PLO Leaders Share Peace Prize - But Where's The Peace?
The Associated Press
October 14, 1994, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 759 words
Byline: By DAN PERRY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TEL AVIV, Israel
Body




Israeli leaders Yitzhak Rabin and Shimon Peres shared the Nobel Peace Prize with PLO chief Yasser Arafat on Friday, as the fragile process they forged over the past year threatened to unravel.
The co-winners had little time to savor the award. They spent the day struggling with a worsening crisis over the kidnapping of an Israeli soldier by Islamic radicals.
Later, in a rescue attempt Friday night at a house in the Israeli-occupied West Bank, the kidnapped soldier was killed, along with three of his captors and an Israeli commando taking part in the raid.
In the short term, the prize could provide extremists on both sides with a focus for opposition to the peace process.
Rabin and Peres faced protests from right-wing Israelis who said Arafat was a terrorist and claimed it was "shameful" to share a peace prize with a man who spilled so much blood.
Arafat's Islamic opponents accused him of betraying the Palestinian cause by striking the deal that established autonomy in Gaza and Jericho five months ago.
There was also controversy in Oslo, Norway, where Nobel Peace Prize Committee member Kare Kristiansen resigned, saying Arafat was unworthy of the prize because of his violent past.
"The prize is not for me," Arafat said in the Egyptian resort city of Alexandria. "It is for my people who suffered a lot, people who have been able to achieve the peace of the brave, for our martyrs, for our prisoners, for our children, for the future."
The week's events highlighted the delicacy of the peace feted in Oslo.
On Sunday, Muslim extremists killed two bystanders in central Jerusalem. Two days later, after news that the Israeli soldier had been kidnapped by militants from the Hamas fundamentalist group, an angry Rabin suspended talks with the PLO on extending autonomy to the West Bank.
Rabin declared Arafat responsible for the safety of Cpl. Nachshon Waxman, a 19-year-old Israeli-American dual citizen. Waxman's abductors had said they would kill him if Israel did not release their founder and 200 other prisoners by Friday night.
Since the failed rescue attempt indicated Waxman was being held in Israel-occupied territory - and not in the PLO-controlled Gaza Strip as the Israeli government had claimed - it wasn't clear whether the Israelis would continue holding Arafat responsible.
In a statement read to reporters, Rabin congratulated Arafat but warned the PLO faced a "moment of truth" and said violence against Israel had to stop.
"If (the Palestinians) do not defeat the enemies of peace, the enemies of peace will defeat them," he said. "The prize is for the future more than it is a reward for the efforts of peace that have been made up until now."
The mood was more upbeat in the office of Peres, who launched the talks with the PLO through a secret Oslo channel. Peres' aides hugged and kissed him amid shouts of "Right on!" and "He deserves it."
Peres himself struck a somber tone, telling reporters that fundamentalists had tried to "kidnap peace and destroy it."
Outside, a small group of protesters waved signs. One shouted, "Be ashamed of yourselves, 70 people have been killed in the name of peace this year."
Right-wing leaders condemned giving the prize to Arafat, still regarded by many Israelis as a terrorist.
"It's shameful for the prize also to go to Arafat," said a statement issued by the opposition Likud Party.
Eliahu Ben-Elissar, a leading Likud lawmaker, said that for Rabin and Peres to accept the prize with Arafat "would defame the names of Arafat's victims."
In a Gaza City mosque, worshippers cheered Mahmoud Zahar, a top Hamas leader, as he excoriated Arafat. "It is known that this prize is only given to those who serve the policies of the West," Zahar said.
Kristiansen's resignation came after the announcement in Oslo of the prize, which carries with it an award of $ 933,000.
"Mr. Arafat is not in any way worthy of this prestigious prize," Kristiansen said. "His past is too tainted with violence, terrorism and bloodshed, and his future too unpredictable to make him a Nobel Peace Prize winner."
Committee chairman Francis Sejersted called Kristiansen's decision to resign "regrettable."
"We are not evaluating the life work of our recipients," Sejersted said. He said the prize honored the "specific act" of the Sept. 13, 1993 Israel-PLO peace pact that led to Palestinian autonomy.
The dispute was the committee's worst since 1973, when two members submitted resignations after the prize was awarded to Secretary of State Henry Kissinger and Vietnamese leader Le Duc Tho. The two later rescinded their resignations.
 Load-Date: October 14, 1994

 

End of Document
