

Israel: It's Up to The Americans to Set Time And Place for More Talks
The Associated Press
November 12, 1991, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 692 words
Byline: By KARIN LAUB, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




The Americans will have to set the time and place of the next round of Mideast peace talks because the Arabs have rebuffed Israeli offers to work out a deal, Israeli officials said today.
"There has been no progress since the Madrid peace conference," said Yossi Ahimeir, an aide to Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir.
Israel insisted in Madrid, after opening meetings two weeks ago with its Arab foes, that bilateral talks be held alternately in Israel and each Arab state. The Arabs want a neutral site, believing that going to Israel would grant recognition to Israel before the talks.
Ahimeir noted that Shamir is going to the United States this week to meet American leaders, adding: "I think we will have to wait until those meetings to know how we can go on with the process."
He said Israel is adamant about the site of the talks, but Foreign Minister David Levy suggested Monday he is willing to compromise.
An Israeli government official said today:
"We never said it would be the absolute prerequisite to hold talks in the Middle East. But in that case, we would like them to take place as close to the region as possible." He spoke on condition of anonymity.
The Israeli daily Davar, quoting Jordanian sources, said today the Americans would propose that the next round of bilateral talks will be held in Washington on Nov. 22.
The Israeli official discounted the report, saying: "Nothing has come from the Americans so far."
In Amman, the Jordanian prime minister, Taher Masri, said today that the next phase of talks were "likely to start sometime between Nov. 17 and Nov. 22 in Williamsburg, Va." Others have proposed Williamsburg, saying it is easy to provide security there and that it has been the site of previous summits.
The Palestinian peace negotiators said they want the bilateral talks to continue in Spain, but they would consider American compromise proposals.
"Madrid provided equality to all parties, and we see no reason why the bilateral talks should be moved from there," Palestinian delegate Saeb Erekat said today.
"The Israelis are afraid of the international umbrella that was created in Madrid, and they want to segregate the Arab delegations in order to reach separate agreements with Arab countries," Erekat said.
He said that once the Americans offer a compromise, the Palestinians would consider it.
Another Palestinian delegate, Bethlehem Mayor Elias Freij, said he expected the talks to resume before the end of the month in Washington.
Despite disagreements over location, the Palestinians were optimistic the talks would be held. They are setting up political committees to advise the peace negotiators on technical issues, such as water rights, land use and the economy.
Israeli officials have put much of the blame for the disagreements on Syria.
"The Syrians have all along looked for a solution imposed by the superpowers, and were not eager to get into direct bilateral negotiations," said Foreign Ministry spokesman Barukh Binah.
The Yedioth Ahronoth newspaper quoted U.S. sources as saying Washington has worked out a blueprint for a settlement between Israel and Syria.
The plan reportedly calls for Israeli withdrawal over several years from the Golan Heights, which Israel captured from Syria in 1967 and annexed in 1981. An American-Soviet force would be deployed on the Golan, and Israel would be compensated for the loss of the strategic plateau by receiving additional U.S. intelligence information, the newspaper said.
Shamir has said Israel would never withdraw from the Golan Heights. Parliament passed a non-binding resolution Monday saying the future of the Golan is non-negotiable.
Binah also said Israel was preparing for another stage in the peace process, a conference on regional issues such as water, arms reduction and the environment. The Foreign Ministry has summoned experts from other ministries, including agriculture, environmental protection and energy, to discuss specific problems, said Binah.
Levy said the Americans were trying to convene the regional talks by early December somewhere in Europe. He said Japan, Canada and European countries would be invited, in addition to Middle Eastern nations.

 

End of Document
