

Israel's Right-Wing Leader: The Case Against The PLO-Israel Accord
The Associated Press
September 2, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 530 words
Byline: By NICOLAS B. TATRO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Benjamin Netanyahu, head of Israel's right-wing opposition, grabbed a piece of paper and sketched a large, anvil-shaped swatch of territory inside Israel.
"It's like a fist aimed at the heart of Israel," said Netanyahu, explaining his opposition to handing the West Bank over to PLO which he predicts will happen as a result of the Israeli-Palestinian autonomy plan.
The plan, worked out in secret negotiations between Palestinian and Israeli diplomats in Norway, would start Palestinian autonomy in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank city of Jericho.
Netanyahu, leaning back in his chair in an office at the Knesset, or parliament, argued that Israelis are so divided over the plan that there is only one solution: new elections.
"It is very clear that if (Prime Minister) Yitzhak Rabin had said he would negotiate with the PLO and install Yasser Arafat and his men in enclaves 15 minutes from Jerusalem and the suburbs of Tel Aviv he would not have been elected," Netanyahu said Thursday.
The man who would like to be Israel's next leader outlined Likud's vision of the future: annexing the 140 Israeli settlements in the West Bank, along with their 120,000 inhabitants, to Israel.
Even though Rabin's government has been shaken by corruption scandals and secular-religious tensions, forcing new elections could be a difficult task, and Netanyahu would make no predictions about such a possibility.
Instead, his strategy seemed to be slowing down the implementation of what he calls "the Rabin-Arafat plan" with demonstrations, petitions, parliamentary action and other democratic forms of protest.
"There is a risk of all kinds of dissent and a chasm in Israeli society that would be very, very hard to control," Netanyahu said.
He called the plan the "height of folly," "preposterous," and "absurd," and compared it to the failed peacemaking efforts of British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain, who tried to forge a peace agreement with Hitler.
The 1991 Persian Gulf War, when missiles easily reached Tel Aviv, changed the thinking of some Israelis, who now contend that territory is no longer an effective buffer.
But Netanyahu argued that the Judean mountain range running through the West Bank was a "stone wall thousands of feet high" protecting Israel from the "great Arab armies" to the east.
He said the PLO long had a plan to destroy Israel in stages, and they could combine forces with neighboring Arab states, using the strategic heights as a launching pad.
"There is no other nation in the world, not even an Arab nation, that would put its cities and population under strategic heights controlled by the PLO," said Netanyahu.
He said the proposed plan grants the Palestinians far more control over land and security than the 1978 Camp David accords, which were approved by a Likud government.
The 1978 proposal would have left Israel in control of security inside the West Bank and Gaza, whereas the new agreement gives the task in Gaza and Jericho to Arafat.
"All the territory is given to the PLO, and there will a few isolated pockets, pinheads really, of Israelis who would not survive for very long," he said. "Effectively the government has given the PLO control of the land."

 

End of Document
