

Israelis and Palestinians: Double Vision When It Comes to the Future - An AP News Anaylsis
The Associated Press
August 31, 1993, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 695 words
Byline: By NICOLAS B. TATRO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




It's a little bit like the song: "You say toh-mate-toe, and I say toh-mah-toe."
Palestinians say withdrawal. Israelis say redeployment.
Such word play reflects the double vision the two sides have of what autonomy - Palestinians say transitional period - will bring to the occupied West Bank, Gaza Strip and, depending on the script, east Jerusalem.
Israel views the proposed plan as an experiment that will test the ability of the Palestinians to rule themselves without posing a security threat to the Jewish state.
If it doesn't work out, the army can roll back in and restore order. If it does, Israel still plans to keep all of Jerusalem as its capital and maintain Jewish settlements and possibly security posts in occupied areas.
Palestinians, however, see the plan as an initial stage enroute to independent statehood, or at least to a confederation with neighboring Jordan in which they would have an equal say.
Palestinians envision east Jerusalem, which was captured by Israel in the 1967 Mideast war, ultimately becoming the Palestinian capital and Palestinian refugees abroad being allowed to return. All Israeli soldiers and settlers would eventually withdraw.
The yawning gap in vision fuels the arguments over the more mundane details involved in implementing the interim self-rule plan, under which the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho will get more of a taste of independence than the rest of the occupied lands.
One area of ongoing dispute, for example, involves the 140 settlements in which 120,000 Israelis live among 1.8 million Palestinians.
Both sides agree the Palestinian self-governing authority will not rule over settlements or their residents in the interim period. But the Palestinians want assurances that no new settlements will be built in occupied areas during that time.
Jerusalem, where 350,000 Jews and 150,000 Arabs live in distinctly separate areas, also remains a bubbling issue.
Both sides agree that Palestinians from Jerusalem will be allowed to vote in elections for the self-rule council and be elected to posts in the autonomous government.
But Palestinians want Israel to stop building new housing for Israelis in the war-won sector of the city and to define what participation in elections will mean to Palestinian residents of Jerusalem.
"This is the main defect of the agreement as far as we Palestinians are concerned," said Ghassan Khatib, a delegate to the peace negotiations who has boycotted recent rounds of peace talks in Washington.
Jericho, the proposed seat of the Palestinian proto-government that may be headed by Yasser Arafat, has also not been defined, at least in geographic terms.
Jericho is a sleepy town with a population of about 15,000, but if three neighboring refugee camps are included, the autonomy plan could change that.
The reason, says Khatib, is that about 70,000 of the camps' former residents live in neighboring Jordan and would seek to return if the PLO leadership took over.
Palestinians also are seeking a corridor to connect the Gaza Strip, located on the Mediterranean Sea bordering Egypt, with the West Bank, which is a landlocked area between Israel and Jordan.
The proposed plan maintains Israeli control of the land and provides no land link between the two. Palestinians are seeking Israeli assurances that residents and commerce can travel unimpeded, without security checks.
The powers of Palestinian police, the control of bridges with Jordan, the presence of international observers and other issues also need to be defined in detail.
The two sides have at least until the end of the year to work out the details before implementation begins. Proponents said none of the disagreements are show stoppers.
"I see no item as having this potential," Deputy Foreign Minister Yossi Beilin. "No one is looking for artificial excuses."
Ahmed Tibi, an Israeli-Arab doctor who has helped arrange meetings between PLO officials and Israelis, agreed: "I do not think the two leaderships which have made bold historic decisions will create obstacles over small details."
 
 ---
EDITORS' NOTE: Nicolas B. Tatro, the Associated Press bureau chief in Jerusalem, has covered the Middle East since 1977.

 

End of Document
