

It Almost Seems the World Was Safer When the Cold War Raged - An AP Essay
The Associated Press
October 5, 1993, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 627 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




In a single day, Moscow witnesses its worst political violence since the Bolshevik Revolution and Washington loses still more American lives in a peacemaking effort where peace refuses to be made.
China defies an international moratorium and conducts an underground nuclear test. Bosnia seems to approach extermination. Civil war starves millions in the Sudan. Pakistan and India scrap over Kashmir, and that conflict, if it turns hot, could turn nuclear.
The Kurds are threatened by Iraq. Eduard Shevardnadze, once foreign minister of the Soviet empire and now leader of a disintegrating state of Georgia, flees for his life.
It almost seems as though the world was safer when the Cold War raged and the doctrine of swift and certain retaliation - mutual assured destruction, it was called - helped keep the peace.
What has happened to the "new world order" that was to follow the collapse of the superpower rivalry and the defeat of a Persian Gulf potentate?
People who study world conflict say this about that:
-The promise of a "new world order" was unfulfillable. As long as the world is anarchical, hostility and conflict will be part of it. Ethnic, civil and religious conflicts went on before, during and since the superpower rivalry.
"We weren't noticing those conflicts. To some extent we were co-opting them; there would have been a civil war in Vietnam whether or not the United States intervened," says Raymond Garthoff, a former ambassador to Bulgaria.
-For all its tensions, the world is safer, and better off, with the Cold War over.
"The world is definitely more unstable, a place of greater uncertainty, but the Soviet empire truly represented an evil idea that had been foisted upon an enormous section of humanity," comments Fareed Zakaria, editor of Foreign Affairs magazine.
Canadian Fen Hampson, a former international affairs professor, now a scholar at the government-supported U.S. Institute of Peace, says only some of today's conflicts result from the aftershocks of the Soviet collapse.
Those conflicts, among the old Soviet republics and in the former Yugoslavia, were suppressed by the strong hand of central authority. Soviet strategy dating back to Stalin's forced relocation of Russians into the other republics planted the seeds of today's upheavals.
What the world must now decide, says President Clinton, is where to intervene and where to stay out.
"If the American people are to say yes to U.N. peacekeeping," Clinton told the U.N. General Assembly last week, "the United Nations must learn to say no."
The criteria? He said the United States will intervene "to enlarge the circle of nations" that live under market-based democracies.
"Where it matters most and where we can make the greatest difference, we will, therefore, patiently and firmly align ourselves."
Clinton deplored the fresh loss of the lives of U.S. servicemen in Somalia but noted that before the United States intervened 300,000 people had lost their lives to warfare or famine.
U.N. peacekeeping is accumulating a proud, if not much noticed, record. Last month, the largest and most expensive U.N. peacekeeping operation ended, having planted democracy in the killing fields of Cambodia.
The United Nations stopped the fighting, restored civil authority or sponsored free elections in Namibia, El Salvador, Cyprus and in the Golan Heights in the Mideast.
Even the old ethnic conflict in Bosnia shows that the world has changed, says editor Zakaria: In the past, European nations would have intervened to grab pieces of the territory.
"Hundreds of thousands have died," he says, "but it has not turned into a general war in Europe in which tens of millions would die."
That's progress, of a sort.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Mike Feinsilber has been covering events in Washington since 1968.
 Load-Date: October 5, 1993

 

End of Document
