

It's Not the Bob Hope Desert Classic, But It's The Only Game in Town
The Associated Press
February 9, 1991, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 469 words
Byline: By ALEXANDER G. HIGGINS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: A U.S. AIR BASE IN CENTRAL SAUDI ARABIA
Body




Without a blade of grass, it couldn't host the Bob Hope Desert Classic. But the base golf course is a welcome diversion for diehard desert duffers longing for the greener links of home.
The austere nine-hole, 1,000-yard course was the brainchild of Lt. Col. Mike Townsend when he wasn't flying bombing missions in his F-16 against Iraqi targets.
"We would like for Bob Hope to come play with us," said Townsend, 40, of Columbia, S.C., who laid out the Desert Fox National course last week just outside the front gate of the largest U.S. air base in Saudi Arabia.
Its name is a play on the Swamp Fox, the emblem of Townsend's South Carolina unit.
The course has fairways and greens that look like the moon's surface. The only green on the course is a doormat strip of Astroturf that players must carry around with them for their tee shots.
"It's a par 3, so if you're a good golfer, you can hit the green with one drive from the Astroturf," explains Chief Master Sgt. Jim Chumley, 50, of South Carolina's Air National Guard.
"If not, then you're in the sand trap. Wherever you hit the ball, you're in the sand trap."
Since the whole course is sand, the official traps are outlined by sandbags. They are called "SAM traps," for surface-to-air missiles. Because there is no water for hazards, the dusty roads cutting through the course serve the same function. Townsend calls them Triple-A, for anti-aircraft artillery.
"Just as a golfer would have to approach a green carefully to avoid these hazards, a fighter pilot must approach a target taking into account these things," he said.
He has drawn up course rules: "Do not remove pins. SAM traps must be played with a sand wedge. AAA hazards require a drop ball with 1-stroke penalty. No carts. Player may improve his line to the hole to putt.
"Use caution for natural inhabitants!" warn the rules. They don't elaborate, but Bedouins and camels sometimes wander through.
"Gentleman's game," continue the rules. "Any reasonable rolling shot that hits the pin is good, any putt within the leather is good."
The toughest holes are dubbed Mt. Suribachi and Pork Chop Hill for hard-won U.S. military victories of World War II and the Korean War. The small hillocks are covered with volcanic rocks and other debris.
"This is the most enjoyment I've had in months," said an officer who works on the flight line. The first week, about 20 golfers played a round, which takes about an hour.
The one with the best score - a 28, upped to a 30 when there was no one around to verify it - turned out to be the base flight surgeon. Other skilled golfers included reserve pilots whose usually fly for commercial airlines.
The basic clubs are a 7-iron, a pitching wedge, a sand wedge and a putter.
"The shots can be very difficult," Townsend said. "The greens are very tough. It's natural Saudi sand."

 

End of Document
