

Japan, Germany, Turkey: On the Sidelines
The Associated Press
February 17, 1991, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 835 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




The Germans and Japanese are sending money, but no soldiers, to the coalition fighting Saddam Hussein. Turkey provides the use of an air base, but has set strict conditions for entering a ground war. Here is a report on three allies whose troops are not directly involved in the military campaign.
---
JAPAN - Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu is trying to convince his country to provide billions of dollars to the allied forces, but many Japanese want nothing to do with the faraway Gulf War.
Fighting in the gulf has paralyzed Japan with this conundrum: What does a nation that has become the world's No. 2 economic power, but renounced war, do to carry its share of the burden in an international crisis?
It is a fundamental question for postwar Japan, particularly since relations with the United States, its main ally and protector, and vital Mideast oil supplies are at stake.
For leaders of the governing Liberal Democratic Party, the answer is clear. Japan must not only provide $$9 billion more to the allied forces, but should send troops to the gulf to perform non-combat duties.
"Japan has a natural duty to make a positive contribution to this effort, and refusal to fulfill this obligation and failure to do what we can would mean choosing the road to international isolation," Kaifu told the deeply divided parliament in January.
Opinion polls indicate many, if not most, Japanese oppose the aid package, especially sending military planes to Jordan to evacuate refugees. Japanese troops have not been deployed abroad since World War II.
Pacifism runs deep in Japan, partly because of the horrors of World War II, which ended with the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
Parliament is expected to vote on the aid package later this month. Whether it passes the opposition-controlled upper house hangs on Kaifu's ability to win over a moderate, Buddhist-backed opposition party that has set several conditions on how the money should be raised and spent.
 
 GERMANY - Criticism by the United States and Britain prompted Germany to increase its financial support for the allies and commit some military hardware.
So far, the Germans have pledged about $$11 billion to the war effort. Chancellor Helmut Kohl's government continues to insist the constitution prohibits sending troops outside the NATO area.
It has sent 18 jet fighters to Turkey, a NATO ally, and mine-sweeping ships to the Mediterranean.
Stung by reports that German companies helped Iraq develop chemical and nuclear weapons, and by Iraqi missile attacks on Israel, the Germans pledged more than $$650 million in humanitarian and defense aid to Israel, including Patriot anti-missile rockets.
Even before the war began Jan. 17, tens of thousands of German anti-war protesters went into the streets almost daily in scenes reminiscent of the early 1980s, when demonstators opposed the stationing of U.S. missiles in Germany.
The number of protesters grew dramatically in the early days of the war, then started to decrease. While the tone of many protests is anti-American, some demonstrators also criticize the German role in providing Iraq with chemical and nuclear technology.
Other Germans express gratitude to the Americans for defending what was West Germany during the Cold War, and U.S. support for German reunification.
Money has been and likely will continue to be the main German contribution.
Kohl has suggested a Marshall Plan for the Middle East after the war, to which the Germans would contribute.
 
 TURKEY - President Turgut Ozal's government allows U.S. warplanes to use the strategic Incirlik air base in southern Turkey for raids on neighboring Iraq.
The Turks say they will not become involved in land operation unless Iraq attacks Turkey, an independent Kurdish state is created in northern Iraq or either Syria or Iran occupies part of northern Iraq after the war.
They also have said, however, that they will retaliate immediately if an Iraqi missile is fired into Turkey.
Turkey has soldiers on its border with Iraq, and early in the war closed an Iraqi oil pipeline that runs through its territory.
Opposition parties, newspapers and members of the powerful military have criticized Ozal for letting U.S. planes use Incirlik. They say Turkey risks an Iraqi reprisal with chemical weapons and is poorly prepared to defend against it.
Some opponents contend support for the allies has wrecked Turkey's efforts to improve ties with its Arab neigbors, once ruled by the Ottoman Turks, and say the country will regret the policy in the long run.
Public opinion polls indicate Turks overwhelmingly oppose direct involvement in the war, but if Turkey did go to war, the army probably would receive great support.
Turks tend to back the army because of a long military tradition and its success in defeending them against sometimes hostile neighbors.
In return for his support, Ozal expects increased economic and military aid from the United States and other countries, more foreign investment and more say for Turkey in Middle East affairs.

 

End of Document
