

Jewish Extremists Mock The Army That's Trying To Control Them
The Associated Press
March 4, 1994, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 663 words
Byline: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KFAR TAPUAH, Occupied West Bank
Body




When the army showed up outside David Axelrod's front door with an order to stay away from Palestinians and hand over his gun, he climbed out the bedroom window, Uzi in hand.
The 27-year-old native of the Queens section of New York and other fugitive extremists are finding it easy to dodge arrest. And just to rub it in, they're giving interviews right and left, mocking the government's efforts to round them up.
"If they want to jail me let them find me. The same goes for my guns. Let them sweat it out and find them," said Axelrod, a leader of the Kahane Lives movement, one of the offshoots of the extremist Kach movement which wants all Arabs out of the occupied territories.
Baruch Marzel, the fugitive leader of Kach, told state-run Israel television: "All the wanted are in contact with each other. They are enjoying themselves. This is a holiday."
The Palestinians have demanded that the settlers be disarmed before the PLO returns to the peace talks. The United State also has encouraged the government to take tougher action against the settlers.
But disarming settlers will be difficult, if not impossible. Nearly all Israeli men serve in the military reserves, hitchhiking or riding public buses to and from their units with their government-issued guns in hand. Illegal weapons are also readily available.
The government does not want to disarm settlers completely, leaving them vulnerable to attacks. So it has limited itself to trying to confiscate the government-issued automatic weapons. On Feb. 25, Dr. Baruch Goldstein, a Jewish settler from New York, used his army weapon to gun down 39 Palestinians in a Hebron mosque.
The Israeli Cabinet decided Sunday to use emergency powers to arrest the leaders of militant Jewish organizations and confiscate weapons. It also empowered the army to bar some Jewish settlers from entering Arab areas.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin pledged he would study whether it was legal to outlaw the Kach organization and its offshoots.
But so far, the army has only issued six arrest warrants and orders were issued to take automatic weapons away from 18 other settlers. Only two settlers have been detained.
Both police and army officers complain about a lack of coordination among the security forces, suggesting this is one reason for the delay.
Ehud Sprinzak, a Hebrew University of Jerusalem political scientist who specializes in right-wing extremists, said Rabin's government was caught off guard by the attack, adding that the cat-and-mouse game made the government's crackdown "look like a joke."
Government spokesman Uri Dromi said the police had been tied up trying to control unrest, but would carry out the new orders within days.
"We will get those people and the arms," he said.
At Tapuah, Axelrod said about 20 army and police officers showed up around 10:30 p.m. Thursday and one shot into air in front of his house.
"They wanted people to think it was a terrorist attack so they would come out with their weapons. Then they started banging on doors," said Axelrod, who got his Uzi from the Israeli army.
Axelrod said after he went out a window he stayed in the settlement until the military convoy departed. The army left behind letters for four Tapuah residents linked to the movement Kahane Lives, barring them from traveling to the Hebron area. That includes the settlement Qiryat Arba, where Goldstein is buried.
"I have no intention of avoiding the place, especially since Qiryat Arba has the grave of an important Jew. I visit there regularly to pray at the grave of Baruch Goldstein," said Axelrod.
While he spoke in front of his home Friday, the only visible army presence was a soldier a few hundred yards away guarding the gate of this settlement, about 7 miles south of the West Bank city of Nablus.
"They really have no idea who is who here," said Reuven Ben-David, a Tapuah resident who left his native Queens 10 years ago. "It's like the end of the movie Casablanca when the guy says, 'Round up the usual suspects."'
 Load-Date: March 4, 1994

 

End of Document
