

Jordan Adds to Israel's Anxieties About the Gulf
The Associated Press
January 5, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 705 words
Byline: By MARCUS ELIASON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




A Jordanian military deployment and the appointment of five Muslim fundamentalists to Jordan's Cabinet are increasing Israel's anxieties about the Persian Gulf crisis.
Israelis consider themselves to be unofficially at peace with Jordan, with whom they share their longest border, and they admire King Hussein's skill at fending off his militants, be they Moslem fundamentalists or Palestinian guerrillas.
So they are willing to believe that the king's recent moves are just another exercise in survival, and not a basic change of attitude to Israel. But they worry that this time things could go wrong.
This explains the stream of carefully phrased warnings from Israeli ministers to King Hussein, coupled with assurances that they wish him well.
"What Hussein is doing could be very dangerous," a senior Israeli official said Thursday, speaking on condition of anonymity.
The Israelis worry that Jordan, which lies between Israel and Iraq, could prove the weak link in the strategy that underpins Israeli security on its eastern front.
Hussein's reluctance to join the Western lineup against Iraq has disturbed Israel since the Persian Gulf crisis began. Recent developments have worsened those fears.
The entry of the Muslim Brotherhood into the Jordanian Cabinet, the Israelis say, is unprecedented. "It is another step, a significant one, in the rise of the strength of the religious in Jordan and the decline of King Hussein's power," editorialized the daily Maariv. "Israel has another cause for concern."
Israeli analysts say the military deployment, although defensive in structure, concentrates the bulk of Jordan's army on its Israeli front - something they haven't seen in decades.
They read it as Jordan's way of saying that if Israel fights Iraq, it will have to fight Jordan too.
Among the scenarios laid out by Israeli analysts are an Iraqi missile attack which would invite Israeli reprisals, or Iraqi forces marching into Jordan, which Israel says it would see as an act of war.
In both cases, Israel would have to violate Jordanian land or air space to retaliate. If Jordan resists, Syria might join the battle against Israel, and the whole situation could careen out of control.
"There is a fear that Iraq will try to embroil Jordan in a military move against Israel in the event of war in the gulf … that the Iraqis will use the Jordanians as proxies to provoke Israel," says Uzi Mahanaimi, who analyzes the Arab world for the daily Yedioth Ahronoth.
According to an Israeli source, Jerusalem initially hoped that the military deployment was a prelude to a crackdown on the Muslim fundamentalists. The fundamentalists' accession to the Cabinet on Tuesday appeared to dash those hopes.
King Hussein avoided overloading his Cabinet with fundamentalists after Islamic leaders won 34 seats in the 80-member Jordanian Parliament last November.
But Muhanaimi said the fundamentalist Cabinet ministers are "just the tip of an iceberg" of Islamic radicalism which is seeping into the lower and middle officer level of the Jordanian army.
"So in the present situation, where the Jordanian army is on high alert, Israel fears that the king may lose control of the army and that this will lead to some sort of provocation," he said in an interview.
Jordanian officials say the buildup on the border results from fears of an Israeli attack.
Dan Schueftan, a Jordan expert at the Hebrew University's Truman Institute, worries about King Hussein being forced into a fight with Israel, and points to the precedent of the 1967 Mideast war.
In 1967, he says, the king had no choice but to join the fighting. Even though he ended up losing the West Bank of the Jordan to Israel, his alternative would have been losing "both banks, and his head, and his kingdom, and his dynasty."
The Israeli government is in the awkward position of having to warn the king without appearing to threaten him.
A significant silence has been that of Ariel Sharon, the housing minister and former general who in the past advocated abolishing King Hussein's Hashemite monarchy and turning Jordan into a Palestinian state.
Sharon "could take advantage of the situation," says Mahanaimi. The fact that he is keeping quiet shows that "he knows the situation is very dangerous."

 

End of Document
