

Kuwaiti Catharsis: New Art Forms Rise From the Wounds of War
The Associated Press
February 25, 1993, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 567 words
Byline: By ANWAR FARUQI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KUWAIT
Body




When Iraqi troops ended their brutal occupation of Kuwait two years ago, painter Ali Hussein vented his rage at Saddam Hussein by hurling a rotten tomato at a blank canvas.
He painted the Iraqi president's trademark black beret above the mess and entitled the work "Revenge." Though vastly different from the artist's usual realistic watercolors, the work was the centerpiece of his latest exhibition.
"It was a kind of therapy for the pains left by the invasion, a form of protest from someone who could do very little else," said Hussein, 24.
Like Hussein, many Kuwaitis are still traumatized by the invasion and the humiliation of the seven-month occupation.
Their experience has spawned new kinds of art - from painting and prose to postage stamps that depict battle scenes and party cakes emblazoned with "Free Kuwait" in creamy script.
The works are a sort of national catharsis, but not just for the survivors who witnessed war's horrors. They are also a way of confronting the thousands who fled soon after the invasion and didn't come home until liberation.
Dr. Muhammed Hussein, a professor of sociology at Kuwait University, said the Kuwaitis who stayed home are hungry to know everything about the war. Those who fled want to forget everything that happened, he said.
As a result, most of the war-inspired art is the work of people who stayed.
All around the city, tanks, anti-aircraft guns and other weapons abandoned by the ousted Iraqis remain on display, often incorporated into a sort of sculpture.
At the entrance to the Ministry of Information, an Iraqi T-72 tank with a splintered turret is partly buried in a mound of concrete. A sign proclaims: "We Will Never Forget."
In a square on the outskirts of the city, a 5-foot bronze fist bursts through the roof of a Lincoln limousine. It is a memorial to Prince Fahd al-Ahmed, a younger brother of Kuwait's ruler and one of the first to die in the August 1990 invasion.
The ruler, Sheik Jaber al-Ahmed al-Sabah, and most of his family fled, followed by more than half the emirate's 650,000 citizens. Most spent the war in Saudi Arabia, Europe and the United States while a U.S.-led coalition fought the Iraqis.
Recent popular fiction bashes Saddam and his forces, and lionizes the Kuwaiti spirit.
The queen of the Kuwaiti pulp novel is Fawziah Dorai, whose best-selling love stories often touch subjects usually shunned in the traditional Muslim emirate.
In one of her short stories, Iraqi captors give a jailed Kuwaiti the choice of dying or raping the Kuwaiti woman in the next cell. He decides to commit the rape and tells the woman: "Look in my eyes. In the eyes of God, you are my wife." After liberation, he marries her.
Even children's works are inspired by the war. A play performed after liberation was called "The Teen-age Mutant Ninja Turtles Free Kuwait."
Publisher Mohammed Khaled al-Qatmeh says there is great demand for all kinds of books about the occupation, both fiction and nonfiction.
Among the most sought-after is "Documents Speak." It sells for about $ 165 and claims to tell the real story of what happened. "Despite its price, we are selling two or three every day," Qatmeh said.
But the books and paintings are only a small step in trying to cope with the outrages of the 1990-91 occupation.
"With all that has been written and done, nothing has been able to express the real suffering," said Ali Hussein. "We are still in shock."

 

End of Document
