

Lame Ducks Still Rule the Nest
The Associated Press
November 6, 1992, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1052 words
Byline: By HARRY F. ROSENTHAL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Lame duck presidents remain active right to the minute their successor arrives at the White House door for the ride together to the Capitol and the inauguration.
For an example, look back no further than Jimmy Carter.
Carter was up all night Jan. 20, 1981, wrestling with the Iran hostage crisis until it was time to slip into a morning coat and head to the Capitol for Ronald Reagan's inauguration.
Reagan worked up to the last minute, too. He presided over a Presidential Medal of Freedom ceremony the day before he turned the keys over to George Bush and couldn't resist saying: "We're having a tag sale upstairs, and everything must go."
"Lame duck" is applied to an officeholder whose power is diminished because he will soon leave office. While the term invokes an image of impotence, the president in fact retains the constitutional powers to command the military, make treaties, pardon miscreants and appoint ambassadors. He submits the next year's budget to Congress with the sure knowledge his successor will change it.
The president is president until Jan. 20 and can be very much hands-on, while recognizing that his successor can undo almost anything he does.
Sometimes, the recognition that only a few weeks are left in office gives the lame-duck president a sense of freedom from doing things he was obliged to do before. Christmas parties, for example.
There are so many people on "must-invite" lists from the various liaison offices - congressional, public and political - that presidents feel pressured to give seven or eight parties over a two-week period just to crowd everybody in and avoid hurt feelings.
Without pet projects that can be scuttled by a peeved congressman, a lame-duck president can say "chuck 'em." That's what Gerald Ford did.
"There is always a hassle over who is going to come to a state dinner," recalls Ron Nessen, Ford's press secretary. "After he lost the election, Ford decided to invite only people he really liked rather than following the lists." A lot of top athletes, Ford's favorite people, raised a glass of eggnog in the White House in 1976.
The Ford-to-Carter transition often is cited as one that really worked well. "I found that everybody, no matter what the hard feelings were, had the attitude that 'OK; it's over; for the good of the country, we have to have an orderly transition," said Nessen, now an executive of a telecommunications association.
Some remember it differently. Carter insisted on conducting his end of the transition from Plains, Ga., although he maintained a Washington office. He may have soured relations with the Washington establishment by summoning people to a Georgia agricultural experiment station near Plains to announce their appointments to top administration jobs.
One, incidentally, who flew to Plains was the director of the CIA, George Bush.
Although it's a caretaker role, a lame duck must stay on top of foreign policy.
"Suppose Saddam Hussein does try to test Bush in the last days or weeks, or something happens in Russia," Nessen postulated. Because a crisis could come at any time, presidents-elect always issue statements like this one from President-elect Clinton, "Even as America's administrations change, America's fundamental interests do not."
Until the day he leaves office, Bush will receive daily foreign intelligence briefings and meet with top officials. He has signed or vetoed all but two of the bills sent to him by Congress, but there may be a few still to be sent down from Capitol Hill.
Lyndon Johnson, who announced March 31, 1968, that he would not stand for reelection, was an example of a president managed accomplishments as a lame duck.
He won congressional approval of major civil rights and fair housing bills in the wake of the assassination four days later of Martin Luther King Jr. and succeeded also in getting major education and health bills passed.
But after the election, says George Christian, his press secretary, "Johnson put the skids on and told his staff that once there was a new president-elect, he (Johnson) did not want to tie his hands."
A chronology of the weeks from Carter's defeat to Reagan's inaugural shows the variety of activity involving a lame-duck president. Carter had to deal with a war scare in Jordan, political assassinations in El Salvador, a stalemated conflict in Iran, repression of political dissidents by Haiti and South Korea and Soviet violations of the Helsinki human rights agreement.
As a lame duck, Carter halted aid to El Salvador because of the murder of five missionaries and forced Congress to delete anti-busing clauses from appropriation measures.
Nearly every presidential tenure ends with a flurry of paperwork. On Inauguration Day 1953, Harry Truman sent a letter to the American Federation of Government Employees reflecting on the 70th anniversary of the government's merit system. It carried this notation: "The president considers this to be his last official act."
Dwight D. Eisenhower's was a letter of disapproval of a Civil Aeronautics Board plan to allow a second U.S. airline to be a flag carrier on trans-Pacific routes because "our foreign relations would be adversely affected."
Not the least of a lame-duck president's duties is preparing a budget for a government he will soon no longer head. And he also speaks about the State of the Union the next president will inherit.
"There is a real, honest tension for the Office of Management and Budget because they are putting the outgoing budget to bed as the new guy appears on the scene," said William A. Morrill, a top official of the since-restructured Department of Health, Education and Welfare under Ford.
Preparation of the budget is such a massive job that the new president can do little more than issue a thin volume of amendments.
Republicans grumbled that in his lame-duck budget Carter proposed a bigger increase in environmental spending than he had in other years to make Reagan's inevitable cuts appear more drastic.
Frank Mackaman, director of the Gerald Ford Library, says Ford spent 50 hours in November and December working on the 1978 budget, which he submitted three days before stepping down. It forecast a $ 47 billion deficit.
With only days left in his presidency, Ford issued an executive order to end price controls on gasoline. A week later, Carter rescinded the order.

 

End of Document
