

Last Days of the Gulf War - a Chronology
The Associated Press
February 27, 1991, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1013 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Here is a day-by-day summary of the final phase of the Persian Gulf War.
 
 Friday, Feb. 22:
President Bush, responding to reports that Iraq had accepted a last-minute peace initiative drafted by the Soviets, rejected the conditions and issued an ultimatum: To avoid a ground war, Saddam Hussein must begin withdrawing his forces from Kuwait by noon EST (8 p.m. gulf time), and complete the withdrawal within one week.
Iraq called Bush's ultimatum "shameful" but didn't reject it outright.
The allied air assault over Iraq and Kuwait continued, while allied troops stepped up preparations for a ground war that seemed imminent. Several dozen U.S. M-1A1 tanks, Bradley fighting vehicles and armored personnel carriers crossed into Iraq at one border point. Elsewhere troops cut through Iraqi-built sand fortifications to make paths for forces to pass through.
U.S. military officials said Iraq set more Kuwaiti oil fields on fire, bringing the total to some 200 installations ablaze in what Bush called "a scorched earth policy."
 
 Saturday, Feb. 23:
Moments before the noon deadline set by Bush, diplomats at the United Nations reported some last-minute peace overtures by Iraq. But U.S. officials said the moves failed to meet the allied coalition's terms for unconditional withdrawal from Kuwait.
Also just before the deadline, Iraq fired a Scud missile at Israel, but it caused no injuries. A deputy chairman of Iraq's ruling Revolutionary Command Council called Bush's demand "an aggressive ultimatum to which we will pay no attention."
The U.S. military reported that Iraqi soldiers were rounding up and killing Kuwaiti citizens and blowing up key buildings in Kuwait City.
Eight hours after the deadline - 4 a.m. local time - the United States and its allies launched a huge ground assault against Iraqi troops, the biggest land war since Vietnam. Early reports from the battlefield were sketchy, but coalition troops were said to be meeting little resistance.
Iraq launched three Scuds against Saudi Arabia, but all were shot down by U.S. Patriot missiles.
Bush addressed the nation Saturday night, announcing, "The liberation of Kuwait has now entered a final phase."
 
 Sunday, Feb. 24:
On the first full day of the ground war, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the commander of Operation Desert Storm, said allied troops were moving into Kuwait and Iraq at great speed and that 5,500 prisoners were captured in the first 12 hours. "Contact with the enemy can best be described as light," he said.
More than 300 attack helicopters from the 101st Airborne Division blasted deep into Iraq in what was called the largest helicopter assault in military history. It was aimed at cutting Saddam Hussein's supply lines.
Although most of the front-line troops wore protective gear against chemical weapons, Iraq's feared chemical threat failed to materialize.
Allied commandeers were clearly pleased with their offensive and the lack of resistance from Iraqi soldiers but cautioned that the tough battles were yet to come.
In a radio broadcast Saddam Hussein urged his soldiers to kill "with all your might."
 
 Monday, Feb. 25
The coalition forces continued their goal of trying to form two circles, one around Kuwait City, and a larger one around Iraq's crack Revolutionary Guard troops, cutting off their supply lines and retreat routes.
Marines were reported with 15 miles of Kuwait City, and allied troops for the first time joined battle with the cream of Saddam's army, the Republican Guard.
The U.S. command said 18,000 Iraqi soldiers were taken prisoner in the first two days of the all-out ground offensive to free Kuwait of Iraq's control. U.S. losses were "extremely light" - four Americans killed and 21 wounded, the command said. It also reported the loss of four U.S. aircraft, three of whose pilots were rescued.
Marine Brig. Gen. Richard Neal said the offensive was going at a faster pace than anticipated.
 
 Tuesday, Feb. 26:
The Iraqis scored their most devasting Scud attack of the war when a missile exploded in the air and its debris hit a U.S. barracks in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, killing 28 servicemen and injuring 100.
Peace hopes were raised briefly when Baghdad radio reported that Saddam had ordered his forces to withdraw from Kuwait. But a majority of U.N. Security Council members insisted that Baghdad accept all 12 council resolutions on the Persian Gulf crisis before a cease-fire could be considered.
The White House reacted icily to Baghdad's statement. White House press secretary Marlin Fitzwater said, "We've heard the radio reports. … The war goes on."
Kuwaiti resistance leaders declared late in the day they were in control of their smoke-filled capital following nearly seven months of Iraqi occupation. They said fleeing Iraqi troops had taken thousands of Kuwaiti captives with them and left behind an armory of tanks and loaded weapons.
 
 Wednesday, Feb. 27:
Iraq's army continued to withdraw from Kuwait, but the U.S.-led troops went on waging war, saying soldiers who were retreating without laying down their weapons were fair targets.
In fierce battles, allied forces had knocked out 26 Iraqi army divisions by early Wednesday, putting roughly 260,000 men out of action, U.S. military officials said in Riyadh. More than 32,000 Iraqis were taken prisoner.
In Kuwait City, the U.S. Marines and Arab troops rode triumphantly past thousands of jubilant residents as Kuwaiti flags fluttered over the capital for the first time in seven months. Kuwaitis cheered, fired rifle bursts into the air and shouted "Thank you, USA!"
Military officials updated the American casualty count for the 43-day-old war: 79 killed, including 28 in the ground campaign, and 213 wounded.
At 9 p.m. EST President Bush told the nation in a televised address, "Kuwait is liberated, Iraq's army is defeated" and announced that at midnight "all United States and coalition forces will suspend offensive combat operations."
A permanent cease-fire will take hold once Iraq ends all hostilities, releases POWs and foreign captives and meets other conditions, Bush said, 100 hours after the ground war began.

 

End of Document
