

Last American Troops Leave the Combat Zone in Southern Iraq
The Associated Press
May 8, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 663 words
Byline: By MARK FRITZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ON THE IRAQ-KUWAIT BORDER
Body




The last American troops rumbled out of southern Iraq on Wednesday after fighting a fast, one-sided war and aiding thousands of refugees left in its turbulent wake.
Elements of the 3rd Armored Division rolled across searing desert sands littered with blasted Iraqi tanks en route to outposts in northern Kuwait, where they will wait anxiously for orders to return home.
"It's been a long haul. We had some fierce battles," said Capt. Charles Brumson, 31, of Sumter, S.C. "I'm kind of burned out."
The tank and infantry division was one of the lead units in the drive to push Iraqi troops out of Kuwait. Its members also assisted the refugees who poured into the border area after the failed Shiite Moslem uprising against Iraqi President Saddam Hussein.
The division was deployed in late December and punched into Iraq when the ground war began Feb. 24. Its departure represents the end of the U.S. troop presence in the part of Iraq where the war was fought.
U.S. troops remain in northern Iraq, where they are deployed to aid refugees fleeing Saddam's postwar crackdown on the Kurdish rebellion.
To some 3rd Armored Division soldiers, the departure from Iraq to Kuwait was more than a move from one sun-scorched stretch of sand to another.
"Out here, you measure time by events," said Lt. Col. Dan Merritt, commander of the division's 2nd Battalion-67th Armored Regiment. "That was another event that helped put the close on it."
The 5,000 troops of the 3rd Armored had been providing food and protection for refugees, and this week completed airlifts that took more than 8,000 of them to a Saudi Arabian camp in Rafha.
The U.S. forces have been replaced by a U.N. peacekeeping force in a 9-mile-wide demilitarized zone that runs the length of the Iraq-Kuwait border.
"I don't know if it's Saddam's fault or our fault or whover's fault that there were refugees, but we had a mission to help them and I think morale was as high doing that as it was since the war ended," said Merritt, 43, of Gladewater, Texas. "Everyone felt good about helping the refugees."
The 38-nation U.N. force was fully deployed on Monday in the southern Iraq security zone, which includes the battered Iraqi border town of Safwan.
Members of the force patrolled the rubble-strewn streets Wednesday in four-wheel drive vehicles bearing the blue-and-white U.N. flag.
Iraqi police are to take over security in the town, although none were spotted Wednesday. "No East, No West, Saddam is the Best," was scrawled on the wall of a crumbled building downtown.
About 5,000 refugees are still encamped on a cluttered, fenced-in compound of tents and shacks just south of Safwan inside the Kuwaiti border. It is being run by the Red Cross and the Red Crescent and the destination of the refugees is uncertain.
"There's a lot of anxiety since the U.S. Army left," said John Tuskan, a U.S. Public Health Service nurse who is assisting the International Red Cross at the camp.
Merritt said he didn't think the allies should be blamed for the rebellions after the war that led to Saddam's crackdowns and the subsequent flood of refugees to all of Iraq's neighbors.
"This is the cradle of civilization," he said. "Since time immemorial this region has had political turmoil. They had it before we came here and they'll have it long after we're gone. I'm proud of the job these soldiers did during the war and after the war."
Staff Sgt. Michael Glass, 28, of Phoenix, remembers the artillery fire directed at his platoon in the fighting.
"It blew the periscope off a Bradley (fighting vehicle)," he said. "We were told that a convoy of tanks was coming for us from our left flank. A bunch of Apaches (attack helicopters) took 'em out."
Pfc. Mike Scott, a 19-year-old from Columbia, S.C., joined the army on a whim and now, after experiencing a war in the desert, plans to make the military his career. As he spoke, the desert sun blazed down and a fierce wind whipped his face with sand.
"I figure it can't get any worse than this," he said.

 

End of Document
