

Legendary Hotel to Rise from the Ashes
The Associated Press
May 13, 1992, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 591 words
Byline: By DONNA ABU-NASR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BEIRUT, Lebanon
Body




A stench hung over the shell-scarred lobby as the clanking of machines signaled the start of the rehabilitation of the legendary Commodore Hotel.
Workmen carried out filthy, bloodstained sofas that had survived fighting and looting. Large rats scampered in the lobby, nibbling on the wooden panels and broken front desk.
Watching over it all Tuesday was Hussam Boubess, a Syrian-born Lebanese millionaire who is financing the refurbishing of the seven-story hotel, a hub for foreign correspondents during most of the country's 15-year civil war.
The war, which ended in October 1990, killed an estimated 150,000 people and wrought damage estimated at $ 25 billion. Economic hardship has discouraged investment, but Boubess has confidence in the hotel's resurrection, which he predicts in less than two years.
"The hotel's reputation as a haven of newsmen will be restored," he proudly proclaimed. "A new business center will cater to all the needs of the press."
The Commodore was more than just a haven during the war.
The rugs were threadbare and the furnishings seedy, but visiting journalists could arrange for anything at the front desk: translators, guides, introductions to political figures, airline tickets or the exchange of any currency in the world.
The discourse was lively in the lobby, where journalists, politicians and militiamen mingled freely. Anglican Church envoy Terry Waite, in Beirut to gain the release of hostages, held news conferences there before he himself was kidnapped.
During a siege by Israel in 1982 when it looked like the Palestinians and Syrians would be overrun, the manager called a reporter into his office, showed a stockroom full of weapons and suggested forming a press militia because he feared Arab extremists would try to take Westerners hostage. The reporter declined.
The Commodore was damaged several times during the civil war and in the Israeli invasion. But it continued to operate until February 1987, when two Muslim militia groups competing for supremacy in the neighborhood turned it into a battlefield.
They traded machine gunfire in the lobby, hurled grenades across the bar and swimming pool and used top floor rooms to snipe.
The hotel was left in a shambles, with gaping holes in the walls and craters in marble floors. Not a pane of glass survived.
When the fighting was over, looters stripped the hotel clean, removing liquor, food, linens, cutlery, crockery, television sets, air conditioners and furniture.
They even took Coco, the demented gray African parrot who used to drive newcomers crazy with his lifelike imitation of the whistle of artillery shells and the first bars of the French national anthem, the Marseillaise.
Pedestrians and motorists slowed down to check the activity Tuesday at the hotel, a landmark of the Hamra district, Beirut's main business center.
Syrian troops in camouflage fatigues occasionally lent the workers a helping hand.
Some 50 Syrian soldiers, part of a 40,000-strong peacekeeping contingent in Lebanon, have been camping in the first two floors of the hotel since routing the militiamen who gutted it.
Boubess said he will ask the Syrians to leave when serious repair work gets under way after the clean-up.
"They have been very cooperative and helpful," he said. "It's not a problem for them to leave."
Boubess, who owns a chain of restaurants, recently leased the hotel for 25 years from its Kuwaiti owners. He said the first renovations, of 150 rooms, would cost about $ 10 million. In the next stage, he plans to build an annex, to increase the rooms to 249.

 

End of Document
