

Lessons of Desert Shield: How the Military Beat the Heat
The Associated Press
July 8, 1991, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 601 words
Byline: By IRA DREYFUSS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Part of America's military surplus from the Persian Gulf War is a wealth of desert-tested knowledge on how to beat the heat.
Before they fought Iraq, the Army and the Marine Corps fought the weather. And the military's strategy could provide textbooks for fighting heat injury at home.
The military did so well that there were no reported heat fatalities and scarcely any cases of heat injury requiring hospitalization.
Heat illness accounted for less than 1 percent of the weekly tallies of sick-call visits to Navy clinics, which treated all U.S. personnel in Saudi Arabia, said Lt. Cmdr. James R. Brooks, a physician who specializes in occupational medicine at the Navy Environmental Health Center in Norfolk, Va.
The scope of heat injury ranges from the aggravating to the fatal. Heat cramps are painful contractions of voluntary muscles, usually as a result of salt loss through sweating. Heat exhaustion, the illness most frequently reported, can result from water or salt loss, as well as from working out. Symptoms can range from profuse sweating to nausea and vomiting. Heat stroke can include delirium and unconsciousness, and can lead to death.
The military borrowed heavily from Israeli experience in desert warfare, said Roger W. Hubbard, director of environmental paraphysiology at the U.S. Army Research Institute of Environmental Medicine, Natick, Mass.
The United States followed the Israeli example in making prevention and treatment of heat illness a major strategic focus, Hubbard said.
Ordinary physical training in the United States assumed new importance, because people who are in shape can tolerate heat better than those who are not. But the heat and humidity of Saudi Arabia were so intense that incoming troops were given a few days to do nothing more than get used to it.
"It was a steam bath. It was beyond sauna," said Marine Sgt. Tony Sinagra, chief of public affairs for the 7th Marine Expeditionary Brigade, Marine Corps Air Ground Combat Center at Twentynine Palms, Calif. He recalls temperatures of 118 and humidity of 90 percent.
Troops later exercised lightly as they adjusted. Military doctrine spelled out an increasing exercise load to make the process go faster. In addition, many personnel kept themselves entertained with sports and weight training.
The primary weapon against heat injury, however, was water. Following the Israeli standard, the United States made drinking mandatory. Hospital corpsmen "would hand you a bottle and say, 'Drink," Sinagra said.
The goal was to prevent troops from being thirsty without knowing it, because a person can be 2 percent below his ideal water level before he feels thirsty. With what is termed "voluntary dehydration," the mind and body become less sharp. And, in desert conditions, continued dehydration could quickly lead to heat injury.
Commanders were told to avoid activity in the hottest parts of the day, when possible. When work had to be done in the heat, it was followed by rest. Digging in helped to reduce the heat, because it allowed the troops to rest in cooler sand.
Salt replacement was not prescribed because the staple food for combat troops, the prepackaged Meals Ready to Eat, had plenty.
When heat injury occurred, medical corpsmen were there to treat it.
The procedure was to "cool the guy off, remove his clothes, pour water on him (have) a couple of guys with cardboards to fan the air to cool him off, and two IVs, one in each arm, to replace the fluid," said Navy Hospitalman Chester Lovato of Twentynine Palms, who was stationed with Marines in Saudi Arabia. The victim would be evacuated if necessary, he said.

 

End of Document
