

Making the Israeli-Palestinian Separation Work
 The Associated Press
October 14, 1995, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 723 words
Byline: By HILARY APPELMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




On the map, the land that Israel will hand over to the Palestinians in the next six months looks like a shattered china plate.
The territory being transferred to Palestinian rule under the latest Israel-PLO peace agreement is broken into more than 200 jagged pieces, separated by land that will stay under Israeli control.
On the ground, the situation is just as complex.
The signers of the Israel-PLO accord, which expands Palestinian autonomy to hundreds of towns and villages in the West Bank, hope they are shaping a new reality of peaceful coexistence after 28 years of Israeli occupation.
But making it work is a tall order.
The former enemies will remain neighbors, staring suspiciously at each other over the backyard fence. Every point of contact - every shared road, every border - is also a point of potential conflict.
"The more we found ways to keep the two populations apart, the better," Israeli government spokesman Uri Dromi said Wednesday. "That is why we insisted on trying to reduce those points of friction.
"But to do it completely is very difficult."
Israel is to pull troops out of six Palestinian towns and most villages - about 30 percent of the West Bank - by year's end. Three more still-undefined pullbacks are planned over the next two years.
Other areas, including Israeli military installations and 128 Jewish settlements, will remain Israeli-controlled until the final status of the West Bank is determined in negotiations scheduled to begin this spring.
The effort to prevent run-ins between Israelis and Palestinians - particularly Jewish settlers and Palestinian police - includes a web of 18 bypass roads around Palestinian cities; other roads designated variously for Palestinian, Israeli, or joint use; and a host of regulations on what Palestinians can and cannot do.
Palestinian police cannot, for example, arrest Israelis or stop Israeli cars. And they cannot go from one West Bank town to another without getting advance permission from a joint Israeli-Palestinian committee.
They do, however, have the right to self-defense - which could lead to trouble if an armed Palestinian officer was confronted by an armed Jewish settler.
Because of Israeli concern about terrorist attacks, Palestinians cannot build fences, orchards or structures higher than 45 feet near roads. Bridges must have clearance no lower than the height of an Israeli tank. The agreement even specifies details such as the maximum engine speed for motorboats off the Gaza Strip and the number of rifles and pistols allowed at each Palestinian police station.
Israel kept the right to close crossings from the Palestinian territories into Israel - a major concern for Palestinians. The Gaza Strip has been closed a total of 230 days since it became autonomous in May 1994 along with the West Bank town of Jericho. The measure keeps thousands of workers from jobs in Israel and stifles the strip's already depressed economy.
By far the most sensitive area addressed by the agreement is the city of Hebron, where 450 fiercely ideological Jewish settlers live amidst 120,000 Palestinians. Emotions are still raw there over settler Baruch Goldstein killing 29 Muslim worshipers at a mosque in February 1994, while settlers keep alive memories of the 1929 massacre of the city's Jews.
Under the agreement, Israeli troops will stay in scrupulously defined sections of Hebron to protect the settlers, and Palestinian police will control the rest.
There are frequent references in the agreement to a new spirit of cooperation and good faith between Israelis and Palestinians. But there is little evidence of that spirit on the ground.
When Israel closed its military office in the West Bank village of Salfit on Tuesday, villagers broke a clay jar on the ground - a traditional ritual for ensuring that an unwanted visitor never returns.
Palestinian radio still refers to Israel as "the enemy," and Palestinians suspected of working as informants for Israel have been beaten and killed.
Jewish settlers say they will not recognize the authority of Palestinian police and some have threatened to shoot if stopped by a Palestinian officer.
And the first "confidence-building measure" specified in the agreement - the release of Palestinian prisoners - became mired in controversy when Israel refused to release four women because they were convicted of murder.
 Load-Date: October 14, 1995

 

End of Document
