

Names In The Games
The Associated Press
November 23, 1993, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 938 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: ZAGREB, Croatia
Body




Goran Ivanisevic has set his sights on winning tennis' Grand Slam next year.
"I have learned a lot this year, I have changed, no more throwing rackets and stuff … and it is possible that I'll take the next Grand Slam," the Croatian said.
It was not clear whether Ivanisevic was referring to the next Grand Slam tourmanet, the Australian Open in January, or the entire Grand Slam series, which no one has won since Rod Laver in 1969.
Ivanisevic took a one-month break after twisting an ankle in January. The injury affected his game, and he did not win a tournament until September.
After that, he won three tournaments and made the semifinals of the ATP World Championship last week. He finished the season ranked No. 7.
"I played very well during the last three months … " he said Monday.
 
LONDON (AP) - The great ball-tampering controversy just won't die.
Allegations that Pakistani fast bowlers doctored the ball have been debated in print and have even been aired in the High Court.
The issue took a new twist Tuesday when a reserve umpire charged there was a coverup by English cricket chiefs.
The controversy stems from a game at Lord's between England and Pakistan in August 1992. At the break, a ball that had been used by Pakistan's bowlers was changed by the umpires.
According to English player Allan Lamb, the ball was replaced because it was thought two Pakistani fast bowlers had been scuffing one side with their fingernails to help make the ball swing late and bowl the batsmen out.
That practice is illegal and has been denied by the bowlers. According to the umpires, it was changed because of the regular wear and tear caused when the ball bounces.
As a result of the controversy, Lamb wound up in court facing a libel action. He made allegations in the Daily Mirror that former Pakistani bowler Sarfraz Nawaz told him, when they were teammates, how the ball could be scratched to make it swing.
Sarfraz denied it. The case went to the High Court this month and both parties settled the issue after four days' evidence without it going to the jury. But the debate continued.
Don Oslear, the reserve umpire at the game, was quoted in the Daily Mirror on Tuesday as saying that cricket officials had amended the statement from "as the condition of the ball had been altered the umpires changed it" to "that the match ball had been changed."
"I could not longer be part of what has been an outrageous cover-up plot protecting so many leading cricketing personalities," Oslear told the Mirror. "Both umpires were hopelessly let down by English cricketing officialdom. They were in a hopeless position not being permitted to make any statement about their match reports."
Meanwhile, the Sun said it had evidence that proved the Pakistan bowlers did not cheat. It said that match referee Deryck Murray filed an official report stating the ball was changed because of wear and tear and not ball-tampering.
The paper said that Clyde Walcott found no evidence of ball-tampering in those games.
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Paul Molitor, the World Series MVP, got another honor Tuesday - winning the October balloting for the S. Rae Hickok Professional Athlete of the Year Award.
The Toronto Blue Jays' designated hitter received 312 points in the monthly balloting, outdistancing two other baseball players. Lenny Dykstra of the Philadelphia Phillies was second with 94 points and Molitor's teammate, Joe Carter, was third with 70.
 
MORGANTOWN, W.Va. (AP) - Three men who became popular after West Virginia's football upset of Miami didn't even play in the game.
City employees Eric Smith and Mike and Rick Cress, who are cousins, had the task Monday of slicing a section of the goal post fans tore down after Saturday's 17-14 victory.
Their phone rang frequently, television crews stopped by and people requested to meet them.
"We didn't realize how much attention this would cause," said Smith, city equipment director.
After eight hours and four saw blades, the cross bar and support post were cut into about 115 2 -inch pieces. Nearly all the pieces were to go to students who carried the post to the Student Union after the game.
Mike Cress recorded the score and date inside each section of the post with permanent marker. The pieces were put in boxes and taken to the city police department for distribution.
"This is a piece of history, any way you look at it," he said. "It was one of the greatest games of all time and these are souvenirs."
 
NAPLES, Italy (AP) - Argentine star Diego Maradona is likely to play against his former teammates of Napoli in an exhibition game next month.
Officials of the Neapolitan club said Tuesday they were considering bids for an Argentine tour in late December, when the Italian league is idle.
Napoli would play Maradona's new team, Newell's Old Boys, at Rosario and possibly at Buenos Aires.
Maradona was a star of Napoli from 1984-1991.
 
PHOENIX (AP) - Tiger Woods of Western High School in Anaheim, Calif., the USGA junior amateur national champion the past three years, is among five finalists for male high school athlete-scholars of the year.
The others are John Booty, Evangel Christian Academy, Shreveport, La.; Trajan Langdon, Stellar Alternative School, Anchorage, Alaska; Andriy Shapowal, Kenston High, Chagrin Falls, Ohio, and Shane Swartz, Poudre High, Fort Collins, Colo.
The female finalists are Rhoni Barton, The Linfield School, Temecula, Calif.; Shannon Feaster, School Without Walls, Washington, D.C.; Nel Fettig, Bishop Luers, Fort Wayne, Ind.; Dominique Dawes, Gaithersburg (Md.) High, and Kristin Folkl, St. Joseph's Academy, St. Louis.
The two winners will be announced by the Dial Corp. Jan. 15.
 Load-Date: November 23, 1993

 

End of Document
