

No Room for Democrats' Domestic Agenda in the Midst of Bush's Triumph
The Associated Press
March 2, 1991, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 855 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




As the Democrats were saying when they were interrupted by the Persian Gulf War, there are other issues to be faced, problems at home, an economy in recession.
But there aren't any other issues that count politically right now.
At this point, all the opposition party can do is applaud the Republican president's success in the conflict their leaders voted against authorizing, and the 100-hour ground offensive that wrapped it up.
So Speaker of the House Thomas H. Foley said President Bush had conducted himself brilliantly. Senate Majority Leader George J. Mitchell called the operation a credit to the president.
They will have other, contentious business with him, but that can wait. So can the field of Democrats who will compete for the nomination to challenge Bush in 1992. Every likely candidate but one, Sen. Albert Gore Jr. of Tennessee, voted against going to war in mid-January, in favor of waiting to see if economic sanctions would force Iraq to surrender Kuwait.
The home-front argument already is beginning over appropriations to pay for the war, and on allied contributions to share the cost, especially from Japan, Germany and the front-line oil nations. That will, inevitably, flow into more general debate on defense spending, high-tech weaponry, the fate of the peace dividend.
But with Bush promising to bring the victorious troops home soon, and with his popularity ratings soaring to near 90 percent, political challengers and critics are out of season. They know and Bush's men know that the numbers will come down when euphoria subsides. They don't know how soon or how far.
Until that happens, they can't hope to change the subject to the domestic concerns that they want to make the focus of the 1992 presidential campaign.
Even then, they can only hope. In what surely will stand as the great crisis of his first term, perhaps of his presidency, Bush gained a triumph unmatched since the end of World War II.
And political seers in both parties had said that Bush would be almost invincible in 1992 if the war was won swiftly with few casualties.
Still, there is no guarantee the Republicans can make it all last until an election still 20 months away. The off-year campaign of 1990 began with Bush, and therefore his party, riding a wave of support that flowed from the end of the Cold War, the toppling of the Berlin Wall.
It didn't last the spring. Within months, the undertow of the federal deficit had dragged Bush with it. He had forsaken his pledge against new taxes to seek a budget deal with the Democrats, and the surge became a slump.
While that deal was a problem at midterm, it may be a big asset when Bush himself is on the ballot. Under its terms, even if the deficit goes up - as it certainly will given the cost of war and the price of recession - the administration doesn't have to do anything about it before 1993.
The political benefits of victory in the Persian Gulf are direct and personal, not indirect or reflected as was the credit gained for the 1989 wave of democratic reform supplanting communist regimes in Eastern Europe.
Furthermore, as a wartime commander in chief, Bush has answered the first question Americans ask about a president or a candidate to become one: what does he do in a crisis?
In this one, Bush held his lines, against Democratic opposition before the war, against Iraqi threats of a battlefield bloodletting when some experts said they were credible, against Soviet diplomatic maneuvers aimed at ending the war short of Saddam Hussein's surrender.
It was done with fewer American casualties than were suffered in the Spanish American War.
When the campaign documentaries are put together next year, the Bush camp may find a spot for this comment from Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf's victory briefing:
"I'm very thankful for the fact that the president of the United States has allowed the U.S. military and the coalition military to fight this war exactly as it should have been fought. ..."
The Democratic challenger in 1992 is going to have to prove - in the abstract - that he could exercise crisis command. That's difficult against an incumbent, doubly so against a war president who won.
So the Democrats' emphasis is, and will be, domestic. Setting their 1991 agenda, Senate Democrats said the war was critical, but "we must also address the urgent problems here at home," beginning with the recession.
Blending patriotism and politics, Democratic Chairman Ronald H. Brown has been saying that a swift and successful end to the war would be good for his party, hastening the day when attention will swing back to issues at home.
Administration economists have linked the war and the recession with forecasts that a swift end to the conflict will speed recovery, saying they look for a comeback in the second half of the year.
"… Successful resolution of the crisis will strengthen the economy by boosting consumer and business confidence," the president's economic report said.
Now that prediction will be tested.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 25 years.

 

End of Document
