

Off A Busy Road, The People In The Middle of A War
The Associated Press
February 4, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 604 words
Byline: By JOHN KING, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KHAFJI, Saudi Arabia
Body




The signs of war are everywhere at the end of the road to Khafji: burned out armored vehicles, some still carrying corpses; nervous Saudi patrols, missile-pocked buildings, the occassional staccato of gunfire.
On and off the road that leads to this coastal town, everyone talks about Khafji, the manifestation of a war they cannot see but constantly hear in the roar of jets overhead and the rumble of distant bombing.
"I hear it got pretty messy up there," says Frank Lammacchio, an Army helicopter pilot found at a makeshift desert airstrip hidden off the north-south highway that leads to Khafji.
Lammacchio, on his way to a new forward base just south of the Iraq border, thinks Khafji will soon be an afterthought.
"There's a lot more blood to come," he says. "I wish I didn't have to say that, but it's true."
With a few detours, a drive to Khafji from Dhahran, about 200 miles to the south, brings one a kaleidoscope view, not of war but of the people waging one.
Only at Khafji, a few short miles from Kuwait and thousands of Iraqi troops, can one view firsthand the death and devastation. Most troops are prohibited from visiting.
At the few phones along the way, newly arrived troops form long lines and wait patiently. For most, this will be their last call home before they see war firsthand.
"I'm going to tell my wife I made it here safely, but not where I'm going," an Army tank crewman from a base in Germany said Sunday. "She heard about the fighting at Khafji. We all figure there'll be more, soon."
At Khafji, Saudis and Qataris did most of the fighting, driving Iraqis from the Saudi frontier town with some crucial help from U.S. Marines. Eleven Marines died in fighting farther west.
"People dying brings it all home," said Army Reserve Sgt. David Haleman, who got here a day before the war began. "It's very real now."
Still, Haleman has the innocence of many of those found along the road to Khafji. His thoughts are still far from the fighting a few short miles to the north.
"My wife just had a baby," said Haleman, a refueler with the 380th Quartermaster Company of Evansville, Ind. "Four days ago."
At his base, a half-dozen airborne ambulances refueled Sunday for a trip to the front, where a series of border skirmishes has many troops thinking an all out ground war is coming soon.
Lammacchio doesn't think the troops - or the American people - are giving that prospect enough thought.
"We had Grenada, and then Panama, and now the first few weeks of a pretty easy war," said the balding Long Islander, who joined the Army at the tail end of Vietnam. "The ground war is going to be bloody. It's not going to be easy."
His experience makes him think that way, instinctively. For many of the younger troops along the road, that reality hasn't set in.
At Abu Hadriyah, a truck stop town 80 miles south of Khafji, Tim Black of the Tennessee National Guard says in one breath that his unit's six-month callup is about to expire, in the next that he doesn't think that means much. But others do.
"Some of the guys think we're going home," he says. He watches two cranes right a tank that flipped off a transport truck, slowing the pace of a miles-long convoy. "Look around. There's no way we're going anywhere."
As Lamacchio's Chinook heads to the north, Haleman wraps his face and ducks down to avoid the swirling sand. As it clears, he points to a mosque in the nearby town, the clay and cement buildings around it.
"It's like going through religious story books, the Bible," said the 26-year-old from Henderson, Ky. "It's like walking into history."
Only then does it dawn on him:
"There are a lot of wars in those books."
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto DHR5 of Feb. 3

 

End of Document
