

On the Home Front: What Will Impact Be?
The Associated Press
January 11, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1226 words
Byline: By STEPHANIE NANO, Associated Press Writer
Body




It would dominate the news and monopolize lunch-counter conversations. But would a war in the Persian Gulf really have much impact on the day-to-day lives of Americans?
In little ways, the Middle East crisis has already touched ordinary citizens. Bus fares went up in Columbus, Ohio, to cover higher fuel costs; worried shoppers spent less for Christmas; some small towns lost their only doctor to the military callup.
The impact has been more direct on thousands of men and women in the reserves or National Guard, yanked from their jobs and out of classrooms - and on the families they left behind.
But, otherwise, how would war's repercussions echo across the nation?
Much depends on when hostilities begin and how long war lasts.
No one suggests a replay of World War II, when victory gardens sprouted in backyards, volunteers scanned the skies for enemy planes, and children pulling wagons collected tin cans for the war effort.
The home front was a front united at the outset of World War II. There was no need to question motives; Pearl Harbor had been attacked.
But the American public has had five months to ponder the rapid buildup of troops in the Persian Gulf and recall the lessons of the Vietnam War.
"Americans are much less easily sold on war than they were at that time," said Todd Gitlin, a sociologist at the University of California, Berkeley. "It's much easier for them to believe that the government lies. It's much easier for them to be suspicious of the government's motives.
"And therefore they're much less likely to line up behind the president."
Robert Karl Manoff thinks likewise. Manoff, director of the Center for War, Peace and the News Media at New York University, initially thought it would take the outbreak of war to test public support for President Bush.
But "the social memory of Vietnam is so strong at this point that even the prospect of those body bags coming home in great numbers has been enough to shake this very thin, shaky structure of support for the president and his policies," he said.
Americans are likely to see the first tangible impact of war at the gas pump. The price of oil has fluctuated wildly since the invasion of Kuwait, pushing up the price of gasoline before it began trickling back down.
And despite assurances from the Energy Department that domestic oil supplies will be adequate if fighting erupts, energy experts believe prices may soar.
Gas station owner Jerry Rudowsky is ready to hear more complaining from his customers in Cleveland's Slovak Village area.
"We're in a working-class neighborhood and get a lot of grumbling and griping about it because they're on fixed incomes," Rudowsky said. "No one likes to pay more for something they have to have - and gas is a necessity."
Federal aviation officials won't talk about the impact war might have on air travel, or what security precautions are being considered.
"We are watching it constantly," said Fred Farrar, spokesman for the Federal Aviation Administration in Washington. "We will take whatever measures are necessary to keep air travel safe."
An academic expert on terrorism expects security to be tightened at domestic airports.
"I think it will take a little longer to get your flight, get your baggage checked," said Victor LeVine, a political science professor at Washington University in St. Louis. "There may well be more screening … more security personnel at airports, particularly at major airports."
At San Francisco International Airport, for example, authorities might make domestic passengers subject to the security measures now used for international flights, airport spokesman Ron Wilson said. That means barring non-passengers from departure-gate areas, no curbside checking of baggage, and making sure passengers with checked baggage get on the flight.
"We don't want to overly inconvenience passengers," Wilson said. "But we will do whatever we have to provide for safety" of aircraft and passengers.
The military has been using chartered commercial jetliners to transport troops and cargo to the Middle East, with little effect on domestic service, sasys the Air Transport Association, which represents major carriers.
The military's need for commercial aircraft during wartime could cut into service, but those needs aren't known, said association spokesman Tim Neale.
The FBI has been tight-lipped about what it is doing to safeguard the home front in the event of war.
"We have an ongoing counter-terrorism program that's an FBI investigative priority - has been for several years now," FBI spokesman Mike Kortan said. "Everything that we're doing now comes under that investigative area."
The State Department has increasingly expressed concern about a terrorism campaign against American interests during a war.
Terrorism expert LeVine thinks such attacks are unlikely, although not impossible, in the United States.
"It's much more likely that Saddam's supporters would strike at American targets outside of the United States, possibly in Europe, which has always been the most accessible for Middle East terrorists," LeVine said. "It's much more difficult to execute successful terrorist strikes in the United States for the simple reason it takes a lot longer to get here and to get out."
Civil defense falls under the Federal Emergency Management Agency and it hasn't called for any heightened readiness. "There appears to be no strategic threat to the continental United States," spokesman Marvin Davis said.
War could increase the need for blood donors, but shouldn't hurt U.S. supplies, said the American Association of Blood Banks, whose members supply half the nation's blood supply. Along with the American Red Cross, it is supplying the military.
Because of an anticipated increase in donors if war breaks out, meeting demands should not be a problem, spokeswoman Marcia Lane said.
"Currently less than 5 percent of the American public donates blood, so there's lots of room for expansion," she said.
One group of Americans worried about a war backlash are those of Arab descent. Arab-Americans have become a scapegoat when problems erupt in the Middle East, said Albert Mokhiber, president of the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee in Washington.
"If there's a crisis in Lebanon, we're Lebanese. If its in Libya, we're all Libyan. Now it's in Iraq, so we're all Iraqis," Mokhiber said.
Mokhiber's group responded angrily to the FBI's decision to interview leaders in Arab-American communities, in part to gather information about possible terrorist attacks by Iraq.
"It's outrageous to think that we're a suspect class just because of our ancestry. … We have no intention of becoming the Japanese-Americans of the '90s," Mokhiber said, referring to the tens of thousands of Japanese-Americans who were interned in guarded camps during World War II.
An FBI spokesman denied the effort amounted to harassment or would lead to discrimination against Arab-Americans.
Immigration officials tallied 1,400 Iraqi students after the invasion of Kuwait, the largest numbers in Michigan and California. Duke Austin of the Immigration and Naturalization Service said travelers carrying Iraqi and Kuwaiti passports would be photographed and fingerprinted.
Kuwaiti passports were included in the order because U.S. officials suspect that many Kuwaiti passports were seized by the Iraqi invaders in August.
 
 End Adv for Use Anytime

 

End of Document
