

One Year After War, Kuwait At The Crossroads
The Associated Press
January 8, 1992, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 743 words
Byline: By DIANA ELIAS
Dateline: KUWAIT
Body




The Iraqis are gone. The oil wells are no longer aflame, and many are producing oil. The al-Sabah family is back in power.
In some ways, Kuwait is back to where it was 18 months ago, before Saddam Hussein's troops invaded. But in many ways, there is no going back.
"We're at the crossroads," said Abdullah al-Shayji, a political science lecturer at Kuwait University.
"The Gulf War transformed Kuwait into another place in every sense of the word. We're trying to find out where we fit in and what we want. Do we want to become more Westernized or more Islamic?"
Al-Shayji, a 34-year-old self-described liberal who specializes in U.S. foreign policy, said that the West's support and the Americanization of this traditional Muslim society has produced an identity crisis for many people.
Young Kuwaiti men who fled into exile and many of those who endured the brutal seven-month Iraqi occupation are casting aside the old values.
They're shedding their traditional dishdasha robes for jeans, demanding to be allowed to date girls in public and agitating for a new order.
"The Gulf War has turned the people of the gulf into hostages . .. of the West," former legislator Abdulla al-Nafisi grumbled in the independent al-Qabas daily recently.
"The American bumper stickers on our cars, the American and British flags on our houses and Bush's photos in our offices are nothing but signs of psychological defeat," he said. "Our dependence on the West is a disgrace."
"This is a part of the long bill we have to pay for the Gulf War," said Issa al-Shaheen, a founding member of the Islamic Constitution Movement, which advocates a return to the sharia, or Muslim religious law.
On the other hand, many women, traditionally disenfranchised, are demanding the right to vote and run for public office.
The emir, Sheik Jaber al-Ahmed al-Sabah, has promised to study the matter, a tricky issue in the gulf monarchies where in some countries there is no vote. Since the 1960s, the country has been gradually moving away from the tribal structure that had been the main social pillar for centuries. The pace of social change has quickened in the last few years as young men educated abroad widened their horizons. The war dramatically accelerated the process.
The emir has pledged to hold elections next October for the National Assembly, which he dissolved in 1986 for the second time because it was growing too independent. The assembly was the first experiment in parliamentary government in the gulf's Arab states, where monarchies still reign.
Outwardly, Kuwait is returning to something like normality.
Utilies are functioning again. The oilfield fires set by the Iraqis were finally put out in November. The oil industry, Kuwait's economic lifeline, is producing some 400,000 barrels a day, less than one-third of prewar output.
But resentment simmers not far below the surface.
After the war, there was tension between the 200,000 or so Kuwaitis who endured and resisted the occupation - they're known in Arabic as al-Samidoun, the "steadfast ones" - and those who fled, including the royal family.
Some Samidouns bitterly call themselves al-mughafaloun, "the stupid ones."
The animosity has eased some. But Shayji said: "The al-Samidoun's resentment is still there. They feel they were not appreciated and that won't go away until the government does something to show them appreciation."
There's resentment that the political and military leaders responsible for the disasterous Kuwaiti rout during the invasion are mostly still in office.
The Interior Ministry says crime has risen by 25 percent. Many Kuwaitis still have weapons acquired during the occupation, despite government collections. Violence among children is now widespread.
Planning Minister Ahmed al-Jassar, defended the government's record and said it is doing it best to rebuild the nation.
"People are depressed because they have nowhere to go, to take their families for entertainment," he said. "The Iraqis planted more than 1 million mines in our beaches and desert.
"What people feel is not dissatisfaction, but depression and a need to go back to what they had before the invasion."
But Shayji said the "Kuwaitis aren't secure any more. Regardless of what you see on the surface, everybody's now got a four-wheel drive vehicle in his garage. Everybody's stacking money overseas and buying houses in Lebanon or the United States so that when things get tough again they have a place to go and the means to get away."

 

End of Document
