

OUT FRONT: Wading the Jordan, Arafat Started the Mix of Myth and Truth
The Associated Press
June 30, 1994, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 936 words
Byline: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Just before a July sunset 27 years ago, a small paunchy figure with an Egyptian submachine gun slung over one shoulder stepped from the muddy eddies of the Jordan River onto the West Bank.
Three battered Dodge taxis, their engines revving, were waiting for Mohammed Abdel-Rauf Daoud Al-Qidwa, a Palestinian guerrilla who intended to organize an insurrection to take back the territories Israel had seized in the Six-Day War a month before.
He hoped to reclaim the land in months. He failed, but several minor sorties vaulted the man known worldwide today as Yasser Arafat to the head of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Ultimately, they led to his announced return Friday as president of the Palestinian National Authority, which will supervise self-rule, and symbol of every Palestinian's wish for a homeland.
After crossing the Jordan in 1967, Arafat traveled around the territories and Israel for four months. When not organizing fighting cells, he played tourist, lunching in Tel Aviv cafes and picking up hitchhiking Israeli soldiers to talk politics.
Over time, the truth and the myth about that period blurred into a larger-than-life picture of Arafat that sustained Palestinians for decades.
At first Arafat, head of a still-unknown guerrilla group called Fatah, was not a special target of Israeli Shin Bet agents.
"In those days Yasser Arafat was not the only one, not even No. 1. He was one of many we were after," said Reuven Hazach, a former Shin Bet agent in the West Bank city of Ramallah.
"When he became a big shot, we all started telling stories about him. We helped create the legend," Hazach said in an interview.
Followers remember how Arafat wanted to make his mark, by having all 40 fighting cells attack Israeli targets the night of Sept. 15. But Israeli secret agents, led by informants, swooped down on a planning session.
Arafat, habitually late, missed arrest.
"They used to say he had nine lives, but really he has 90 because he escaped so many times," said Mohammed Al-Dila, a 47-year-old Nablus carpenter who did 12 years in jail for his membership in Fatah.
Arafat's cells did complete some missions. They exploded bombs at a U.N. broadcast station and an Israeli publisher whose Arabic textbooks were thought to distort Palestinian history.
That October, a bomb planted at the Zion Cinema in Jerusalem's main square was discovered 20 minutes before it was set to explode among 200 movie-goers. Still, even that botched job resonated across the Arab world and served notice of Fatah's new muscle.
Israel started searching for Arafat in earnest. His legend only grew when agents repeatedly arrived moments after he had fled.
Baruch Avres, a member of a special police squad tracking Arafat, recalled arriving once to find his bed still warm, his glasses, two pens and a transistor radio left behind. Others remember him jumping out windows or leaping over rooftops.
Arafat told his biographers he once escaped through the twisting alleys of the Nablus casbah dressed as a woman carrying a baby.
Eventually, one close call prompted Arafat to leave the territories in late October or early November 1967. The Israelis were scheming to capture Arafat with the help of a Palestinian prisoner who could identify their quarry, not yet known by his trademark kaffiyeh headdress and chin stubble.
According to Nasser Karain, 51, a tailor and Fatah member, the Israelis put an army uniform on the prisoner and hauled him off to Damascus Gate in Jerusalem's Old City, where Arafat was known to frequent a cafe.
When Arafat walked through the massive portal, big enough for the camel caravans of the old spice-and-silk trade, the prisoner froze and said nothing.
Arafat, startled by the sight of his disguised henchman, fled within days, said Karain, and shifted his military operations across the river to Jordan.
His young followers then had no idea that Yasser Arafat (whose name combined a college nickname meaning "carefree" and his maternal great-grandfather's surname) was the leader of Fatah, the strongest PLO faction. They regret today that the 64-year-old man known to all Palestinians as "Abu Ammar," for "father of the builder," is not returning at the head of an army.
"There is a big difference between his first trip and now. It's like the distance between Heaven and Earth," said Ziad Joulani, 43, who was Arafat's driver and served 15 years in prison for transporting weapons.
"The first time he came as a militant. It was such an adventure," Joulani said, remembering one lunchtime trip to a Tel Aviv skyscraper. "We went to look at the Shalom Tower. He talked about how much TNT it would take to bring it down."
None of Arafat's followers interviewed seemed surprised he gave only a few days' notice of his return. They said his mercurial nature was already well-known when he first roamed the occupied territories.
Sometimes he was euphoric, enormously proud that Palestinians, out of the disastrous defeat in the Six-Day War, were wresting control of their cause from Arab leaders. But he could also be unrelentingly harsh with West Bank conservatives, still loyal to Jordan's King Hussein, who did not support his insurrection.
"He could go from being extremely charming - the father of the smile - to extremely tough in a second," said Al-Dila, the carpenter. "When he was nervous, his lower lip would quiver and he would spit and swear."
Al-Dila looked out the window at Nablus, still occupied after 27 years. One of Arafat's key goals is to speed establishment of Palestinian control throughout the West Bank.
Then he sighed and said, "We thought the occupation would last less than six months."
 Load-Date: June 30, 1994

 

End of Document
