

Parliament Approves Israel's Agreement With The PLO
The Associated Press
September 23, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 774 words
Byline: By SERGEI SHARGORODSKY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin declared he won "freedom of action" to pursue Mideast peace after parliament ratified the historic Israel-PLO accord on Thursday.
Rabin said the 61-50 vote allowed the government to implement the agreement on Palestinian self-rule in the occupied lands and continue attempts to reach peace with Israel's Arab neighbors.
The margin was less substantial than Rabin had hoped for, but it put a convincing end to calls for early elections or a national referendum that would have slowed down the peace momentum.
It also diminished fears that Israel would be torn by violence and political anarchy after recognizing the PLO, its bitter enemy.
"Now we shall build a new Middle East," Foreign Minister Shimon Peres said after the vote.
Still, hard-line opponents to the accord said that the government's mandate was slim, and they would try to force changes in the accord.
PLO spokesman Yasser Abed-Rabbo praised the result, telling Israel army radio from Tunis it was a "positive step" and that support for the treaty was larger in the street than in parliament.
Rabin had staked the credibility of the peace initiative as well as the future of his government on winning the vote, saying it would constitute a formal vote of confidence.
Eight legislators, including three from the hard-line Likud bloc, abstained from the vote, and one was absent in the 120-seat Knesset, or parliament. The result clearly embarrassed Likud, which failed to enforce party discipline.
One of the three Likud members who abstained, Meir Shitreet, said his party's opposition to a peace deal backed by the majority of Israelis was "political suicide." He said on Israeli radio that seven Likud members backed the agreement privately.
"There is no need for new elections. The parliament very clearly approved the agreement. The margin is very clear," Rabin's spokesman Oded Ben-Ami told The Associated Press.
Rabin said he will now focus on the painstaking task of establishing Palestinian autonomy in the occupied Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho, and on pursuing peace negotiations with Jordan, Lebanon and Syria.
"This gives the government freedom of action to implement what it brought to the Knesset," he said on Israel radio.
Ben-Ami voiced hope for the resumption of Middle East peace talks in Washington next month and for detailed negotiations on what promised to be "a long and bumpy road."
Peres, speaking later on Israel television, said Israel and the PLO hoped to formalize their current unofficial contacts within two to three weeks, with the PLO naming several delegates for face-to-face talks.
As part of the accord, Israel will free 11,000 Palestinian detainees, said Palestinian leader Hanan Ashrawi.
Confirming a report in the Jerusalem Report magazine, Mrs. Ashrawai said the release could not come immediately. Prison services spokesman Dubi Ben-Ami denied the plan but acknowledged that the detainees' fate was still unclear.
Another 2,000 maximum security detainees will be moved from the occupied territories to Israel, the magazine said.
Mrs. Ashrawi also said Jan. 1 "could be a target date" for PLO chief Yasser Arafat's arrival in the areas of future autonomy.
Rabin's opponents, who say the agreement would eventually lead to a Palestinian state and endanger Israel's existence, meanwhile prepared for battle.
Gonen Segev of the right-wing Tsomet Party said the hard-liners will now start "an information campaign" to force changes in the agreement.
"Our aim now is to guarantee no Palestinian state and guarantee that the settlements in Judea and Samaria will not be removed," Segev said, using the Biblical names for the West Bank.
The right-wingers also charged that the backing of only 61 of 120 legislators showed that the government had no mandate from the people.
Segev said Rabin's majority was "miserable" because it relied on five Arab legislators who "define themselves as Palestinians."
The prime minister had hoped to avoid relying on the pro-PLO Arab lawmakers, and there had been reports that he would call new elections or form a new coalition if he got a narrow victory.
The government was not required by law to get parliament approval for the accord signed Sept. 13 in Washington, but it is customary and considered necessary for the legislature to give a nod of approval on issues of historic consequence.
Rabin got a large margin of approval after five members of the ultra-religious Shas Party decided to abstain. The group's sixth member was overseas.
The marathon debate, which began Tuesday and lasted for 32 hours, was punctuated by screaming and angry walkouts by opponents and supporters of the plan.
 Load-Date: September 23, 1993

 

End of Document
