

Patriot Makers Boast of Missile That Was Nearly Canceled in the Mid-1970s
The Associated Press
January 21, 1991, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 896 words
Byline: By JONATHAN YENKIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOSTON
Body




From Florida to Texas, defense workers are cheering the Patriot missile - a weapon once nearly canceled and untested in battle until it proved itself with pinpoint accuracy at supersonic speeds in the Persian Gulf.
The Patriot simply appears to do what it was designed to do. And that is no small achievement for an industry that has taken its lumps over large expenditures and doubts about such items as the B-1 bomber, the Apache helicopter, the Sgt. York air defense gun and the Bradley Fighting Vehicle.
The first Patriot fired in combat knocked an Iraqi Scud missile out of the air as it headed for Dhahran in Saudi Arabia last week. On Sunday and early Monday, Patriot missiles knocked out nine more Iraqi Scuds fired into Saudi Arabia.
"There is a lot of pride in the plant here," said Doug McCurrach, a spokesman for Martin Marietta Corp.'s facility in Orlando, Fla., which assembles the missiles.
"I'm excited about the success so far and feel it's going to continue because of the workmanship and quality we've put into the warhead section," said Herb Fouch, missile mechanic in Martin Marietta's warhead section.
Similar sentiments were heard in various places that had a hand in the missile's development - from Raytheon Co., the prime contractor, to research and development sites in New Jersey, Florida, Texas and New Mexico.
The early track record of the Patriot has also given rise to cautious approval by more impartial defense experts.
Kevin Page, of the non-profit watchdog group Project on Government Procurement, said there is reason to cheer but that with such a complex system, "to break out the champagne is really premature."
Lior Bregman, an analyst with Oppenheimer & Co. in New York, said the success of high technology weapons such as the Patriot will certainly boost the defense industry in the short term and may bring even longer term public and private backing for development.
"They've proved pretty good, but I don't think it's a 100 percent system," said Rupert Pengelley, editor of International Defense Review, part of the authoritative London-based Janes Group of publications on the defense industry.
But compared with Soviet anti-aircraft missiles that were 3 percent effective in the 1973 Arab-Israeli Yom Kippur War, "they are a great improvement," he said.
Patriot batteries were rushed to Israel last week after two volleys of Scuds were fired into that country. The shipment is believed to have helped persuade Israel to remain on the sidelines of the conflict for now.
Raytheon's stock rose $$4.50 per share on the New York Stock Exchange Monday to $$74.62 . Shares of other major defense contractors, such as McDonnell Douglas, Northrop, Martin Marietta and Thiokol, also rose sharply.
The missiles, which cost about $$500,000 each, carry high-explosive fragmentation warheads designed to knock down attacking aircraft and rockets. The 18-foot-tall, 16-inch-diameter missiles, which fly at slightly over 2,900 mph, have a range of just 37 to 50 miles.
The missiles are used in conjunction with radar equipment on the ground, which essentially asks incoming targets whether they are friend or foe.
"If it doesn't get the right response, it determines the target is hostile," said Robert Skelly, a spokesman for Lexington, Mass.-based Raytheon. "All this happens within a very few tenths of a second."
If the target is hostile, the Patriot is automatically fired, although it can be shot manually as well. Once aloft, the missile is guided to its target by the ground radar system.
Despite the seeming ease of its initial successes, the Patriot had an arduous journey to the battlefield. It was conceived more than 20 years ago as a surface-to-air missile system that could attack airplanes and enemy missiles.
The Pentagon quickly shifted directions and decided Patriot would be strictly an anti-aircraft system.
Development continued through the 1970s under Raytheon's leadership. At one point in the middle of the decade, senior defense officials said they were worried the missile system might not work because of its complex technology.
The project was briefly put on hold so the missile could be tested. It passed, and the project continued, said David Harris, spokesman for the Army Missile Command in Huntsville, Ala., which oversees development of the Patriot system.
Production started in 1980, but the missile system continued to encounter technical glitches. "It took some time to get the bugs out, but we did," Harris said.
Then in the mid-1980s, the project changed directions again. By modifying the missile's technology, Raytheon turned Patriot back into an anti-missile system that also had the ability to hit aircraft. During trials at the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico, the Patriot successfully intercepted 15 out of 15 test missiles, but officials had never seen how the system would hold up in combat until last week.
"We were very pleased," said Maj. Jeff Lovell at Fort Bliss, Texas, where soldiers are trained to operate the system. "It has surpassed our expectations."
Among other contributors to the project, the Picatinny Arsenal in New Jersey developed the systems warhead and arming device; Morton Thiokol Inc. at Huntsville makes the solid fuel motors; Raytheon's Andover plant manufactures the radar guidance system; and Texas Instruments in Dallas makes a computer component that is put into the tail of the missile.

 

End of Document
