

Perry's Around-the-World Trip Includes Some Laughs.
The Associated Press
October 22, 1994, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 832 words
Byline: By JOHN DIAMOND, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HONOLULU, Hawaii
Body




Defense Secretary William Perry rested here Saturday on the way home from a grueling around-the-world trip that took him from the Mideast to China, the Philippines, South Korea and Japan.
It began in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, where Perry arrived with a full agenda for talks with Saudi and Kuwaiti leaders on the latest Iraqi crisis. Perry wanted the Mideast allies to contribute to the cost of deploying U.S. forces in the region.
He planned to hold strategic discussions on how to counter the Iraqi threat. And he was set to ask the allies to allow more U.S. military hardware to be stored in the region.
But in a meeting with Saudi King Fahd, Perry found it sometimes can be hard to get a word in.
Fahd dominated the meeting with his assessment of the Mideast situation, Iraq's motives and the U.S.-Saudi alliance. On it went for nearly two hours. Then the King announced it was time for him to go wash his hands. When he returned he announced the meeting was over.
 
 Has Anyone Seen the Senators?
Perry's party arriving in Beijing got the U.S. embassy briefing package that is standard fare when presidents and cabinet members go overseas. This one included a warning: If the defense secretary gets into his limousine, you'd better be in your vehicle back in the motorcade and ready to go.
The Chinese, scrupulous followers of protocol, are serious about their motorcades. An ironclad rule is that once the principal gets in his car, the motorcade moves out, no matter what.
Sens. Sam Nunn, D-Ga., and John Warner, R-Va., found that out the hard way on the first full day of Perry's visit. The two senators traveled to China at Perry's invitation; relations with China are a dicey issue in Congress, where concern about the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre lingers.
The official party was staying at the exquisite Diaoyutai, a Chinese government guest house in Beijing that includes pagoda-style residences scattered among gardens, stone walkways, and ponds.
Nunn and Warner were up on time but had taken a stroll around the grounds when Perry emerged and jumped into the lead car in the motorcade for his 7:30 a.m. breakfast with Chinese Foreign Minister Quian Qichen.
Nunn, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee and Warner, the committee's second-ranking Republican, are used to getting VIP treatment. But when they returned to the driveway they found only a cloud of dust where the motorcade had been.
They were hastily, if belatedly, retrieved.
 
 Take the Bar, Men
Perry traveled to the Philippines for the 50th anniversary of the Leyte Gulf landings when U.S. and allied forces began the liberation of the islands from the Japanese.
Although the occasion was put on as a commemoration of a crucial battle in the Pacific theater during World War II, the re-enactment put on for Perry and other officials carried as much comedy as solemnity.
U.S. and Philippine military forces put on an elaborate show complete with a mock shelling of the beach. Charges set in the roped off sand packed a bit more punch than planners had intended. Veterans and islanders alike were showered with sand and other beach debris.
Hundreds of soldiers, dressed in authentic World War II uniforms, charged off their landing craft against a convincing background of very real Navy ships. But when they got up and charged inland, they ran headlong not into deadly Japanese pillboxes but the veranda-bar of the MacArthur Park Beach Resort hotel.
Then came the big moment, when an actor portraying Gen. Douglas MacArthur was to step off a landing craft, wade ashore and declare that, as promised, he had returned. The actor was the picture of the showy general; he stood on the ramp of the landing craft, chest thrust out, corncob pipe clenched in his teeth, aviator sunglasses looking dead ahead.
Then he stepped off the ramp.
From over the shoulders of a crowd packing the beach to watch the big moment, it looked like "MacArthur" had stepped into an elevator shaft. He simply disappeared from view. Peels of laughter rolled back over the crowd. And then a very wet American hero impersonator came back into view.
From the veranda, where patrons could sip beer while watching the battle unfold, it was clear the hotel was getting into the spirit. Matchbooks bore the message: "'I shall return!' For reservations, pls. call Leyte 323-3015."
 
 Where's the Pork
Not even defense secretaries get the VIP treatment from the United States Customs Service.
Perry arrived in Hawaii early Saturday with a Boeing 707 full of exhausted staffers and a freezer full of frozen pork. Customs officials duly boarded the aircraft and began their inspection, which included a tour of the galley.
There they found $ 400 worth of pork that had been purchased in the United States at the outset of the trip and frozen for the duration. It was to be served on the final leg back to Washington.
Nothing doing, Customs said. Because the crew of the Air Force jet couldn't prove the pork was made in the USA, Customs said it had to be thrown out. And it was.
 Load-Date: October 22, 1994

 

End of Document
