

Prosecutors Turn Their Attention To The Former President
The Associated Press
May 17, 1992, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 919 words
Byline: By PETE YOST, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Iran-Contra prosecutors are trying to persuade two key former Cabinet members to cooperate in investigating former President Reagan and a possible coverup of an arms shipments to Iran, sources close to the probe said Sunday.
But lawyers for former Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger and former Secretary of State George Shultz told prosecutors that their clients have no information suggesting a coverup involving Reagan or anyone else, said the sources, speaking on condition of anonymity.
The Washington Post reported Sunday that Weinberger has been told he might face felony charges in the scandal unless he provides evidence they believe he has against Reagan.
"I can't comment on that" report, said Mary Belcher, a spokeswoman for the office of independent counsel Lawrence Walsh, who has been investigating the scandal for the past 5 1/2 years.
A federal grand jury investigating Iran-Contra went out of business last week, but Walsh could go to any sitting grand jury if he decided to seek indictments.
Weinberger's lawyer, Robert Bennett, refused to say whether his client had been offered any kind of a deal in exchange for testimony against the former president. Seven people have pleaded guilty to lesser crimes in the Iran-Contra affair in order to avoid felony indictments.
"Mr. Weinberger will not plead guilty to anything because he is not guilty of anything," Bennett said. Lloyd Cutler, one of Shultz's lawyers, said through a secretary last week that he would have no comment on the matter. Shultz has said he is a subject in the investigation, meaning his actions fall within the scope of a grand jury probe.
Reagan's lawyer, Theodore Olson, said late last week that he has cooperated with various document requests from Walsh's office, but has not heard from Walsh's office recently.
The focus of the prosecutors' attention, according to the sources: who knew, and how much did they know, about the most legally troublesome of all the Iran arms shipments, a CIA-assisted delivery of 18 Hawk anti-aircraft missiles from Israel to Iran in November 1985.
Reagan has given several different accounts of how much he knew about the November 1985 Hawks shipment.
The sources say prosecutors have examined notes from key White House meetings attended by Reagan, then-Vice President Bush, Weinberger, Shultz and White House chief of staff Don Regan in late November 1986 when the public furor erupted over the secret Iran arms sales.
Prosecutors retrieved some of Weinberger's notes from the Library of Congress late last year and are using those in their investigation, the sources added.
"The prosecutors' theory is that in the midst of this political crisis, the Reagan White House decided to limit the political damage and conceal the most troubling aspects of the Iran arms deals," said one of the sources, who is outside the government.
The 1985 delivery of Hawk missiles was a huge problem for the Reagan administration because the shipment went forward without formal presidential authorization as called for under the Hughes-Ryan Amendment of the Foreign Assistance Act.
A document signed by Reagan which retroactively approved the shipment was destroyed by national security adviser John Poindexter in November 1986. It depicted the Iran initiative as a swap of arms for American hostages held in Lebanon, something Reagan had declared on national television that he would never do. Investigators later recovered drafts of the document.
One White House meeting that Iran-Contra prosecutors are focusing on, according to the sources is a meeting of the National Security Planning Group on Nov. 24, 1986. The participants were Reagan, Bush, Weinberger, Shultz, Regan, Attorney General Edwin Meese, CIA Director William Casey, Poindexter and retired CIA employee George Cave.
During the meeting, Poindexter implied that his predecessor, Robert McFarlane, was the only one with much information about the 1985 Hawks shipment, according to Meese's notes of the meeting.
In fact, as a congressional investigation found in 1987, the CIA assisted the shipment and White House aide Oliver North helped arrange it, keeping Poindexter informed of its progress. McFarlane testified that he had updated Reagan and Regan on the impending Hawks shipment. And McFarlane said he also informed Shultz of the impending arms-for-hostages swap.
McFarlane and Poindexter both have made grand jury appearances recently.
Poindexter told the participants at the NSPG meeting there was "no documentation" of the Hawks shipment. In fact, Poindexter just three days earlier had destroyed the presidential document that ratified the shipment.
The president told the Tower Board investigating the Iran-Contra affair on Jan. 16, 1987 that he did not remember how the Hawks shipment came about. He said he objected to it and that as a result, the missiles were returned to Israel.
In February 1987, the president and Regan told the Tower Board that they could not remember any meeting or conversation about the Hawks shipment.
Three years later, in a deposition for Poindexter's criminal trial, the ex-president said he could only "recall learning that there had been at some point a shipment of Hawk missiles by Israel to Iran."
Weinberger has testified that he didn't know until long after the Iran arms sales became public that the administration had been involved in shipping Hawk missiles from Israel to Iran in November 1985.
Shultz said he knew little about the Hawks shipment. Both he and Weinberger opposed the idea of selling arms to Iran.

 

End of Document
