

Questions and Answers on the Iraqi Offer, U.S. Rejection
The Associated Press
February 15, 1991, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 850 words
Byline: By MICHAEL PUTZEL, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Iraq's call for a cease-fire in the Gulf War offers an opening for diplomats to pursue an end to the fighting but includes conditions the United States and other coalition partners have insisted would be unacceptable.
In the midst of an unrepentant denunciation of its enemies, the Iraqi government nonetheless announced it had "decided to accept the U.N. Security Council Resolution No. 660" that first set out the world community's demand for Iraq's withdrawal from Kuwait.
The conditions attached to that decision, however, led to the proposal's outright rejection by President Bush. He called it a "cruel hoax" and suggested that Iraqis overthrow President Saddam Hussein in order to end the war.
The Iraqi proposal and the U.S.-led coalition's response raised many questions about the issues in dispute and the future of the conflict. Here are the answers to some of them.
Q. What are the coalition's stated terms for ending the war?
A. U.N. Resolution No. 660, the first of a dozen resolutions adopted by the United Nations Security Council following Iraq's invasion of Kuwait last Aug. 2, says the world body "demands that Iraq withdraw immediately and unconditionally all its forces to the positions in which they were located on Aug. 1, 1990," the day before they crossed the Kuwaiti border.
Q. What conditions did Iraq set?
A. The call for an immediate cease-fire demanded:
1. The embargo against Iraq must be ended.
2. The first step of an Iraqi withdrawal "must be coupled with the withdrawal of all U.S. and other forces" from the region within one month.
3. Any weapons supplied to Israel since Aug. 2, such as the Patriot antimissile missiles, also must be removed.
4. The Iraqi pullout from Kuwait "should be linked to an Israeli pullout from occupied Palestine (the West Bank and Gaza) and other Arab territories in the Syrian Golan Heights and Lebanon."
5. The al-Sabah family that ruled Kuwait before the Iraqi invasion must not determine the political future of the country.
6. All countries participating in the war against Iraq must rebuild what they destroyed at no cost to Iraq.
7. All Iraqi debts to those countries should be forgiven.
8. Postwar security should be arranged by the gulf countries themselves, including Iran, which has sought to play peacemaker in the war.
9. All outside forces must renounce any claim to military bases or intervention in the gulf region.
Q. Who made the Iraqi offer?
A. The Revolutionary Command Council, a five-member body that makes the most important decisions in Iraq. It is headed by President Saddam Hussein and includes Saddam's second in command, the country's armed forces chief, two deputy prime ministers and the foreign minister.
Q. How was the proposal presented?
A. The proposal was contained in a lengthy communique first read in Arabic by an announcer on Baghdad Radio and released by the official Iraqi News Agency.
Q. On what grounds did Bush reject it?
A. Bush said he and the United States' coalition partners agreed "there is nothing new here, with the possible exception of recognizing for the first time that Iraq must leave Kuwait."
"There are new demands added," he said of the proposal and reiterated his demand that Iraq "must withdraw without condition." Bush cited U.N. Resolution 678, the last in the series, which authorized the use of force against Iraq, but all make the same demand for unconditional withdrawal.
Q. What conditions did Bush set for a cease-fire?
A. Bush said the U.S.-led offensive against Iraq would continue "until a massive withdrawal begins, with those Iraqi troops visibly leaving Kuwait."
"Another way for the bloodshed to stop," he said, would be for the Iraqi military and people to "take matters into their own hands," force Saddam out and then comply with the U.N. resolutions.
Q. Did Bush change the terms for ending the war?
A. The president has said in the past that Saddam was not a target of U.S. forces and that the coalition's only goal was the departure of his troops from Kuwait. Bush's suggestion on Friday, however, implied the United States would support an effort to depose the Iraqi leader.
Q. What prompted Iraq's announcement?
A. U.S. officials say the month-long allied bombardment of Iraq and occupied Kuwait intensified in recent days and that new tactics had proven dramatically more effective in knocking out Iraqi tanks and other ground forces. An allied ground offensive aimed at driving dug-in Iraqi forces out of Kuwait is regarded as imminent.
The Iraqi communique said its proposal was made partly "in appreciation of the Soviet initiative that was carried by the envoy of the Soviet leadership." Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev is conducting a diplomatic offensive to end the war. His personal emissary, Yevgeni Primakov, traveled to Baghdad to meet Saddam on Wednesday and returned to Moscow saying he saw "rays of light that enable us to think more optimistically."
Gorbachev then met with Kuwait's foreign minister and planned talks Friday with Iran's foreign minister, Ali Akbar Velayati, before the scheduled arrival in Moscow on Sunday of Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz.

 

End of Document
