

Rabbi of The Wall Resigns Over Ceremony For Unruly Teen-agers
The Associated Press
August 5, 1991, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 616 words
Byline: By KARIN LAUB, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




The rabbi in charge of the Western Wall said Monday he stands by a decision to resign rather than allow informally dressed teen-agers to defile Judaism's holiest site.
The furor revived a long-running battle between observant Jews who view the Wall, also known as the Wailing Wall, as a strictly religious site and secular Israelis who believe it is a national symbol open to all.
At issue are plans by Gadna, the army's voluntary training program for high school students, to again hold its closing ceremony for summer campers at the Wall after a controversy last year.
At the time, some Gadna graduates showed up at the Wall wearing cutoff shorts and short-sleeved shirts, and some boys and girls were holding hands or hugging.
Observant Jews wear modest dress, and public display of affection is strictly forbidden, especially at the Wall, the last remnant of the Jewish Temple destroyed by the Romans in 70 A.D.
Rabbi Yehuda Meir Getz, the spiritual guardian of the Wall, resigned last week after the army reportedly said it would go ahead with the ceremony despite his protests.
"As long as I can guard the holiness of the Western Wall, I can function. Since I could not, I resigned. I raised my hands," Getz said in a telephone interview Monday.
He said he was so embarrassed by last year's ceremony that he did not want to discuss specifics. "Their behavior was not good. In Gadna, there is no discipline," he said.
He said he stood by his resignation even though Religious Affairs Minister Avner Shaki did not accept it.
In an attempt at compromise, Shaki met Monday with Israel's two chief rabbis and a Gadna representative and agreed the ceremony would be held at the Wall on Aug. 14.
The compromise was that the youths wear modest dress, that young men and women be kept separate and that the ceremony be brief and "in keeping with the holiness of the site," said Yonathan Ben-Ari, Religious Affairs Ministry spokesman.
The army noted that the ceremony would be held outside the area where religious Jews pray at the base of the Wall.
The dispute has drawn stinging comments from secular Israelis, who argue that the Wall is also theirs as a symbol of the rebirth of Israel as a modern state.
Yossi Sarid, a legislator of the Citzens' Rights Movement, accused the army of giving in to religious coercion by accepting the compromise.
The Gadna graduates should not participate in the ceremony "following the shameful conditions dictated by authoritarian rabbis which goes against all that has been accepted over the years," Sarid said in a statement.
Others noted that if Israeli paratroopers had not captured the Wall from Jordan in the 1967 Middle East war, Orthodox Jews could not pray there today.
Amnon Dankner, a columnist for the Hadashot daily, wrote a stinging satire about the imaginary capture of the Wall by students at religious seminaries, or yeshivas, many of whom never serve in the army.
"I don't believe the gall of the Gadna commander to demand permission to have an orgy at the Western Wall. … We still remember the magnificent breakthrough of the yeshiva boys who stormed the positions of the (Arab) legionnaires," Dankner wrote.
But Getz, 67, who said he lost a son in the battle for the Wall, called the attacks unfair.
"I'm a super-Zionist," he said. He noted that he permitted many army ceremonies to take place at the Wall every year, including the annual swearing-in for new paratroopers.
Getz, who has been rabbi of the Wall since its capture in 1967, was described by the Jerusalem Post as a man who rises each day before dawn to study ancient Jewish texts.
Asked what the Wall meant to him, Getz said: "What are the eyes and the heart to a man? There are things one cannot suffer."

 

End of Document
