

Reassuring to the Republic, But Painful to the Participants
The Associated Press
November 17, 1992, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 570 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




That was then, and this is now.
And the White House, where George Bush is greeting Bill Clinton today, is not the Waffle House, as Bush always said it wasn't.
Still, when the president of the United States arranged to get together with the next president, you can assume Bush didn't plan to shake Clinton's hand and say "Hello, Bozo." Or ask him to play his "taxophone."
Surely, he wouldn't say, "Governor Taxes, I presume" or ask after "the Ozone man."
Good thing these gents are no longer in what Bush used to call "campaign mode."
Talk about averted eyes. They have a year of escalating nastiness to live down. As long ago as the Republican convention in August, Bush was talking about his rival this way: "Slippery when wet."
Clinton, when he was ahead in the polls, engaged in less name-calling.
He never quite called his opponent a liar, but he danced close.
He said Bush was "just like Pinocchio." He said he was "incapable of telling the truth."
On Oct. 31, three days before the election, Bush said that if Clinton won, "every day is going to be Halloween - fright and terror."
Next day he said Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein was planning a "party for 500,000 people in downtown Baghdad" if Clinton won.
Bush wasn't so far off target. When Iraqis learned that the man who had humiliated their army during the Persian Gulf War had been defeated, they danced in the streets and prepared sheep for feasts. Saddam, on a rooftop, fired his pistol into the air in celebration.
The sad fact is these ceremonial meetings of victor and vanquished, while reassuring to the republic, can be painful to the participants.
Before their first formal meeting, Dwight D. Eisenhower derided the incoming John F. Kennedy as a "young whippersnapper" but afterward they walked arm-in-arm into the Cabinet room.
Jimmy Carter prepared meticulously for his first meeting with successor Ronald Reagan. But his vice president, Walter Mondale, said, "It all went over Reagan's head and Carter really was shaken by it."
Harry S. Truman's turnover meeting with his successor, Eisenhower, was a chilly affair.
"I had the feeling," Truman wrote later, "that, up to this meeting in the White House, General Eisenhower had not grasped the immense job ahead of him."
But for absolute frigidity nothing matched pre-inaugural relations in the Depression winter of 1933 between Herbert Hoover and his successor, Franklin D. Roosevelt.
Presidents were sworn in on March 4 in those days. It had been a long five months since the election. Banks collapsed and the country was panicking. Roosevelt refused to act in league with Hoover on anything.
Too exhausted and embittered to have Roosevelt over for the traditional pre-inaugural dinner, Hoover had him to 4 o'clock tea. He again pleaded for a bipartisan statement. Roosevelt demurred.
Preparing to go, Roosevelt bent to adjust his leg braces. "Mr. President," he said, "I know it is customary to do so, but you don't have to return our call if you don't want to."
"Hoover strode across the room and loomed above him menacingly," wrote historian William Manchester. "In his most cutting voice he said, 'Mr. Roosevelt, when you have been in Washington as long as I have, you will learn that the president of the United States calls on nobody!"'
Son Jimmy Roosevelt had never seen his father so angry. Before Roosevelt could speak, his wife, Eleanor, jumped up and said quickly, "It's been very pleasant, but we must go now."

 

End of Document
