

Reform Fever Gone, Soviets Fear the Chill
The Associated Press
February 5, 1991, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 929 words
Byline: By MARK J. PORUBCANSKY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




In one joke making the rounds in Moscow, a small ad appears in a local newspaper: "Will exchange Nobel Prize for Stalin Prize."
The joke, steeped like most Soviet humor in irony and Slavic melancholy, captures the country's gloom as the sixth year of perestroika draws to a close.
The last flickering image of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev as the "Soviet savior" may have died Jan. 13 along with defenders of the Lithuanian TV tower.
A president who won the Nobel Peace Prize in October and has been praised for his democratic instincts now rules largely by decree. One hand acts with increasing firmness to hold the country's 15 republics together. The other hand still shakes when it touches the levers of the economy.
The joke builds a multi-level bridge tying Gorbachev the would-be liberator to the dictator Stalin.
In the past four years, even as the economy worsened, there was hope Gorbachev understood and would solve everything. That hope is gone.
"The people are tired of hunger and injustice," said Nina Lastovskaya, a journalist who joined 300,000 others at a Moscow rally. "The president only promises."
"The people are afraid of dictatorship," she added.
"Perestroika is over," declared a middle-age Dmitri Seshko.
Soviet friends seem physically frail and vulnerable.
Statistics indicate deaths have increased and births decreased in the Soviet Union. The consumer economy consists largely of barter and rationing. Media that burst open with the joyful noise of glasnost are fighting new restrictions.
About 400,000 people emigrated last year and millions more have at least contemplated it.
Meanwhile, Gorbachev may have squandered his chance to create a market economy, lost reform-minded Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze and top economic advisers, fudged his reaction to the Baltic bloodshed, confiscated one-third of the money supply and broadened the power of the military and KGB in what is called a bid to control crime.
Gorbachev prodigiously built compromises and coalitions between conservatives and reformers. He has won battle after battle in the Kremlin while the war to remake the country outside passed him by.
Now he is isolated and mistrusted by both sides.
As recently as July, pressed by resurgent hard-liners, he managed to guide the Communist Party Congress down a center path.
He retired Yegor K. Ligachev, his chief hard-line critic. Reformers like Shevardnadze and Alexander Yakovlev left their Politburo jobs for top spots in the government.
Gorbachev seemed to be trying to establish the dominance of the government over the Communist Party. At same time he promoted obedient party bureaucrats.
But Shevardnadze left the government and Yakovlev's status is unclear. So it seems hard-liners and loyal bureaucrats are taking over the government as well as the party.
Boris Pugo, a former KGB official, and Boris Gromov, the former Soviet commander in Afghanistan, run the police. New Prime Minister Valentin Pavlov was finance minister last year when the government printed 50 percent more rubles to cover budget deficits.
Reform-minded Moscow historian Yuri Afanasiev long was one of Gorbachev's most eager supporters. But a week after the bloodshed in Vilnius, he was leading the largest protest in a year in central Moscow in a chant of "Resign! Resign!"
This time the target was not Communist Party conservatives, but Gorbachev himself.
Boris N. Yeltsin warned in a message that citizens could not win a better diet and domestic peace by surrendering to dictatorship.
Despite Gorbachev's recent actions, hard-liners are equally suspicious.
Viktor Alksnis, a pro-Moscow Latvian, claims Gorbachev reneged on promises to impose presidential rule in his Baltic republic after a clash between Soviet and Latvian Interior forces left four people dead.
For all Gorbachev's unpopularity, there appears to be no clear alternative.
Yeltsin, Gorbachev's toughest rival, vigorously protested the Baltic crackdown, but is politically weak. He could not push a resolution condemning it through his own Russian Federation parliament.
Establishment of joint army and Interior Ministry patrols throughout the country in effect told Yeltsin the Soviet military would take final responsibility for law and order in Russia.
The country also seems to be nearly devoid of a governing ideology.
Communist Party membership has fallen. A truthful accounting of history appears to have dealt a fatal blow to Lenin's legacy. Some Russians openly honor the last Romanov, Nicholas II.
But the opposition, as in the time of Nicholas, is badly splintered and cannot agree on common approaches.
The hard-line military men now surrounding Gorbachev act much like the orthodox Communists who seized the Baltics and Eastern Europe in the 1940s.
In the Baltics, they say they are out to protect the average working man, who often is Russian or Ukrainian rather than Lithuanian, Latvian or Estonian.
But it is their muscle that makes people pay attention. And the new policy promises only tinkering with the country's fundamental economic problems.
Faced with this gloomy picture, Soviets must decide whether to hunker down as they have so often in the past, or whether they will fight back through the hundreds of small openings Gorbachev created in business, politics and the media.
The question yet to be answered is whether perestroika fundamentally changed Soviet people, who will insist on creating new lives for themselves and in the process change society from below.
Gorbachev long has said that would be the measure of his success. But his words, and policies, may now end up haunting him.

 

End of Document
