

Rushdie Welcomed at the Capitol, But Not the White House
The Associated Press
March 25, 1992, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 511 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Senators showed their support Wednesday for beleaguered writer Salman Rushdie, who lives under an Iranian death threat, but the Bush administration sought to keep its distance from him.
While members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee lunched with Rushdie to support his freedom to write without fear, White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater pictured him as just another writer "doing interviews and book tours and things that authors do."
He said President Bush would not meet with him during his visit to America.
And State Department spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler said no high-level meeting would occur because any such session "could and possibly might be misinterpreted."
Pressed to elaborate, she would not.
"It's a private matter, we will not be meeting with this gentleman," she said.
But the United States "has repeatedly and publicly condemned the death threat against Salman Rushdie" and that policy has not changed, she said.
The Iranians have offered $ 1 million to anyone who kills Rushdie. The bounty was decreed more than three years ago by the late Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini following publication of Rushdie's novel, "The Satanic Verses." The ayatollah called it the book a blasphemy against Islam.
Subsequently, the Japanese interpreter of the book was killed and the Italian translator wounded.
Rushdie has been living in hiding, emerging only occasionally, always under extraordinary security. Police stopped traffic when he arrived at the Capitol. Dogs sniffed for explosives.
Rushdie himself had suggested the United States and Britain were backing away from their support of his cause, perhaps to improve relations with Iran.
During a speech Tuesday night, he said a meeting with leaders of the House and Senate had been canceled abruptly "and I have not been given any convincing reasons."
"I appeal to the American government to show itself, to be the true friend of liberty," he said.
Following that, senators quickly invited him to lunch. They said the administration had not tried to block the contact.
"We can't conduct foreign policy," said Sen. Patrick J. Leahy, D-Vt., 'but we can stand up for our own Constitution."
Said Rushdie: "Being here itself is an achievement. The simple fact is that I need all the help I can get."
But at the White House Rushdie's visit was portrayed as a purely private matter.
"There's no reason for any special relationship with Rushdie," Fitzwater said. "I mean, he's an author, he's here, he's doing interviews and book tours and things that authors do. … He doesn't write about government policies."
Fitzwater denied his words were part of a U.S. diplomatic strategy to nurture improved relations with Iran.
As for Rushdie's plight, Fitzwater said, "He certainly has every right to freedom of expression and we would not do anything to stand in his way." He said Bush had denounced the death threat as "the most vile kind of terrorism."
Bush on Feb. 21, 1989, said: "However offensive that book may be, inciting murder and offering rewards for its perpetration are deeply offensive to the norms of civilized behavior."

 

End of Document
