

Scenes From the Front
The Associated Press
January 21, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1266 words
Dateline: WITH U.S. MARINES IN SAUDI ARABIA
Body




Marines who have engaged Iraqi troops in sporadic skirmishes just over the Saudi-Kuwait border say the Iraqis are restraining their return fire and instead concealing their weapons.
The relatively passive reaction has surprised many Marine helicopter pilots, who say they are worried because their low-flying Cobra gunships are vulnerable to surface-to-air missiles and anti-aircraft cannons known to be possessed by the southernmost Iraqi troops.
"We expected to see a lot more," Capt. Doug Griffith, 27, of San Antonio, said Sunday. "We're ready for them, but they're just not coming."
The Marines have been concentrating their fire on Iraqi spotter positions near the border, trying to knock out troops the Marines believe are directing Iraqi artillery fire at the Marines.
Capt. Travis Allen said some targeted Iraqi positions are in residential areas, raising concerns among the pilots that Kuwaiti civilians may be in harm's way as well.
"We're trying to liberate the country," said Allen, a 32-year-old Texan. "We don't want to kill the inhabitants."
Assisting the Marines at times are Air Force A-10 "Warthogs," which swoop in low to fire armor-piercing shells at Iraqi tanks, artillery and short-range rocket launchers.
Several Marines in the group told members of a media pool that seven Iraqis had defected and surrendered to a Marine company, but Col. Ron Richard said there have been no confirmed defections.
At another Marines encampment in the northeastern Saudi desert, officers said hundreds of Marine helicopters, including more Cobra gunships, plan to move to a new base within 25 miles of the Kuwaiti border, joining allied forces moving north to prepare for an eventual ground war with Iraqi forces.
"We would move men at the earliest later in the week," said Lt. Col. Mike Aguilar. "We are establishing a forward position in anticipation of the ground war."
Asked about the coming move, Col. Lonnie Howerton, 42, of Enid, Okla., had this to say: "I'd rather operate out of Jaber airfield in Kuwait."
---
WITH THE 1ST INFANTRY DIVISION (AP) - Unshaven and a little distracted with the responsibility of preparing a 4,000-member brigade for combat, Col. Lon Maggart says "I don't have a clue" when the unit will be asked to fight.
"When they tell us to go, we'll go," Maggart says as clouds of gunpowder smoke from M1-A1 tanks calibrating their cannons washes across the desert. An occasional streak of flame and an ear-splitting crack announce each shot.
All through the night, the tanks and self-propelled artillery in this division fire their cannons, attempting to compress the time it takes to be combat-ready.
Staff Sgt. Steven Smith, of Columbus, Ohio, says he doesn't have time to worry about going into combat.
"We've made peace with our people before we came," says Smith. "My wife knows there is a chance I won't be coming home. Once we left the port (in Saudi Arabia) it was too late to worry about being waxed. It was time to do the things that make sure you don't get waxed."
Units of the 1st Infantry Division continue to arrive hourly. When they get to Saudi Arabia, it takes at least a couple of days before they are combat-ready, officers say.
---
AN AIR BASE IN SAUDI ARABIA (AP) - The pilots of F-117A stealth bombers talk about the adrenaline, how it obliterates the fear they feel when they first enter Iraqi airspace and see the anti-aircraft salvos from the ground.
"The only way I can describe it is if you turn a room into the world's biggest popcorn popper and, you know, just popcorn going over all over the place, and try to walk from one end to the other without getting hit by a piece of popcorn. That's really what it was like," said Greg, 39, of Roseville, Michigan.
"You just have to think … 'they're not going to hit me' and keep on going," he said. He would not give his last name for security reasons.
---
ABOARD THE USS JOHN F. KENNEDY (AP) - A U.S. Navy submarine and Navy pilots have registered two wartime "firsts" - first firing of a sub-launched cruise missile and first use of a "standoff" missile by an aircraft.
Rear Adm. Riley D. Mixson, commander of the Red Sea battle force, told reporters aboard his flagship that the first use of a Standoff Land Attack Missile came during an air raid against a major industrial target in western Iraq.
Bombers from the carriers Kennedy and Saratoga were the first to be armed with SLAMs. Mixson said that the first two fired hit "a very important target. I would classify it as a well-defended industrial-type activity."
He would not describe it further, but said the missile could be used against facilities in Iraq linked to producing nuclear, biological and chemical weapons - a major goal of the U.S.-led attacks against Iraq.
Mixson, speaking to reporters Saturday, would not provide the details of the firing of the sub-launched cruise missile or give the submarine's location, but he noted that more than 40 had been fired by the U.S. Navy from the Red Sea since the start of the conflict.
Cruise missiles - actually pilotless, low-flying jets - can be fired from battleships, cruisers and submarines.
American naval units have plucked 11 more Iraqis from rubber rafts in the Persian Gulf, bringing to 23 the number captured since an assault on Iraqi oil rigs converted to anti-aircraft gun platforms, U.S. officials say.
Lt. Col. Greg Pepin, a spokesman for the U.S. Central Command, also confirmed Sunday that five Iraqis were killed in the Friday's attack. Twelve Iraqis who fled the attack and were fished out of the gulf earlier were the first prisoners of war to be taken by U.S. forces.
All but five of the 23 POWs - four of whom had wounds - were turned over to a U.S. Marine Corps holding facility, Pepin said. They will be transferred to more permanent quarters, he said.
It was unclear why the five were not turned over to the holding facility.
Iraq's navy consists of a handful of small patrol craft, some equipped with missiles. A few larger ships sat out the eight-year war with Iran in Italy, where they still sit. Pepin said the Navy was "actively seeking" Iraqi naval craft in the gulf and would attack and destroy any it encountered.
The assault climaxed a series of lesser clashes in gulf waters south of Iraq since Thursday, when the multinational force attack on Iraq began with air strikes on Baghdad and other targets in Iraq and occupied Kuwait.
On that day, the Navy said, U.S. aircraft bombed and sank one Iraqi patrol boat and left another sinking and on fire.
The next day, U.S. planes used Rockeye cluster bombs on an oil rig service boat that fired on them in waters near the Kuwait-owned Dorra oilfield, 65 miles east of Kuwait and 100 miles south of Iraq.
---
WITH THE 82ND AIRBORNE DIVISION, SAUDI ARABIA (AP) - In a far corner of this camp, Sgt. Rick Gonzales, 24, of San Antonio was writing letters on a makeshift desk made from Meals Ready to Eat ration boxes.
He sat among the sand and the flies from the nearby latrines, one of the compound's few isolated spots.
"I wrote a letter to my ex-wife telling her I really did love her even if it didn't work out," Gonzales said. "I wrote a letter to my 4-year-old son explaining what war is. I wanted him to know I tried to give him some insight if I don't make it back for some crazy reason."
Gonzales is a senior medic attached to Bravo Company, 2nd Battalion, 325th Infantry Regiment.
I don't want to see these guys get chewed up. I know these guys. I live with them. Undoubtedly, we will take some casualties. I'm hoping they're not that bad," Gonzales said.
"This ain't like the movies. They're going to get shot, maimed, have holes in them."

 

End of Document
