

Seven Nations' Views From the Summit
The Associated Press
July 17, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1154 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body




At the conclusion of the Group of Seven summit Wednesday, leaders of the seven nations and the European Community gave prominence to these issues:
 
 UNITED STATES
President Bush came to the meeting hoping for the leaders to maintain a united front on dealing with the post-summit guest, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, and to nail down the nuclear-reduction treaty in a separate meeting with the Soviet president. He also wanted the group to keep the heat on Saddam Hussein and to renew pressure on the European allies and Japan to lower their agricultural trade barriers.
The leaders seemed reconciled to Bush's pre-summit admonition that "this is not blank-check time" but that the Soviets should be helped with technical assistance and in other ways. And Bush got what he wanted in agreement on a treaty to be signed at the Moscow summit in two weeks.
The summit's political communique promised to keep sanctions on Iraq until it complies with all United Nations resolutions, and appealed for free elections. Bush said he had strong support for the use of military force if necessary to ensure that Iraq discloses and destroys its entire nuclear weapons capacity.
The Group of Seven also backed the U.S. formula for bringing Israel and the Arab states to the peace table, along with simultaneous negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians.
The administration achieved its goal of establishing a new end-of-the-year deadline for completing ambitious talks to overhaul the global trading system, but in spite of personal commitments from the other summit leaders the final communique broke no new ground in narrowing the differences that have left the negotiations stalled since last December.
 
 BRITAIN
Prime Minister John Major said the leaders could hold an emergency summit if the Uruguay Round, the 108-nation trade negotiations, threatened to collapse for a second time.
But, he said, "I do not believe that will be necessary because of the personal commitment."
Reminded the leaders made a similar pledge at their summit last year, Major said, "I can only hope you will accept our bona fides and I hope by Jan. 1 next year I can say to you, 'We delivered."'
"There was an acknowledgement that this may mean for many individual countries painful decisions they would prefer to avoid," he added.
The talks, sponsored by the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, broke down last December after the European Community and the United States failed to settle a dispute over farm subsidies.
Pointing to the summit call for a United Nations-supervised arms sales register, Major said the leaders had moved to ensure "that a country like Iraq can never again build up such a huge and a deadly arsenal."
He said the summit leaders also "renewed our firm commitment" to reforms in East Block countries.
 
 CANADA
Prime Minister Brian Mulroney said his country was willing to offer Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev "practical initiatives" to help his ailing economy.
"If the right climate is created (in the Soviet Union) and structures are put in place, then foreign investment will follow," he said.
He said the summit declaration included Canada's ideas on setting up an arms sales registry at the United Nations, strengthening the United Nations and protecting forests and the marine environment.
He expressed optimism about a successful completion of the Uruguay Round trade negotiations.
Some G-7 countries, he said, would have to agree to painful reductions in farm subsidies. "So somebody's got to bite some bullets on this."
If the talks were not completed by year's end, he said, "We'd lose the round."
"Next year is an election year in the United States, a tough time for any country," he said.
 
 EUROPEAN COMMUNITY
Dutch Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers - his country holds the community's rotating presidency - said there should not be too much skepticism about completion of the GATT talks.
"We realize we made a similar promise a year ago. … There are new factors," he said, citing the community's recent proposal to overhaul its farm program.
"Everybody has to show flexibility, including the United States," he said. The Americans have demanded steep cuts in the community's payments to farmers.
 
 FRANCE
President Francois Mitterrand stressed that the Western nations "must, really must, reach out" to the Soviet Union to support its political and economic reforms.
It is better, he said, to risk doing too much than not doing enough.
"In view of what Mr. Gorbachev has achieved, he is worthy of some consideration," he said.
He said "it would be a very good thing" for the Soviet Union to one day join the Group of Seven - but not yet. "For the moment, the structure is not sufficiently stable."
Mitterrand also expressed concern that disparities "between the rich and poor and the north and south represent a danger which is perhaps greater than that of the atom bomb."
 
 GERMANY
Chancellor Helmut Kohl said Gorbachev's visit to the summit meeting was "important in itself."
"His mere presence in London suggests … he will be a guest on other occasions in the future," the German said.
Kohl, a champion of the Soviet president, said, "It's inordinately urgent to give Western support to the Soviet Union."
He noted the superpower was Germany's most powerful Eastern neighbor and said, "Peaceful developments (there) are in the interests of everybody in Europe."
He appealed to other nations to share the burden of providing financial assistance to the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.
"We are not in a position to continue assuming the degree of financial responsibility we have shouldered heretofore ad infinitum," he said.
 
 ITALY
Italian Premier Giulio Andreotti welcomed what he said was the group's "total reversal" in its attitude toward the Soviet Union.
He said Italy went along with the others and supported associate membership for Moscow in the International Monetary Fund. But he said his nation would continue to press for full membership.
"We continue to believe our approach is valid,"he said.
Andreotti said the increasing level of international cooperation will prove beneficial on the environmental front and in fighting drug trafficking.
"We must get used to the fact that good and bad are evermore without frontiers," he said.
 
 JAPAN
Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu said the Western nations want to help Gorbachev succeed in his political and economic reforms.
But he said the Group of Seven agreed the ailing superpower cannot absorb large amounts of financial aid. The nations, though, were willing to give the Soviets technical assistance.
Japan, he said, would be willing to give hefty assistance to the Soviets once Moscow showed it has made comprehensive reforms.
Earlier, Kaifu met privately with Gorbachev and called for a quick resolution of a territorial dispute between the two. Japan claims four islands the Soviets hold north of Japan.
Tokyo has said it won't give significant financial help to the Kremlin until the dispute is settled.

 

End of Document
