

Some Things Change, Some Stay the Same: Still the Summit
The Associated Press
May 6, 1995, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 829 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




It's still the summit, although the altitude isn't the same as when there were two superpowers. And bargaining with Moscow seems as difficult.
So President Clinton's journey to celebrate with the Russians on the 50th anniversary of allied victory in World War II may prove more ceremonial than substantive on such differences as nuclear reactor sales to Iran, the fighting in Chechnya and the eastward expansion of NATO.
When there was a Cold War on, even ceremony was enough to make a summit a success. A walkout, or a stalemate, touched nuclear nerves. But summitry usually was reassuring. At least East and West were talking, and not at the nuclear brink.
"In the bad old days, every issue became a crisis that might lead to nuclear confrontation," Secretary of State Warren Christopher said. In the new era, he said, there can be a pragmatic, long-running effort to manage differences.
"If one is to judge the summit, I certainly wouldn't judge it as a box score," he said. "This is a long term engagement. … I wouldn't expect any tremendous breakthroughs."
But it may take more than that to convince diplomatic skeptics and conservative Republicans that this trip was necessary. It had been debated for months, in and out of the administration. At one point, Christopher himself had said it was unlikely the president would go, largely because of Russia's war on secessionist forces in Chechnya.
Christopher now describes the summit as an opportunity to manage differences constructively, and to salute the Russian people for their sacrifices in World War II.
Republicans, notably Sen. Bob Dole, the majority leader and frontrunning candidate to challenge Clinton next year, have complained that his policies are too cordial toward Moscow. Dole called it "misguided devotion to a Russia first policy," tied too closely to President Boris Yeltsin.
The administration argues that engagement is in America's best interests. The Soviet Union has splintered, but Russia remains a nuclear power, and U.S. policy is aimed at the control and dismantling of leftover weapons, no longer targeted as in the Cold War era, but still a potential menace.
Without contacts like this one, Russian isolationism, a historic habit, might rise again, in place of economic and democratic political reform efforts.
But engagement hasn't eclipsed differences. There are direct policy conflicts between Clinton and Yeltsin, and scant prospect of more than token steps to deal with them when they meet at the Kremlin on Wednesday.
First, on Tuesday, Clinton joins the leaders of more than 50 other nations to celebrate Victory Day, the Russian holiday marking the surrender of Nazi Germany that ended World War II in Europe.
Even that had to be negotiated so that Clinton wouldn't be at an old-style Red Square military parade, with missiles and the weapons of war in Chechnya. It is to emphasize veterans of the allied war, not weapons of conflicts since.
Parades are easy. Policy isn't.
That's certainly so on the Iran nuclear deal. Clinton promised to be quite aggressive in pressing Yeltsin to cancel it. Russian officials have insisted that they will not drop the sale of nuclear power plants to Iran, although they may back off a planned deal for equipment that might be used to convert byproducts into weapons-grade material.
Christopher and Secretary of Defense William Perry both said at a White House session with columnists on Thursday that they doubt the top echelons of Russian government, including Yeltsin, are fully aware of the weapons potential in the Iran deal.
Christopher said the Iranians have no need for nuclear power for civilian purposes, and clearly want the plants as a step toward building nuclear weapons. He said Yeltsin is being provided U.S. intelligence data that demonstrates that point.
"It's not in their self-interest to have a nuclear-capable Iran on their border," he said. Christopher also said that if the deal proceeds, it would interefere with peaceful nuclear cooperation with the United States, which will have greater long-term economic benefit for Russia than the planned sales to Iran.
On the Russian side, there's unyielding opposition to the expansion of NATO, the Cold War western alliance, in eastern Europe. Yeltsin said in an interview with Time magazine that he and Clinton had discussed that at length by telephone, and were moving closer to a solution.
He also said some people are trying to drive a wedge between the two nations, but that it won't work. "To be quite frank, when the Democrats lost the elections it made life more difficult for President Clinton," Yeltsin said.
Yeltsin has his own problems on the right as well.
So if the diplomatic conversation stalls, there's always politics. Clinton is running for re-election in 1996. There's a Russian presidential election next year, too.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.
 Load-Date: May 6, 1995

 

End of Document
