

Stamps In The News: "Great Americans" Series Honors Dr. Alice Hamilton
 The Associated Press
August 25, 1995, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Length: 544 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH: For AP Special Features
Body




Dr. Alice Hamilton made a significant impact in the fields of industrial medicine, protection of working women and promotion of child labor laws. She now has made an impact on U.S. stamps.
A new 55-cent definitive stamp has been issued by the U.S. Postal Service to honor Dr. Hamilton whose pioneering work contributed to the passage of early workmen's compensation laws.
The newest addition to the USPS "Great Americans" series is primarily intended for 2-ounce first-class mail. The design depicts a portrait of Dr. Hamilton. At the left vertically is her name "Alice Hamilton, MD." At the right margin is "Social Reformer." "USA 55" appears beneath the photo.
Dr. Hamilton's heroic efforts during the 1910s and 1920s in the field of industrial medicine exposed many occupational hazards in the workplace. She was the first woman appointed to Harvard's faculty as assistant professor of industrial medicine, a position she held from 1919 to 1935.
First-day covers postmarked with the official "First Day of Issue" cancellations may be purchased from the Philatelic Fulfillment Service Center, U.S. Postal Service, P.O. Box 419636, Kansas City, Mo. 64179-0996. Or you may phone (800) STAMP-24.
---
V-E Day Honored
The Isle of Man, a tiny island in the middle of the Irish Sea, is proud of its heroic efforts during World War II. Elements of the Manx Regiment fought in North Africa, the Middle East, the Normandy invasion and subsequent battles in Europe, plus service in Burma.
To honor V-E Day, the Isle of Man Post Office issued four new stamps illustrating the medals won, the battles fought and V-E Day celebrations.
The 10 pence features the 1939-1945 Star medal at the left and the France and Germany Star at the right. The 20 pence depicts the Air Crew Europe Star at left and the Pacific Star for Burma at right.
The 24 pence portrays the cheering crowds which gathered in London to celebrate V-E Day. The 40 p pictures similar scenes of rejoicing on the Isle of Man at left while King George VI and Queen Elizabeth are shown at a presentation on the island during their first visit following V-E Day in 1945 in the right portion of the stamp.
The Isle of Man stamps are available at your local dealer.
---
Dinosaurs Featured
Dinosaurs continue to be popular on the stamps of the world.
The East African nation of Uganda recently issued a set of six individual stamps depicting different dinosaurs that once roamed the Earth. Simultaneously, Uganda released a sheetlet of 12 different vertical stamps to form a unified design image of the prehistoric animals that fascinate millions today.
Some of the familiar creatures seen on the stamps are stegosaurus, the pteranodon, the brachiosaurus, the allosaurus, the tyrannosaur, the giant dragonfly and the triceratops.
The former Soviet republic of Georgia, now issuing its own stamps, also has joined the dinosaur philatelic parade. Recently released was a sheetlet of nine different stamps combined to form a unified image of the prehistoric dinosaurs.
Featured on the Georgia stamps are the pterodactylus, the rhamphorhynchus, the pteranodon, the spinosaurus, the tyrannosaurus, the velociraptor, the monoclonius, the ornithomimus and the mastodon.
The stamps of Uganda and Georgia are available at your local stamp dealer.
 Load-Date: August 25, 1995

 

End of Document
