

Stamps in the News: Israel Stamps Hail Fighting Heroes From Past
The Associated Press
May 8, 1992, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 727 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body



For AP Special Features
Heroes from biblical times to recent years are honored on new stamps from Israel. Receiving philatelic tribute are the Samaritans of ancient days, the Palmah units who fought during World War II as well as Israel's War of Independence, and a pair of women freedom fighters.
The Samaritans are an ancient sect who have been called "the heirs of the 10 Lost Tribes." Some of their descendents still live in Israel. The ancient Samaritans period overlaps the period of the old Kingdom of Judea. Their religion is based on Judaism, and they observe most of the Hebrew holidays and festivals. The new stamp depicts Samaritans praying on Mount Gerizian.
The Palmah formed the striking units of the Hagannah. During World War II they fought alongside Allied forces against the Axis powers. When the War for Independence broke out in 1948, the Palmah brigades helped achieve victory on many fronts. The new stamp features the emblem of the Palmah.
Two women - Hanna Rovina (1889-1990) and Rivka Guber (1902-1981) - are hailed for their efforts in war and peace. Guber accompanied Prime Minister Menachem Begin to the U.S. to sign the Camp David Peace Treaty. Rovina became a fine actress on stages around the world. The pair of stamps show them at different periods of their lives.
Also released by Israel is a stamp dedicated to Lake Kinneret (the biblical Sea of Galilee), the only fresh water lake in Israel and its major source of water supply.
A non-denominational stamp for use on standard inland letters features the anemone, a bulbous flower growing in all sections of Israel.
These stamps can be obtained from the Israel Stamp Collectors Society, Box 917, Van Nuys, Calif., 91408. The price for all sets is $ 12.95 (with tabs). First day covers cost $ 19.95.
---
Columbus Celebration Sparks Many Stamp Issues
Many countries which have issued (or will issue) stamps celebrating the 500th anniversary of the Christopher Columbus voyages, have utilized this opportunity to philatelically hail other discoveries by explorers who made historic voyages through the ages.
In the Caribbean area where Columbus first landed, this is the fourth year of stamp issuances for the occasion.
Grenada Grenadines, a part of the Grenada chain, issued a set of four honoring such explorers as Sir Francis Drake, the first Englishman to circle the world during the years 1577-80 and Capt. James Cook, who sailed around the globe in 1768-71. The final two stamps in the set are a tribute to modern exploits, including the Soviet satellite sputnik, the first man-made vehicle to orbit the earth; and the U.S. space shuttle program, which has made many missions to outer space.
The Turks & Caicos islands recall early Polar explorers on their set of four stamps. The 5-cent stamp depicts the ship used by Henry Hudson on his voyage of 1610-11, during which he discovered the Bay in Canada now named after him. The 10 c shows the "Norge," an airship flown by Umberto Nobile and Roald Amundson, noted as the first vehicle to fly over the North Pole in 1926. The 75 c illustrates the ship "Terra Nova" in which Englishman Robert Scott sailed to the Antarctic on his ill-fated attempt to make the first land trek to the South Pole in 1911. The $ 1.25 portrays the aircraft used by American explorer Lincoln Ellsworth in 1936 to become the first person to fly across the Antarctic from the Wedell Sea to the Ross Sea.
---
Postal Service Switches Signals
The U.S. Postal Service is revising its previous report to collectors concerning recycled paper stamped envelopes.
The 29-cent Savings Bond printed envelope which bears a preprinted return address will NOT be reissued. The 29-cent Savings Bond plain envelopes without preprinted return address will be included as one of the 18 reissued stamped envelopes.
The set of 18 envelopes supplied by the USPS with the first day of issue postmark will be sold for $ 6.20 per set. Each set contains 14 29-cent envelopes at 34 cents each and four 11.1 cent nonprofit envelopes at 36 cents each. The Postal Service will affix a 19-cent Fawn stamp to meet the first class rate of 29 cents.
The recycled paper envelopes can be ordered by mail through the Philatelic Sales Division, PO Box 449997, Kansas City, MO 64144-9997. Also accepted are Visa, Master Card and Discover cards by telephone (816-455-4880). Fax orders can be sent to 816-453-7264.

 

End of Document
