

Stamps In The News: Israeli Stamps Feature Birds, a Mausoleum and Begin
The Associated Press
April 2, 1993, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 657 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




Songbirds, nature reserves, the Bahai World Center and former Prime Minister Menachem Begin are featured on four sets of seven new stamps being issued by Israel. Each stamp, as is customary with Israeli stamps, has a tab with a message or illustration.
More than 500 different bird species can be found in Israel. Two of them appear on a new set just issued. The birds belong to the Passeriformes, sometimes known as songbirds. One stamp shows the Palestine Sunbird. The other has the black-eared wheatear.
Three stamps depict a trio of Israel's nature reserves. Shown are the Hof Dor-Habonim coastal area, the Nahal Ammud Reserve with its water cascades and the Nahal Ajun Reserve noted for its beautiful canyons with four waterfalls.
A single stamp honors the Bahai World Center in Haifa. The Bahai faith is an independent religion now established worldwide. The Center is a mausoleum surmounted by a golden dome.
Menachem Begin, sixth prime minister of Israel and remembered as the man who signed the first peace treaty between Israel and an Arab state, is hailed on a special stamp. Begin was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1978 for his efforts in the peace process. He died March 9, 1992.
---
Holocaust Memorial on Postal Card
A view of the Holocaust Memorial in Washington, D.C., appears on a new 19-cent U.S. postal card. The card commemorates the opening of the Holocaust Museum on April 26.
The new museum will help educate Americans of all faiths and creeds - as well as the many visitors to the nation's capital - about the Holocaust and the genocide of European Jews by the Nazis during World War II. The new postal card was designed by Tom Engeman of Washington and is his first stamp design, reports the U.S. Postal Service.
First-day postmarks are available for the new card. You may purchase the card at your local post office, address the card, and place in an envelope addressed to: Customer Supplied Cards, Holocaust Memorial Card, Postmaster, Washington, DC. 20066-9991. If you prefer to have the Postal Service provide the cards, send your self-addressed, pressure-sensitive labels and 50 cents per postal card, in check or money order to: Holocaust Memorial Card, Postmaster, Washington DC 20066-9992.
All orders must be postmarked by April 22.
---
Orchids Featured on British Stamps
Five British stamps have been released to mark the 14th World Orchid Conference in Glascow, Scotland, April 28 through May 2. The stamps show different species of orchids from various parts of the world.
The 18 pence stamp, for the second class local rate, depicts the Dendrobium, an orchid found in the mountains of east New Guinea. The 24 p illustrates the Paphiopedilium, an orchid created in the late 18th century by crossing two fine white flowered varieties. The 24 p pays the basic first class domestic and European Community rate.
The 28 p pictures the long arched spikes variety originally introduced from Burma in 1877. The 33 p for the world postal card rate shows the Vanda Rothschildiana, a crossed species from the Himalayas and Thailand. The 39 p, highest value in the set, pictures the Dendrobium Vexiliarius, another orchid from New Guinea. The 39 p is for the basic airmail letter rate.
The first world orchid conference was held in 1954 in St. Louis, Mo. The conference now takes place every three years on a different continent and hemisphere. The 1993 conference at the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Center in Glasgow will focus on the theme of the historic contribution of Great Britain to orchid botany and culture.
 
 The seven Israeli stamps (with tabs) are available for $ 15.95, first day covers for $ 19.95 from The Israel Stamp Collectors Society, PO Box 854, Van Nuys, CA 91408 or call 1-800-484-9795, Ext. 5733.
 
 For collectors interested in the Maldives stamps featuring American cowboy movies, (reported in an earlier column) write to the Inter-Governmental Philatelic Corp., 460 West 34th St., New York City 10001.

 

End of Document
