

State Of The Union: Bush Confident War Will be Won, Recession Will End
The Associated Press
January 29, 1991, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1170 words
Byline: By TERENCE HUNT, AP White House Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Bush confidently assured Americans Tuesday night that the war against Iraq will be won and the recession at home will end in short order. "We stand at a defining hour," the president said in his State of the Union address.
"For two centuries, we've done the hard work of freedom. And tonight, we lead the world in facing down a threat to decency and humanity," Bush said.
He won a long standing ovation when he praised U.S. forces in the Persian Gulf as "truly America's finest" and again when he predicted "we will prevail" over Saddam Hussein.
It was the first wartime State of the Union address since the dark days of Vietnam and the most potent moments came with reference to America's troops abroad. Extraordinary security precautions enshrouded the Capitol, a bow to the boisterous threats of terrorism by Iraq.
Shortly before the president spoke, a joint U.S.-Soviet statement hinted a cease fire would be possible if Iraq took "concrete steps" to withdraw from Kuwait. The White House said later the statement represented no change in policy, and only a "massive withdrawal" could end the hostilities.
The two superpowers also called for a "meaningful peace process" to deal with the Arab-Israeli dispute once the war was over.
With those diplomatic developments reverberating in the background, the president delivered his nationally broadcast address to Congress.
"As Americans, we know there are times when we must step forward and accept our responsibility to lead the world away from the dark chaos of dictators, toward the brighter promise of a better day," Bush said in his 48-minute speech.
The president delivered a terse assessment of the war to date: "I'm pleased to report that we are on course. Iraq's capacity to sustain war is being destroyed.
"Time will not be Saddam's salvation."
With Americans' attention focused on the almost half-million troops risking their lives in the Persian Gulf, Bush devoted the heart of his annual address to the two-week-old battle to force Saddam out of Kuwait.
In the Congress, Democrats and Republicans rallied behind the president. "Now that war has begun, we'll work to see that it's swift and decisive, with the least possible loss of life," said Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell, D-Maine, one of those who had preferred more diplomacy to war.
Along with the Cabinet, lawmakers and the diplomatic corps, there were two special guests in the audience: Brenda Schwarzkopf, wife of Desert Storm commander Norman Schwarzkopf, and Alma Powell, wife of Gen. Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Both received standing ovations when introduced by Bush.
Bush was careful to address the nation's festering domestic concerns.
"There are reasons to be optimistic about our economy," Bush said, citing low inflation and record export levels by U.S. firms.
Once again, Bush proposed a controversial cut in taxes on capital gains - an initiative denounced by Democrats as a tax break for the rich. This time, however, Bush suggested that lawmakers join in a study, led by Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan to resolve differences "so that we can avoid a return to unproductive partisan bickering."
Bush briefly mentioned plans still under wraps for a national energy strategy, an overhaul of the banking system, education initiatives and a proposal to transfer $$15 billion worth of federal programs to the states with grants to fund them.
The president paid tribute to the democratic aspirations of the people of the Soviet Baltic states and said he remained "deeply concerned" about the Kremlin's bloody crackdown.
Bush, who met Monday with Soviet Foreign Minister Alexander Bessmertnykh, said the Soviet leadership had made promises which "would result in the withdrawal of some Soviet forces, a reopening of dialogue with the Republics and a move away from violence." Administration sources said the United States was expecting a "substantial withdrawal," and some roll back had already been detected.
Bush also announced he was refocusing the decade-old Strategic Defense Initiative to protect against limited ballistic missile threats, rather than an all-out nuclear war. He praised the success of Patriot antimissile missiles, a Star Wars-style weapon that has killed dozens of Iraqi Scud missiles.
"Let us pursue an SDI program that can deal with any future threat to the United States, to our forces overseas, and to our friends and allies," he said. It appeared to be a dramatic scaling down of a program once touted as a missile shield for the entire nation. SDI research will focus on ground-based defenses rather than space-based.
For the first time, Bush acknowledged without qualification that the nation is in a recession. "People are in genuine economic distress. I hear them," he said.
"We will get this recession behind us, and return to growth - soon," Bush promised, stopping short of offering a blueprint for recovery.
Details of some of Bush's proposals will come Monday, when the White House submits a $$1.4 trillion federal budget to Congress. The budget will project a $$138 billion deficit for the current year - more than double last year's deficit - even before $$1 billion a day war costs are considered.
Harkening to the start of World War II, his own generation's war, Bush said, "Almost 50 years ago we began a long struggle against aggressive totalitarianism. Now we face another defining hour for America and the world."
The world wonders, Bush said, what Saddam is thinking. "If he thinks that by targeting innocent civilians in Israel and Saudi Arabia, that he will gain advantage - he is dead wrong.
"If he thinks that he will advance his cause through tragic and despicable environmental terrorism - he is dead wrong.
"And if he thinks that by abusing the coalition POWs, he will benefit - he is dead wrong.
"We will succeed in the Gulf," Bush vowed.
To the chamber filled with Washington officialdom, Bush said, "I come to this house of the people to speak to you and all Americans, certain that we stand at a defining hour."
Despite the clouds of war and recession, Bush said, "If anyone tells you America's best days are behind her, they're looking the wrong way."
On the domestic side, Bush proposed a "crime summit" of the nation's top law enforcement officials and said he would resubmit legislation to expand the use of the federal death penalty, particularly for drug-related crimes.
Bush said he wanted "to put more power and opportunity" into the hands of the poor and advocated programs to make it easier for public housing tenants to buy their homes and to give inner-city businesses special tax breaks.
Bush also said his administration was proposing aggressive new health-prevention initiatives "to promote a healthier America and to help keep costs from spiraling."
The White House said one program would target federal funds to cities with high infant mortality rates to help provide prenatal care for poor women. Sources said Bush would request $$200 million for the program in about 10 cities and rural Mississippi.

 

End of Document
