

Suppose Saddam Won't Surrender - How Will The War End?
The Associated Press
February 25, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 830 words
Byline: By TERENCE HUNT, AP White House Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Confident of quick victory over Iraq, the White House is grappling to understand how the war will end and what the peace will bring. President Bush wants to deal Saddam Hussein a crippling humiliation, but it may require more than military conquest to achieve it.
It might require a settlement involving oil, or territory, or both.
Even if Saddam is defeated on the battlefields, the White House is concerned that he may sit defiantly in Baghdad, refusing to surrender. What then?
It seems unlikely Bush and his allies would send masses of troops north through Iraq to force peace on Saddam. That is not authorized under the carefully negotiated U.N. mandate to expel Iraq from Kuwait, and prospects of additional bloodshed could shake the coalition of Arab forces that have steadfastly supported Bush.
More likely is a version of the formula described by Rep. Les Aspin, D-Wis., the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee.
At the end of the war, the allies will control not only Kuwait but also a chunk of Iraq, perhaps all of the territory south of the key port city of Basra, Aspin said. Allied forces already are deep into Iraqi territory.
"We will control some part of Iraqi territory and we still have the economic sanctions in place," Aspin said.
"They (the Iraqis) are going to want to lift the economic sanctions; they're going to want to get their territory back," Aspin said. "And at that point we say, OK, let's talk settlement."
Unless the sanctions are lifted, Iraq would be prevented from resuming its exports of oil, and thus would be unable to begin rebuilding from the war's devastation. The allies would be in a strong negotiating position. "Our price at that point is, let's sign a peace treaty," Aspin said.
Along the lines envisioned by Aspin, Brent Scowcroft, the president's national security adviser, said it would be a serious mistake to lift the sanctions, even after the war, "until we understand what is necessary to be done to rebuild the area."
Aside from Iraq's withdrawal, the allies will demand recognition of Kuwait's government and its borders. But it's clear that the administration is expanding its war aims, intent on the destruction of Iraq's offensive military machine and hopeful of driving Saddam from his presidency.
"The restoration of peace and stability in the gulf would be a heck of a lot easier" without Saddam, says Secretary of State James A. Baker III.
In the administration's dreams, Saddam would be removed by his disenchanted military or war-weary populace.
If Saddam clings to power, the administration will demand a tight arms embargo against Baghdad to prevent him from becoming a threat again. There will be efforts to prevent Iraq from rebuilding its nuclear, chemical and biological weapons facilities.
Pressures for new security arrangements for the region could keep U.S. ground forces as well as naval forces there for some time.
"I think that the way the war terminates and the nature of the regime in Iraq may have something to do with the size of the forces, but certainly we must have a force around the borders of Kuwait in order to preserve the security of that state," Scowcroft said. He said Arab forces might be able to do the job.
Most Americans agree that the war aims should go beyond the goals of freeing Kuwait and returning its exiled leaders. According to a new Washington Post-ABC News Poll, a majority believes the United States should not end the war until Saddam is forced out and his army abandons most of its weapons in Kuwait.
Bush has raised the prospect of war crimes trials and the payment of reparations for the damage in Kuwait. The U.N. resolutions do not explicitly authorize either measure, so that remains to be sorted out.
There are other problems, as well.
"There will be different viewpoints with respect to what sort of regional security arrangements there should be, with respect to how the Arab-Israeli conflict should be solved, with respect to whether there should be arms control and proliferation regimes, with respect to questions of economic reconstruction," Baker said.
And the Soviet Union, which unsuccessfully tried to broker between Washington and Baghdad, will want a major voice in the discussions.
"I think it's probably fair to say that the Soviets have their own objectives in this that may not be entirely parallel with those of the United States," Scowcroft said.
Iraq was a client state of Moscow before the war, and the Kremlin will not want to see Baghdad weakened too far, or the United States win unchallenged influence in the Middle East. Cautiously, the administration is offering Moscow a place at the table.
"I think that they can contribute," Baker said, "if the role that they play is positive and they can contribute significantly to the resolution of some of these problems that pre-existed this crisis." That is far from a blank check.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Terence Hunt has covered the presidency since 1981 and is the AP's chief correspondent at the White House.

 

End of Document
