

Talks Were Often Bitter, But Faint Rays of Hope Light the Sidelines
The Associated Press
November 2, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 961 words
Byline: By MARCUS ELIASON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MADRID, Spain
Body




The bitter language that clouded the Mideast peace conference showed that the Persian Gulf War, far from ushering in a new world order for Arabs and Israelis, has barely jolted the old one.
The Berlin Wall may have fallen and the Soviet empire collapsed, but in the Hall of The Columns of the Spanish royal palace, the talk still was rooted in decades-old grievances, and both Israelis and Palestinians were still defending their very right to exist.
Having spent eight months getting the sides to sit together, Secretary of State James A. Baker III now faces the equally arduous task of keeping them talking.
The conference was supposed to switch format over the weekend and become direct negotiations between Israel and each Arab country, but agreement was delayed by a complex wrangle over where to hold the talks.
Still, things were far from hopeless.
More than ever before, all sides need to please the United States, which is the main reason they came here in the first place.
Israel needs U.S. help absorbing Soviet immigrants. The Arabs need American might to defend them against men like Saddam Hussein. Sitting in the conference chamber were observers from Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states, giving their silent blessing to the occasion.
And on the sidelines, among journalists and a few of the more outgoing officials on either side, there were glimmers of new insight.
Nobody expected the three days of speeches to produce a dramatic breakthrough. "What matters is the negotiations that are about to open," said Israeli negotiator Eliakim Rubinstein in an interview Friday.
These will determine whether "people will break away from their slogans and all sorts of things that are unattainable, and will confine themselves to what is attainable."
The rancor that permeated the proceedings began with diametrically opposing opinions on who was to blame for the 43-year-old conflict.
When Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir called Syria a tyrannical, terrorist-supporting state, Syrian Foreign Minister Farouk al-Sharaa hit back by branding Shamir a terrorist.
Al-Sharaa mocked the Jews' attachment to their Promised Land. Israeli Deputy Foreign Minister Benjamin Netanyahu accused an Arab religious leader of complicity in the Nazi Holocaust. Al-Sharaa snubbed Israeli reporters at his news conference. No handshakes were seen among the adversaries.
Shamir insisted the issue was Arab acceptance of Israel, saying "The issue is not territory but our existence."
The Palestinian delegate, Haidar Abdul-Shafi, appealed to the Israelis to acknowledge his nation's existence. "You may wish to close your eyes to this fact, Mr. Shamir, but we are here in the sight of the world, before your very eyes," said the 71-year-old physician from the occupied Gaza Strip.
All the Arab speakers insisted that land was the central issue, and that Israel should give back what it captured in the 1967 Mideast war - "every inch," said al-Sharaa.
Shamir challenged the Arabs to recognize Israel by inviting them to continue the negotiations in his country and rotate them through the Middle East.
The Arabs refused. Syria and Jordan said they were happy to stay in Madrid. The Palestinians argued that since they are subject to occupation law, they would be negotiating under duress.
In his closing remarks to the conference, Baker sounded almost like an aggrieved schoolmaster as he berated the parties for failing to send a meaningful message of conciliation to their peoples.
"Don't wait for the other side to start; each of you needs to get off the mark quickly," Baker said. "You should know best what is needed."
The rhetoric, though predictable, was significant. Shamir's reticence on the land issue and political rights for the Palestinians will not persuade Arab audiences that he is serious about peace.
Al-Sharaa's performance can only reinforce the Israeli image of Syria as a dangerous, unyielding enemy.
The Palestinian were the big winners at the conference, gaining a sense of self-esteem they had never before experienced.
People living under military occupation, some of them former prisoners, were treated with the same pomp as the Israelis - the same motorcade, same delegate's tag, equal time at news conferences and at the negotiating table.
Moreover, they sat at the conference table as equals, just eight months after they consigned themselves to the losing side by backing Saddam Hussein.
"We removed the dust from our face after the Gulf War, in which we were the first loser. Now we went back again with a clean face, in the picture and on the map," exulted delegate Freih Abu Meddain, a Gaza lawyer who once spent a year in prison for anti-Israeli activity.
Daoud Kuttab, a Palestinian journalist from Jerusalem, said: "People who come from refugee camps, who have lived under occupation, experienced being beaten up, and now being given royal treatment - it's amazing."
Both sides had the opportunity to portray themselves to the enemy as real people, not political caricatures.
Jordanian Foreign Minister Kamel Abu Jaber loomed larger than life with his ebullient manner and eye for colorful metaphors, answering questions from Israeli radio reporters that were broadcast live to the Jewish state.
Netanyahu gave a news conference especially for Arab reporters, and clearly relished the vigorous give-and-take.
"What was remarkable here was that Israelis have realized that the Palestinians are closest to them in terms of comprehension and talking business," said Albert Aghazarian, a West Bank professor advising the Palestinian delegation.
"We know the sub-jokes, the language," said Aghazarian, 41, who speaks Hebrew. "We know the rules of the game, we know what to look for in conversation, what is funny or serious in that person. It's a very strange kind of symbiosis."

 

End of Document
