

Text of the U.S. Military Briefing in Riyadh
The Associated Press
January 19, 1991, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1477 words
Dateline: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia
Body




The following is the text of a statement Maj. Gen. Robert Johnston of the U.S. Marine Corps made during a briefing Saturday and a question-and-answer session with reporters.
 
 Today the U.S. Air Force and the air components of the U.S. Navy and Marine Corps, along with Saudi Arabian, Kuwaiti, British, Canadian, Italian and French air forces are continuing around-the-clock operations in support of Operation Desert Storm. Emphasis continues to be placed on offensive counter-air and interdiction missions.
The objectives of this large-scale interdiction air strike continue to be the destruction of major Iraqi military complexes, troop concentrations, air defense, long-range artillery and missile sites, and command and control elements.
Additionally, today Marine forward air controllers, flying OB-10 aircraft, directed U.S. Air Force against some active enemy artillery sites. As of 3 p.m. this afternoon, local Riyadh time, these continuous operations around the clock have raised the total sortie count for Operation Desert Storm to over 4,000 sorties.
Coalition aircraft were protected from Iraqi interceptors by Navy F-14 Tomcats, Marine F-18 Hornets, and Air Force F-15 Eagles, and F-16 Fighting Falcons.
These aircraft provided air cover during all phases of the operation. And as of 3 p.m. today, our aircraft were responsible for destroying 10 Iraqi aircraft in air-to-air combat, of which six were MiG-29 Fulcrums, three were Mirage F-1s, and we believe the 10th aircraft was a MiG-23 Flogger. Of this total, five have been shot down in the last 24 hours.
As of today, the United States has incurred five aircraft losses due to enemy fire. The Navy has lost one F/A-18, and two A-6Es, the Air Force, one F-15 Echo and one F-4G that was not a result of hostile fire. The Marine Corps lost one OB-10.
As an integral part of the air campaign, the Navy in the last 24 hours has launched over 50 conventional Tomahawk Cruise missiles for a total of 150 launched to date.
Turning to the Navy and a report very recently released, last night the guided frigate the USS Nicholas and Army helicopters together with a Kuwaiti patrol boat, engaged and neutralized Iraqi forces operating from Kuwaiti oil platforms in the northern Arabian Gulf.
The Iraqi forces had been firing on coalition aircraft with anti-aircraft artillery and shoulder-fired SA weapons. We have taken 12 Iraqi prisoners and they're presently aboard the Kuwaiti patrol boat and the USS Nicholas. The Iraqi soldiers will be transferred to a U.S. Marine holding facility and eventually to a POW camp.
Turning to the ground forces, the U.S. Army and Marine Corps continues to maintain a defensive posture within Saudi Arabia. Yesterday, an Army 7th Corps artillery unit engaged two SA-2 surface-to-air missile sites with three missiles. One site was destroyed, and damage to the other is unknown at this time.
There have been no direct hostile confrontations on the ground. However, Marine units received some sporadic artillery fire, and did engage them with airborne-controlled air strikes.
Our ground forces continue to hone their combat skills and continue to conduct anti-aircraft weapons training, tank crew drills, field training exercises and numerous live-fire exercises.
Today there have been three reported launches of Iraqi surface-to-surface missiles. And all three of these missiles were launched towards Israel. Reports indicate at this time that one landed within Israel and two others are unaccounted for. This brings the total for the last two days to 11 surface-to-surface missiles fired by the Iraqis.
I might make a comment here that today at 3:57 p.m. there were two Patriot missiles fired unintentionally from a location inside Saudi Arabia. The missile-firing resulted in no personal injuries or damage and we are now investigating the cause of those launchings.
Let me summarize by saying that in the last 24 hours, the U.S. has lost three aircraft, one Navy and one Air Force and one Marine. And to date the U.S. lost a total of six aircraft, three Navy, two Air Force and one Marine.
In the last 24 hours, our U.S. pilots have downed five Iraqi aircraft and as of today, U.S. and coalition pilots have downed a total of 10 Iraqi aircraft in air-to-air combat.
That is a very basic rundown of where we stand today, and I'd like to open the floor for questions.
Q: (inaudible) in London. Can you tell me how it's possible you unintentionally fired Patriot missiles and were they the ones seen here from Riyadh?
A: Until we have investigated I think it's rather difficult for me to predict and to speculate quite frankly on how they were launched.
Q: Were they the ones that were seen from here?
A: It is my understanding that those were the ones that were seen on your video screens.
Q: Can you just confirm that they were destroyed by yourself in the air or what did happen to them?
A: They were destroyed.
Q: There's a report that the Iraqis are using a Texaco facility in the neutral zone as a platform for their SAMs and triple-a. Can you confirm that, that they're using Kuwait oil facilities as a cover for their anti-aircraft installations.
A: Well, I think I was really talking about that one incident where the Navy and the Kuwaiti patrol boats actually picked up some Iraqis who were firing from platforms.
Q: This is onshore in the storage area?
A: Those were offshore platforms.
Q: But I've heard a report that they are still onshore in the Texaco facility.
A: I cannot support that. That would be speculating at this time.
Q: Do you know whether these anti-aircraft, or the SAMs, the SA-7s that were fired from these platforms, were responsible for hitting any of the aircraft that we have lost or any of the aircraft that we didn't lose?
A: Quite frankly I could not respond to that. I don't know. But clearly they were firing at aircraft and we have eliminated that threat.
Q: Is that information you could tell us if you knew?
A: If I knew I would tell you.
Q: How many platforms are we talking about?
A: I think there were nine or 10. Several. Nine, I believe is the correct number.
Q: One follolw-up. Would these be the first POWs taken in this conflict to your knowledge?
A: Yes.
Q: Can you tell us about casualties on either side in the storming of the platforms and any other details of that fight that you can give us?
A: I do not have all the details yet. I think until we get the crews back and the POWs it will be pretty difficult to give you a totally clear picture. We have no casualties on our side.
Q: No casualties. No U.S. casualties. (Reporter repeating response.)
Q: General, as a matter of policy do you intend to make a distinction between prisoners of war and Iraqi defectors who give up the fight or want to stop fighting in some way?
A: Well, they still, of course, would be processed through a POW compound.
Q: But would they be treated differently if they approached our forces and declared themselves to be defectors?
A: They will all be treated according to the Geneva Convention. Absolutely. Yes, sir.
Q: General, Charles McClain from NBC. There were only three Scuds fired last night, eight the night before. Are you under the impression now that they may be running out of those mobile launchers? Have we effectively, do you think, neutralized them?
A: Well, I think it's difficult to say that we've neutralized them, but I think that if you look at, I believe we have some expectation there were probably about 50, perhaps 30 permanent sites and maybe 20-plus that can move around, total of 50-plus, and they've gone from firing eight on one day down to three and they are being targeted as a very high priority target by our air campaign, and I think it would be reasonable to expect that we have certainly caused them to have great difficulty in firing. So I think the answer is our air campaign is having some effect on their ability to fire those missiles. That's not to say that they've all disappeared, that the threat has gone away totally.
Q: General, (inaudible). Could you tell us how many Scuds, mobile and fixed launchers you've accounted for so far.
A: It's a litle early to tell, quite frankly. Until you can confirm battle damage, and there is a lot of cloud cover out there, I think I would be reluctant to say that we've killed a certain number. I think really by the fact that they're firing less at this point would give us some high confidence that we're having an effect on them with out air campaign. But I couldn't give you a head count right now. Yes, ma'am.
Q: Have the coalition forces decided yet who will be the detaining power for POWs, which government?
A: The Saudi Arabian government, as the host nation, will be ultimately responsible for the control of those POWs.
Q: All POWs will be handed over to them?
A: Ultimately, they will be handled by each one of the components and eventually handled by the Saudi Arabian government. Yes, sir.

 

End of Document
