

The Artists: Exhibit Explores Conflict, Cooperation Between Blacks, Jews
The Associated Press
July 24, 1992, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1079 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Black actor and singer Paul Robeson performed in the Yiddish theater. Jewish labor organizers were among the first to recruit black workers and support black trade unions. And the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. often invoked the Hebrew prophets Amos and Isaiah.
These relationships between blacks and Jews - and others filled with mistrust, resentment, even hatred - were explored in the exhibit "Bridges & Boundaries: African-Americans and American Jews" at The Jewish Museum's temporary galleries at the New-York Historical Society.
"We started this long before Los Angeles and Crown Heights," said curator Gretchen Sullivan Sorin, referring to the recent riots in Los Angeles sparked by the Rodney King verdict, and violence last summer between blacks and Jews in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn.
"We were thinking of the direction the country has been going in over the past 10 years, of the way African-Americans and American Jews have been successful political partners. And we were wondering who benefits when blacks and Jews fight."
The show, a collaboration between the museum and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, includes more than 300 artifacts, photographs, documents, media clips and artworks.
It tells a story of cooperation and conflict, as Jews and blacks worked together for many years to overcome prejudice and discrimination, then turned against one another over the divisive issues of class, quotas and Israel.
Among the objects are a rare 1857 glazed stoneware jar made and signed by a South Carolina slave; a letter from a Russian Jew to her sister in 1905 describing a pogrom in Odessa; the 1964 FBI missing poster for civil rights workers James Chaney, Andrew Goodman and Michael Schwerner; and a 1949 FBI report on a Jewish woman in Merriam, Kan., who "reportedly meets regularly with Negroes … and spoke recently at an NAACP conference."
The exhibit, which closed here July 19 for a seven-city national tour, was proposed four years ago by Ward Mintz, the museum's assistant director for programs. He turned to Sorin, an independent curator specializing in social history who teaches museum studies at the State University of New York, Albany.
Early on, she said, the curatorial team realized that the show, in examining "how groups have failed to get along" rather than engaging in the usual celebration of ethnicity, might be controversial. They were right.
While more than five dozen prominent black and Jewish leaders endorsed the exhibit, the curators were rebuffed by the United Teachers Federation and the International Ladies Garment Workers Union.
The teachers' union objected to the portrayal of a school decentralization experiment in the Ocean Hill-Brownsville section of Brooklyn in 1968 that pitted black community activists against the heavily Jewish teachers' union.
While the show uses the conflict to symbolize the growing rift between blacks and Jews in the late 1960s, Jeannette DiLorenzo, treasurer of the teachers' union, says the dispute was "taken out of context and given too much importance."
Meanwhile, ILGWU officials objected to the inclusion of charges from a retired black garment worker that the union discriminated against black union members. They said the allegations weren't true.
"We were trying to get people to realize multiple points of view," Sorin said. "If people in a diverse society can't learn to listen to one another, what will happen? We have to find some common ground."
In seeking diversity, the curators tapped a multiplicity of voices, from prominent leaders and intellectuals to activists and laborers. Text of documents and interviews, interspersed with paintings, sculpture and objects such as a Klan robe and a voting booth, are organized in roughly five "spaces" to show how blacks and Jews in the United States cooperated and clashed over the past century.
The first space looks at biblical themes of slavery and triumph as they appear in each group's paintings, songs and prayers. The art includes the 1977 collage "Joshua at Jericho" by black artist Romare Bearden; "Exodus," a 1931 work by Jewish artist Isac Friedlander on the freeing of black slaves; and "Sanctuary," a 1946 linocut by black artist Wilmer Angier Jennings representing either the Underground Railroad or the Holocaust.
The second area looks at stereotypes of blacks and Jews in the early part of the century, in print and film. Excerpts are shown from a number of films, including the 1907 work, "Cohen's Fire Sale," about an unscrupulous Jewish merchant, and D.W. Griffith's 1915 "The Birth of a Nation," which features Ku Klux Klan heroes and black villains.
The third space examines the relationship between blacks and Jews in the labor movement during the Depression and after World War II. It is here that Florence Rice, a black retired garment worker, complains that black workers were discriminated against in the ILGWU - charges that Mintz said don't detract from what is "by and large a very inspiring story" of the ILGWU organizing black workers and supporting other black unions.
The fourth space presents photographs, documents and other memorabilia from the freedom marches, bus boycotts and sit-ins in the segregated South during the 1950s and '60s.
The final space explores tensions that developed between blacks and Jews in the late 1960s as some blacks, impatient with their slow progress toward equality, adopted a militant stance that alienated many whites.
Those strains worsened as Jews, who had largely obtained the economic success and social acceptance denied to many blacks, fought with their former allies over such issues as quotas and Israel.
The formal interpretation of the relationship ends with the Ocean Hill-Brownsville unrest, but there are two additional displays: a collage of angry newspaper headlines about recent racial unrest in this country, and a gallery of contemporary works of art on racism and anti-Semitism.
Among the artworks is a piece by Cary Leibowitz, who chooses the format of an 8-by-12 rug - something underfoot in every home - to make the following statement: "There are two things I need to watch for the rest of my life: my weight and my racism."
After leaving New York, the show travels to San Francisco (Sept. 22-Dec. 25); Rochester (Jan. 14-March 14, 1993); Baltimore (April 18-June 10, 1993); Wilberforce, Ohio (July 11-Sept. 1, 1993); Los Angeles (Sept. 27-Dec. 6, 1993); Philadelphia (Jan. 7-March 13, 1994); and Chicago (April 7-July 4, 1994).

 

End of Document
