

The Artists: The Glorious Vikings - Largest Exhibit Ever on Their Culture
The Associated Press
April 10, 1992, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 422 words
Byline: By JAN OLSEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: COPENHAGEN, Denmark
Body




The Vikings are invading Europe again. This time they're bringing treasures, rather than plundering them.
"The Scandinavians and Europe," an exhibition of Viking weapons, household goods, art and literature from Newfoundland to Russia, opened March 31 in Paris. It moves to Berlin on Sept. 1 and Copenhagen on Dec. 26.
"It's the first time we are able to show items from Russia, Ukraine and the Baltic states. This makes the exhibition the widest ever and shows how far away the Vikings went," said Niels-Knud Liebgott of the National Museum in Copenhagen.
"For decades, many of these historic objects were hushed up in the Soviet Union and unable to leave," he said.
The exhibit covers the years 800 to 1200 when Vikings sailed out of Scandinavian harbors to terrorize Europe from the Baltics to Spain. They pillaged monasteries and churches, then settled down, became farmers and adopted Christianity.
The Vikings carried their boats across Russia to establish trade routes to Istanbul, Baghdad and Samarkand. They colonized Iceland and Greenland and their descendants were the first Europeans to reach North America. Under the name Norsemen, they settled in French land that became Normandy and they eventually conquered England.
More than 600 objects from 82 museums, libraries and private collections in 15 European countries, Canada, Russia and Ukraine will retrace the Vikings' travels and settlements.
Queen Margrethe II of Denmark and French President Francois Mitterrand opened the exhibition which runs through June 13 at the Grand Palais.
A bronze needle and a spinning-wheel weight stone from Newfoundland will be on display. Gold brooches, bronze swords and skeletons from Nordic burial sites in Russia and the Baltics will contrast with a stone image of the Madonna from Sweden and the carved portal of an early Norwegian wooden church.
There is also a runic stone from Berezan, near Odessa on the Black Sea, an example of the writing system used by Scandinavians before they adopted Christianity and a Latin alphabet.
Nordic literature, poetry and sagas will be highlighted. Manuscripts written with ink on parchment from Iceland and England will be on display.
The Nordic Council of Ministers, the Council of Europe and several French and German museums and associations are behind the 30 million kroner ($ 4.5 million) collection which took six years to bring together.
The Altes Museum in Berlin will have the exhibit from Sept. 1 to Nov. 15. Then it travels to the National Museum in Copenhagen from Dec. 26 to March 14, 1993.

 

End of Document
