

The Soldiers' Newspaper, at 50, Faces Midlife Crisis
The Associated Press
April 12, 1992, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1027 words
Byline: AP Photo Planned, By GEORGE BOEHMER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DARMSTADT, Germany
Body




Stars and Stripes, the GI newspaper born in London to the wail of sirens and thunder of German buzz bombs, is turning 50 and faces a midlife crisis.
Reductions in the number of American soldiers in Europe from more than 300,000 in the 1980s to 150,000 by 1995 will take away half the paper's potential audience.
Still, the European edition of Stars and Stripes is planning celebrations this month to mark the half-century since its founding in 1942. The Pacific edition is three years younger.
Cartoonist Bill Mauldin and television commentator Andy Rooney are among the Stars and Stripes veterans expected to attend celebrations at the paper's headquarters in a suburb of Darmstadt, 25 miles south of Frankfurt.
A dinner for Stars and Stripes veterans and staff is scheduled for April 24.
The anniversary also is a time for sober assessment of the future.
Stars and Stripes, a 28-page tabloid, prints a full range of international, Stateside and military news provided by news agencies and its own correspondents in Germany, Belgium, Britain and Italy.
It carries both Ann Landers and Dear Abby. An excellent sports section covers all major events in the United States and abroad. Beetle Bailey, Doonesbury and Blondie are in the star-studded lineup of comics.
At its height in 1989, the European edition had a daily circulation of 120,000. That rose to 200,000 during the Gulf War, when 80,000 copies were sent to the troops in Saudi Arabia.
Now that American soldiers are leaving Europe in droves, circulation is about 90,000 a day and the newspaper's management is scrambling to keep readers.
Is Stars and Stripes facing a midlife crisis?
"You can certainly say that!" chief editor Bernard Zovistoski responded. "But we're going to continue providing a quality newspaper to our customers."
Zovistoski estimates the paper reached only about 30 percent of its potential readers in the past, partly because there was no circulation department.
Because of force reductions, more of the American soldiers in Europe now are able to live on base, he said, and that gives the paper better access to its remaining readers.
Stars and Stripes is called "an authorized unofficial publication for the military overseas" and the publisher is a military commander.
The commander also was the editor in the old days, which led to military censorship.
Ken Zumwalt, a former managing editor, recounts many censorship incidents in his book "The Stars and Stripes."
One involved a German general who was fired as a security risk in 1983 for alleged homosexual contacts, but later exonerated.
U.S. military officials confirmed that Gen. Bernard Rogers, then commander of NATO, ordered Stars and Stripes not to print stories about the case.
Angry members of the Stars and Stripes staff leaked word to Washington. The incident so upset Sen. William Proxmire that the Wisconsin Democrat introduced a bill calling for an investigation of military censorship.
After a congressional hearing in early 1989, the Defense Department hired Philip Foisie, a veteran journalist, to investigate and recommend changes at both the European and Pacific editions of Stars and Stripes.
In a recent telephone interview, Foisie described the gag order on stories about the German general as "a case of overt censorship."
"It was that kind of censorship that Stars and Stripes decided must stop," he said.
One of the most important changes he recommended, Foisie said, was that experienced civilian editors be hired to run the papers.
Others had suggested that previously, he said, and "it was an idea whose time had come."
Military leaders agreed. Zovistoski, a former editor at the Albany Times Union, and Robert Trounson of the Los Angeles Times were hired last year as the first chief editors of the European and Pacific editions respectively.
Foisie said Stars and Stripes now is "absolutely free of censorship, news management or the calculated withholding of unfavorable news."
"They are as free of that kind of pressure on editorial content as any newspaper in the United States, and a lot better than most," he said.
He pays regular visits to make sure that continues.
During the Gulf War, Stars and Stripes carried critical stories and commentary, including an article about a soldier who refused to go because the United States said it wouldn't use nuclear weapons on Iraq.
Changes at the paper in the past year include an expanded letters to the editor section and printing complete stories on the first two pages. Top stories previously were continued on the back page.
Many Stars and Stripes reports since the Gulf War have dealt with the military reductions and problems facing soldiers returning home.
Although it costs about 55 cents a copy to produce and deliver, Stars and Stripes is sold for 35 cents daily and 50 cents on Sunday. Income from the European edition's 170 book and magazine outlets, about $ 53 million in 1991, have bridged the gap.
A weekly founded in Paris on Feb. 8, 1918, was the forerunner of the current Stars and Stripes. It folded after World War I.
The current Stars and Stripes was born April 18, 1942, when GIs began printing a four-page weekly in London. It soon became a daily and for a time was published at 25 locations in Europe, North Africa, the Middle East and Hawaii.
Anniversary festivities were set back to April 24 because of Easter weekend.
It printed thousands of front-line stories during the war and later covered the Nazi war crimes trials, divided Germany and the rise and fall of the Berlin Wall.
After VE Day on May 8, 1945, Stars and Stripes established a Pacific edition in Hawaii, and later Tokyo, that had a separate commander and staff. That edition also covered Korea, Vietnam and other far-flung points.
Staff members work at modern computer terminals at Stars and Stripes headquarters, a large L-shaped building in Griesheim, a Darmstadt suburb. Early editions go to such distant points as Britain and Italy, later ones to soldiers in the Netherlands, Belgium and Germany.
The European edition has 85 staff members, 18 of them military. Stars and Stripes has about 600 other employees in seven countries, about half of them U.S. citizens and the rest local nationals.

 

End of Document
