

The Networks Covered the Outbreak of Ground War
The Associated Press
February 24, 1991, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 664 words
Byline: By SCOTT WILLIAMS, AP Television Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Television was at a loss for pictures, not words, when allied forces began the ground war to oust the Iraqis from Kuwait. And without pictures, TV didn't have the story.
Covering the battle for Kuwait on Sunday was tough. There was little official information, and network news consultants were hard pressed to second-guess the tactics of commanders in the field.
The mood was near-euphoric Sunday when allied commander Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf said U.S., French and Arab forces had reached first-day objectives and were continuing the attack. Casualties were "remarkably light," he said.
CNN Pentagon reporter Wolf Blitzer later quoted sources saying there were 11 U.S. troops killed in the first hours of the ground war. There was no confirmation of casualties.
The U.S. government had restricted reporters to pools, and their reports were subject to military censorship before news and pictures could be transmitted to the United States.
That reduced the networks to reporting from a distance. Their military analysts used simulations, toy tanks, electronic chalkboards, and informed guesswork on tactical doctrine to assess the progress of the land battle.
ABC and CNN aired the first video from the battlefield, a report from London-based ITN, an independent television agency. ITN, moving into Kuwait with Saudi mechanized columns, showed the first Iraqi prisoners of war, some of them wounded.
There was one story from ABC's Forrest Sawyer, from a quiet corner of the Kuwaiti frontier using a portable satellite uplink. CNN's Peter Arnett reported on the relative quiet in Baghdad.
Without pictures, there was little to sustain the news reports past noon. By then, ABC, CBS and NBC had gone back to their regular Sunday programming of basketball games and public affairs shows.
At one point, CBS interrupted its coverage of the Pitt-Syracuse basketball game for a live report from Dan Rather, showing tape of a Patriot missile knocking out a Scud missile being fired into Saudi Arabia.
Rather, wearing a flak jacket, finished the live segment, saying, "Now, back to the basketball."
Events had the same unreality around 8 p.m. EST Saturday, when allied forces began the attack.
CBS said it broke the news at 8:26 p.m. EST Saturday, in a report from David Martin at the Pentagon.
NBC said it broke the story at 8:27, when Pentagon correspondent Fred Francis interrupted the credits of the series "Amen" with a report confirming that the war had begun. ABC's report on the outbreak aired at 8:32 p.m.
"CNN quoted NBC as saying the war had begun," an NBC spokesman said later.
President Bush spoke briefly to the nation at 10 p.m., followed by Defense Secretary Dick Cheney's truncated Pentagon briefing, announcing the suspension of regular briefings for military security.
CBS said it had the only battle report at 10:41 p.m. Saturday, when CBS reporter Bob McKeown telephoned a report that he was about a mile from Iraq, watching artillery bombard Iraqi positions.
"The ground here rumbles, everything shakes, when a bomb hits over there. So we're that close," McKeown said.
By 11:30 p.m., NBC cut viewers in the East to the regularly scheduled "Saturday Night Live," but continued its news feed in the West. Some affiliates in the East chose to stay with the network's news feed.
"We'll be pretty much wall-to-wall with the story most of the day," said CNN spokesman Steve Haworth. "We're not expecting much pool video anytime soon, but we don't have any real solid way of knowing."
ABC said it would air a special, 90-minute edition of its "World News Sunday," anchored by Ted Koppel.
CBS planned an edition of its "Evening News," and a special edition of "60 Minutes" with the latest news and an exclusive report on Kuwaitis in exile, before returning to its scheduled miniseries "And the Sea Will Tell."
NBC planned a 90-minute news special, followed by an hourlong special edition of "Expose" with war coverage. NBC would then return to its regular schedule, the movie "Good Morning, Vietnam."

 

End of Document
