

The Usual Partying, But A Sober Start To A New Decade
The Associated Press
January 1, 1991, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 913 words
Byline: By FRANK BAJAK, Associated Press Writer
Body




U.S. soldiers in the Saudi desert welcomed 1991 with non-alcoholic toasts, embargo-strapped Baghdad residents paid handsomely for their libations and world leaders offered sobering thoughts for the post-Cold War age.
Pope John Paul II, acknowledging the threat of war in the Persian Gulf, today offered a special New Year's wish that 1991 will be a year of peace in the Middle East.
"Oh New Year … may you be the year of salvation. May you be the year of peace," said the pontiff, speaking to the faithful in St. Peter's square.
As usual, celebration was loud and raucous from the firecracker-popping streets of Manila, where pyrotechnics took its annual toll in life and limb, to London's Trafalgar Square, where 60,000 people partied.
Paris marked the 12th stroke of midnight noisily, with whistles, honking horns and the pops of thousands of champagne corks. Tourists filled the Moulin Rouge and other dance halls.
In New York's Times Square, the steel ball that traditionally drops at midnight was lit for the first time with red, white and blue bulbs in a tip of the hat to the soldiers overseas.
For those troops, New Year's was generally low-key, though many dined on steak and listened to a radio performance by comedian Robin Williams, who mused about how much PLO chief Yasser Arafat reminded him of Ringo Starr.
On the minds of many was how they might perform in an attack to drive Iraq from Kuwait, which the United Nations has authorized if Saddam Hussein doesn't withdraw by Jan. 15.
Many U.S. service personnel said they were so caught up in training that they hadn't even thought about the holiday, but there were some small celebrations.
Soldiers who yearned for a cup of kindness could only follow the lead of French troops, who toasted 1991 with "Saudi champagne" - apple juice and Perrier mineral water. A strict Muslim state, Saudi Arabia bans alcohol.
On the USS Midway in the Persian Gulf the mood was barely festive. The 4,300 men aboard the aircraft carrier celebrated with ice cream and popcorn at the end of routine 12- to 14-hour workday.
Among the troops, there was one almost universal New Year's resolution:
"To leave and go home," said Staff Sgt. Johnnie Montgomery, 27, of Annaston, Ala.
In Baghdad, the well-heeled rang in the new year with parties in major hotels and nightspots. But most people stayed home for quiet celebrations.
The cost of partying was high due to the U.N. embargo on trade with Iraq, with a bottle of imported Scotch whisky costing more than three times what it did before the crisis.
In Moscow, Mikhail S. Gorbachev told the Soviet people something they hardly needed telling, that 1990 was one painful year.
In a New Year's speech broadcast nationwide just before midnight, he called the year "one of the most difficult in our history. … Crisis phenomena in economics, the lowering of people's personal safety, a weakening of order and discipline affected the conditions of life."
The 59-year-old Kremlin chief appealed to the country's 285 million citizens to help him preserve the union, which is threatened with collapse by rebellious republics.
"There is no more sacred matter than the preservation and renewal of the union in which all people would live voluntarily and well," he said.
Germans began their first year in decades under as a single nation, and fireworks lit the sky over the Brandenburg Gate, which not long ago stood above the wall that divided East from West.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl urged in a New Year's Eve speech for support for Soviet reforms to maintain peace on the continent: "No one has a bigger interest in that than we Germans in the heart of Europe."
Gorbachev also addressed the American people, welcoming a superpower summit planned for February. Looking back, he summed up 1990 as a momentous year: "The Cold War is over. There is no more danger of nuclear catastrophe. The horizons of peace have been widened."
But he pointed to Saddam's "aggression" as threatening to destroy the peace that arrived with East-West harmony. The international community "should find strength to overcome this obstacle," he said.
In his reciprocal address to the Soviet people, President Bush saluted Gorbachev for undertaking an "arduous journey" to a new society.
He also applauded "the decisive action of the Soviet Union in strongly opposing Saddam Hussein's brutal aggression in the gulf."
The Iraqi Embassy in London wished the world a peaceful and prosperous new year and acused Bush of sending the opposite message, one of "further aggression, destruction and war. … As for Iraq, it will always carry the olive branch and sing songs of peace and curse war."
In Manila, nine people were killed and more than 1,000 injured as people generally disregarded pleas to avoid celebrating with fireworks and weapons.
The dead included three children killed in one of at least 13 fires caused by fireworks. Among the injured was a 5-year-old boy whose thumb was blown off by a firecracker.
Temple bells, ship's whistles and fireworks welcomed the Year of the Sheep in Tokyo. Millions of Japanese headed for shrines to pray for success. Others gathered around bonfires at neighborhood shrines to drink sake.
Taiwan announced the release of 5,574 drug addicts, gangsters and other criminals under a New Year clemency approved by President Lee Teng-hui.
In Trafalgar Square, police made 145 arrests and reported more than 120 injuries, mostly minor. But Scotland Yard said the festivities were relatively trouble-free compared to past years.
 Graphic



 
LaserPhotos MOSB4, TOK6,7

 

End of Document
