

The Allies Would Not Fight Saddam's War, or Redo Vietnam Either
The Associated Press
March 4, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1043 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




If the American people must make war, it was the kind they like to wage: high in dazzling technology, swift in prosecution, low in American casualties and victorious in outcome.
It exorcised the ghosts of the last big war, in Vietnam, which was the opposite, painfully long, painfully costly and painfully lost.
In the end, President Bush simply called off the Persian Gulf War, giving it a conclusion as astonishing as every other aspect.
On Wednesday afternoon, with the ground war in its fourth day and the Iraqi army falling apart, Bush caught glimpses of the hour-long briefing in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, when Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf laid out the utter destruction imposed by the allies.
Bush sat down and watched the entire Schwarzkopf accounting replayed, then reached a decision.
This was no longer a war, or a rout, but a slaughter, and the time had come to call it off.
"I want to stop it as soon as possible," Bush told Gen. Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. That night he went on television and declared a unilateral cease-fire.
If the defeated Saddam Hussein would not sue for peace, Bush would impose peace on him.
The next day, Saddam accepted Bush's terms. One hundred hours after the ground war started, the fighting ended without a word of dialogue between the two warring parties.
The allied victory was overwhelming. Never in the history of warfare had one army suffered so few casualties while inflicting so many.
Outnumbered in combat troops, tanks and artillery, the allies suffered 149 combat deaths, compared to Iraqi losses estimated to range between 25,000 and 50,000. The allies gave up 13 prisoners, the Iraqis, tens of thousands.
Schwarzkopf offered an explanation. No matter what numbers of troops an army may have, "if you are not dedicated to your cause, if you don't have the will to fight, then, you are not going to have a very good army."
Saddam Hussein had miscalculated.
A week before devouring Kuwait, he called in the U.S. ambassador, April Glaspie, and boastfully assured her the United States lacked the willpower to take him on.
"Yours is a society which cannot accept 10,000 dead in one battle," Saddam told her.
He was right.
So U.S. military planners fashioned a war in which machines would do their fighting, in which munitions costing a million dollars a pop would be used with abandon.
The Americans refused to fight on Saddam's terms, man-to-man, the type of war that had allowed him to eat up - "attrit" is the military term - Iran's huge army in the eight-year war, 1980-88, that claimed a million casualties.
The Americans would not allow their troops to become cannon fodder. They made the most of weapons like the Apache attack helicopter, with night vision gun sights that enabled crews to cut down Iraqi soldiers in the dark, before they could even see their adversary.
The allies took control of the air and in six weeks flew 110,000 missions, four times the number flown against Japan in the final 14 months of World War II.
Saddam had promised that U.S. soldiers would drown in a river of their own blood. He threatened "the mother of all battles," and gave Americans a catch phrase they relished throwing back at him, when the war was over.
Allowing himself a moment of gloating, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney ridiculed Saddam, whose forces had staged, he said, "the mother of all retreats."
War was a new experience to many Americans, victory even newer.
Two-thirds of the country has no memory of World War II, which ended 45 years ago, but four-fifths of the country remembers Vietnam, which ended in a papered-over American defeat. In that war, it was the Americans who came to wonder what it was they were fighting for.
This cause was less ambiguous. And so the country fell in love with its army. It sent mail addressed "To Any Soldier" and dispatched so many homebaked cookies that postal authorities threw up their hands and begged for a cease-cookie.
The U.S. army in Vietnam was a conscript army, with college kids exempt from the draft. While the regular army units dispatched to the Saudi desert were disproportionately composed of blacks, the reserves and National Guard represented a mix of middle America, doctors and policemen, farmers and truckers. Forty-three percent of the people back home said they knew someone in the war zone.
Waiting for the war to start, the GI's exercised the soldiers' inalienable right to complain.
Denied beer so as not to offend their Muslim hosts, they complained about their thirst and their chow, this war's update of the old C-ration, called MRE's for "Meals, Ready to Eat." Soldiers called that nomenclature a triple lie; MRE's, they said, weren't meals, weren't ready and weren't fit to eat.
Women played a conspicuous role. The country squirmed when it saw mothers march to war. Many wondered if it were really necessary to send both parents, leaving a bewildered child behind in the arms of a bewildered grandma.
The country got the war from television, and was fixated, though many people thought the press was telling too much. The press, bristling under military censorship, thought otherwise.
On television, America saw Iraq's Scuds fired randomly at Israel and Saudi Arabia, and cheered another bit of U.S. technology, the Scud-smacking Patriot.
Saddam proved an inept propagandist, shooting himself in the foot at every opportunity. He tried the role of cuddly uncle and went on television with the children of his "foreign guests." He posted the "guests" at potential bombing targets, then reversed himself and let them leave. He outraged Americans by parading captive pilots on television. He created the world's biggest oil spill in an act of environmental sabotage. His army savaged Kuwait before leaving.
The ground war did not live up to its numerous worst case scenarios: no tens of thousands of casualties, shortages of ammunition or blood or body bags. It ended with stunning swiftness.
Bush said he did not yet share the American people's sense of euphoria, but of one thing he was sure: "By God, we've kicked the Vietnam syndrome once and for all."
As for the country, Barbara Gaines of Anderson, S.C., mother of an Air Force sergeant, summed up the feeling. "All of us have waited for this moment," she said. "I'm jumping up and down inside."

 

End of Document
