

The Scenario Is Tidy, But the Realities May Not Be
The Associated Press
January 15, 1991, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 890 words
Byline: By JIM ABRAMS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




In a Persian Gulf war, more than 1 million troops would battle each other, armed with some of the world's most deadly and complex weapons, on some of Earth's most confusing and hostile terrain, probably at night, perhaps unable to tell friend from foe.
The ingredients for chaos, always present in combat, are manifold.
The Pentagon's scenario, neat and tidy, calls for vastly superior U.S. air power to quickly demolish Iraq's air force and missile systems and sever Baghdad's communications and supply lines to occupied Kuwait.
Iraqi troops, isolated and pounded from the air, would then be able to offer only limited resistance to the eventual allied ground offensive into Kuwait.
That's the plan.
But military experts say a lot of things could go wrong. Here are some elements that could make the best-laid battlefield plans go awry:
- The weather. Everyone talks about it, but until the warplanes and missiles are unleashed no one knows how great a factor it would be. The swirl of sand and dust could play havoc with finicky weapons systems, and temperatures hot enough to stop machines and man alike are only months away.
America's technological wonders could be rendered nearly useless by sandstorms that would seriously erode the ability of laser beam and TV-guided missiles such as the Copperheads and Mavericks to zero in on their tank targets.
Even rain could be a factor in the coming winter weeks, creating another visibility obstacle for Apache tank-killing helicopters seeking out targets for their Hellfire missiles.
The Army has tried to prepare for all exigencies by training troops on the Mojave Desert in California, but memories are fresh of the last U.S. military encounter with the desert night, the 1980 hostage-rescue effort that ended in chaos and collapse in the desert with eight American soldiers killed.
-Technology. "Never before has the United States introduced so many new elements of military technology into one intense effort," said retired Rear Adm. Eugene Carroll, an adviser for the Center for Defense Information.
Carroll, whose organization has opposed military action in the gulf, said that despite military assurances that the equipment will work, "a lot of things can go wrong."
Among the worrisome machinery are the Apache, which has a history of maintenance problems, its Hellfires, never tested in combat, the newest version of the $$3 million M-1 tank and the Navy's Aegis weapons system, which gained notoriety in 1988 when the USS Vincennes, failing to electronically distinguish a commercial jetliner from a hostile warplane, shot down an Iranian passenger plane and killed all 290 aboard.
Another crucial unknown is how successful Patriot ground-to-air missiles, a vital defense against Iraq's missiles, will be in knocking out of the sky Iraqi Scuds and other missiles at close range. Gattling guns aboard Aegids cruisers could face a similar test if Iraqi jets launch Exocet missiles at Navy ships in the Persian Gulf.
The Air Force has rushed into use a new surveillance system known as "Joint Stars" that would allow field commanders to "see" troop and tank formations far behind enemy lines. But only two prototype planes deploying the system have been built so far, and it's apparently the first time the Air Force has sent to the battlefield a system still in the developmental stage.
-The allies. There are widely stated questions whether America's 400,000 troops have adequate strategic coordination with the British, French, Saudi, Kuwaiti, Egyptian, Syrian and other allied forces scattered along the Saudi-Kuwait border. This could result in disastrous mix-ups, complicated by communications problems.
"Identification of friend or foe will be one of the greatest concerns," said Bruce Blair, a military analyst with the Brookings Institution.
-The Iraqis. A preemptive strike by Iraqi aircraft and Scud missiles could "severely upset our level of command" and create havoc for American war planners, Blair said. This would be particularly true if the Iraqis penetrated U.S. defenses with missiles carrying chemical weapons, or hit Israel, resulting in Israeli retaliation that would undermine Arab support for the anti-Iraq coalition.
It is not inconceivable that America's improbable alliance with Syria would revert to its old-time enmity if Israel intervened. On the other hand it is not unimaginable that Syria, Iran and even Turkey would take advantage of a conquered Saddam Hussein and launch a territorial grab in Iraq.
-Night fighting. The initial American air attacks and any subsequent ground offensives are expected to take place largely under cover of darkness, when U.S. night-fighting technology gives it an advantage.
"But we've found that even in peacetime maneuvers night fighting can be hazardous because of pilot error and equipment failure," Carroll said. He predicted that short-range firing, when artillery shells fall on friendly frontline troops, will kill Americans in this war just as it did in Vietnam.
In Vietnam, along with the 47,244 Americans killed doing battle with the enemy, there were 10,466 other deaths, many due to what Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf III, head of the U.S. command in the Persian Gulf, has called the "fog" of war.
"Things will go wrong, you can plan on it," said one Pentagon officer. "The trick is, it's not what goes wrong, it's how you recover."

 

End of Document
