

The 48th: A Brigade That Was Called But Never Chosen
The Associated Press
March 10, 1991, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 782 words
Byline: By ROBERT BYRD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ATLANTA
Body




They were called three months ago and ordered to leave their families, their homes, their careers and their salaries to go to war.
Instead, the men and women of the 48th Infantry Brigade (Mechanized), Georgia Army National Guard, spent the days before, during and after the Persian Gulf War in the California desert, fighting make-believe battles.
In one exercise early in the training, they pretended to be tanks, pointed their arms and yelled "Boom!" Later, they graduated to using live ammunition and real tanks.
When peace came, they got a flight back to Fort Stewart, their base in southeastern Georgia. They are to be demobilized next month, their commander said Friday.
Two other National Guard combat units were mobilized for the war against Iraq - one from Mississippi, one from Louisiana. Both of them also trained extensively, in Texas, and neither of them went to war, either. The only Guard units that went to the Middle East were non-combat units, chiefly in support roles.
Army officials and congressional representatives now praise the 48th for becoming a competent fighting machine in a relatively short time. But at least some of the troops say the whole experience was confusing, discouraging, maybe even a waste.
"We were confused about whether we were going to war or not going," said Spc. Johnny Williams, a textile worker in civilian life. "The morale got weaker and weaker as the days grew longer."
"I volunteered to be in this unit, and I gave up three months of my life for it," Spc. Ian O'Brien said. "I think we wasted six weeks out of the eight weeks of the training - a waste of the taxpayers' money."
Their commander - who was transferred to a non-activated unit during their long training - is openly resentful of the pressure and criticism they faced.
"In the future, no brigade should be put through what the 48th was put through," said Brig. Gen. William A. Holland.
The episode renewed the debate over the "roundout" concept, by which Guard units such as the 48th are "rounded out" for combat alongside the regular Army. Whether the concept can work or not, whether it had time to work or not, it didn't work for the 48th in the Persian Gulf War.
"Nobody wants to go to war, but we trained hard," said Staff Sgt. Larry Wolfe of Fitzgerald, Ga. "We could have done it."
It was back in August when the Army's 24th Infantry Division, the professional sibling of the 48th, was mobilized for the Middle East crisis. But military officials sent the active-duty 197th Infantry Brigade from west Georgia's Fort Benning to accompany the 24th.
The 4,500-member 48th wasn't mobilized until Nov. 30, after questioning from congressional supporters of the Guard.
"We had to force the Army even to call them up," grumbled Rep. C.V. "Sonny" Montgomery, D-Miss., chairman of the House Veterans Affairs Committee.
"We simply wanted to see that what we planned on would go ahead and be tested," said Rep. Lindsay Thomas, D-Ga., who represents the Fort Stewart area. "Just like testing your weapons. We wanted to see everything we put in place utilized."
After nearly a month at their home base of Fort Stewart, the 48th was sent to Fort Irwin, Calif., home of the military's National Training Center.
The usual training stint for Army forces at the center is about 20 days, but according to Holland, no Guard unit had ever been sent there for wartime rapid-deployment combat training. The 48th was scheduled for 41 days, early January through mid-February.
In mid-January, Brig. Gen Wesley Clarke, commander of the training center, was saying he was "very proud of the soldiers" in the 48th. But at January's end, the problems with the 48th went public.
The independent newspaper Army Times quoted congressional and military sources as saying the brigade was plagued by mismatched skills and personnel, vehicle maintenance problems and a lack of qualified leaders.
Instead of leaving the center after 41 days, the 48th stayed in the desert and practiced further.
Even the brigade's home-state senator, Sam Nunn, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, pronounced the troops unfit for combat in early February. Nunn gave the brigade high marks for dedication, but said it was simply not realistic to expect part-time soldiers to be ready for quick deployment into combat.
While the 48th trained, the air war began. The ground war followed - and wrapped up in 100 hours. When President Bush proclaimed the war was over, the 48th was still in California.
The soldiers of the 48th finally got to go home. They returned to Fort Stewart last week. On Friday, the commander in chief of the Army Forces Command told Congress the brigade will be demobilized in mid-April, if the Pentagon approves.

 

End of Document
