

The Terry Anderson Story: Part II
The Associated Press
September 10, 1993, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 2210 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body



'I'm Lawrence Jenco'; "Hi, Father. I'm Terry Anderson.'
 This is the second installment of the three-part serialization of excerpts from "Den of Lions," Terry Anderson's account of his ordeal as a hostage in Lebanon.
In this section, various hostages are together, although out of view of each other because of partitions and blindfolds. Anderson overhears the dying gasps of the tortured William Buckley, the CIA's station chief in Beirut. Anderson reflects on his past life, and asks to meet another hostage, the Rev. Lawrence Martin Jenco, so that the Roman Catholic priest can hear his confession.
---
From "Den of Lions: Memoirs of Seven Years," by Terry Anderson. Copyright 1993 by TMS Corporation. Published by Crown Publishers, Inc.
---
I can hear the guards talking to Buckley. He's put in my former place, perhaps six feet away from me. He's ill. All of us have had colds for the past week or so, filling the small apartment with coughing and sneezing. Buckley is the only one not recovering. Instead, he develops a fever, mutters to himself. One phrase is clear. "Oh, God. I've lasted a year, and now my body is going." He goes delirious, moaning in the night, and can't keep down food. They give him a bucket, but he vomits little. I ask about him, but am rebuffed.
A new hostage is brought in late in the evening. He speaks loudly. When asked, he gives his name to one of the guards - David Jacobsen, administrator at the teaching hospital of the American University of Beirut. He is placed on a mattress just outside the plastic curtain of my cubicle, and chained to the wall. I peek cautiously during a quiet moment in the apartment. Tall. Long, thin pale legs. Blindfold like mine. White shorts, T-shirt. I don't dare whisper to him - the guards are lying on their mattresses just two or three feet away.
One or two days later, in the evening, the chief comes in. He's always referred to as "the Hajj," a title of honor given to those who have made the pilgrimage to Mecca, and the guards show much deference to him. He talks with his men, then walks over to Buckley's cot. In Arabic, he mutters, "Mareed. Ktir, ktir mareed." Sick, very sick. Then he goes out.
The guards won't give Buckley water or juice. "No good. You sick." They believe that anyone with a fever should not be given liquids - exactly the opposite of proper treatment, like many such "remedies." He pleads for an orange. Finally, in the night, there is the sound of him gasping, floundering about on his cot. The guards come in. A thump, like Buckley kicked the wall. Then silence. After a few minutes, the guards unlock his chains and carry him out of the room. The conviction leaps to my mind - he has died. I begin praying for him, as I had many times before.
The next day, I ask Sayeed about him. "Where's Buckley? Is he OK?"
"Oh, yes, he is in a very good place," Sayeed replies lightly.
---
My memories of Madeleine keep me from condemning myself completely. She's such a lovely person, strong, knowing herself, happy with who she is. Intelligent. What does she see in me, beyond all these weaknesses? There must be something there for her. But I can't build pictures of her in my mind, can't think about the months together in any detail. It still hurts too much, far too much.
Long nights, squirrel-in-a-cage nights. Mind spinning, thoughts, emotions whirling. Anger. Frustration. Pain. Guilt.
I can't do this, God. I'm finished. I surrender. There's nothing I can do to change anything, nothing anyone can do. And it's just going to go on, and I can't do it. Help me. There's no reason why you should. Don't we always turn to you when we're in trouble, and away from you when things are good? I'm doing the same. But you say you love me. So help me.
So far down. My mind so tired, my spirit so sore. And more to come, more and more. I just can't do it.
But at the bottom, in surrender so complete there is no coherent thought, no real pain, no feeling, just exhaustion, just waiting, there is something else. Warmth-light-softness. Acceptance, by me, of me. Rest. After a while, some strength. Enough, for now.
It happens once, twice. A few hours later, it fades, and the anger and frustration and longing are back. But the memory is there, the sense of presence. And sometimes the place is reached again, briefly. Not often, but sometimes. Meanwhile, the hours are endured, the days gotten through. And the nights are spent in prayer, and thought, and the effort to get back to that place.
---
Cautiously, I raise my blindfold. Father Jenco, a white-haired man with a full beard and a gentle smile, is sitting cross-legged on David's mattress. We clasp hands. "I'm Lawrence Jenco." "Hi, Father. I'm Terry Anderson. I don't know where to start. It's been a very long time since I said confession."
"It doesn't matter. Just go ahead." He nods in encouragement.
"I left the church when I was young. For a long time, I was an agnostic, or at least I said I was. I don't know what I meant by that. Just laziness, I guess. Didn't want to deal with it. I came back just a few months ago. Haven't gone to confession, or taken communion yet, though. But I'm a Catholic.
"I was in the process of getting a divorce when I was kidnapped. Mostly my fault, I know. I was not a good man - chasing women, drinking. Seems like I just kind of lost my way for a while."
The discussion goes on for 20 minutes or more, twice the time the guards had agreed to. Father Martin's responses are always quiet, gentle. Mostly, he just listens. A few times he offers brief assurances on points I do not understand, such as how difficult it might be to get an annulment of my first marriage.
For a Catholic, ritual confession, or the sacrament of reconciliation, as it is called now, is an emotional ceremony, no matter how informal the setting. This was my first confession in 25 years, my first formal step back to the church. I'd spent months wrestling with myself; months trying to understand where that moment in an English church six months ago was taking me; more months lying chained on a cot with nothing to do but examine myself, study the Bible and try to deal, alone, with my anger, frustration, remorse. This smiling, soft-spoken priest, also a hostage, dressed like me in white cotton shorts and T-shirt, frightened, in his own pain and anger received the full flood of my emotions, guilts, and concerns, returning warmth, love, and understanding.
By the end of our session, the bare floor around us is littered with crumpled tissues. Both he and I are crying. Finally, I kneel beside him. "Father, forgive me, for I have sinned, in word and in thought, in what I have done and what I have not done."
He rests his right hand lightly on my head. "In the name of a gentle, loving God, you are forgiven." He pulls my head gently to his shoulder and hugs me. We sit back and look at each other. In a few moments, we hear a guard turning the lock on the door, and we pull our blindfolds down over our eyes.
---
(Anderson, Jacobsen, Jenco and two other hostages, Thomas Sutherland and the Rev. Benjamin Weir, must make a seemingly fateful decision. Later, Anderson reflects on God's role in his plight.)
---
We've just had a startling announcement from the Hajj. They've decided to let one of us go home, "as a humanitarian gesture"! It's also an effort to persuade the Reagan administration that these people are serious about wanting to negotiate. The most startling part, though, is that he says we're to choose which one. We're all stunned.
Then the Hajj adds that it cannot be Tom. He will be the last to go home, he says. It's impossible to tell if he's serious. He also says it should not be me. We protest. Ben argues in Arabic with him, fruitlessly. He leaves.
How are we going to handle this? Ben, kidnapped in 1984, has been here longest, of course. But if someone is going to be a spokesman, is he the one? He's a very good man, but quiet. We all deserve to go home, and we all want it badly. I can see it on everyone's face, and I know it's on mine. What a terrible, terrible thing to do to us. Perhaps we should refuse to choose. But then, maybe no one will go. No, we will try.
We quickly decide that, whatever choice is made, it must be unanimous, and it should be by secret ballot. We also agree that we will ignore the Hajj's stricture about Tom and me. We walk around in our circle for half an hour. Very little talking. Finally, I speak.
"We all want to go. I think, if it can't be me, it should be David. He's articulate and forceful. If someone is to speak for us, to persuade Reagan to begin talks, he'd do it well."
David's grateful, but says little. Pastor Ben says he does not want to go, that he will stay. Father Martin says the same.
We sit down, tear up some paper, and begin the ballot. First time, one vote for everyone except Ben, two for me. How does Ben feel? His face shows nothing, and he says nothing. Another ballot, same result. We take a break, get up, and begin walking in a circle again. After a few minutes, I ask, "Anybody want to say anything else?"
"Why? You want to campaign?" David snaps. I don't reply.
Another ballot. This time it's two for David, three for me. I'm in a quandary. Should I vote for myself? Or David? How long will this go on? Again. Same. Again. Now it's four for me, one for David.
"Well, that's that," Father Martin says, obviously assuming the single vote for David is mine. "No, Father. It has to be unanimous," I tell him. It takes him a few seconds to realize that both David and I are voting for ourselves. I'm ashamed at the silence.
Last ballot. Five for me. We sit back. I can feel the tears building. Father Martin hugs me, then Ben, Tom. Finally David.
"Thank you," I manage. "I'm very grateful. I also feel guilty. You all deserve to go as much as I do."
I'm also scared. The Hajj said he didn't want it to be me. Will he veto the choice? Dear God, I don't know what I feel. I can't believe it will happen, I feel somehow it's not right. I'm ashamed of wanting it so bad. But they chose, we all chose. I can't allow myself to really believe this is the end.
We call Sayeed, tell him of our choice. He laughs. "We have already chosen." We ask him why. The Hajj told us to choose. Whom have they picked? "I will tell the Hajj. He will talk to you."
A night of misery, joy, confused prayer. I try as hard as I can not to believe it. But it's no use. I can't help thinking about being free, seeing Maddy, my daughter, Gabrielle. The shame and guilt won't go away. I can't even look at Ben. He's so sincere in his happiness for me. And the others, they must be terribly disappointed.
Finally, the Hajj appears. No discussion, no greeting. He speaks in Arabic to Ben, at length, angrily. Ben gasps. "Oh, no. Oh, no." What is it? I know already.
"He says I'm the one. I'm going tonight. I tried to argue, but he won't listen. I'm sorry."
The disappointment overwhelms me. I expected it. I was prepared for it. It's a relief to have it settled so surely, after all the agonizing. But it hurts. Oh, God, how it hurts.
Ben is quickly given a haircut, clothes. We get a brief chance to embrace him, wish him luck. "I'm sorry," he says to me again. "Don't worry," I reply. "You should have been the one we chose anyway." He's hustled out.
The four of us sit quietly for a while. Then the lights are turned out. I pray, reaching for calm, for acceptance. Slowly, slowly, it comes. Lord, I don't know what you want of me, what you're trying to do. Help me.
---
None of this was God's doing. I cannot believe in an accountant God, who weighs my sins and metes out appropriate punishment. These men are not in any way I can understand God's instruments. This is not my punishment for adultery, or indifference, or all the petty dishonesties I've been guilty of in my life.
Nor do I believe it is a deliberate test, that I'm a kind of modern Job, being subjected to some sort of spiritual test. God knows my soul, to its innermost depths, if he cares to. He doesn't need to check, to give me a midterm examination.
This is man's work, the product of a combination of political and economic forces, mixed with the needs and greeds of petty, evil men and the indifference of others. God is there to help me, to give me guidance and solace, and to keep me in the knowledge that no matter how much I may be humiliated, no matter how much I may come to dislike myself as my knowledge of myself grows, His love is unquestioning. He did not place me here, but He will help me get through it, even unto death, with grace and dignity, if I accept His help. But that, strangely enough, is the hardest part - accepting.
None of my speculation is entirely satisfactory. I come up with no sure answers, no definitive understanding. Had I a single grain of humility, I wouldn't expect to. These are things the greatest minds in the ages have grappled with, without reaching any final resolutions. God is essentially unknowable; whatever plans, or purposes, or arrangements He has for us would have to be unknowable as well. But somehow, here, now, I have to work out some way of understanding what is happening to me, physically and spiritually, some way to come to terms with Him, and with myself, to know what we expect of each other.
---
NEXT: Part III - 'I'm a Syrian Colonel. You're Free.'

 

End of Document
