

The Long Wait Ends with the Start of War
The Associated Press
January 16, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 765 words
Byline: By MITCHELL LANDSBERG, Associated Press Writer
Body




For all the hours of preparation, for all the discussion and speculation, when war with Iraq finally came Wednesday many people across America still were jolted by the news.
"I was expecting it. I knew it was coming," said Sandra Hippen of Support Our Country's Military in Sioux Falls, N.D. "But there's no way to prepare for war … for the fear."
Like many around the nation, Mrs. Hippen was just arriving home from work when reports that American fighter-pilots had taken off from Saudi Arabia were televised shortly before 7 p.m.
"You could hear the bombing on TV," she said, her voice cracking. "We just looked at each other. The war is here."
It was not a surprise, coming fewer than 24 hours after the expiration of a United Nations deadline under which Saddam Hussein had to either pull out of Kuwait or risk attack by a U.S.-led multinational force.
Citizens immediately took to the streets as dusk passed into dark, their numbers swelling as the news spread.
In Washington, D.C., across Pennsylvania Avenue from the White House, hundreds of protesters demonstrated in a park before marching through downtown. "Don't Bag Our Boys" one sign read.
In San Francisco, minutes after the attack was launched, hundreds of protesters clogged one of the city's downtown arteries, chanting "no blood for oil." Police in the nearby suburb of Alameda raised a drawbridge to halt a band of student demonstrators.
A group of about 200 Oregon activists quickly gathered in a park facing Portland's federal building. A half-hour later, the crowd had doubled.
Kay Reid, 51, joined in singing "Give Peace A Chance" while cradling a candle. She said she was disappointed rather than shocked by the military action.
"And the use of language, to say that we are liberating Kuwait, to call this Desert Storm, is repugnant," she said.
Similar protests and candlelight vigils quickly formed in Austin, Texas; Harrisburg, Pa.; Huntington, W.Va. Others were planned in Des Moines, Iowa, St. Louis and Providence, R.I.
"Everybody's been expecting it," Frank Halabi said from his printing shop in the Detroit suburb of Dearborn, one of the largest enclaves of native Arabs outside the Middle East.
"I'm just like any other American, watching what's happening over there," the Lebanese-born Halabi said while watching the war unfold on television. "It's like watching two brothers fighting. I just hope there aren't casualties too big on both sides."
Casualties were on the minds of people gathered in living rooms, taverns, shopping malls, office buildings and street corners.
"I'm just horrified," said the Rev. Bob Moore, executive director of the Coalition for Nuclear Disarmament in Princeton, N.J. "I'm grief-stricken. I can't help but think about the people who are down there who are human beings and civilians. We're going to have thousands of dead civilians."
The news came to Fort Devens, the largest military installation in New England, during a ceremony to ship out the 94th Military Police Army Reserve unit.
"The word is being passed by word of mouth," said John Rasmuson, a spokesman for the fort, located in Ayer, Mass. "The mood is somber."
In Nashville, Tenn., Beau Thomas was into his fourth consecutive day of anti-war protest in front of a downtown post office when he learned the attack had started.
"I think it's a horrible, terrible thing. War is immoral," he said. "George Bush has stepped into something and he has no idea of what it is."
Many said, however, the president's decision was inevitable and just.
"I thought they waited too damn long," said Jim Freyburger of Seminole, Texas, father of Marine Sgt. Jim Freyburger Jr.
"I think they ought to have started bombing when they told them they would start right after the deadline," said Freyburger, whose son is stationed aboard a warship in the Persian Gulf.
"I think the attack is the best thing they could have done," Freyburger said. "I'm scared for my son … (but) this comes with the territory."
Freyburger said an attack was necessary to bring Saddam to justice.
"I hear those Americans crying 'No blood for oil' and it makes me sick," Freyburger said. "This is not a war about oil. This is the same thing that Hitler did. He started small and the next thing you know he wanted the world. This man has to be stopped."
But politics and moral stands were of little comfort to some of those with loved ones in immediate peril.
Victoria Nord of Quincy, Mass., was among them. Her son, Russell, is with a National Guard unit in Saudi Arabia.
"I'm glad (the president) had a restful night last night. I didn't," she said. "I'm glad he's at peace. I'm not."
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto NY85; others upcoming

 

End of Document
