

The Prosecutor And The Seven-Years War
The Associated Press
January 20, 1994, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 739 words
Byline: By PETE YOST, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Prosecutor Lawrence Walsh says he's content with the outcome of his seven-year investigation into the Iran-Contra scandal - even though two ex-presidents have nothing good to say about him and much of official Washington thinks he should have left town long ago.
The criticism hurts, Walsh acknowledged Wednesday as he defended his final report's conclusions that top Reagan aides engaged in a cover-up to protect the president from impeachment.
"We thought we'd be able to wrap up a year or so" after the 1990 trial of ex-national security adviser John Poindexter, Walsh said in an interview.
That was before Walsh's investigators uncovered Caspar Weinberger's notes chronicling the behind-the-scenes maneuvering inside the administration as the Iran-Contra scandal unfolded in November 1986.
"We've followed the evidence as far as it will take us - it's time to conclude," said Walsh.
His final report was called "a vehicle for baseless accusations" by former President Reagan. And Senate Republican Leader Bob Dole described his seven-year stint as "a case study in prosecutorial abuse and excess."
The prosecutor is highly critical of George Bush - both as vice president and president - and top Reagan Cabinet members - less-so of the man at the top, Reagan, who "set the stage" - in the Walsh report's words - for the illegal activities which ensued.
Walsh is even kinder to Reagan during interviews than in the prosecutor's final report.
"Yes, the president did set in motion activities which circumvented the Arms Export Control Act on the Iran arms shipments and the Boland Amendment" barring U.S. military assistance to the Nicaraguan Contras, said Walsh.
"But both are civil statutes (and) the president honestly believed that what he was doing was right for the country," said Walsh. "I hate to treat the president of the United States like someone who walks on the grass where there's a sign saying keep off the grass. I think the president should be treated differently."
Walsh is less kind to those under Reagan.
The prosecutor said he was stunned by President Bush's pardons of Weinberger and five other Iran-Contra figures on Christmas Eve 1992, two weeks before the scheduled start of Weinberger's criminal trial. And Walsh said Bush was reluctant to be interviewed after he left office last year - as the ex-president's lawyers tried to set restrictions on what questions could be asked. The interview never took place.
On the pardons, "there may have been a self-protective aspect to them" since Bush was a potential witness in Weinberger's case, said Walsh.
"Unlike Reagan, there was nothing unique about Bush's position during Iran-Contra; he was simply the vice president," said the prosecutor, whose report concluded that contrary to Bush's public statements, he was fully aware of the Iran initiative.
Bush said the "slim possibility" that he would be called as a witness was not a factor in issuing the pardons in Iran-Contra - which Bush said was largely a political dispute between a Republican administration and a Democratic Congress.
Perhaps most galling to Walsh: former Attorney General Edwin Meese - whom the Walsh report describes as spearheading the cover-up - is now leading the charge against the prosecutor.
It was Meese who first interviewed White House aide Oliver North about his activities in Iran-Contra in 1986, with the attorney general accompanied by note-taking aides instead of experienced lawyers from the Justice Department's criminal division. While Meese and the lawyers took a break to go to lunch, North destroyed Iran-Contra documents.
"If it had been the housing department Meese was investigating instead of the White House, he would have sent the criminal division and he wouldn't have let them keep their documents," said Walsh. "It was hopelessly conflicted" having Meese conduct the initial inquiry into covert White House operations whose exposure could wreck the political fortunes of the attorney general's boss.
Walsh served in the Justice Department during the Eisenhower administration as deputy attorney general. Early in his law career, Walsh worked for rackets-busting Manhattan District Attorney Thomas E. Dewey. A former federal judge, Walsh became one of Wall Street's superlawyers, defending major corporations in complex litigation. And at age 83 - after a criminal investigation he had believed would last only a few years - he plans to continue practicing law in Oklahoma City.
 Load-Date: January 20, 1994

 

End of Document
