

The Denver Post:
The Associated Press
March 1, 1991, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 960 words
Body




The Iraqi army has not been completely vanquished, so the fighting may continue a few days. And if Iraq's military command capitulates to the reality of defeat, its political apparatus may resist a full surrender and make a continued American military presence in the region a necessity. But even if these fears aren't realized, the time-consuming logistics of moving a half-million American soldiers out of the region will take months.
And as they move out, U.S. military personnel still may be in danger. Given historical precedent, it's certain that the anger and hatred stirred up by this war will linger, making any American in the Middle East a potential target for terrorists.
… An American and allied victory in the Persian Gulf was relatively painless, thanks to superb planning by our top military commanders and equally laudable battlefield behavior by average U.S. soldiers, sailors and aviators.
A lasting peace in the region will be far more difficult to achieve."
 
 ---
Post-Bulletin, Rochester, Minn.:
President Bush acted responsibly in calling a cease-fire and declaring the liberation of Kuwait accomplished.
The decision sets in motion a whole chain of events which will be required to bring the military operations to an end and to begin the demanding process of building peace in a region riven by violent and ancient antagonisms.
… The task for the U.S. and allied leaders now is to address the challenges of peace as skillfully as they conducted the military campaign. The goal should be to make sure that Iraq's war machine is neutralized and to encourage a more moderate leadership.
… The United States and United Nations should also begin reaching out to other nations of the region in an effort to build a consensus for a peace that goes beyond a mere settlement with Iraq. The horrors of the recent war should be a sufficient motivation to address the area's fundamental problems, including the great disparity in wealth among the Arab countries and the seemingly irreconcilable conflict of the Palestinians and Israelis.
 
 ---
Lincoln (Neb.) Journal:
Politically, George Bush sits on top of the world; the United States today is deemed the globe's only true military superpower. The gamble Bush took, single-handedly changing the character of the Middle East adventure from a punishing but passive defensive chokehold on Iraq to an offensive campaign and then compelling Congress to endorse it, seems to have paid off for the Republican president. If the next election were tomorrow, Bush would win in a breeze.
 
 ---
Star Tribune of Minneapolis:
Although he did not know it then, Saddam Hussein began a long surrender the day after his troops invaded Kuwait. He must complete it on the terms President Bush set down in announcing the unilateral cease-fire that began at 11 p.m. last night Twin Cities time.
No single person can take credit for forcing Iraq to relinquish its conquest, but Bush comes close. We have disagreed at times with his strategy. But we have highest praise for the skill he has shown in carrying it out.
 
 ---
The Clarion-Ledger of Jackson, Miss.:
Saddam Hussein's seven-month military rope-a-dope in Kuwait is about over, which brings up another issue: Should democracy be a condition of ending sanctions?
The issue of the democratization of Iraq is given weight when it's considered that the same Baath Party in Iraq that produced a Saddam is still in power.
Should Saddam or his henchmen be allowed to stay in power, or should the coalition require free elections?
So far, the U.S. government has shied away from the question, saying the Iraqi people will deal with Saddam.
… The U.N. or the alliance could require elections as part of the conditions for the lifting of economic and trade sanctions. But would they? That is clouded by the political conditions of the Mideast as a whole.
Neither Saudi Arabia nor Kuwait is a democracy; neither has elections. It would seem highly hypocritical for them to demand Iraq democratize when they don't.
Indeed, it would seem that the United States could - even should - insist on it by Kuwait at the least, since without the U.S. involvement there would be no Kuwait.
 
 ---
St. Louis Post-Dispatch:
Though praising the splendid job done by the U.S.-led forces, Mr. Bush was careful to make a distinction between gloating and pride. His words were the words of a man who knows that the end of the war marks the beginning of an equally daunting challenge.
 
 ---
Charleston (W.Va.) Daily Mail:
President Bush's cease-fire today ends Saddam Hussein's brutal 209-day occupation of Kuwait and the center of the world stage.
A bully has been soundly thrashed.
The lessons of this war are many. Soviet arms sales to other nations are as deadly as the Soviet arms buildup. The trillion-dollar push to a 600-ship Navy and 16-division Army was money spent wisely. Quick, decisive action beats cautious deliberation when it comes to saving lives in battle. The United States still has the resolve to stand up and fight for what's right.
America's sons and daughters soon will come home. There shall be parades. A fifth star for Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf is likely.
But consider this. The Congressional medal of Honor is reserved for those whose valor saves American lives in combat. How about one for the military planners whose daring ground war tactics - what Schwarzkopf called the Hail Mary - kept allied casualties well below anyone's wildest dreams.
The allies stood up to aggression, and a threat to the safety of the world has been eliminated. Let's not let Saddam Hussein rebuild.
As for the future, the time has come for Saudi Arabia, Syria and Kuwait to recognize Israel. The time has also come to settle the Palestine issue, if only to remove any other despot from using this as a cover for aggression.

 

End of Document
