

The Deportees and Hamas: Who And What Are They?
The Associated Press
February 7, 1993, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1093 words
Byline: By G.G. LaBELLE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




In the snowy hills of Lebanon, the men deported by Israel say their prayers, cook simple meals and plead for justice to television cameras that carry their images around the world.
In Israel, officials excoriate the men as Islamic terrorists who are financed by Iran and have links with shadowy Muslim groups in America.
The public relations battle has raged since the Palestinians were expelled Dec. 17, but the basic questions remain: Who are the 399 men now in Lebanon and what is Hamas, the group they are said to lead?
First, as Israel readily admits, they are not the triggermen directly responsible for the deaths of six Israeli soldiers in December that inspired the mass deportation.
Second, most of them undoubtedly support extremist Muslim groups that want to replace the Jewish state with an Islamic one and issue leaflets that advocate killing as a means to that end.
"We certainly do not claim that they are Boy Scouts," said Andrew Whitley, director of the human rights group Middle East Watch, outlining a study it conducted of deportees.
Human rights advocates say Israel violated international law by deporting people from occupied territory and could have tried them instead.
Whitley added that he is not convinced all the deported men were ringleaders or inciters of the radical factions Islamic Jihad and Hamas, as Israel asserted.
Most appeared to be chosen as "the easier ones to deport," since they openly sympathized with radical factions, he said.
His organization's report noted that about half were prayer leaders, religious scholars or Islamic judges. They also include 15 professors, 14 physicians and 16 employees of the U.N. agency that aids Palestinian refugees.
Many are well known to Israeli authorities, have been arrested before and could have been picked up again at any time.
Dr. Abdul-Aziz Rantisi, the Gaza physician who has become the deportees' spokesman, was interviewed by journalists regularly as a founder of Hamas. Another prominent deportee, Dr. Mahmoud Zahar, publicly supported the group.
Both were in a "Who's Who" of Hamas published by the Israeli intelligence magazine Matara two years ago.
Matara listed about 30 supposed activists. Some are in the latest batch of deportees, others were exiled earlier or imprisoned and a few are still in their homes.
The "Who's Who" says little more about the newly exiled Palestinians than the deportation orders, which simply accused them of being "inciters."
Matara's most specific accusation is that deportee Nizar Abdallah "made contact" with the Hamas squad that kidnapped an Israeli soldier in 1989 and later killed him.
It said Rantisi was jailed for 2 years as a founder of Hamas, which Israel outlawed in 1989, and for leading its operations in southern Gaza. Zahar was described as "very active" in the movement.
The magazine said Zahar was one of five Hamas men named as a possible Palestinian peace negotiator in 1989 and had met with Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin, now the prime minister and responsible for the deportations.
As Zahar's role illustrates, Hamas is a complicated, even contradictory organization. Philosophically, it is dedicated to the destruction of Israel and opposes peace with it. But behind the scenes, it has been trying to join the leadership of the PLO, which supports the peace talks.
It has an armed underground, as does the smaller, more violent Islamic Jihad. Hamas zealots have killed soldiers, Israeli civilians and Palestinians suspected of collaborating with Israel.
But Hamas group also operates mosques, clinics, charities for the poor - even a drug-cure program. Those activities are its political base in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Palestinians doubt that all the men expelled are connected with the Hamas underground. They see them on television and recognize them as neighbors.
Ali Jarbawi, a political science professor at Bir Zeit University, who has studied Hamas, says Israel has given political stature to an organization most Palestinians believe has far less support than the PLO.
"Christians are even asking what is the way to be like Hamas," Jarbawi said.
He accused Israel of labeling anyone who speaks against it as a Hamas radical. He did not claim all the deportees were innocent, but said some known to him were just Islamic ideologues who did not even belong to Hamas.
To many Israelis, angered by the killings of their soldiers in December, the reported link to Hamas justifies the deportation. The government argues that those sent to Lebanon were at least indirectly responsible for the deaths.
Rabin's spokesman on defense matters, Oded Ben-Ami, said the men "don't have blood on their hands, but were those behind the scenes … who did the financing, the paperwork and acted as go-betweens."
Ben-Ami included in his description of the deportees people who distributed leaflets and wrote slogans on walls, which hardly seem to be major offenses.
It is no wonder Hamas frightens Israelis, however, given its rhetoric. The group's covenant states: "The day of judgment will not come to pass until the Muslims wage war against the Jews and destroy them."
Hamas leaflets have been more specific: "Every Jew and every settler will be a target for murder; his blood and possessions are expendable."
Those are shocking words, but not much worse than past statements by PLO factions, or by a few Jewish extremists on the other side. The Middle East seems to lend itself to overblown rhetoric.
But the words of Hamas do not always match its politics. Although it demands all of historical Palestine, including Israel, its supporters also want a role in any Palestinian state, whatever its territory.
Despite the group's pledges of no peace with Israel, Zahar said in December he would negotiate with Israeli leaders if they would withdraw from the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Ideologues like Zahar see no conflict between negotiating with Israel and the Hamas goal of destroying it.
They see the Islamic state as a long-term end, arguing with the same absolutism as some extremist Jews who see no place for Arabs in biblical Israel, including the occupied territories, since God gave it to the Jews.
Zahar believes not only Israel, but what he regards as sinful Arab states such as Iraq and Saudi Arabia, will be swallowed up in a future Islamic nation stretching across the Middle East.
"Israel will cease to exist of its own free will when it sees one pan-Islamic state around it," he explained once to the Jerusalem Post. "Israelis will then change their feelings toward Muslims and accept Islamic rule with full religious rights."

 

End of Document
