

The War Gave Adversaries a Windfall Look at U.S. Tactics
The Associated Press
March 3, 1991, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 853 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Victory, too, has a price: The U.S. military, in using its most advanced weapons and tactics to defeat the Iraqis in six weeks, gave other potential adversaries a windfall look at everything in the American arsenal.
And that gave them a chance to devise countermeasures.
"It is the kind of situation that intelligence people regard as a windfall," said Frank Gaffney, former deputy assistant secretary of defense for international security policies.
Others were looking, no doubt.
Nicholas Johnson, a space engineer who monitors Soviet space activity for Teledyne Brown Engineering in Colorado Springs, Colo., said after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait "we saw activity of a nature which suggests the Soviets were increasing surveillance of the region." Surveillance notched up again after the war started Jan. 17.
"There is no question that Soviet military and security planners followed very closely the progress of the war and paid special attention to the technology we deployed, from the Patriot to the stealth aircraft to the capabilities of the M-1 tank in the desert," said Bruce G. Blair, an expert on military technology at the Brookings Institution.
On the other hand, the Soviets, chief arms supplier to Saddam Hussein, probably drew no pleasure in what they saw, Blair says; he guesses they were "chastened" by the poor performance of their weapons in Iraqi hands.
"This war constitutes a severe blow to the prestige, reputation and export marketability of Soviet weapons," he said, and that could be significant because "the Soviets depend very heavily on arms exports for hard currency."
It's probably no coincidence, then, that as soon as the cease-fire was on, Soviet Defense Minister Dmitri Yazov called for a sweeping review of that country's air defenses because of "weak spots." The military, he said Thursday, "is analyzing the use of armed forces by the United States and other countries" during the war.
Richard Betts, former member of the National Security Council staff, said that since the Iraqis used Soviet equipment and reflected Soviet training and Soviet doctrine, the war tipped the Soviets' hand, too.
Although the Soviet Union does not seem to be the superpower rival it once was, plenty of people in Washington still worry about the hard-line drift of events there or the prospect that the old guard military may yet take over from Mikhail Gorbachev. They're unwilling to discount the Soviets as antagonists.
Other regional powers - Syria, for example - no doubt soaked up whatever arms intelligence was to be gleaned, said John Pike, director of space policy for the Federation of American Scientists.
Satellites aren't necessary for that activity; broadcasts and the newspapers provided plenty of useful information about U.S. capabilities, Pike said.
But Gaffney said the Russians had a special advantage.
"One of the virtues of maintaining a very close relationship between their intelligence services and those of Iraq," Gaffney said, "is that they almost certainly got a thorough take from the Iraqis and their own collection (of intelligence) about performance characteristics, communications frequencies, electronic countermeasure techniques and, of course, the application of doctrine and technology."
Greg Williams, research associate at the Project on Government Procurement, a non-profit group which monitors arms development, said a number of weapons proved their mettle in the Persian Gulf War.
Among them: the Apache attack helicopter, equipped with night vision gun sights which enabled crews to see Iraqi soldiers fleeing in the night; the stealth fighter-bomber; the Bradley Fighting Vehicle; the Tomahawk missile and the airborne battlefield reconnaissance aircraft system known as J-STARS.
While using those weapons exposed them to scrutiny, Williams noted, there was "tremendous benefit in the experience you gain in a large-scale operation like the gulf." No exercise is as valuable as combat for testing weapons and war-making concepts.
Of course the one-sided nature of the battle was not necessarily a reflection of inadequacies in Soviet equipment or tactics; the Iraqis lost control of the air early on and many of their troops lacked any stomach for battle.
Pike said the war's big lessons were that countermeasures can be taken against weapons like the Scud missile; that air defense systems can be overcome; how effectively tanks can be disabled from a distance by helicopters; and the importance of reconnaissance and of jamming the other side's communications and radar.
Gaffney said that when the Soviets monitored the battlefield performance of new American weaponry, they also gained insights into American strategy.
"We have spent a lot of time developing and refining the AirLand battle doctrine which involves a high level of coordination and integration of various arms of the U.S. military in order to accomplish given objectives," he said.
"What I'm sure the Soviets are benefiting from - much as we are - is seeing this doctrine put into play. There's nothing like the real thing to teach you what you're trying to do - and to teach your adversary how you're doing it."

 

End of Document
