

The 102nd Congress Began With War, Ended With Fighting
The Associated Press
November 28, 1991, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1095 words
Byline: By STEVEN KOMAROW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




From the first vote on the Persian Gulf War to the final stalemate over taxes, the session of Congress that ended Wednesday was marked more by conflict than accomplishment. It was one where hearings on a Supreme Court nominee touched America far more than any bill.
The routine got done but the cries for change, for better health care, for better education, for protection from crime, went unheeded. The recession went unanswered, save for longer unemployment benefits and the jobs created by a renewed federal roads program.
"Everyone knows there's a lot of trouble out there yet there's very little happening to combat the problems," said Rep. Leon Panetta, D-Calif. In the words of one Republican staffer, it was: "The Behind the Curve Congress."
It didn't start that way.
The first session of the 102nd Congress started in a rush, the rush to war.
It was the first time since World War II that a president had so directly asked to attack another nation. The president wanted authority to use military force to drive Saddam Hussein's army from Kuwait. Democratic leaders favored continued economic sanctions.
Bush won the vote and then, in short order, the war. And then he turned his guns, which by popularity polls were formidable indeed, toward the Congress. He demanded a crime bill and a highway bill, and within 100 days.
The Democrats retrenched, passing new veterans benefits as winter turned to spring with little action in the House or Senate. The economy remained frozen.
At mid-session, the recession finally spurred the political debate, if not the legislative pace, and talk of a tax cut began to emerge. Just talk, then.
A much more lively topic of conversation had to do with the recession-proof lifestyles of the lawmakers themselves.
The Senate nabbed itself a pay raise to catch up to the House at $ 125,100 a year in a night-time sneak attack.
Meanwhile, it turned out that at the House Bank lawmakers had been enjoying for years free overdrafts on their accounts. Some were kiting thousands of dollars of checks a month, and House Speaker Thomas S. Foley was forced to shut the place down and launch an ethics committee investigation.
During all this, the unemployment rate climbed, and Democrats promised a package of bills to serve as an economic stimulus. These would include a tax cut for the middle class, extended benefits for the long term unemployed, and the highway bill.
It would be months, however, months of economic distress, before these tasks would begin to be addressed. There were distractions.
Bush fought Congress' attempt to reverse a series of Supreme Court rulings that made it harder to sue for job discrimination. He called it a quota bill. Only months later, after his stubbornness began to anger some Republican senators, did Bush agree to compromise.
At first, the nomination of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court was moving along as scripted. The Democrats on the Senate Judiciary Committee asked a lot of questions, the nominee answered few, and Senate approval before the first Monday in October seemed in order.
But someone leaked that the committee was told of a sex harassment accusation against Thomas from a former underling, Anita Hill, and the panel decided to hold public hearings.
Not since Watergate had anything in Congress kept the nation so glued to its television sets. The networks pre-empted the soap operas, and why not - no soap opera could top these sordid tales of pubic hairs and porno stars.
In the end, Thomas won his lifetime seat on the high bench and Hill became a darling of the feminists. But the public opinion polls showed Congress had never been held in lower esteem.
They just didn't "get it," people said, but they did get everybody from Oprah to Phil talking about it.
In the wake of that fiasco, the focus of Congress turned to getting down to business before getting out of town.
The annual spending bills had to get done, and they were, but only after another round of vetoes from a president stiff-arming abortion-rights provisions.
The president had insisted that the recession was over and vetoed two bills to extend the jobless payments before agreeing to a third. But it turned out that one wasn't drafted quit right and the final piece didn't clear the House and Senate until Congress' last day before Thanksgiving.
The highway bill, a huge $ 151 billion package, was five years in the planning and was supposed to be done by October 1. But House Democrats mistakenly thought lawmakers would support raising gasoline taxes, and the bill had to be redrafted.
This bill too wasn't resolved until Congress' final-day rush of legislation, because of bickering to the last over which states would get the most money.
A major crime bill, expanding the death penalty and imposing new gun controls, never made it. The House managed by two votes to keep it alive but the Senate put off final action until January because of Republican protests.
At the end, congressional leaders of both parties tried to portray the year in a positive light. The Persian Gulf vote alone made it historic, they said, and they cited successes in the nuts-and-bolts of governing.
The Congress obeyed, as much as could be done, the spending limits in the deficit reduction pact signed with Bush last year. This year, they approved emergency aid to a disintegrating Soviet Union. Next year, they would look at whether the declining Soviet threat could ease some of the burden of America's taxpayers.
Thanks to Congress, the savings and loan cleanup will continue and the bank insurance fund remain solvent, with taxpayers' dollars.
A year after the recession began, the leaders said December would be the time to begin a formal look at tax cuts and other suggestions to boost the economy.
And they adjourned, sort of.
Instead of giving Bush the liberty of attacking them for going home and abandoning the nation's problem, Democrats rewrote the normal resolution so they could recall their members at any time, to pass an economic stimulus plan, if necessary.
If not, they will return in January for the second session of the 102nd Congress.
Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell, D-Maine, said next year's session will be the one to watch. It was unfair, he said, to judge this Congress now.
"Just as no football game is ever decided at halftime… no full, fair and final evaluation of a Congress can be made until the end of the (two-year) Congress," he said.
And he promised that the message from the public was getting through, that next year Congress would "act on those things important to them and that affect their daily lives."

 

End of Document
