

The Artists: Museums Battle Takeover Attempts Aimed at Prize Pieces
The Associated Press
June 14, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 892 words
Byline: By KILEY ARMSTRONG, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Sometimes it's a plundered treasure. But sometimes an artwork or antiquity whose ownership is contested was acquired in good faith - decades ago, in some cases.
Museums and other caretakers around the world are steeped in custody battles over paintings by Matisse and Chagall, artifacts from Germany and Peru and even a 16-ton rock from outer space.
In one well-publicized case, the Dallas Museum of Art is storing a collection of medieval art that will eventually go back to Germany. Included is a rock-crystal relic holder that one art expert said might hold a lock of the Virgin Mary's hair.
It's alleged the late Army Lt. Joe T. Meador of Whitewright, Texas, took the relics from a mine shaft at Quedlinburg, East Germany, in 1945. The government-financed Lutheran Church of Quedlinburg sued Meador's heirs. In a Jan. 7 settlement, the heirs agreed to surrender the booty in exchange for nearly $$2.75 million.
Meanwhile, Berliners are hoping a treaty ratified April 25 by the Soviet and German governments will bring about the return of the Treasure of Priam.
A German archaeologist unearthed the priceless gold jewelry, flasks, cups and saucers in ancient Troy, now part of Asian Turkey.
It disappeared from a Berlin tower at the end of World War II. Some experts have speculated the Trojan hoard is stashed in Moscow's Pushkin Museum; others say it's in private hands in Western Europe or the United States.
Even if it surfaces, the story may not end - the Turkish government is also said to want it.
On May 15, a federal appeals court in San Francisco rebuffed Peru's claim to some 90 pre-Columbian artifacts held by the late Benjamin Johnson, a Santa Monica collector. A previous judge had ruled that Peru had failed to prove the origin of the objects.
But the court did not resolve broader issues of the application of a 1929 Peruvian law that declared artifacts found on Peruvian land to be government property.
Peru is using that law to pursue another lawsuit in Los Angeles against collectors of more than 200 other pre-Columbian art objects. If Peru is successful, experts worry that other countries, from Greece to India, Costa Rica to Nepal, could commence similar legal actions.
Other claims are being staked under the 1990 Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act, which calls for the return of cultural property by museums, as well as state and local agencies.
On March 5, the Smithsonian Institution promised to honor documented claims by American Indians for the return of their ancestors' skeletal remains and cultural artifacts held by the proposed new National Museum of the American Indian.
Schoolchildren and a miffed taxpayer are also tussling over museum holdings.
The taxpayer, Don Owens of Taylor, S.C., filed suit over the sale of 26 Andrew Wyeth paintings that had hung for 11 years at South Carolina's Greenville County Museum of Art.
Owens was angered last July when art patrons Arthur and Holly Magill sold the collection to a Japanese conglomerate for $$45 million. He said movie mogul Joseph Levine sold the paintings to the Magills in 1979 on the condition they be donated to the museum.
On March 26, a judge approved the sale of "The Quaker," "Hay Ledge," 'Rum Runner" and other works, and found that Owens had no legal connection to the museum or the paintings.
Sometimes, the case ends up in the court of public opinion - like Oregon Kids vs. the American Museum of Natural History.
The museum says this one's an open-and-shut case.
Miner-farmer Ellis Hughes discovered the 16-ton Willamette Meteorite in 1902 near Portland. The landowner, Oregon Iron and Steel, sued Hughes to get it back. The company later sold it for $$26,000 to Sarah Dodge, a New Yorker who donated it to the museum.
For over a year, schoolchildren in Lake Oswego, Ore., have lobbied for its return.
"The meteorite was donated quite legally," said museum spokesman Herb Kurz, who adds that the rock could be damaged if it was moved.
Some contested treasures involve legally perplexing theft allegations.
New York's highest court ruled Feb. 14 that the Guggenheim Museum could sue to recover a Marc Chagall painting that was stolen there in the late 1960s.
But there must be a trial to investigate how hard the museum tried to recover the 1912 painting, "Menageries."
Museum officials have said they never reported the theft because they thought the publicity would drive the missing painting further underground.
Since 1967, the work has hung in the livingroom of Rachel Lubell, who bought it in good faith from a well-known art dealer for $$17,000. It's now valued at $$200,000.
Sometimes, the story ends on a sour note for all involved: like in the case of "View of Collioure With a Church."
Henri Matisse painted it in 1905 and gave it to photographer Edward Steichen in 1908. Steichen died in 1973 and left it to one of his daughters, Charlotte, who lent it to New York's Museum of Modern Art.
The family said Charlotte, who died in 1988, bequeathed it to her great-niece, Ariana Stahmer, now 7. The Modern asserted that Miss Steichen had given the painting to the museum.
After two years of bickering, the museum relinquished the painting in an out-of-court settlement last August.
The family said it had to sell the Matisse to pay its legal bills. It was offered at auction on May 7, with an estimated value of $$700,000 to $$900,000, but did not sell.

 

End of Document
