

The Blackbird Flies Again
 The Associated Press
December 25, 1995, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 761 words
Byline: By JAMES HANNAH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DAYTON, Ohio
Body




After a five-year breather, America's premier spy plane is again scorching the skies. Wright-Patterson Air Force Base has put the SR-71 Blackbird back in business.
The high-altitude, turbojet-powered plane can fly more than three times the speed of sound - literally faster than a speeding bullet - and up to 15 miles above the Earth. It is designed to take photos of hostile forces and installations without the threat of being shot down.
"The plane is the only one of its kind. It's the highest-flying, fastest manned reconnaissance platform," said Capt. Michael Zimmerman, who managed the SR-71 restoration program from Wright-Patterson.
The SR-71s are based at Edwards Air Force Base in California.
"It's without a doubt a marvel of American ingenuity," said Col. Robert Behler, commander of the 9th Reconnaissance Wing at Beale Air Force Base in California. Behler, a former SR-71 pilot, oversees the Air Force's entire high-altitude reconnaissance fleet.
The plane, with its crew of two, flies high enough to see the curvature of the Earth.
The Blackbird, named for its dark and stealthy presence, first flew in 1966. The 12-plane force was retired in 1990 because of the high cost of maintenance. But several of the planes were brought out of mothballs last September to plug gaps in U.S. intelligence-gathering.
Sen. Robert Byrd, D-W.Va., led the charge for reactivating the jets in July 1994 as a member of the Senate Armed Services Committee.
"We needed it in the Persian Gulf War, when battlefield commanders could not get enough imagery from satellites to answer all of their intelligence questions," Byrd said then.
The other U.S. reconnaissance planes - the U-2 and the RC-135 - do not have the speed and altitude to fly over a potentially hostile opponent and unmanned aerial vehicles are still being developed, he added.
Had the SR-71 been activated and allowed to fly over Iraq during the war, it could have detected Iraqi troop movements and determined the accuracy of U.S. bombings, he said. And it could have helped make more precise airdrops of food and medical supplies in Bosnia.
In fiscal year 1995, Congress approved $ 100 million to reactivate three SR-71s, one of which will be used by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration for pilot training and to conduct high-speed, high-altitude tests. Zimmerman said the Air Force accomplished the restoration for $ 62 million.
The planes have an operating budget of $ 35 million in fiscal 1996.
There were hurdles in restoring the planes.
Many of the necessary spare parts no longer were being made, so salvage yards had to be scavenged.
Zimmerman said a vital sealant needed to prevent fuel leaks was no longer being manufactured because it contained a carcinogen. But the Air Force managed to arrange a large purchase of the sealant that is expected to last the lifetime of the planes.
"That was our big show-stopper," said Zimmerman. "Without fuel-tank sealant, it never would have gotten off the ground."
Cameras and radar systems were restored on the planes, equipped with a radio link. That allows radar images to be relayed to the ground without landing for a film drop-off.
Reactivation of the SR-71s has not been without its critics.
Eugene Carroll of the Washington-based Center for Defense Information said the Blackbird "would be a pretty priceless item" if satellites were not available to take photos. He questions whether two SR-71s will be enough to have one in the right place at the right time.
"You aren't going to have two airplanes available all the time," he said.
And, at a cost of $ 39,000 an hour - per plane - to operate, "the bills are extraordinary."
The center studies waste and excess in U.S. security programs.
"It's a costly airplane, but it's very unique in that nothing else can do it," Behler said. "I believe the number of airplanes we have to fulfill that requirement is adequate."
SR-71s have crashed in the past but no crew member has ever died. The most recent crash occurred in the late 1980s, when an engine on an SR-71 blew up while the plane was over the Philippines.
The crew ejected, and the plane crashed into the ocean, but was later recovered, Behler said.
"You're traveling at about 2,500 mph, and you've got to pay a lot of attention," Behler said. "Since it is an old airplane designed in the early '60s, when something goes wrong, it can go wrong very quickly and very catastrophically.
"The aviators that fly this airplane are world-class aviators. … When everything is going to hell in a handbasket, you still have to be able to focus and survive the airplane."
 Load-Date: December 25, 1995

 

End of Document
