

The Terry Anderson Story: Part I
The Associated Press
September 8, 1993, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 2215 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body



'You Are a Spy'; 'No, I Am a Journalist'
 On March 16, 1985, Associated Press correspondent Terry Anderson was kidnapped by Muslim extremists in Beirut. He would be kept captive for 6 years, the longest-held Western hostage in Lebanon.
His account of his ordeal, "Den of Lions," will be released next month by Crown Publishers. This is the first of a three-part serialization of excerpts from the book.
Anderson's retelling of those harrowing years is both a frightening look at the inhumanity of terrorism, and a profound self-examination. As he writes in a foreword, it is "an attempt to define who I was, and who I became."
This installment begins with the abduction, when three gunmen force Anderson into their automobile and roar off. "Madeleine" is his fiancee, Madeleine Bassil. "Don" is AP photographer Don Mell, left behind when the kidnappers grabbed Anderson.
---
From "Den of Lions: Memoirs of Seven Years," by Terry Anderson. Copyright 1993 by TMS Corporation. Published by Crown Publishers, Inc.
---
There was no conversation in the car, except for an occasional muttered "Down, down," and a shove with the foot, or a poke with a gun into my back. The gunmen said nothing to each other.
After 15 or 20 minutes, the car turned off the main highway straight into what seemed to be a garage. A metal door clanged down, cutting off the street noise. The doors were yanked open, and hands grabbed at me, pulling me upright, but careful to keep the blanket over my head. There were mutterings in Arabic, short, guttural, incomprehensible.
Someone slipped the blanket away, slipping a dirty cloth around my head at the same time, then wrapping plastic tape around and around. Other hands grabbed at my tennis shoes, yanking them off. Someone pulled at the gold chain around my neck, fumbled with the fastening until it opened. Then the gold bracelet on my right wrist, the watch on my left, also went.
"Don't," I said, involuntarily. "They're gifts. Don't take them."
"We are not thieves," one of the men said. He stuck my watch into my sock. Not the chain or bracelet. I never saw either again.
More tape, around my wrists and arms. I was pulled out of the car and guided clumsily to the side of the garage, pushed down onto a filthy blanket smelling of oil and gasoline.
My legs were taped tightly, around the ankles, knees, and thighs. I could no longer sit upright and slid sideways. One of the men lifted me up by my arm and shoulder and propped me against the wall.
The men talked among themselves for a few minutes, then several left. Only one seemed to be still with me, pacing back and forth.
After a while - 20 minutes? An hour? No way to tell - they came back. I was pulled upright, guided across the floor, and seated again.
"What is your name?" a voice asked, heavily accented.
"Terry Anderson. I am a journalist."
"Your company?"
"The Associated Press. A wire service."
The man seemed uninterested in my answers. Either he understood "wire service" - unlikely - or he didn't care.
"Why have you taken me? Who are you?"
Muttering in Arabic. "Quiet. We ask questions. Do you know where you are?"
"No." Explaining my deductions didn't seem wise.
"You are a spy."
"No. I am a journalist. I work for The Associated Press. What do you want from me?"
The interrogation went on, almost aimlessly, without heat. Accusations. Denials.
"Why do you have this?" A hand shoved something at me. Peering along my nose, through the small gap it made in the tape around my head, I saw the gold charm from my chain - an inscription from the Koran.
"It was a gift."
"You are Muslim?"
"No. Christian."
"Why do you wear this?"
"My wife gave it to me."
"She is Muslim?"
"No. Maronite. Catholic."
"You are not Muslim. Why do you wear words from the Koran?"
"They are beautiful. They are the words of God." He was obviously unsatisfied, and muttered to his companions. Then more serious questions.
"What other Americans do you know? Who works at your office?"
"I can't tell you that."
"You must say. Give us the names of all the Americans you know."
"No. I can't do that."
"We can make you."
"I know you can try. You can hurt me. But I can't give you the names of my friends."
"We have electricity. You know?"
"Yes. I know. But I still won't give you names. They are my friends. I can't help you kidnap them." I decided to take a chance.
"Can you call my office? Tell them I am alive? My wife will be very, very worried."
"You want your wife here? We can go get her, bring her here."
"She is pregnant. You would not harm her. You cannot be so evil."
"We will take her, too. No one can stop us."
"God will stop you. No one has to stop you. You will not do this."
"Give us the names."
"No. I'm sorry. I can't. Do what you want to. I still can't."
More demands. Refusals. Strangely, the procedure was still without heat. It didn't seem as if they really meant the threats. It was hard to believe they might carry them out, though nothing I had ever seen in Lebanon gave me any confidence in their humanity or reluctance to inflict pain. They just didn't seem serious about it.
It ended after perhaps 30 or 40 minutes. The men got up and left, except for one. He shoved me back against the wall, resumed pacing.
I could think of nothing except Madeleine, still in bed, sleepily kissing me goodbye at 7 a.m. Six months pregnant, her belly making a mound of the blanket. She would know soon, probably knew already. Don would have gone straight to the office, alerted the AP people there. They would have gone to our apartment, just a few hundred yards from where I was kidnapped.
I began crying silently, rocking forward and back against the wall, my knees shoved tightly between my taped arms. Who would tell her? How? I twisted my wrists against the tape, struggling against it. The guard came, bent over and, surprisingly gently, put his hand on my arm. "No. No. No good."
I stopped struggling and tried to compose my mind. Breathe evenly, smoothly, gently. Calm. Don't think. Calm.
---
(More than three weeks pass before the shackled Anderson is even allowed to sit up. Several hostages are brought together, though isolated by blindfolds and partitions. Anderson thinks incessantly of Madeleine; of Mickey, the wife from whom he seeks a divorce; and of their daughter, Gabrielle. He reproaches himself for not taking seriously enough an apparent unsuccessful kidnap attempt the day before he was seized. In the final passage, he describes his young guards.)
---
Twenty-four days. It must be about the 8th of April. I'd kept track by scratching a line in the wall next to my head each gray dawn, beginning with what I thought was the third day. My body was locked for hours each day in cramps from the effort of not moving. I was exhausted by the ceaselessly churning thoughts in my head, images of my family, friends, wrung by emotions so sharp and strong, my chest hurt.
Around and around, over and over, remorse, anger, pain. Replaying endless scenarios in which I escaped, gunned the car, jumped out and dropped my kidnapper with a karate blow, grabbed his gun and shot him - useless, childish plays. Humiliation of trying to pee in a bottle while lying down. Humiliation of being poked and prodded and cursed at. I knew I was on the edge of madness, of losing control completely, breaking down.
Finally, as one of the guards walked past my cot, I called out softly. "Chebab. Hey."
"Shu?"
"Tehki Inglisi?" Speak English?
"Lahsa." One moment.
He left, came back with another guard.
"What?"
"I can't do this anymore. I am not an animal. I am a human being. You can't treat me like this."
"What do you want?"
"A book. A Bible. And to move. You must loosen these chains. I will go crazy."
A grunt. The two guards exchanged a few words.
"I speak chef."
"Thank you."
The next day, late in the afternoon, the English-speaking guard came in and threw a heavy object on the bed. I reached for it, felt the smooth covers of a book.
The guard came around to the head of the bed.
"Good?"
"Yes, very good, thank you."
He began fiddling with the chain on my right hand. After some fumbling, he got the lock open, then replaced it, but allowing a foot or so more chain. Moving around the bed, he did the same on the other side.
"Sit up. But no look."
I sat up slowly, stiffly. He pulled the blanket off me and draped it over my head, leaving it hanging in front of my face. "Now look."
I cautiously pulled my blindfold up a bit, until I could see the book. Red, new. A Bible, the Revised Standard Version. I caressed it gently.
"May I read now?"
"Thirty minutes. Be careful. No look."
"Thank you."
I leaned forward so the blanket would hang down over my face, but allow light from the bulb above me to fall on the book in my lap. Opening the cover gently, I sniffed at the pages, inhaling the new-book, paper-and-ink smell like perfume. My back started aching almost immediately, but I ignored it.
I read the title page, the publishing and copyright information, the notes of the editors, slowly, carefully. Then: Genesis.
"In the Beginning ..."
---
Dim, gray light. Blank ceiling, bare electric light bulb just visible over the top of the partition, but giving no light, since the electricity was off again. Snoring of guards. Tired. Just tired. Hours, long nights, praying. "Dear God. What have I done? I'm not good, I know that. I've cheated and lied. I've strayed so far from you. Self-indulgence. Stupidity. I'm sorry. But do something. Anything. I just can't do this. I can't."
It's surprising what you can remember when you have nothing to do but remember. At first, the mind is a blank. Jesus, I always thought I was smart. Where are all the things I learned, the books I read, the poems I memorized? There's nothing there, just a formless, gray-black misery. My mind's gone dead. God, help me.
Start with the memories. Forget the stupidity of not paying attention, of walking out into the street after one kidnap attempt, the very next morning, to give them your open, stupid self. That's done. You're paying. Think about Madeleine - so beautiful, all dark and flashing and loving. You're so lucky, to win this woman now, after all these years. What is she doing? What is she feeling? Stop. It hurts too much.
What about Mickey, and Gabrielle? I've hurt them both, greatly. Especially Gabrielle. She sounded so sad, had so much pain in her voice the last time I talked to her on the phone. She's 8. How can she understand? Thou shalt not commit adultery. So many times, in so many places. No excuses. No "but if only she'd ..." No. You did it. Accept it. Be sorry.
But I'm not sorry about Madeleine. No matter what. We didn't plan this child. Maddy wasn't supposed to be able to conceive. But so much joy when it happened. Inconvenient, sure. But never regretted. Is that wrong, God? To be thankful for this joy? So short a time together - what, 10, 11 months? Worth all this, if I die today, worth it.
I'll not apologize for this, God. Never.
All the other memories. The people. The mistakes, offenses. How arrogant I was! It must have been hard to like me. Did they all? Or was I just tolerated? I don't like me much. How can anyone else?
Hours, days, nights, weeks. Blank nights. Gray dawn after gray dawn.
---
I ask Sayeed, "How can you do this? Doesn't the Koran say you may not punish someone for another's sins? I'm innocent. You know that."
The question bothers him. He goes to the chief, an older man held in great respect by all the guards. A little later, he comes back. "The chef says I must not talk with you about this. He says you think like a snake," weaving his hand back and forth, held low enough for me to see under the blindfold, through the small gap next to my nose.
Another of the guards is simply evil. Calling himself Michel, he claims to be a Christian from East Beirut - an obvious lie. He prays the same as all of them. He delights in sneaking up to the curtain at the end of my cot and snatching it suddenly open, then screaming at me, "No look. You look. I kill." Sometimes he creeps up and just sticks the barrel of the silenced pistol through the curtain. "Bam. Bam," he says quietly.
Michel throws the little fruit we get - a banana, an orange - over the top of the partition. Often it just falls between the side of the bed and the wall, onto the floor where my chains prevent me from reaching it. The two or three bananas there already smell, bringing dozens of huge cockroaches. Once Michel sets a bowl of soup on the end of the bed, just out of my reach. Knorr's dried chicken noodle, I can tell by the smell. Stretching painfully for it, chained arm stretched out straight behind me, I knock it over, spilling soup and noodles onto the bed. He laughs and walks away, leaving the mess. It stays overnight, until another guard helps me clean up.
It's difficult to talk to these men, to bring myself to be polite, to act as if I care what they think. Their minds are alien to me. They seem to think that what they're doing is some kind of small but necessary unpleasantness. Only the loneliness, the hours and days without speaking a word bring me to talk to them. That, and the devouring desire to find out what the hell is going on, what they want, what the chances are of getting out of here. But on that subject, they have little to say. "Soon, and very soon, Inshallah" - God willing - is the unvarying response.
---
NEXT: Part II - "Hi, Father. I'm Terry Anderson"

 

End of Document
