

U.N. Team To Build Plant For Destruction Of Chemical Arms  U.N. experts traveled to Iraq Sunday to survey progress on the construction of an incinerator to dispose of chemical weapons as part of the drive to destroy Iraq's military might. Iran's weapons of mass destruction are being destroyed under the supervision of the United Nations and in accordance with the cease-fire that ended the Gulf War. Last month, Iraq averted a possible Western military attack when it backed down from its previous insistence that its missile-production facilities be converted to civilian use rather than dismantled.
The Associated Press
April 5, 1992, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 272 words
Dateline: MANAMA, Bahrain
Body




A crucial test of Baghdad's willingness to continue cooperating with the U.N. inspectors' Special Commission will begin Tuesday, when experts travel to Iraq to start destroying some of the buildings at the Al Atheer nuclear complex.
The task of disposing of the chemical weapons is expected to continue well into next year.
"We're basically building an incinerator plant and a chemical plant for hydrolysis and we want to see the progress being done by the Iraqis," the chemical weapons team leader, Ronald Manley, told The Associated Press on Sunday.
Hydrolysis is a chemical process in which a substance reacts with water and changes into another substance - in this case, from a hazardous weapon chemical into a less harmful compound.
Manley spoke before leaving for the airport with his 14-member team, which includes Britons, Americans and Japanese. The U.N. inspectors' Special Commission has regional headquarters in Bahrain.
In November, U.N. experts went to Iraq to determine how to destroy the weapons. They asked the Iraqis to build the plant's basic structure, which could cost about $ 500,000, Manley said.
The team will leave Iraq for Bahrain on April 13, leaving the Iraqis with more instructions to complete the task.
Manley, a Briton, said the process began with the collection of chemical weapons and stocks of chemical agents at Muthana, a plant on the outskirts of Baghdad. It was heavily bombed by coalition warplanes during the Gulf War.
Manley said there were about 40,000 chemical-filled rocket warheads, shells and bombs that were leaking at Muthana. Unfilled weapon pieces may bring the number to more than 100,000.

 

End of Document
