

U.S. Peace Push Sets Off Faint Alarm Bells on The Golan Heights
The Associated Press
July 26, 1991, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 757 words
Byline: By MARCUS ELIASON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KATZRIN, Golan Heights
Body




The mass wedding ceremony on the Golan Heights for 24 Soviet immigrant couples carried a subtle message to the White House.
The couples had come to Israel already married, and Thursday's rite was simply to add the seal of Jewish law. But the boisterous celebration, set among the ruins of a 3rd-century synagogue, was also a way of signaling the resolve of the Golan's Jewish settlers not to be dislodged by the Middle East peace process.
"It's a good answer to Baker!" Rabbi Yehoshua Hershkovitz shouted over the squeal of Hasidic music that soared across the volcanic, boulder-strewn plateau.
He was referring to Secretary of State James A. Baker III's efforts to bring Israelis, Syrians and other Arab representatives to a peace conference.
The Golan was captured by Israel from Syria 24 years ago. It is among territories that could be ceded under the land-for-peace formula Baker envisions as the basis of the conference.
The settlers aren't panicking. But they worry that Syria's positive response to the U.S. initiative will lead to pressure to yield the Golan, and they are scrambling to make sure that Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir hears them.
Meir Munitz, deputy mayor of Katzrin, the largest Jewish township on the Golan, says more than half the 120 members of parliament have signed a petition against a withdrawal.
"That strengthens Shamir," he said. "But we must keep our hand on the pulse, and strengthen the pulse."
The Golan's strategic value is readily apparent. It looms like a towering wall above the Israeli towns of the Jordan Valley. In the north it links up with Lebanon, where Israel has vital security interests, and it is also a major water source.
"Whoever controls the Golan controls Tel Aviv's water," says settler Michael Ben-Horin.
For 19 years after Israel's birth in 1948, its border with Syria was volatile. Clashes over land, water and fishing rights in the Sea of Galilee frequently led to Syrian gunners shelling the area, killing farmers and fishermen.
Thus the whole of Israel cheered when, in the 1967 Six-Day War, Israel captured the 460-square-mile wedge of territory.
Syria briefly regained part of the territory in the 1973 Yom Kippur War and was forced back. A U.N. force now separates the armies, policing a sturdy de facto peace. About 18,000 indigenous Druse, adherents of an Islamic subgroup, live in four Golan villages, and 11,000 Jews live in some 30 settlements.
In 1981, Israel annexed the territory, but the move has not been recognized by the United States and most other countries.
Before 1967, "the Syrians would shoot at our fishermen. Then, during the night, our army would retaliate, and the next morning we would get a dose of shelling," said Mendel Nun, 73, a member of the Ein Gev kibbutz on the Sea of Galilee.
"It was a nightmare," he said, recalling fellow fishermen and farmers killed by Syrian fire.
The Druse appear divided. Some express pro-Syrian sentiments, while others are openly pro-Israel.
Salman Abu Saleh, the Israeli-appointed mayor of the Golan village of Massada, says many Druse are hedging their bets by selling land and hoarding valuables in the face of an uncertain future.
Some Israelis, even among the Golan settlers, argue that their government can take risks for peace. They maintain that the pre-1967 troubles were at least partly due to inconsistent border lines, and that Syria has proved over the past 15 years that it sticks to its agreements.
"If a situation somehow arises where it will be necessary to disband settlements, we'll accept it," said Ilana Rosenthal, secretary of Geshur, a Golan kibbutz, or communal farm. "Geshur won't be an obstacle to peace."
But the Israeli public at large sees Syria as an aggressor, and opposes withdrawing. This view is strongest among the 11,500 Israelis on the Golan.
The settlers feel strengthened by the Soviet influx. They say nearly 300 families have arrived in the past two years, and project a Jewish population of 100,000 in the coming years - triple earlier forecasts.
The Israeli government has undertaken not to send Soviet Jews to the occupied territories, but doesn't discourage private initiatives such as that of Rabbi Hershkovitz, who traveled to Odessa to woo prospective settlers.
At first the Soviets were reluctant, Hershkovitz recalled. "When they saw on the map that the Golan is next to Syria, they said, are you crazy?"
"I think the Golan is quieter than Jerusalem," said Yevgeny Grizotsky, 16, whose parents were among the 24 newly remarried couples. "Our army defends us from Syria, so why should we worry?"

 

End of Document
