

U.S. General Says Won't 'Go Into The Teeth Of The Enemy'
The Associated Press
February 7, 1991, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 335 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The commander of U.S. forces in the Persian Gulf War said Thursday he thinks it is still too early to tell whether a ground war is needed and it would be dumb to "go into the teeth of the enemy"
Asked if an air war alone could drive Iraq out of Kuwait, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf said, "I don't know. I think it's still too early to tell. I think (we've) got to wait and see." Schwarzkopf was interviewed in Saudi Arabia on ABC-TV's "Primetime Live."
ABC said the interview was conducted Thursday as Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and Gen. Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, were leaving for the gulf to evaluate the course of the war.
Schwarzkopf was asked how he would fight a ground war. "The dumbest thing you do is go right into the teeth of the enemy and play his game," he said. "We're not going to play his game out here."
Schwarzkopf said he has reports that some of the Iraqi pilots who flew planes to Iran were defectors.
"There have been some reports that some of the pilots before they went over there tried to bomb the palace and tried to bomb Saddam Hussein," he said.
The general did not describe the nature of the reports. He was similarly reticent about reports he said he had received that at one point Saddam was so distraught about the war that his doctors prescribed tranquilizers for him.
The television show showed Schwarzkopf's office and sleeping quarters, with a red telephone including a direct line to the White Houae and a shotgun beside his bed, which ABC said was to protect him in case a terrorist got past guards.
Schwarzkopf said he had never used the phone to call the Whtie House although he had received one call from President Bush.
He praised Bush for not micro-managing the war.
"In all due respect, presidents are not trained in battle techniques," he said. "The bottom line is that the people who really know what's going on on the ground are the people in the theater here and they're the best ones to make a judgment on what action should or should not be taken."

 

End of Document
