

Unhappy Ever After: The Plight of Jewish Wives in Limbo
 The Associated Press
December 9, 1995, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1400 words
Byline: By LEANNE WAXMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Linda R.'s courtship was as bumpy as her five-year marriage. Her husband drank and had a hair-trigger temper, but she chose to ignore the bad and focus on the future.
Then he started pushing her around. After he hurt her one time too many, she and her toddler fled into the night. Several years later, she's still afraid, reluctant to reveal her identity or details of her life after one nightmare ended - and another began.
After her marriage collapsed, Linda R. spent two years as an "agunah,' a Hebrew word for a woman whose husband won't agree to a "get," a Jewish divorce that only the man can grant.
"He was obsessed with me," said the 33-year-old Linda R. "It was, 'If I can't have you, nobody can.' People don't know what to do with us. It's a type of slavery. We're at their mercy."
The future children of such women are "mamzerim," illegitimate and worthy of marriage only to those with the same tainted status. The taint is passed on through generations, poisoning family bloodlines.
Agunot often become victims of blackmail at the hands of vindictive, angry husbands who demand wild sums of money, custody of children and unfair property settlements in exchange for the get.
The women are sometimes shunned by their communities, forced to keep their agony to themselves. Some wait decades for a get or give in and pay off defiant spouses. Without the get, they are unable to remarry, or even date.
There are hundreds of agunot, literally "chained" or "anchored" women, in the United States. Thousands more are in Israel and scattered around the world.
In Israel, marriage and divorce are the sole domain of rabbinical courts. In the United States and elsewhere, Orthodox and other strictly observant Jews seek divorce in both the eyes of God and secular courts.
"I consider the issue of agunot to be the priority activist issue facing the Jewish community today," said Avi Weiss, a Bronx-based rabbi and activist who won't perform a marriage ceremony without both parties signing a prenuptial agreement calling for a get in the event of divorce.
"Many years ago this was the battle of the few. Now thousands of women suffer because their husbands are recalcitrant," Weiss said.
Estimates of Israeli agunot range from 8,000 to 16,000. In the United States, where most Jews are less observant, the count may be in the hundreds.
Many of them find their way to Rabbi Herschel Kurzrock. He sits in his cramped Manhattan office, nibbling a bagel as he tries to keep up with his ringing telephone. Most of the callers are women.
As the leader of a "beth din," or rabbinical court, Kurzrock is a pious man, father-figure, lawyer and cop when it comes to the get.
The rabbis of special courts like Kurzrock's handle divorces. They are often criticized by agunot and their advocates for trying to "make peace" in marriages at the expense of women, or favoring the husband to ensure a get is not coerced, which would invalidate it under Jewish law.
"The whole beth din system is so awful. It's completely self-contained. There's no monitoring and women are very badly abused in them," said Rivka Haut, an Orthodox Jewish feminist and a director of Agunah Inc., a group offering support and services.
"Making the man happy might mean selling the house right out from under her or greater visitation with the children. … There's always this underlying sense that if she tried harder she could have kept her marriage together. The rabbis don't seem to have much sympathy," Haut said.
Kurzrock is frustrated by critics, yet acknowledges that rabbis, in the United States, anyway, are "toothless dragons" with no effective enforcement authority.
"The power is in the tongue as it says in the Proverbs. I use my tongue. You gotta find the weak spot," he said.
In Israel, a new law gives rabbis the power to prevent a stubborn husband from receiving a passport or driver's license, holding public office or working in state-licensed professions, including medicine and law.
Perhaps the biggest bite in Israel is that a recalcitrant husband can be jailed. Putting a recalcitrant behind bars always was an option, but rabbis were reluctant to take such a drastic step. Last year, 81-year-old Yehia Abraham died behind bars after 32 years of refusing to divorce his wife.
Divorce has always been a part of Jewish life. The basis of the rules are in the Bible. If a husband disappeared, rabbis worked diligently to help a woman avoid the awful fate of becoming an agunah - a common occurrence during times of war, and an all-too-common result of the Holocaust.
Until 15 or 20 years ago, divorce in the Orthodox world was "almost unheard of," Haut said. The rate went up as divorce became more prevalent in the secular society.
About 21 percent of American Jews have been divorced, according to a 1990 population study done for the Council of Jewish Federations. The vast majority didn't obtain a get. At the time of the study, there were 3 million to 4 million adult Jews in the United States.
Of 800,000 divorced Jews surveyed, 113,000 (a little more than 14 percent) had a get, said Barry Kosmin, research director of the council and director of the study.
Many Jews don't pursue a get out of disinterest or ignorance that such a thing exists. Hard-core cases of recalcitrance, where a husband refuses, are few, said Rabbi Yehuda Levin, who works with Get Free, another group that helps facilitate the divorce process.
"The husbands many times feel they are losing financially. They're losing as fathers and now 'she wants a get so she can go on with life and I feel that my life has ended,' " Levin said.
For the women, getting on with life is impossible without a get.
"Eventually most of them get their divorces," said Viva Hammer, a lawyer who helped set up a wedding resource center at Lincoln Square Synagogue in Manhattan. "The question is how long will you have to wait?"
To avoid the issue altogether, a marriage protection agreement movement has gained strength. Weiss isn't the only rabbi who won't conduct a marriage ceremony unless both parties have signed a prenuptial agreement on divorce.
Some of the prenuptials amount to a promise to submit to a rabbinical court for arbitration. Others call for support payments that increase over time for recalcitrance. One requires a get be given if a civil divorce is granted.
New York state has leveled the divorce playing field with a "get law," allowing judges to consider refusal of a get in distributing marital assets in a civil divorce.
Kurzrock takes no stock in divorce prenuptials: "Even if he agrees now, what if he doesn't agree later? That's a problem."
Blu Greenberg, an Orthodox feminist who wrote a book called "On Women and Judaism: A View From Tradition," wonders why the rabbis most respected as interpreters of Jewish law are doing little to change the fate of agunot.
"That confounds me. Twenty years ago, I thought there were solutions, if not around the corner, then at least within two decades, but there's resistance. Jewish divorce law is problematic at its core. It's the essence of the law that is the problem," she said.
Many of the advocates for agunot prefer not to make waves, working quietly through negotiation to procure a get. Extreme cases, however, are sometimes met with extreme measures.
About three years ago, Ms. Hammer helped boycott a man's business and arranged for his suppliers not to work with him until he gave his wife a get.
In another case, a woman was "criminally violated" by her husband and he agreed to give the get if she didn't file charges. Still another established her own committee to agitate for a get after her husband refused for many years.
Kurzrock knows of far more severe approaches to procuring a get.
"Another person takes the law in their hands and gets guys to beat the guy's brains out and so forth and get him to cooperate," he said.
But gets are not supposed to be coerced. "It's not right," he shrugs, "but it happens."
Nonetheless, there are women who use every gambit at their disposal, every ploy in the limited arsenal of the agunot - and still, they wait.
Sally G., another victim of abuse at the hands of her husband, has been waiting a decade for her get.
"He said 'I'm going to milk your parents. You're not going to get the child. You're not going to get the house. You're not going to get a penny from me,' " she said.
"I have no civil divorce and I have no get. I'm living in limbo. I can't get on with my life."
 Load-Date: December 9, 1995

 

End of Document
