

United States Opens Consulate in the Ukraine
The Associated Press
February 11, 1991, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 826 words
Byline: By ALAN COOPERMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KIEV, U.S.S.R.
Body




After 15 years of diplomatic wrangling, the United States is opening a consulate this month in the Ukrainian capital, drawing cheers from independence activists who are courting Western support.
U.S. officials, wary of stirring trouble for President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, say the consulate's opening does not mean diplomatic recognition or support for an independent Ukraine, the second most populous of the 15 Soviet republics.
"It's not our policy to confer recognition if the matter hasn't been resolved by the Soviets themselves," said a Western diplomat in Moscow who spoke on condition he not be identified.
U.S. officials note that if the Soviet Union had not invaded Afghanistan in 1979, the building might have opened a decade ago, when few people could conceive of Ukrainian secession.
France and Germany, which already have consulates in Kiev, also have remained neutral in the fray over independence.
Behind the diplomatic tiptoeing, however, is a clear U.S. recognition that the Ukraine is an industrial and agricultural powerhouse of 52 million people whose future is important to the West.
If it breaks away from the Soviet Union, it will be Europe's largest country in territory and fifth-largest in population, after Germany, Italy, Britain and France.
Ukrainian independence activists welcome the opening of Western missions.
"Without question, we need Western contacts," said poet Ivan Drach, chairman of the Rukh independence movement. "We particularly need people who are here permanently, who can see and understand what is going on, because truth and knowledge are our only weapons."
The U.S. State Department originally decided to open the consulate in the 1970s in an exchange that involved opening a Soviet consulate in New York. It sent a 15-person advance team to Kiev and invested about $$1 million in renovations to three buildings for offices and housing.
When the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan in December 1979, however, President Carter retaliated by cutting off government-sponsored exchanges, boycotting the Moscow Olympics and canceling plans for the consulate.
After Gorbachev came to power in 1985 and U.S.-Soviet relations warmed, plans for the consulate were renewed. But the 1986 Chernobyl nuclear accident, security concerns heightened by the alleged bugging of the new U.S. Embassy in Moscow, and reciprocal limits on U.S. and Soviet diplomatic staff delayed the project.
In the last year, as the Ukrainian independence movement has grown, the United States has been pushing again to open the consulate.
Its legislature declared sovereignty from Moscow in July and called for a new constitution, an independent banking system and a separate currency. Lawmakers also approved legislation to exempt conscripted Ukrainians from serving in the Soviet Armed Forces outside the Ukraine, and to create its own military formations. That step has not actually been taken.
All of the major political groups in the republic, from the Communist Party to the greens movement, have endorsed the sovereignty claim.
Unlike the Baltic republics of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia, however, the Ukraine has not declared full independence.
"Sovereignty," in the Soviet lexicon, means only that the republic's laws take precedence over national ones. By the end of 1990, all the 15 republics had made such claims, creating what Soviet leaders call a "war of laws" that has paralyzed government at all levels.
Until the new Ukrainian constitution is complete, which could take at least a year, the republic's leaders have said they will not consider signing the new Union Treaty proposed by Gorbachev to hold the country together. The republic, however, is taking part in a March 17 nationwide referendum on preserving the union.
Support appears to be growing for Rukh, the powerful independence movement formed two years ago. It claims 700,000 dues-paying members and 5 million supporters.
Two U.S. diplomats, Consul General Jon Gundersen and Consul John Stepanchuk, are scheduled to move to Kiev in late February. At first, they will work out of their apartments.
Stepanchuk said they will not be able to perform full consular duties, such as issuing visas to enter the United States, until a building has been designated for the consulate by Soviet authorities.
Their initial duties, he said, will be "making contacts, getting to know the political, economic and cultural situation, and getting known by all the players."
Ukrainian officials said they tentatively have picked a building for the United States on Streletskaya Street in the old section of Kiev, near the majestic St. Sophia's Cathedral.
To keep the heat on, the State Department has insisted on strict reciprocity and refused to allow the Soviets to move into the new consulate building in New York until permanent quarters have been set aside in Kiev.
Because the Soviets own the building, they are eager to occupy it. For the moment, their staff also is working out of temporary quarters.

 

End of Document
