

Wall Streeters, Farmers Break Out the Caviaron Soviet Coup Collapse
The Associated Press
August 21, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 804 words
Byline: By RICK GLADSTONE, AP Business Writer
Body




Wall Street rebounded with its biggest buying spree since the beginning of the Gulf War as financial markets around the world reversed course Wednesday in response to the collapse of the 3-day-old coup in the Soviet Union.
Investors surged into stocks, gobbled up grains and dumped dollars and oil in a wild burst of trading that countered Monday's nervous reaction to the attempted overthrow of President Mikhail Gorbachev.
The speed of events in Moscow spilled into the financial markets from Tokyo to Frankfurt to New York, where the turnaround in prices mirrored the triumphant comeback of the deposed Kremlin leadership.
"The assessment in the stock market is ecstasy," said John Eberle, head of equity trading at the Chicago Corp. investment firm. "You just took a major unknown out of the market."
On Wall Street, the Dow Jones average of 30 industrials, America's best-known stock barometer, surged at the opening bell and finished 88.10 points higher at 3,001.79.
It was the sixth biggest point rise ever and the largest since Jan. 17, when the average rose 114.60 points after the first successful bombing raids against Iraq.
Wednesday's 3 percent gain more than erased losses Monday when news of the coup first shocked the world and raised fears of a Soviet civil war, superpower chill and global economic disruptions.
Other stock barometers in the United States and abroad also surged. The number of stocks gaining in price swamped declining issues in heavy trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
"We've had a very good day. The market is roaring," said Peter J. DaPuzzo, co-head of worldwide equities at Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. in New York. "It looks like a lot of people want to get some money invested because the problems are settled in Russia."
Among the notable gainers were well-known companies with business ties to the Soviet Union, such as Pepsico Inc., which jumped $ 1.37 a share to $ 33, and General Motors Corp., which rose $ 2.25 a share to $ 37.50.
Conversely, some big defense contractors, which jumped Monday on fears of a Cold War revival, retreated. General Dynamics Corp. was down $ 2.62 a share to $ 44.12 , and McDonnell Douglas Corp. fell $ 1.50 a share to $ 54.
"I think what happened on Monday was a surprise, and what happened today is the reverse of that," said John J. Muldowney, head of stock trading at Scott & Stringfellow Inc. in Richmond, Va.
The turnaround was even more dramatic in the grain trading pits of Chicago's commodity markets, where prices of corn, wheat and soybeans soared after tumbling on Monday out of fear that Soviet anarchy would endanger Moscow purchases of American grain, a critical source of business for U.S. farmers.
"Today's reaction brings us back to where we were," said David Miller, director of the feedgrains, soybean and wheat department of the American Farm Bureau Federation in Park Ridge, Ill.
"There's even speculation that positive developments will come out of this. Efforts to help the Soviets stabilize their internal economy may lead to expanded grain trade," Miller said.
In the foreign exchange markets, where currencies are traded, the dollar's value fell sharply as investors who had hoarded the currency a few days earlier bailed out. The turnabout largely reflected the loss of the dollar's premium as a safe harbor during times of global turmoil.
"This was a knee-jerk reaction, not a trend reaction," said Thomas Aspray, president of APM Management, an investment advisory firm in Spokane, Wash. He said most of the dollar's loss resulted from selling by speculators who risked losing enormous amounts of money unless they sold.
The dollar's loss was especially acute against the German mark, the currency most susceptible to the Moscow convulsions because of Germany's close economic relationship with the Kremlin. By the close of New York trading, the dollar fetched 1.7415 marks vs. 1.7985 marks Tuesday, a 3.1 percent drop.
A similar situation prevailed in the oil market, where traders had purchased petroleum to capitalize on fears of a supply disruption in the Soviet Union, the world's largest oil producer. They decided to sell on the news of the coup's collapse.
On the New York Mercantile Exchange, the world's leading petroleum market, the price of light sweet crude fell 85 cents a barrel to $ 21.55, putting the price about where it was last Friday. Prices of refined products like gasoline and heating oil also fell.
Earlier in stock markets overseas, prices jumped as word of the coup's collapse spread. In London, the Financial Times 100 share index rose 47.4 points or 1.9 percent to 2,601.9. In Frankfurt, the DAX index rose 43.9 points or 2.8 percent to 1,570.82; the Milan stock index rose 32 points or 3.1 percent to 1,061; and the 225-issue Nikkei Stock Average in Tokyo rose 364.54 points or 1.68 percent to 22,051.60.

 

End of Document
