

WASHINGTON TODAY: The Sudan and Its Manmade Famine
The Associated Press
April 26, 1991, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 674 words
Byline: By GEORGE GEDDA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




"One death is a tragedy, a million deaths is a statistic."
By that measure, the reputed author of that observation, Joseph Stalin, was identified not with tragedy but with statistics, numbers so large they numb the mind. In the 1930s, Stalin's victims ran well into the millions.
But Stalin had a point in his parable about the banality of large-scale death compared with the horror of a child whose life is snuffed out. Nowadays, the sight of a defenseless Kurdish youngster at the edge of death can generate waves of sympathy in living rooms around the world.
Governments have been tripping over themselves lately to respond to public demands - the product of those poignant scenes on television - that they do something to help the luckless Iraqis on Saddam Hussein's hit list. If the only way to help is to flout Iraqi national sovereignty by setting up camps inside Saddam's domain, so be it.
The other side of the Stalin's analogy is the relatively muted reaction to situation in the Sudan, where famine once again lurks. Traditional donor countries - the United States and Western Europeans - are helping, but the old zeal is not there.
For every Kurd whose life is at risk there are scores of Sudanese in the same situation. But Sudan's military regime, unwilling to submit to outside scrutiny, has refused permission for Western television networks to record the unfolding nightmare. If the cameras were allowed in, the suffering in the Sudan probably would quickly eclipse the Iraqi refugees on the chart of newsworthy stories.
According to Andrew Natsios, director of the U.S. Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance, between 9 million and 11 million Sudanese lives are at risk. With a shortfall of more than 500,000 tons of food, a famine of "epic proportions" is in prospect for this summer, Natsios says.
The Sudan was a country once viewed as the potential breadbasket of Africa. But events have conspired to make the Sudanese perhaps the world's most unfortunate people.
Nowadays, natural disasters alone cannot produce famine. There are too many countries with the will and the wherewithal to ensure the hungry are fed, no matter how severe the drought, the flood, the earthquake.
But drought is only one of the Sudan's enemies. All of the others are manmade. There is the civil war that has raged for years between the Muslim north and Christian black and animist south. Then there is the Sudanese government's policy of achieving self-sufficiency, one which accepts offers of outside help only grudgingly.
Those who disagree with this policy, or any other, risk imprisonment without charge. Much of the country's intellectual elite has been imprisoned since Lt. Gen. Omar Hassan al-Bashir took charge two years ago in a military coup. The economy is in shambles along with the transportation system.
The government didn't ingratiate itself with the outside world last summer when it sided with Saddam Hussein in the Persian Gulf War, just at the time the magnitude of the impending 1991 food crisis was becoming apparent.
Last January, as the air war against Iraq was about to begin, the State Department was torn by a difficult choice: withdraw U.S. personnel from the embassy in Khartoum rather than have them face the wrath of pro-Saddam mobs, or leave them there to try to help deal with the approaching famine.
The diplomats were ordered home, producing outrage among some. "The Sudanese are too weak to throw rocks!" said one, debunking the notion that Khartoum was unsafe for Americans. The embassy was reopened a few weeks later.
Officials report that the Sudanese government is somewhat more open than before to outside charity. But pledges from donor nations, including 300,000 tons from the United States alone, do not even come close to overcoming the food deficit.
Hardly anyone argues with predictions that the death toll will number in the hundreds of thousands - perhaps enough some day to qualify as a "statistic" in Stalinist lexicon.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - George Gedda has covered foreign affairs for The Associated Press since 1968.

 

End of Document
