

WASHINGTON TODAY: Passing the Torch and the Problems
The Associated Press
January 20, 1993, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 687 words
Byline: By TOM RAUM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A 35-word oath at noon today, and suddenly it's Bill Clinton's budget deficit - and his unwieldy federal bureaucracy and his battle with Saddam Hussein, too.
All presidents present themselves as ready to go on Day One. But soaring inaugural rhetoric aside, Clinton is likely to find that a tall order, as have presidents before him.
The first president to begin a full term since the end of the Cold War, Clinton also is the first to come to power with American forces in combat since Richard Nixon in 1969.
The renewed hostilities in Iraq mean that the Democrat who vowed to focus on the economy must make immediate decisions as the nation's commander in chief.
For instance: Can Clinton respond any other way than with force if Iraqi President Saddam Hussein continues to nibble away at U.N. resolutions? Dare he do less than Bush? But does he want his first act as president to be a belligerent one?
The crises in Somalia and Bosnia are also distracting from Clinton's hopes of giving his full attention to the economy. Already, Clinton's earlier vow to present an economic package by Inauguration Day has slipped by at least a month.
The first baby boomer to become president, the third youngest man to occupy the White House, Clinton inherits the problems of an aging industrial democracy: a still wobbly economy and a national debt that has soared to $ 4 trillion.
The nation is in the grips of banking and health-care crises. And foreign competition and cutbacks by U.S. companies have left many of Clinton's fellow baby boomers - and others - on unemployment lines.
Nearly all presidents in their inaugural addresses speak of change and renewal, of remaining strong abroad to remain strong at home, of healing political wounds and drawing together as a nation, of working to end poverty and improve education.
But few presidents are able to live up to their lofty themes.
Lincoln solved that problem in 1865, his second inaugural and one admired by Clinton, by lowering expectations and being deliberately vague.
He told Americans that since they already basically knew what he stood for, "little that is new could be presented." He added: "With high hope for the future, no prediction in regard to it is ventured."
After a landslide victory, Lyndon Johnson in 1965 talked of "the excitement of becoming - always becoming, trying and always gaining."
Three years later, he was so bogged down in the Vietnam War that he chose not to seek a second term.
Richard Nixon talked of working for change in 1973 after serving four years. "Building a new era of progress at home requires turning away from old policies that have failed," he said.
But a year and a half later, a change came he hadn't envisioned: his resignation in disgrace in the Watergate cover-up scandal.
Ronald Reagan came into office vowing to balance the budget by 1982, then 1984. And he told the nation upon being sworn in in 1981: "We must act today to preserve tomorrow. And let there be no misunderstanding - we are going to begin to act, beginning today."
But the national debt quadrupled in the 12 years that Reagan and Bush held power.
Bush in his 1989 inaugural asserted that "the American people await action. They didn't send us here to bicker. … And so there is much to do; and tomorrow the work begins."
Yet Bush accomplished little on the domestic front in his four years, getting into increasingly bitter partisan battles with a Democratic-controlled Congress.
For Clinton, Day One has arrived. In June, he promised: "I'll have the bills ready the day after I'm inaugurated. I'll send them to Congress and we'll have a 100-day period. … It will be the most productive in modern history."
Clinton wasn't about to repeat that in today's inaugural; he's already fallen too far behind schedule.
The best presidential model may be a few words spoken by Johnson, not after his 1964 victory but on Nov. 22, 1963, after he had taken the oath of office aboard Air Force One the day John Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas: "I will lead and I will do the best I can."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Tom Raum has covered presidential inaugurations since 1977 for The Associated Press.

 

End of Document
