

Welcome to the 'A' List, Norman, Colin and Ted
The Associated Press
March 5, 1991, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 890 words
Byline: By DONALD M. ROTHBERG, AP Political Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




At the top of everyone's list of winners in the Persian Gulf War are the obvious names: George Bush and Gens. Powell and Schwarzkopf. But don't forget Ted Turner, Les Aspin and, yes, the Keating Five. Winners all.
Saddam Hussein towers above all other losers. But that list is long as well and includes the media, think tank military gurus, Sam Nunn, Yasser Arafat, George McGovern and the Lafayette Park drummers.
In fact, as in most wars, there probably are more losers than winners. And often a place is earned on one list or the other through an accident of history. The North Vietnamese proved themselves a tough, resourceful fighting force and made fools of those who predicted a quick victory for American power. The Iraqi army melted away like butter and made those who said it would fight look equally foolish.
List makers also must contend with those few intrepid survivors who always manage to straddle both lists. Foremost among them: King Hussein of Jordan, who infuriated the Bush administration by supporting Iraq and, as a result, enhanced his popularity at home.
Here is a partial list, a smattering of the obvious and not-so-obvious:
Winners:
George Herbert Walker Bush. Call him Mr. President, call him commander-in-chief, but don't ever, never again call him Wimp.
Gens. Colin Powell and H. Norman Schwarzkopf emerge as the soldiers everyone wants to have on their side along with the 537,000 Americans under their command in the Persian Gulf.
Lt. Gen. Tom Kelly came across during daily Pentagon briefings as the infinitely patient, surprisingly good-humored headmaster to an unruly class of reporters.
Pete Williams was the civilian component of the Pentagon briefings. Articulate and informed, he always sounded like he was answering even when he wasn't. The next White House press secretary?
Ted Turner, the founder and owner of CNN, the network America and the world turned to for news of the war.
Rep. Les Aspin, D-Wis., chairman of the House Armed Services Committee. Not many Democrats make the winners list. But Aspin stood up early and said the war would be short with relatively low casualties.
Smart bombs, cruise missiles, Patriot missiles, everything that's hi-tech and goes boom.
Israel gained friends and support by exercising restraint after repeated Scud missile attacks. Images of Israelis donning gas masks have supplanted memories of Israeli troops suppressing Palestinian demonstrators on the West Bank.
Iran. Iran? It's a measure of Saddam's villainy that he succeeded in making Iran look reasonable. After all, the Iranians adhered to the economic boycott and never did let those Iraqi planes return to the battle. Even their brief effort at peacemaking was done without references to "the Great Satan."
The Keating Five were the most improbable beneficiaries. The Senate Ethics Committee issued its report on the senators tied to savings and loan operator Charles H. Keating Jr. only a few hours before Bush declared a cease-fire. The end of the fighting buried the S&L scandal on the inside pages of America.
Now for the losers:
Saddam Hussein was a world-class villain desperately in need of a new speech writer who'll drop references to making his enemies "swim in their own blood" and the "mother of all battles."
Nearly every day, twice a day, the media tried to pry information from military briefers. What took place was the traditional adversary relationship between reporters and briefers. But this time it was televised live and polls indicated the public overwhelmingly sided with the military.
When Bush ordered U.S. troops to Saudi Arabia in response to the Iraq invasion of Kuwait, the first response was from a battalion of military gurus based at various think tanks. With few exceptions they forecast disaster from thousands of battlefield casualties, to unchecked terrorism and anti-American violence throughout the Moslem world.
Sen. Sam Nunn, D-Ga., chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee and his party's reigning expert on military matters, was a leader of the opposition to using force in the Persian Gulf. If nothing else, he'll have to keep explaining why.
George McGovern, the former Democratic presidential nominee, is flirting with the idea of challenging Bush in 1992. After all, he carried one state in 1972. McGovern went to Iowa looking for support from the peace movement on the very day the fighting stopped.
Day after day, night after night, unceasingly, peace demonstrators beat drums in Lafayette Park across the street from the White House. Bush said he lost no sleep, but guests at the nearby Hay-Adams Hotel sure did. In the end, the drummers didn't end the war; Bush and the military did.
Palestine Liberation Organization Chairman Yasser Arafat jumped out too quickly in support of Saddam and lost much of the sympathy he'd cultivated among Western European nations. More importantly, he lost financial backing from Saudi Arabia and Kuwait.
Peacemakers, particularly the French and Soviets, now look like people who would have given Saddam an out had they succeeded.
The biggest military losers were the Republican Guard, once routinely called the elite Republican Guard, and the Soviet military equipment they used. Neither the troops nor the equipment lived up their billing.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Donald M. Rothberg has observed winners and losers in Washington since 1966.

 

End of Document
