

With The Boom of Missouri's Guns, Navy Serves Notice
The Associated Press
February 5, 1991, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 730 words
Byline: By JOHN KING, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia
Body




Two weeks into the war with Iraq, even the Navy brass was beginning to concede center stage to the Air Force.
"This is really and truly an Air Force effort … and we're participating and we're trying to add to it as best we can," said Rear Adm. Douglas J. Katz.
But on Sunday, the venerable USS Missouri snuck up close to the Kuwaiti coastline and lobbed seven 2,000-pound shells from its 16-inch guns at an Iraqi command and control center near the Saudi border. The guns were back in action again today, silencing an Iraqi artillery battery in Kuwait, the military said. The 47-year-old battleship's thunderous performance served notice that the Navy, too, is a major player in Operation Desert Storm.
"We have done our job of clearing the coastline and now we are going to move in close," said Cmdr. Mark Lawrence, intelligence officer aboard the nuclear-powered carrier USS Roosevelt.
Not that the Navy hasn't been active already.
With a permanent presence in the Persian Gulf region, the Navy was called on early to enforce the embargo against trade with Iraq ordered by the United Nations after Saddam Hussein's Aug. 2 conquest of Kuwait.
In war, the Navy is charged with patrolling the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea and lending the warplanes aboard its six carriers in the region to the relentless air assault on Iraq and its occupation forces in Kuwait.
Nearly three weeks into the war, the Navy, which has more than 100 ships in the region, has:
-Flown 22 percent of Operation Desert Storm's more than 44,000 bombing and air missions. That figure does not include thousands of additional sorties to provide routine air combat protection for carrier battle groups.
-Launched scores of Tomahawk cruise missiles, from both ships and submarines, at targets in Iraq.
-Participated in the capture of the first chunk of Kuwait, the tiny island of Qaruh, and in the capture of 23 Iraqi prisoners during assaults on 11 Kuwaiti offshore oil platforms being used by Iraqi troops.
-Sunk 41 Iraqi ships, including 23 combatant vessels.
-Damaged 42 Iraqi ships, 34 of them combatants.
"From what we can tell, their navy has given up," said Lawrence. "We have accomplished the bottling up of the navy."
Now the Navy is targeting Iraqi missile and artillery batteries along the Kuwaiti coast, perhaps to clear the way for a Marine amphibious landing.
With the 58,000-ton Missouri and sister ship Wisconsin, the Navy has the potential to deliver devastating blows to Iraq's heavily fortified positions in Kuwait. Navy jets already are making coastal artillery and Silkworm missile sites priority targets.
The Navy's combat air patrols also are taking on added significance these days because of the roughly 100 Iraqi warplanes that have taken refuge in Iran.
Although the Tehran government says they will be impounded for the rest of the war, there is always the possibility that Iran could provide the warplanes - and Iraq's ship-killing Exocet missiles - a potential sneak-attack route on ships in the gulf.
"The Exocet is what we're really worried about," said Navy Lt. Chris Eagle, 27, of Wheaton, Md.
For good reason. It was an Iraqi Exocet that hit the USS Stark in 1987, killing 37 sailors in what Iraq at the time called a case of mistaken identity.
"The Stark probably nags in the back of the mind of every commanding officer of any ship," said Capt. Glenn Montgomery of the USS Curts, like the Stark, a frigate.
The Navy also is studying the impact the huge oil slick the allies say Iraq dumped into the gulf - the biggest spill in history - will have on its operations.
The top Marine in Operation Desert Storm, Lt. Gen. Walter Boomer, said over the weekend that the spill would not affect any plans for a Marine landing, but Navy officers aren't so sure about other operations.
"We don't know yet whether it will be an interference," said Rear Adm. David Frost, commander of the Roosevelt carrier group. "We do not have a lot of experience operating ships in oily waters."
The Navy's isolation from some aspects of the combat makes it easy to overlook. Even sailors feel set apart.
"You look outside and you just see water, you don't see bombs going off or dead bodies," said Janice Evans of New Brighton, Pa., an operations specialist aboard the supply ship USS Niagara.
But the Navy was bound to be heard from eventually.
Lt. Bill Harrop, 26, of Fort Myers, Fla., said: "The Air Force can't do everything."

 

End of Document
