

With Peace Faltering, Rabin Is On The Ropes
The Associated Press
January 31, 1995, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 918 words
Byline: By DAN PERRY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Wracked by infighting and uncertain about where to take the faltering peace process, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's government is in its deepest crisis since his hope-filled ascent to power in 1992.
The latest evidence of lack of resolve came Monday, when Rabin ordered cancellation of an unpopular capital gains tax after first swearing it would never be imposed and then vowing not to bow to public pressure against it.
The move, intended to boost Rabin's sagging popularity, raised questions about his credibility.
"This government is crumbling," said opposition legislator Shaul Yahalom of the National Religious Party. "It's a caricature. One day there is a tax, the next day there isn't."
Nehemia Strassler, an analyst for the Haaretz daily newspaper, wrote Tuesday that Rabin's wishy-washiness was losing him points.
"The public sees Rabin's behavior as that of a premier who tends to bend in the wind … who is for and then against, who can't endure pressures," Strassler wrote. "Then the question arises, perhaps this is also the way the premier will act on other, more fateful issues, such as the peace process."
In parliament on Monday, the government survived a no-confidence motion brought by religious parties - including Shas, a would-be coalition partner - accusing Rabin of desecrating the Sabbath by holding a working meeting last Saturday.
But polls show that if elections were held now, the legislature would become predominantly right-wing and Rabin would be clobbered by opposition head Binyamin Netanyahu, likely spelling the end of peace talks with the PLO.
Rabin's standing has been slipping for months as it became clear that the autonomy accord signed by Israel and the PLO in September 1993, which led to the granting of autonomy in May to Gaza and the West Bank town of Jericho, hasn't improved personal security for Israelis.
The watershed moment appeared to come last Sunday, when two Islamic suicide bombers from Gaza blew themselves up on a busy highway in central Israel, killing 20 soldiers and a civilian. Similar attacks have killed 54 Israelis since Oct. 1.
"A year and a half after what seemed to have been a historic turning point in the relations of the two peoples, they are sinking deeper and deeper into the mud without an exit," political commentator Uzi Benziman wrote in the liberal Haaretz daily. "The experiment has failed."
Polls taken after the bombing show that about 50 percent of Israelis want Rabin to end talks with the PLO - a call sounded even by the generally dovish president, Ezer Weizman.
Rabin has argued that stopping the talks would only reward the terrorists, who oppose the peace process. He told high school students Monday that the process must go on.
"Is it possible to expel two million Palestinians? Or is it possible … to prevent terror? … No. There are no miracle solutions," he said.
Some officials, like Deputy Defense Minister Mordechai Gur, say openly that Israel will not implement the second phase of the autonomy agreement, a troop pullout from Palestinian towns in the West Bank, until Arafat cracks down on Islamic militants in the PLO-ruled areas.
And in a subtle rhetorical shift, Rabin is now stressing not peace but "separation" between Israelis and Palestinians.
Last week officials floated plans for an electronic border fence. On Monday, police minister Moshe Shahal told parliament the border would be patrolled by guard dogs.
The idea is popular among Israelis and consistent with the Israeli left wing's ultimate desire to withdraw from the West Bank, occupied along with the Gaza Strip in 1967.
But it is a marked departure from the autonomy accord, which preserved economic interdependence between Israel and the Palestinian areas for a five-year interim period.
Critics have charged that proposals for separation are premature unless Rabin agrees to uproot Jewish settlements deep in Arab areas. The autonomy accord left the settlements in place until a final agreement to be reached by 1999.
Reflecting deep divisions within Rabin's government, some officials are urging the multiphase approach be scrapped in favor of a decisive push for a final accord before the end of Rabin's tenure - less than two years away.
"If this term ends with an elimination of the threat of war for generations there won't be any meaning to the polls," Deputy Foreign Minister Yossi Beilin wrote in Haaretz. "But if the polls slow down the peace process, governance will have no meaning."
Rabin's woes have been multiplied by incessant quarrels in his government. During Sunday's Cabinet session, he lashed out at Finance Minister Avraham Shohat, who had persuaded him in August to impose an unpopular tax of 10 to 20 percent on stock sales.
"Admit that we made a mistake on the stock exchange tax law," Rabin told Shohat.
"Just like we erred on Oslo," Shohat said, referring to the Israel-PLO dialogue that began in Norway. "This apparently is a government of errors."
On Monday, after nearly six months of government flip-flops on the issue, a chastened Shohat said he would cancel the tax.
A poll published in the Yedioth Ahronoth daily newspaper Tuesday found that 47 percent of 508 Israelis questioned said the government's turnaround on the tax weakened its credibility.
Thirty-three percent said the move helped the government, and 20 percent said it had no effect. The survey had a 4 percent margin of error.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Dan Perry is the The Associated Press correspondent in Tel Aviv. He has covered the Middle East and Eastern Europe since 1990.
 Load-Date: January 31, 1995

 

End of Document
