

'The madmen seem to be at it again': U.S. mediation in the Mideast often a source of exasperation
April 19, 2002, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 786 words
Byline: By CALVIN WOODWARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Even U.S. officials who have succeeded in Mideast mediation have confessed to bewilderment about that part of the world.
Bullheadedness on the Israeli side and countless permutations of positions on the other have complicated the tasks of American negotiators since the beginnings of Mideast shuttle diplomacy three decades ago.
Sometimes they've plowed through to success anyway. Not this time.
Secretary of State Colin Powell reported to President Bush on Thursday about his just-concluded trip to the region, during which he fell short of winning a cease-fire in this latest chapter in the decades-old Israeli-Palestinian dispute.
Aides said no decisions were made on what to do next, but CIA Director George Tenet was expected to go soon to resume his periodic mediation while lower level officials press their diplomacy.
Powell's failure to talk Israelis and the Palestinians into a course for peace in his most ambitious mission did not surprise negotiators who have come up against the peculiarities of Mideast dealmaking.
Glacial movement is an Israeli bargaining characteristic well known to U.S. negotiators stretching back to Henry Kissinger, who was exasperated by their "maddening negotiating method."
U.S. officials have had to play catch up on Arab negotiating cultures - some honed from traditions of marketplace haggling and blood-feud arbitration that go back centuries.
When Kissinger, as secretary of state, brokered a cease-fire in the October 1973 war between Israel on one side and Egypt and Syria on the other, he had yet to set foot in an Arab country. His first visit was in January 1974, when he shuttled between Egypt and Israel in negotiations to disengage their forces.
He acknowledged an imperfect understanding of Arab leaders, among them the nuanced Saudis who would publicly praise radicals while rooting quietly for their defeat, and Egypt's Anwar Sadat, who seemed to be bluffing when he threatened a move on Israeli forces, but was not.
As for the Israelis, he said in his memoirs, they "haggle over even the slightest concession, never make an unexpected compromise, and settle only when everyone has reached a state of exhaustion that deprives the conclusion of exaltation or even goodwill."
He once allowed himself a burst of emotion while commiserating with a Soviet counterpart when the Mideast conflict was bringing the superpowers close to direct confrontation.
"The madmen seem to be at it again," Kissinger said, insulting Israelis and Arabs equally in the evenhanded tradition of diplomacy.
Yet there is almost a pining in U.S. foreign policy circles these days for some of the Mideast leaders of that time, especially the assassinated Sadat.
"Nobody's quite like Sadat any more," William B. Quandt, a U.S. negotiator in the breakthrough Camp David accords, said wistfully.
"He was one of a kind - grand, strategic, sweep away the details and go for the prize."
Instead of Sadat there is Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, "chairman of the board, with a very unruly board," Quandt said.
"Master of the half measure," Martin S. Indyk, former U.S. ambassador to Israel, calls him.
And in Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, Quandt sees a leader with positions so far from U.S. goals that it was no wonder Powell could not bridge them.
That's not to say U.S. mediation has been a model of predictability or resolve. Bush only recently changed his step-back approach to the Israeli-Palestinian feud, and some analysts question whether Powell went to the Mideast with adequate support from him.
"I think Colin Powell was playing the weak hand in this round," said James Phillips of the Heritage Foundation.
"We have been passive for a year," Zbigniew Brzezinski, who was national security adviser under President Carter, said on CNN. "In a nutshell - no strategy, no success."
Bush argued Thursday that progress in the Middle East comes slowly.
"This is a part of the world where killing has been going on for a long, long time, and one trip by the secretary of state is not going to prevent that from happening," he said. "But one trip by the secretary of state laid out the framework and the path to achieve peace."
Quandt outlined the two prevailing negotiating models that he said Americans face in that part of the world.
One, the "suk" or marketplace method, is a messy haggling negotiation in which the parties assume a deal is there somewhere. The second has been used for blood feuds between families and nations alike - a third party stepping in to settle a dispute and save face for the others.
Powell's mission did not fall neatly into either category, he said.
"I think this is a non-negotiating model," he said. "I don't think either Arafat or Sharon are in a negotiating frame of mind."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo WX103
 Load-Date: April 20, 2002

 

End of Document
