

'The gun doesn't develop a country'; but disarming the Afghans won't be easy
March 6, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 748 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: KANDAHAR, Afghanistan
Body




Police and soldiers have collected thousands of assault rifles, grenade launchers and other weapons in this southern province. But it may take rounding up millions to make a difference in the arsenal called Afghanistan.
"We and the army have collected 60,000 weapons since the Taliban fell," said Brig. Gen. Mohammad Akram Khakrizewal, provincial police chief.
Across Afghanistan's 29 provinces, however, as many as 10 million weapons were believed to be in the hands of organized fighting units and ordinary people as of 1997, a U.N. study panel reported. That's two weapons for every five Afghans.
Since the U.S.-led war toppled the Taliban's radical Islamist government, Afghans at all levels - from street peddlers to tribal warlords - have said "de-weaponization" is essential for lasting peace.
"The gun doesn't develop a country," a senior Kandahar commander, Haji Habibullah, told a reporter. "The priority must be to disarm the people."
A nation of tribes, mountain game and feuding clans, Afghanistan took enthusiastically to guns, symbols of manhood and power, as weapons grew available over the generations. Now, after 23 years of war against Russian occupiers and among themselves, millions of Afghans also view small arms as essentials for basic security.
Afghan and international officials have only begun to plan how to separate Afghans from their weapons. Collection efforts thus far have been erratic. In Helmand province, for example, Kandahar's western neighbor, officials have not even begun rounding up guns.
Police and military in Kandahar, the Taliban's former stronghold, first collected guns that the populace gave up voluntarily after public appeals. In January, police set up roadblocks in Kandahar city and checked vehicles for weapons. More recently, they've relied on informants to tip them to weapons caches, or even single guns.
The vast majority of confiscated weapons are AK-47s, Russian-designed assault rifles. But weapons seized also included mortars and even anti-aircraft missiles. "More than five or six" Stinger missiles have been seized, said provincial government spokesman Yusuf Pashtun. Stingers are shoulder-fired anti-aircraft weapons that the United States supplied to anti-Soviet Afghan fighters in the 1980s.
After the Taliban were routed in the fall, unidentified gunmen roamed Kandahar's streets. These days, by contrast, almost the only armed men seen in this teeming city are uniformed police or military - that is, soldiers of local militias being integrated in the new national army.
"At the beginning, there was a lot of crime," said Akram, the police chief. "But crime has decreased. It's mostly traffic incidents now."
Akram said authorities had confiscated 90 percent of the city's arms and 70 percent of those elsewhere in the province listed on records of weapons distributed by the Taliban.
Those figures would not include countless guns held clandestinely in homes, however. In addition, the Taliban fled from Kandahar with many of their weapons, and unknown numbers of Taliban fighters may be holed up in the mountains 60 to 100 miles north of here, like the holdouts currently sought in U.S.-Afghan combat operations in eastern Afghanistan.
Afghan and U.S. military forces swept through a Kandahar province town on the Pakistani border in January and seized dozens of truckloads of weapons. But such sweeps are not likely to become routine.
"If we need to, we'll do home searches. But that's a sensitive issue in Afghanistan," said Pashtun, the provincial government spokesman.
Methods and resources for large-scale disarmament are being debated among Afghan officials and international specialists.
The interior minister in the interim Afghan government, Yunus Qanooni, suggests that the international community buy up all weapons - at a cost he estimated at $200 million.
Others say the reward should not be cash, but support for development projects in communities that surrender arms.
"Afghanistan presents a model for a disarmament program, a guns-for-goods program, instead of guns for cash," said Rachel Stohl of Washington's Center for Defense Information. Stohl is chairman of the Small Arms Working Group, a coalition of advocacy groups working for control of small-arms proliferation worldwide.
The Japanese government is reported planning such a program, offering to build a school, for example, in a town that collected a specified number of weapons.
"You can't just ignore guns in Afghanistan," Stohl said. "Something must be done."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY107
 Load-Date: March 7, 2002

 

End of Document
