

A few sites that the USOC may have missed along the way …
August 2, 2001, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 462 words
Byline: By LARRY McSHANE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




In three days of touring New York City, members of the U.S. Olympic Committee enjoyed several Big Apple treats: a trip to Yankee Stadium, lunch at Gracie Mansion, a reception at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
But it's a big city; even with visits to all five boroughs, there's more than any Olympic official could absorb in a mere 72 hours. Some of those passed-over sites might even serve the city well in its bid to host the 2012 Summer Games.
With that in mind - sound the Olympic theme, please - here's a select list of some New York fixtures that the committee might want to check out (or not) before making its final decision next fall.
- FRESH KILLS LANDFILL: The 20-story high Staten Island garbage dump could provide a unique - and aromatic - venue for mountain biking. Degree of difficulty could be determined by the number of car parts on the course.
- GRANT'S TOMB: An appropriate burial spot for the medal hopes of the Equatorial Guinea swim team - remember "Eric the Eel" Moussambani's near-drowning in the Sydney 100-meter freestyle? - and the French basketball squad.
- THE WEST SIDE STADIUM: One of the centerpieces of the New York bid, the magnificent, multipurpose, multimillion dollar new West Side stadium … does not exist. It may never exist. Currently, it is a railroad yard. Just close your eyes and imagine …
- AQUEDUCT : A home for all the equestrian events … and the betting windows are already installed out at the "Big A." Get a $10 exacta down on the dressage, then sit back and check out the show jumping.
- DONNA HANOVER: Notice that Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's date for your Gracie Mansion luncheon was Gov. George Pataki? Hanover, the mayor's estranged wife, was out of town for the day. Or the week. Or maybe the month. With any luck, their divorce settlement may be final by 2012.
- THE BRONX COUNTY COURTHOUSE: Just a few blocks behind the right field wall at Yankee Stadium, this full-service hall of justice can handle everything from the arrests of steroid-peddling team trainers to Tonya Harding-style lawsuits.
- NATHAN'S FAMOUS HOT DOGS: The home of the annual hot dog eating contest, an event that already draws competitors from … well, the U.S. and Japan. Officials at the International Federation of Competitive Eating believe that if New York hosts the games, hot dog eating may finally receive Olympic recognition.
"We have long hoped that competitive eating would be included in the Summer Olympics," said Richard Shea, head of the IFOCE, his tongue firmly in cheek. "And Coney Island is the Mount Olympus of competitive eating.
"I find it absurd that sports of the rich, like equestrian, are included, while the sport of the everyman - hot dog eating - is ignored," Shea concluded.
A little mustard for the delegate from the USOC, please.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos
 Load-Date: August 3, 2001

 

End of Document
