

A look at changes in Iraq and among the allies since the Gulf War
February 22, 2001, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 523 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




The U.S.-led defeat of Iraq in the 1991 Gulf War was arguably the highlight of the first President Bush's single term in office. Ten years later, his son faces its unraveling. Secretary of State Colin Powell, the soldier who led the allied victory, is now the diplomat charged with salvaging the alliance.
A look at where the sides are now:
THE UNITED STATES. President then: George Bush. President now: George W. Bush. The United States maintains a force of between 17,000 and 25,000 in the region, and U.S. and British planes maintain no-fly zones, punishing Iraqi incursions into the restricted areas with air strikes.The United States is under pressure from European allies to consider co-opting Iraq through incentives.
BRITAIN. Prime ministers then: Margaret Thatcher and John Major. Prime minister now: Tony Blair. Under Conservative and Labor governments, Britain has remained the most steadfast of U.S. allies, and is still its partner in air patrols.
FRANCE. President then: Francois Mitterrand. President now: Jacques Chirac, a strong nationalist who is much less disposed to ceding world leadership to the United States. During his presidency, the French have favored diplomatic persuasion to moderate Iraq, and have worked with Russia and China to stymie U.S. efforts to force weapons inspections.
GULF COOPERATION COUNCIL (Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Oman, United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Kuwait). Leadership then and now is in the hands of royal families. The Gulf states signed a defense pact in December pledging to increase their forces from 5,000 to 22,000, but still rely principally on the United States for defense. Kuwait - overrun and sacked by Iraq before the 1991 war - still backs sanctions, but the others are lured by the Iraqi commercial potential, and are wary of popular support for Saddam Hussein.
SYRIA. President then: Hafez Assad. President now: his son, Bashar Assad. Syria's actual role in the 1991 alliance was minimal, but had symbolic heft. Including a once-adamant anti-Western country among the allies appeased Gulf state concerns that hosting Western troops would be perceived as a sacrilege. In recent years, Syria has lifted some trade embargoes. When he meets with Syrian leaders, Powell plans to discuss reports that Syria plans to funnel embargoed oil through a recently reopened pipeline.
RUSSIA. President then: Mikhail Gorbachev. President now: Vladimir Putin. Gorbachev, presiding over the implosion of the Soviet Union, had little time to deal with the Gulf crisis. He even offered a gesture to the West, deploying a destroyer and an anti-submarine ship to the region. Putin hopes to restore Russia to what was once a pre-eminent role in the Middle East, and is eager to lift trade barriers with a major oil producer. In recent years, Russia has joined France and China in blocking U.S. efforts to isolate Iraq.
IRAQ. Leader then and now: Saddam Hussein. Before the 1991 war, Saddam's forces stood at about 1 million. Today, they remain at their postwar number of about 350,000. Still, Iraq dwarfs most other Gulf armies, and since 1998, Saddam has managed with to keep weapons inspectors out of Iraq.
 Load-Date: February 23, 2001

 

End of Document
