

Afghans grateful for the ouster of the Taliban on second anniversary of U.S. war
The Associated Press
October 7, 2003, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 591 words
Byline: By DANIEL COONEY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KABUL, Afghanistan
Body




The second anniversary of the start of the U.S. war against Afghanistan's repressive Taliban regime passed without ceremony Tuesday. The capital instead was filled with the hammering sounds of reconstruction and the laughs of girls as well as boys hurrying to school.
"We are so happy the Taliban have gone," said Sadiqa Sharif, a teacher at Malalai high school in the capital, Kabul. "Girls are able to study again. We have books and computers. The international community has given us so much."
The Taliban, who ruled Afghanistan from 1996 to 2001, banned girls from school and women from having jobs. The hard-line Islamic militia ordered women to wear body-shrouding burkas in public and men to grow their beards long.
"A few teachers still come to work in burkas, but most don't. At least now, it's the choice of the individual, rather than the government telling us what we have to do," Sharif said.
But Afghanistan remains a deeply impoverished country, and many in the government have complained that the international community is not doing or spending enough to pay for rebuilding a nation that has been devastated by nearly a quarter-century of war.
The U.S.-backed Afghan government has lifted restrictions against women, but in rural areas where it has little authority many women still cannot work or be educated. Many are still cloistered at home and wearing burkas is mandatory in public in some areas.
Mohammad Anif Sarwari, the owner of a construction company, said that during the Taliban's time, there was no work.
"No construction was going on. But during the past two years, we have been busy with reconstruction projects. We are rebuilding schools all over Kabul with U.N. money," he said. "There are still lots of problems in Afghanistan, especially security, but there have been many positive changes."
Two years after the Oct. 7, 2001, start of Operation Enduring Freedom, which ousted the Taliban two months later, the Afghan government is laying foundations for a democracy, but it also is struggling to stamp out an intensifying insurgency.
Taliban rebels, al-Qaida operatives and fighters loyal to renegade warlord Gulbuddin Hekmatyar have launched increasingly bold attacks on coalition troops, aid workers and Afghan government workers.
U.S. forces at their headquarters at Bagram Air Base said they have no plans to mark the anniversary. Sixteen American troops died and uncounted numbers of Taliban and civilians lost their lives during the war. Twenty U.S. soldiers have been killed in fighting since it ended.
The U.S.-led coalition still has 11,500 troops in the country, hunting down Taliban and al-Qaida militants holdouts who appear to have regrouped recently.
There is also a 5,000 strong, NATO-led peacekeeping force, but it is restricted to Kabul. President Hamid Karzai's government wants the force to deploy to other parts of the country where warlords and their private militias are largely in control.
NATO leaders in Brussels are reviewing plans that could involve 2,000 to 10,000 more peacekeepers fanning out to major provincial cities.
Attacks by Taliban militants and bandits have led to the suspension of aid projects in some parts of the country.
The government is expected in the next week to make public a draft of a new constitution, which aims to revolutionize the way women are treated in this devoutly Muslim nation. It is also expected to declare Afghanistan a Muslim state, but stop short of enshrining Shariah, or Islamic law.
The first democratic elections in decades also have been scheduled for June.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo KAB101
 Load-Date: October 8, 2003

 

End of Document
