

Afghans remember the last man executed by the Taliban in Kandahar
April 4, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 655 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER TORCHIA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KANDAHAR, Afghanistan
Body




Often, Mohammed Taher doesn't only see the swirl of crowds and traffic when he looks down on Martyrs' Square from his second-floor restaurant. He also sees the image of a hanged man.
He sees Abdullah, the last man to be executed and publicly displayed by the Taliban in Kandahar, and perhaps anywhere in Afghanistan. Abdullah died in late November, one week before the Islamic militia fled their last stronghold under pressure from U.S. bombing and the approach of enemy Afghan forces.
"Every time I glance out of the window, I remember this guy," said Taher, part-owner of the Khorasan hotel and restaurant. "It's as though it happened yesterday."
The demise of the Taliban swiftly followed the start of the U.S. bombing campaign on Oct. 7, but they left their mark with ways that were considered cruel even in a country long accustomed to violent death.
Respected in Kandahar and other parts of southern Afghanistan for imposing peace on lawless regions, the Taliban also were feared because of their penchant for public executions. They gathered crowds in soccer stadiums to watch as criminals were shot or hanged and thieves had their hands severed.
As U.S. bombs pulverized their refuges and vehicles in the last days of their rule, the Taliban didn't have time to assemble an audience for the death of Abdullah, an informer for the Americans. It was a hasty job.
Taher was one of the first to see Abdullah's body, waking up with the pre-dawn call to prayer and spotting a shape dangling from a large iron tripod in the gloom of the square below.
"When I went down to see up close, there was a paper on his body that said he was an American spy who took dollars from the Americans, and for that he was hanged," Taher said.
Abdullah was indeed linked to the Americans, said Nazak, his nephew and a commander in the local government that replaced the Taliban.
Both men were arrested in late October after using a satellite telephone to report information on Taliban movements to Afghan dissidents in Pakistan, who passed the data to the U.S. military, Nazak said.
They were held together in a dark cell, and were beaten, he said. Taliban fighters dumped their raw limbs in buckets of saltwater.
"We were waiting for the sentence. We thought, 'Maybe tomorrow, they'll hang us.' Then night came and we thought, 'We're lucky, we're still alive,"' said Nazak, who was released after the Taliban left town.
Abdullah, however, was singled out earlier. He is believed to have been beaten to death before the Taliban hanged him in Martyrs' Square, a main intersection in Kandahar. A tiled, domed monument pays tribute to Afghan warriors who fought British colonialists in the nineteenth century.
All that day, people gazed at the corpse of Abdullah, a 28-year-old father of a boy and two girls who once sold medicine for a living. Most witnesses were quiet and fearful. Armed pro-Taliban Arabs - many of them suspected members of Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida terrorist network - stopped by, smiling and chatting.
Abdullah hanged there until late afternoon, when the Taliban untied him and delivered his body to a hospital funded by the International Committee of the Red Cross. His relatives collected the mutilated body for burial.
The Taliban hanged many others during their seven years in power, when they ruled much of Afghanistan. When they seized Kabul in 1996, they tortured and killed Najibullah, the Soviet-installed Communist president, before hanging him from a lamppost just outside the presidential palace.
On Oct. 26, they hanged Abdul Haq, a leading anti-Taliban figure who was on a clandestine mission to rally support against Afghanistan's rulers.
Abdullah was the last to die here, Taliban-style.
"According to Islamic thought, everybody has a chosen death," said Haji Mohammad Dawood, a worker with a U.N.-funded government demining agency. "Because of that, we accept everything. Still, we are sad. These kinds of things are unforgettable."
 Load-Date: April 5, 2002

 

End of Document
