

After the Beijing wins the Olympic vote, many wonder what's beyond the Great Wall?
July 14, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 678 words
Byline: By LARRY SIDDONS, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




The Olympics are going to the Great Wall. What lies behind it is anyone's guess.
With a potentially far-reaching step it was unwilling to take eight years ago, the International Olympic Committee chose Beijing to stage the Summer Games in 2008.
The victory was a landslide, with Beijing's 56 votes more than doubling the 22 for runner-up Toronto in the second and final round of ballots. Paris, Istanbul and Osaka trailed badly.
And the IOC, mindful of worldwide criticism of China's human rights policies, quickly told the newly named hosts Friday that they better pull this one off.
"We are totally aware at the IOC there is one issue on the table … and that is human rights," IOC director general Francois Carrard said. "Human rights is a very serious issue in the entire world."
Tightlipped on the subject as Beijing's bid moved in front, the IOC was now saying it knew what it was getting into and liked the odds, as long as the Chinese paid attention.
"It is not up to the IOC to interfere in these issues, but we are taking the bet that seven years from now we sincerely and dearly hope we will see many changes," Carrard said. "The IOC is a global organization. … The vote reflects these sensitivities.
"The 2008 Games are now in the hands of the Chinese people. … They have a great responsibility. … We trust them to develop excellent games in 2008, and it will be up to them to welcome the world."
No problem, the newest Olympic city replied.
"On the human rights question we have achieved a tremendous progress," said Yuan Weimin, China's minister of sports. "In the next stage of our national development we will continue to open ourselves wider to the outside world and carry out more reforms."
The victory took some of the sting out of the two-vote defeat by Sydney in 1993, when Beijing was running for the 2000 Games. Human rights issues were more prominent then, with the bloody scenes of Tiananmen Square still fresh in the world's memory.
Flag-waving crowds took the place of tanks in the square Friday night when the vote was broadcast live. The IOC now tells the Beijing organizing committee that perhaps it is best to find somewhere other than the scene of a deadly anti-democracy crackdown to stage beach volleyball.
But the upside of a Beijing Olympics is big.
"Possibly today, this opens a new era for China," IOC president Juan Antonio Samaranch said after opening a blue envelope and declaring Beijing the winner.
"This is a very important step in the evolution of China's relationship with the world," said former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, who helped open relations between Beijing and Washington in the 1970s. "It will have a positive impact."
According to Olympic historian John McAloon, giving the games to China marked a watershed.
"In some ways, the Olympic movement might have been reborn in this vote," he said. "They gave political and historical significance to what's best for the games instead of what's best for the sports industry.
"Beijing got the games not in spite of, but because of, the human rights issue."
Not all reaction was so positive.
"It truly boggles the mind," said Rep. Tom Lantos, the House International Relations Committee's top Democrat, whose resolution urging the IOC not to choose Beijing was blocked by Republican leaders. "This decision will allow the Chinese police state to bask in the reflected glory of the Olympic Games despite having one of the most abominable human rights records in the world."
In Dharmsala, India, Tibetan activists said they would push for an international boycott of the games. China has ruled Tibet since 1950.
The IOC has been burned by world politics over the years. It has been hit with boycotts in the Cold War and accused of fostering Naziism in 1936 Berlin.
But it also has shown an uncanny knack of picking the right city at the right time to stage the games. It points to Seoul, where the 1988 Games helped accelerate a change from a military regime to democracy.
"The power of the IOC wanted Beijing," said Paul Henderson, an IOC member from Canada. "Now they have to live with it."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos XMOS157,165
 Load-Date: July 15, 2001

 

End of Document
