

After the Taliban, keeping the peace in Afghanistan will be difficult and tricky business
November 30, 2001, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 792 words
Byline: By SALLY BUZBEE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




In post-Taliban Afghanistan, keeping the peace may be as tricky as stopping decades of war there or smashing Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida terrorist network.
The issue is touchy because whichever country or ethnic group controls security on the ground stands to gain political influence and a crucial toehold in the new government.
It has gained urgency in recent days as the humanitarian situation inside Afghanistan worsens, with rival leaders and bandits, who control key roads, preventing delivery of emergency food aid.
"The easy part of these operations is always to destroy the bad government," said James Lindsay, a peacekeeping expert at the Brookings Institution. "The hard part is cleaning up afterward and building a stable new government."
Both the United States and the United Nations have made clear they don't want to send peacekeepers into Afghanistan, either now or after the war ends. They worry that peacekeeping troops would face attacks from rival factions and get bogged down for years. Both support letting Afghans keep the peace among themselves while recognizing the possible need for an international security force if the Afghans cannot handle the job.
For their part, Afghans are divided. The northern alliance, which controls much of the country, reiterated Thursday that its own forces are keeping peace just fine, for now. Other Afghans want international troops, now.
Meanwhile, Iran is leery of Western troops just across its border in Afghanistan. Another neighbor, Pakistan, wants to protect the interests of the majority Pashtuns, who control the south, have little to do with the northern alliance and have Taliban ties.
Already, foreign soldiers - from the United States, Britain, France, even Russia - occasionally act as de facto peacekeepers, working to repair airfields and increase security to facilitate food delivery.
Many Europeans worry that too little is being done. Unexploded mines and lawlessness on roads make delivery of emergency aid to Afghans unsafe, both around Mazar-e-Sharif in the north and Jalalabad in the east, a European Union official said Thursday.
"The security issue still is a very real problem," said the official, Humanitarian Aid Commissioner Poul Nielson.
Britain has 100-200 troops at an airfield near Kabul but initially had put thousands on alert for possible peacekeeping deployment. The northern alliance said the British troops weren't welcome before eventually allowing the Kabul presence.
The northern alliance, a collection of ethnic groups who previously controlled only the north, sees peacekeepers "as a pretext for rolling back the gains they've made on the ground," Lindsay said. "They see it as a threat to their political power."
Meanwhile, Russia has sent emergency ministry staff, construction crews and diplomats to Kabul for humanitarian work.
U.S. military teams are working to clear unexploded ammunition at the airport at Mazar-e-Sharif in the north so that humanitarian aid flights can land. French troops also are near Mazar.
Pakistan has offered to provide security for U.N. aid workers inside border areas of Afghanistan, but that is viewed with suspicion by the northern alliance. A Turkish force also is on standby for a possible peacekeeping mission, but Turkey's ties with the northern alliance could rile Pashtuns and Pakistan, where Pashtuns form a major ethnic bloc.
On Thursday, at talks in Germany on a post-Taliban government, the northern alliance said no international security force is needed in the country, at least not yet. But it won't oppose an international security force once an interim Afghan government is formed, said Younus Qanooni, leader of the alliance delegation.
In such a case, Afghans would prefer a foreign force drawn from Islamic countries, Qanooni said. Turkey and Bangladesh are possibilities.
The other three delegations at the talks all favor a neutral foreign force.
Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage reiterated this week that the United States wants Afghans to handle peacekeeping themselves. If they can't, then an international peacekeeping force might be necessary, he said.
Another senior U.S. official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the United States does not want to participate in any international security force.
President Bush, during his campaign, said U.S. troops should never be used for "nation-building."
The reasons for U.S. and U.N. hesitancy are clear, Lindsay said.
"Peacekeepers do very well when they go into situations where peace has been established, where the parties want to get along and they just need a buffer," Lindsay said. "They do a terrible job when their job is really peacemaking."
On the Net: Library of Congress Country study on Afghanistan: http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/aftoc.html 
 Load-Date: December 1, 2001

 

End of Document
