

Against the odds, Holbrooke got results at the U.N. - but not everything
January 6, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 1096 words
Byline: By EDITH M. LEDERER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




As a diplomatic troubleshooter Richard Holbrooke loves challenges, and during his 17-month stint as U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, he took on some of the toughest - from reforming the United Nations to trying to bring peace to Africa.
Against the odds, he got results, but not everything he hoped for.
"What's the point of being in the government if you don't try to make things better, which means trying to change things," Holbrooke said in an interview as he reflected on his U.N. tour and his plans now that the Republicans have won the White House.
Holbrooke's most important U.N. victory came four weeks before he was to leave office: He persuaded 188 countries to overhaul U.N. financing and reduce U.S. payments to the world body.
After a grueling 14-month battle in Congress over his nomination, Holbrooke was a man in a hurry to make his mark when he arrived at the United Nations in September 1999. He had successfully brokered the 1995 Dayton peace agreement that ended the war in Bosnia and served as President Clinton's special envoy to Yugoslavia on Kosovo.
But he faced serious obstacles at the United Nations.
A global outcry over the U.S. failure to pay $1.6 billion in U.N. dues had seriously undermined U.S. influence at the United Nations, and the Security Council was deeply divided over Iraq and the U.S.-led bombing of Yugoslavia without council authorization.
A hard-driving fighter with sharply honed diplomatic skills, Holbrooke wasted no time in tackling the U.S. debt, which many observers said was the single most important issue to resolve if he wanted to restore U.S. relations with the organization.
"People said, 'It can't be done.' As everybody who worked with me knew, that was the best way to get me to accept an issue," Holbrooke said.
By his own estimate, Holbrooke spent a third of his tenure trying to get U.N. members to agree to revamp the U.N. payment scale for the first time in over two decades. That's because Congress demanded that U.S. payments be cut before it would pay a major chunk of back dues.
After a year of shuttling to Washington and a last-minute lobbying effort by the Clinton administration, the General Assembly approved a budget deal in December that came very close to meeting the congressional demands.
Britain's U.N. Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock said the deal "would not have happened if Richard Holbrooke had not been driving the negotiations to see it settled."
"He's a bulldog for the globe," said Timothy Wirth, president of the United Nations Foundation, which disburses Ted Turner's $1 billion pledge to U.N. causes. "The relationship between the U.S. and the U.N. is the most fundamental cooperative relationship in New York, and Holbrooke has gone a long way to getting that relationship sorted out and back on an even keel."
As his other U.N. priority, Holbrooke chose Africa.
He spent his month as president of the Security Council trying to focus a global spotlight on the continent's problems, which he saw firsthand on two separate trips.
He invited the presidents of the warring factions in Congo to the Security Council to pledge to stop fighting. He brought in Nelson Mandela to brief ambassadors on efforts to forge peace in Burundi. Vice President Al Gore presided over a council meeting on the havoc the AIDS epidemic has wreaked in Africa.
Holbrooke later ushered through a resolution declaring AIDS not just a health problem but a global security threat, particularly in Africa.
"I think it was historically, and morally and politically and economically correct," Holbrooke said during a recent interview at his office at the U.S. Mission to the United Nations. "We showed the Africans that we paid attention - that Africa matters."
Despite the fanfare, Holbrooke has little concrete progress to show for the effort. Congo is still at war and new crises have erupted in Sierra Leone and between Eritrea and Ethiopia.
While acknowledging disappointment, Holbrooke stands by his decision to focus global attention - and U.S. attention - on Africa, which he calls a work-in-progress.
"I'm absolutely certain that if we hadn't done it, things would be much, much worse," Holbrooke said.
But he acknowledges more could have been done.
"In Washington, African policy was complicated and politically charged despite its relatively low priority and that was wrong," Holbrooke said. "There should have been a higher priority to Africa, and a clear formulation of our policy earlier," he said, without elaborating.
In the Middle East, Holbrooke led a behind-the-scenes U.S. campaign to give Israel the chance to be represented on U.N. bodies in New York for the first time in 50 years. And he successfully helped engineer the defeat last month of a Palestinian-backed resolution to send U.N. observers to the West Bank and Gaza - because Israel opposed it.
But many U.N. watchers and diplomats note that Holbrooke was conspicuously absent during virtually every Security Council discussion on the other Mideast issue on the U.N. agenda - Iraq.
Several observers speculated that as a top candidate for secretary of state if Gore had won the presidency, Holbrooke may not have wanted to take a high-profile position on the vexing Iraq issue.
To such criticism, Holbrooke counters that Iraq was in "a maintenance position" during his U.N. tenure and could be handled by his deputies while he focused on other issues. He says he was involved behind the scenes and spoke to Secretary-General Kofi Annan repeatedly about Iraq.
With just two weeks to go before he steps down as ambassador, Holbrooke is satisfied that he got a lot done during a short time - though he quickly adds that there is plenty of unfinished business, from solving Africa's crises to reforming the entire U.N. system.
But after eight years of diplomatic problem-solving, the 59-year-old Holbrooke says he's now ready for a break.
He plans to join the Council on Foreign Relations, the New York-based think-tank, and write at least one book. "I love to write - that's my real passion," he said.
But leaving the United Nations won't be easy.
"I've loved this job," Holbrooke said. "It's been exciting. It's a dream job - to be a member of the Cabinet and live in my hometown, New York."
While still critical of the bloated U.N. bureaucracy, Holbrooke has nothing but praise for Annan, whose first, five-year term as U.N. chief comes to a close at the end of 2001. Holbrooke said Annan was the best secretary-general the United Nations has ever had, and he hopes he will seek a second term.
"He is an international rock star of diplomacy," the ambassador said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NYR102-103
 Load-Date: January 7, 2001

 

End of Document
