

AN AP ARTS REVIEW; 'The Last Battle: The Mayaguez Incident and the End of the Vietnam War'
June 1, 2001, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 422 words
Byline: By RICHARD PYLE, Associated Press Writer
Body




"The Last Battle: The Mayaguez Incident and the End of the Vietnam War" (Carroll & Graf, 400 pages, $27) - Ralph Wetterhahn
After 15 years of bloodshed, South Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos fell to the communists in May 1975. The Indochina war had not ended in victory for the United States and its allies, but at least it was over.
Then, two weeks later, came the Mayaguez Incident - a jarring and unwelcome postscript to the conflict that Americans already wished to forget. In a grim fiasco that began with the Khmer Rouge seizure of a cargo ship and crew off the Cambodian coast, 41 American Marines and airmen died, victims of official bungling and confusion that reached all the way to President Gerald Ford's White House.
Ralph Wetterhahn, a retired Air Force pilot with 180 missions in Vietnam and a published magazine writer, researched the Mayaguez story for five years, made several trips to the scene and interviewed some of the Khmer Rouge who took part.
As he recounts, the 39 Mayaguez crewmen had been released elsewhere, even as the helicopter-borne rescuers approached Koh Tang Island, where U.S. officials wrongly believed they were held hostage. In the ensuing 14-hour debacle, three U.S. helicopters were shot down, 13 Marines and sailors and two airmen were killed, and 23 more airmen perished when a fourth helicopter crashed in Thailand.
Wetterhahn correctly says that the Pentagon tried to gloss over the reality by denying that the Thailand casualties were related to the Mayaguez, but fails to acknowledge that at least one news organization, The Associated Press, reported otherwise at the time.
Far worse than that cover-up, says Wetterhahn, was official concealment of the fact that three Marines had been left behind on Koh Tang - a "traditional no-no," as he puts it, for the proud Corps.
The three were at first listed as missing, and a year later officially declared dead. Two decades later, after repeated return trips and interviews with former Khmer Rouge, the author says he managed to establish that the three had been captured and executed. Possible remains of two were recovered by a U.S. MIA search team in 1999.
Wetterhahn describes in detail the work of the Joint Task Force-Full Accounting, the Hawaii-based military unit that since 1992 has searched out the remains of American MIAs in Indochina. Among the Mayaguez dead at Koh Tang, at least six have been identified.
--
EDITOR'S NOTE - Richard Pyle covered the Indochina war for five years, and served as chief of the AP's Saigon bureau from 1970-73.
 Load-Date: June 2, 2001

 

End of Document
