

An ancient weapon, information, wielded in the conflict between Iraq and the United States
The Associated Press
March 20, 2003, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1530 words
Byline: By MARK FRITZ, Associated Press Writer
Body




Want to rattle the enemy? Give him a sneak peek at a scary new weapon, pepper his commanders with e-mailed inducements to surrender, fill the airwaves with endless accounts of an awesome American army warming up for warfare. Make something up about his wife having an affair.
Need to rally the folks at home? Question the patriotism of the anti-war crowd, recite a grisly litany of the adversary's atrocities, maybe roll out the trusty comparisons to that mother of all evildoers, Adolf Hitler. Promise peace as the payoff for war.
During World War II, such tactics were called morale and subversion operations. Today, the voguish terms are information warfare and "public diplomacy." But the basic principles of propaganda predate cable television news. They are as old as war itself.
"People painted their faces, wore bearskins to look bigger and intimidating, carried banners, beat drums, chanted slogans," says Susan Brewer, a University of Wisconsin historian and author of "To Win The Peace: British Propaganda During World War II."
Experts agree that every word, image, leak and threat being uttered by nearly everyone connected with a war against Iraq is serving some sort of strategic purpose. Some of it works, some it doesn't. Some of it is true, and some of it is pure deception.
"None of this stuff is incidental," said Scott Gerwehr, an analyst at the Rand Corp.
The selective missile strikes on Baghdad late Wednesday ran counter to a U.S. military commander's comments earlier in the day to "shock and awe" the enemy at war's opening with unprecedented firepower, a classic example of using propaganda to deceive.
Since the attacks were aimed at a place where the Iraqi leadership was believed to be holed up, it fit with another propaganda objective: to intimidate the leadership without unduly terrorizing a general population being told it was about to be liberated.
Sometimes, a simple gaffe can be a strategic gift to an enemy. Brewer gives President Bush a "C" for his efforts so far. Polls show he has won the support of most Americans, but alienated much of the world.
His one-time reference to the war on terrorism as a "crusade" was a blunder, seemingly affirming the worst fears of the Muslim community: That the U.S. agenda was to repeat the Christian Crusades of a millennium ago to supplant Islam in the Holy Lands.
Though the president apologized, such slips have a tendency to stick.
"These things are reproduced as truths, and as permanent truths," said Philip M. Taylor, a historian at Britain's Leeds University and the author of "War and the Media: Propaganda and Persuasion in the Gulf War."
He said reports that the United States was already soliciting Iraqi reconstruction bids from a list of entirely American contractors was another inadvertent propaganda plus for Saddam.
Taylor said the suspicion abroad that a war was about making money was not diminished last week when a British lawmaker asked Bush's main ally, Prime Minister Tony Blair, why no British firms were on the list.
Bush may have alienated some key allies, but the most recent polls show a solid majority of Americans back a war on Iraq even without UN approval.
His somber, forceful, State of the Union speech in particular was an accomplished piece of persuasion, said Nancy Snow, a communications professor at California State University and author of the book "Propaganda, Inc."
Snow said she showed a tape of the speech to her American Media History class. "It came across as 'Wow!' They were very impressed with the gravity," she said.
As for the people who stand to be on the receiving end of a Western military operation, the Iraqis are being bombarded with radio broadcasts and leaflets urging them to support Saddam's ouster. U.S. operatives are even sending e-mails and making phone calls to Iraqi commanders.
The Americans and their allies dropped 28 million leaflets on Iraq during the 1991 war. For the sequel, 80 million already have been dropped.
The targets of that information undoubtedly are being blitzed with other news, from the global debate on the validity of a war to Saddam's own propaganda. Iraqi officers are conceivably finding their e-mail accounts clogged with war-related spam.
"It doesn't do you any good if your e-mail is one of a thousand e-mails you are getting," Gerwehr said. "A good psychological operation takes into account that (the targets) are subject to other sources of information, and finds a way to cut through that noise."
Military psychological operations come in two basic forms: Influencing behavior, or compliance, and changing attitudes, known as conversion.
"It's much easier to make people comply," Gerwehr said. "As you're dropping bombs, you're dropping leaflets telling people to surrender and avoid this stuff. You're literally saying 'Take one of these and survive.' That's compliance."
If a war ousts Saddam, conversion would be getting the Iraqi people to buy into a democratic government. The biggest conversion campaign came after World War II, when the Allies carefully manipulated every form of media in conquered Nazi Germany to essentially grow a democratic state like a potted plant.
Regardless of who it's aimed at, Gerwehr said propaganda is governed by the same principles of persuasion as political campaigning and marketing. And though the military is prohibited by law from using psychological warfare against the American public, any bit of information aimed at the enemy can wind up on the evening news or an Internet Web site.
An operation in Afghanistan, part of an effort to undermine Osama bin Laden, featured a doctored photo of the extremist Muslim wearing a suit and shorn of his beard. Though aimed at Afghans, the media picked it up. "The news coverage internationally was not glowing," Gerwehr said.
During World War II, U.S. intelligence officer Barbara Podoski won a Bronze Star for the creative lies she concocted to demoralize German troops. Much of her material was gleaned from interviews with POWs, including one who said his biggest fear at the front was that his wife was "messing around with other men."
Podoski, now 88 and living in Washington, distributed fake accounts about a Third Reich program in which German women were allowed to have sex with any soldier on leave. The goal was to seriously depress the soldiers stuck at the front, but the operation was so believable that the Washington Post wrote a story about it as if it were a true account of Nazi amorality.
A similar operation was carried out in Vietnam, with pictures of Communist leader Ho Chi Minh and voluptuous women distributed to soldiers in the field. "Ho Chi Minh is having his way with your wife while you're away," Gerwehr said, paraphrasing the message.
Even now, some of the leaflets being showered on Iraq depict Saddam living in opulence while his people struggle to find food and water.
During the 1991 Persian Gulf War, military officials contended that oil spills in the gulf were an attempt by Saddam to poison the important fishery. Most the spills were proven to have been caused by the UN coalition's air war. And the professed accuracy of the Patriot anti-missile system turned out to have been overstated.
Though separating truth from fiction won't be easy until after the Iraqi campaign has run its course, a combatant traditionally goes to hyperbolic lengths to demonize an opponent. Recently, Washington sources said they had information that Saddam planned to dress some of his troops as American soldiers and then commit atrocities.
Just before the invasion of Afghanistan, the same sort of sources said the terrorist-harboring Taliban regime planned to poison Western food drops and blame the casualties on the United States, something which never materialized.
If such intelligence is reliable, Gerwehr said "We would want people to know that. At the same time it has other uses. It's sort of a you-can't-lose situation."
The United States recently unveiled what it said was the biggest non-nuclear bomb ever, the MOAB. Declassified intelligence files have shown that spreading news about a super weapon is a propaganda standby, whether that weapon is real or not. "Historically, there are two reasons why you might want to do that," Gerwehr said. "To intimidate (the enemy) and to deceive them."
The Bush administration has maintained that the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on New York and the Pentaqon were tied to Saddam who, despite murdering thousands of his own people, has been linked to few terrorist acts outside the Middle East and shares a mutual animosity with fundamentalist leader Osama bin Laden.
One can buy a beer in the Baghdad of the secular Saddam, and Taylor pointed out that bin Laden offered to lead an Islamic army against the Iraqi ruler in 1991. Saddam is less suicide bomber than survivor, as his surrender in 1991 demonstrated.
American presidents have traditionally distilled a conflict into two themes: as a battle between good and evil, and how America might benefit by blowing that evil to bits. When Bush ticked off Saddam's lengthy record of brutality, he was following a time-honored tradition.
"Atrocities have been used to create an image of an enemy who deserves death," Brewer said.

 

End of Document
