

AP News in Brief; Jury spares the Houston mother who drowned her five children in the tub
March 15, 2002, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1617 words
Dateline: HOUSTON
Body




A jury spared Andrea Yates' life Friday after prosecutors stopped short of demanding the death penalty for the tormented mother who drowned her five children in the bathtub.
Yates, 37, was sentenced to life in prison and will have to serve at least 40 years before she is eligible for parole.
The jury took just 35 minutes to bring an end to the case that had angered family members, women's groups and others who said prosecutors had shown no mercy in bringing a capital murder case against a mentally ill woman overwhelmed by the demands of motherhood.
Yates learned her fate with her attorney's arm around her. Dressed in a silk blouse and white sweater, she turned to her attorneys and smiled as she realized her life had been spared. She later looked back toward her mother and siblings as she was led out of the courtroom.
Arafat meets with U.S. envoy as Israel withdraws from three West Bank towns
 
RAMALLAH, West Bank (AP) - After a first round of meetings with Israeli and Palestinian leaders, U.S. mediator Anthony Zinni was upbeat Friday, saying he believed the two sides could begin implementing a cease-fire in the coming days.
Yet the violence continued; nine Palestinians were killed in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, including a woman and four children who died in a mysterious explosion.
Israelis and Palestinians remained at odds over the terms of a truce, with Israel rejecting a Palestinian demand for an Israeli withdrawal from all Palestinian-run territory ahead of the resumption of cease-fire negotiations. On Friday, Israel withdrew from three West Bank towns, but remained in two others.
Zinni met for 90 minutes late Friday with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat following separate talks Thursday and Friday with Prime Minister Ariel Sharon and Israel's foreign and defense ministers.
 
Bush, Cheney rally U.S. troops from both sides of globe; Bush makes budget a patriotic issue
 
FORT BRAGG, N.C. (AP) - President Bush stood at a camouflaged lectern and promised U.S. forces "everything it takes" to battle terrorists. "USA!" they chanted in return, applauding as he prodded Congress to increase military spending as a patriotic duty.
Halfway around the world, Vice President Dick Cheney visited an aircraft carrier in the Arabian Sea where warplanes are hunting al-Qaida.
"America believes in you," Cheney said, as the commander in chief and his second-in-command rallied U.S. troops for the next phase of the war on terrorism.
"This war will end when we and our allies have delivered justice in full measure and no terrorist group or government can threaten the peace of the world," said Cheney, who wore a large white floatation vest, a helmet and goggles for a tour of the USS John C. Stennis.
 
His Black Hawk down, paratrooper colonel directed battle from 9,000-foot-high ridge
 
KANDAHAR, Afghanistan (AP) - The brigade commander from the 101st Airborne surveyed the unfolding battle from high above the Shah-e-Kot valley. Suddenly a rocket grenade streaked toward his helicopter, creased the underbelly, and forced the Black Hawk down.
It was an inauspicious beginning to the biggest operation of the Afghan war - and the biggest mission of Col. Frank Wiercinski's career.
Grounded on a ridge at 9,000 feet, Wiercinski and his command group quickly recouped, and over the next dozen days the three battalions of his U.S. Army task force combined with Afghan fighters and the U.S. Air Force to bloody and scatter remnants of al-Qaida and the Taliban in the eastern mountains.
Wiercinski maintained the joint offensive, dubbed Operation Anaconda, killed "hundreds" of al-Qaida and Taliban fighters, although thus far Afghan militiamen have reported finding only 25 bodies in an initial sweep.
 
Powell pledges U.S. won't use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear states
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - As the Bush administration weighs possible confrontation with Iran and Iraq, Secretary of State Colin Powell said Friday the United States would stand by a 24-year pledge not to use its arsenal of nuclear weapons against states that don't have them.
In an interview with The Associated Press, Powell also said that he hoped Israel's pullback of troops and tanks on the West Bank would continue but that the withdrawal may not be permanent.
A Pentagon policy review that surfaced last weekend raised the prospect of the United States possibly using its powerful nuclear stockpile in a wide range of conflicts.
President Bush's denunciation earlier of Iran, Iraq and North Korea as an "axis of evil" and the U.S.-led campaign against terrorism already had raised chances of using American military power generally.
 
Boston archdiocese newspaper says church must face question of celibacy
 
BOSTON (AP) - In an extraordinary editorial on the city's child-molestation scandal, the official newspaper of the Boston Archdiocese says the Roman Catholic Church must face the question of whether to drop its requirement that priests be celibate.
The editorial, published Thursday in a special issue of The Pilot, asks whether there would be fewer scandals if celibacy were optional for priests and whether the priesthood attracts an unusually high number of homosexual men.
It offers no answers, but says: "These scandals have raised serious questions in the minds of the laity that simply will not disappear."
The editorial was written by Monsignor Peter V. Conley, the paper's executive editor, who is said to be a close confidant of Cardinal Bernard Law, Boston's archbishop. Law is listed as the paper's publisher.
The Rev. Christopher Coyne, a spokesman for the archdiocese, said Friday that Law was unaware the editorial would be published.
> Government bars Enron, Andersen from new contracts following indictment of accounting firm
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - The government suspended Enron and its former accounting firm, Arthur Andersen, from new federal contracts on Friday, citing evidence of misconduct a day after an indictment that charged Andersen with obstruction of justice.
Current contracts - some $35 million for Enron and $60 million to $90 million for Andersen - are not affected by the action announced by the General Services Administration, which oversees many of the contracts for the rest of the government and is Enron's biggest federal client.
The move came a day after a federal court unsealed a grand jury indictment charging Andersen with obstructing justice by destroying thousands of documents and deleting computer files related to its audit of Houston-based Enron. It was the first indictment in a case that has roiled the White House and Congress and dissolved the retirement savings of thousands of current and former Enron employees.
 
Serbian deputy prime minister arrested on suspicion of passing documents to U.S. diplomat
 
BELGRADE, Yugoslavia (AP) - A former Yugoslav army commander has been arrested by military police on suspicion of passing secret documents to a U.S. diplomat that could implicate Slobodan Milosevic at his war crimes trial, officials said Friday. The diplomat also was detained - and at one point reportedly was held with a bag over his head.
The U.S. Embassy lodged a protest, saying the diplomat was "arbitrarily arrested and held incommunicado for 15 hours." Declaring that the American was "physically assaulted," State Department spokesman Richard Boucher said the United States was "outraged."
The Yugoslav military identified the diplomat - who was set free on Friday - as John David Neighbor.
Police from the military secret service also detained Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Momcilo Perisic, said Perisic's aide, Nebojsa Mandic.
 
Veteran college basketball coach Jerry Tarkanian calls it quits, source says
 
FRESNO, Calif. (AP) - After years of chewing on the towel, Jerry Tarkanian, the fourth-winningest coach in major college basketball, is throwing it in, The Associated Press has learned.
The 71-year-old coach and Fresno State officials were to announce the decision Friday, a source close to the coach said, speaking on condition of anonymity.
Tarkanian, who won an NCAA title with University of Nevada-Las Vegas in 1990, was an unmistakable presence on the sidelines through the years, with his bald pate and hound-dog eyes. There was also his trademark habit: He chewed on folded white towels as a way to ease the tension.
The Bulldogs ended their season Wednesday with an 81-75 loss to Temple in the NIT. They finished 19-15, only the second time in Tarkanian's 31 years in Division I his team failed to win 20 games.
Tarkanian has a 778-202 record, with most of his success coming at UNLV. He coached the Rebels to 12 NCAA tournaments, reaching the semifinals four times. He also coached at Long Beach State.
 
Decades after its heydey, Yiddish radio returns to the airwaves in NPR series
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Ask Seymour Rexite to sing your favorite song and the 91-year-old will gladly oblige, in Yiddish.
"Yiddish radio was very big," Rexite says, and so was he for 40 years on the air. "Name just about any song and we'd sing it in Yiddish."
Then he breaks into a heartfelt Yiddish rendition of Cole Porter's "Night and Day," followed by a bilingual plug for the shaving cream "Bar-ba-soooool!"
After a half-century on the shelf, recordings of Rexite in his prime and other gems of Yiddish radio history are returning to the airwaves - this time on National Public Radio, in a 10-part series starting Tuesday.
The longest series ever to air on NPR, "The Yiddish Radio Project" is the product of 17 years of digging through archives for the fragile aluminum discs recorded during Yiddish radio's heydey, from the 1930s to the 1950s.
More than 100 stations nationwide had Yiddish programming, and nearly 5,000 records were produced for the nation's 2 million Yiddish speakers.
 Load-Date: March 16, 2002

 

End of Document
