

Bombs savage Bombay, but the city by the sea bounces back
The Associated Press
August 27, 2003, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 726 words
Byline: By VIJAY JOSHI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOMBAY, India
Body




The blood has been washed off the gray stone courtyard in front of Gateway of India, the giant colonial-era archway that stands as a symbol for this bustling, commercial city on the edge of the Arabian Sea.
Waves crash against its embankment and drench a dapper man sitting on the parapet, drawing suppressed laughter from lunchtime strollers. Pigeons peck at a carpet of grain spread near a police kiosk.
Bombay, the unique Indian city known for its style and industry, is back on its feet barely two days after a pair of car bombs - one at the Gateway of India and the other at a crowded jewelry market - killed 51 people and injured 156 others.
"It is a city of people who have ambitions, aspirations, who want to do something in life. It is a city of doers and dreamers," Javed Akhtar, India's top movie songwriter and poet, said in an interview.
The speed with which the city's 16 million residents have shrugged off the bombings has reinforced Bombay's vibrant spirit. The city, which sprawls over seven islands, is unlike any other in India.
Power failures are few, taxi drivers are polite and honest, and commuter trains run on time, carrying 6 million people everyday.
The city - officially renamed Mumbai years ago though many residents stick to Bombay - is home to a rainbow of migrants from across the country. They speak different languages but communicate with each other in a patois made famous by "Bollywood," the world's biggest film industry, employing upward of 100,000 people.
In Zaveri Bazaar, Bombay's biggest diamond and gold jewelry market, some $2.6 million worth of jewels are traded daily among the hundreds of harshly lit shops lining its warren of narrow alleys.
It was here that one of the bombs, stashed in the trunk of a taxi, exploded.
Gold ornaments at Ramesh Punwani's 150-year-old shop, Roopchand Moolchand Jewelers, were thrown into the street by the blast.
Punwani said he and his staff tossed the jewels back into the shop, slammed down the shutters "and ran for our lives." They were back on Wednesday, cleaning up the shattered display window.
The Indian government has blamed pro-Pakistan Muslim militants from the divided Kashmir province. Bombay police chief Ranjit Sharma said Wednesday that theory was backed up by evidence suggesting that RDX, a potent bomb-making ingredient favored by Kashmiri guerrillas, was used in the two bombs.
"Forensic reports are awaited but we suspect that a small quantity of RDX is responsible for creating this damage," Sharma told The Associated Press.
Most people in Bombay believe the blasts were meant to deepen the religious divide between India's majority Hindus and minority Muslims. If that's true, Punwani said, the terrorists failed.
"Eighty percent of my clients are Muslim and they too feel what happened was a crime against humanity," said Punwani, a Hindu.
Immediately after the bombings, up to 3,000 people thronged outside the city's hospitals to donate blood. In Zaveri Bazaar, Muslims and Hindus helped each other, pulling bloody victims from the smoking wreckage of cars and shops.
While some feared a backlash against Muslims, the streets remained calm after the blasts.
The fears of unrest are not unfounded, though. In December 1992, Hindu-Muslim riots that killed hundreds tarnished Bombay's reputation as a secular, work-driven city. Such riots are common in India, but Bombay had remained largely untouched until then.
"It was shocking, frightening. We were shocked because we proved to be the same (as the rest of India). We felt humiliated that we also behaved the way so many other societies do," said Akhtar, the songwriter.
That carnage spurred Bombay's leaders to act. Neighborhood committees were set up to keep religious tensions in check, and they seems to have worked.
In March 1993, bomb blasts in Bombay killed at least 250 people. Again, Muslim militants were blamed. But there was no retaliation.
On Wednesday, about 1,000 members of two Hindu nationalist parties marched silently from Gateway of India to the state legislature with black ribbons tied across their mouths to protest the latest tragedy.
"The people of Bombay are very brave. We have delivered a slap to the terrorists and shown them that even bigger blasts will not slow us down," said Rajiv Kori, 35, a businessman who took part in the march. "Bombay is a running city. It is not a sleeping city."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos BOM101-103,XAS102
 Load-Date: August 28, 2003

 

End of Document
