

Bush says Saddam Hussein deserves 'the ultimate penalty,' but he faces objections to the death penalty
The Associated Press
December 17, 2003, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 565 words
Byline: By BETH GARDINER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




President Bush said Saddam Hussein deserves the "ultimate penalty" for his crimes, but he faced objections from Europe, the United Nations and the Vatican, which are adamantly opposed to the death penalty.
But while most European countries have abolished the death penalty, it's not clear how vociferously they would object to a death sentence for the captured Iraqi president.
A day after saying his opinion on Saddam's fate doesn't matter and it's a decison for Iraqi citizen, Bush stepped forward with an unequivocal statement of his views.
"Let's just see what penalty he gets, but I think he ought to receive the ultimate penalty … for what he has done to his people," Bush told ABC News' Diane Sawyer in an interview broadcast Tuesday. "I mean, he is a torturer, a murderer, they had rape rooms. This is a disgusting tyrant who deserves justice, the ultimate justice."
Bush said Saddam's punishment "will be decided not by the president of the United States but by the citizens of Iraq in one form or another."
Britain's left-leaning Guardian newspaper said Saddam should be tried by a United Nations-approved tribunal that would not impose the death penalty. "The last thing Iraq needs is another corpse - or a martyr," the paper said in an editorial.
British Prime Minister Tony Blair's spokesman said earlier this week that Britain opposes the death penalty, but it would have to accept an Iraqi decision to execute.
Yet Britain's top representative in Iraq, Sir Jeremy Greenstock, said his country would not participate in a tribunal or legal process that could lead to execution.
The Vatican's Cardinal Renato Martino stressed the Roman Catholic Church's longtime opposition to capital punishment.
He said he felt "compassion" for Saddam, despite his crimes, after seeing images of "this destroyed man" being "treated like a cow, having his teeth checked" by an American military medic.
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan said the world body opposes the death penalty. The European Union shares his view.
"We believe there are no circumstances that can justify the death penalty," said Diego Ojeda, the EU's spokesman on external relations.
Danish Prime Minister Anders Fogh Rasmussen, who supported the U.S.-led war that ousted Saddam, also emphasized his country's opposition to the death penalty.
The international community and the Iraqi leadership "must show the Iraqis that an alternative to the past decades' terror regimes exists," Denmark's Berlingske Tidende newspaper said.
Bush has long been a proponent of capital punishment. During his six years as governor of Texas, 152 convicts were put to death. All 15 member nations of the European Union have abolished capital punishment, and they often encourage other countries - most notably the United States - to abolish it.
Members of the U.S.-appointed Iraq Governing Council have predicted a quick trial and a quick execution for Saddam. The U.S. occupation authority suspended using the death penalty, and Iraqi officials have said they will decide whether to reinstate it when a transitional government assumes sovereignty, scheduled on July 1.
Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Yuri Fedotov, whose country opposed the war, said only Iraqis could decide Saddam's fate.
But Australia's Prime Minister John Howard, who sent troops to fight in Iraq, said he would support the death penalty for Iraq. "If it were imposed, absolutely," he said.
 Load-Date: December 18, 2003

 

End of Document
