

Caring for the survivors three days after the devastation
The Associated Press
December 28, 2004, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1175 words
Body




EDITOR'S NOTE - The following are snapshots of how people coped Tuesday with the aftermath of a powerful earthquake and tsunamis.
 
By RICHARD VOGEL
Associated Press Writer
BANGKOK, Thailand (AP) - The Alliance Francaise is usually the place in Bangkok where people who enjoy French food and culture gather to watch movies or take classes.
In the last few days, it's become a kind of community center for French people to exchange news and donate food and clothes to help families caught up in the devastation of the tsunamis that hit Thailand's southern beach resorts.
On Tuesday, 8-year-old Juliet David was being helped by a volunteer to try on little dresses. Other children showed up wearing nothing more than underwear. All their clothes had been lost.
One of Juliet's arms was bandaged, cradling in a sling. Her angelic face stared forlornly as she sorted through shoes on the table. She grabbed a teddy bear in a pile of dolls and held it close to her chest while aimlessly wandering around a large room stocked with food, clothes and toys.
Juliet was on the beach with her father and sister when the tsunami hit. She was found after sleeping alone for two days in the woods.
Her father died, but Juliet's sister survived and somehow they were reunited. They were brought to Bangkok and taken into the care of the French Embassy and Alliance Francaise until they can be reunited with their mother back home.
--- By SEAN YOONG
Associated Press Writer
KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia (AP) - Malaysians shocked by the waves that killed scores of their fellow citizens are being pestered by a prankster-fueled frenzy of cell phone text messages that warn of further calamity.
Thousands of people are receiving messages that urge caution by the residents and visitors in the northwestern resort island of Penang, where the highest casualties occurred.
"Do not go to the seaside or cross the Penang bridge between 7 p.m. and 8 p.m.," one message read. "EARTHQUAKE may happen again."
Malaysians are accustomed to such hoaxes, but the messages have triggered worry and anger.
"Some idiot was bound to use the tragedy as a good reason to start a crank chain SMS message," a Malaysian complained on an Internet message board.
"What … was he thinking, spreading this when tragedy has just struck?" wrote another user.
But meteorological officials also advised the public to remain away from beaches because of aftershocks in neighboring Indonesian waters that might cause more tsunamis.
--- By S. SRINIVASAN
Associated Press Writer
NAGAPPATTINAM, India (AP) - When an ambulance siren approaches, two groups of doctors at the hospital get ready: one to treat the injured, the other to receive bodies. Usually, the second group gets the work.
Across a wide swathe of India's southern coast, hospitals have been reduced to counters for registering the dead.
"There were so many dead and very few injured," the Rev. P. Xavier, rector of the Basilica of the Virgin Mary, said Tuesday. He estimated 1,400 people may have died in the nearby pilgrimage town of Velankanni.
In most disasters in India, the injured far outnumber the dead, and hospitals often get overwhelmed by patients. This disaster was different.
At a temporary clinic at the basilica, only a half dozen injured lined up to receive medication, while hundreds of corpses were being buried together in a large pit two miles away.
"Most people who got caught in the waves died. It was so sudden," Xavier said.
At the government hospital in Nagappattinam, more than 2,000 corpses have come in, but only 230 injured, the resident medical officer said. He declined to give his name.
V. Raghu, a 25-year-old fisherman who needed treatment for an injured forehead, said he walked to the hospital from a marriage hall where he has been staying since his home was wrecked.
"The ambulances are all for bringing the bodies. I can walk," he said.
--- By LELY T. DJUHARI
Associated Press Writer
LHOKSEUMAWE, Indonesia (AP) - "Heave ho! Let's get this out of the way!" a team of men shouted as they lifted the frame of a destroyed house Tuesday. Women wailed when they saw what lay underneath - the body of a young girl half-buried by wet, black sand.
At a makeshift morgue a short drive away, villagers holding towels against their faces made their way past rows of corpses, lifting plastic sheets to look for a familiar face. One of the bodies was tagged, with a name scrawled on one side of cigarette pack.
"My mother, no word. My sisters, brothers, aunt, uncle, grandmother, no word," yelled one woman. "Where are they? Where are they? I don't know where to start looking."
About 3,000 people are living in tents in Lhokseumawe, a battered town in Aceh province on the island of Sumatra.
--- By CHRIS TOMLINSON
Associated Press Writer
MUTTUKADU, India (AP) - When a man who gave his name as Prabhu and his friends showed up in a three-wheel delivery motorcycle piled with used clothes Tuesday, they were mobbed by people left homeless by the tsunamis.
As the situation verged on chaos, local officials stepped in and shepherded Prabhu across the street, where his 10 bags of clothing were put with food that was being rationed.
This small fishing village 20 miles south of Madras was pummeled Sunday.
More than 300 people are sheltering under three huge banyan trees. Most lost everything when waves swept over their thatch homes. Women who salvaged their saris stretched them out to dry, giving the brown grassy expanses streaks of color.
"Mostly these people lost clothes. … We wanted to help," said Prabhu, a 26-year-old laborer who is going around with his friends to gather clothes from their neighbors.
Despite the mob scene, he said they would continue to gather clothes in the morning and hand them out in the afternoon.
"Human nature is to help people," he said.
--- By ALISA TANG
Associated Press Writer
KHAO LAK, Thailand (AP) - A caravan of trucks carrying volunteers and empty coffins woke us before dawn Tuesday as they rumbled past the police checkpoint where we had spent the night on a dark, deserted road in this tourist haven devastated by a tsunami.
Following the convoy, my colleagues and I found a wasted land. Hundreds of bloated, rotting corpses lay on beaches that I had visited less than a month ago on a peaceful tropical vacation.
At the once-luxurious Sofitel hotel, soldiers searching for survivors suddenly sprinted away, yelling "Arsenal! Explode!" They feared that shells from a naval weapons stockpile that had been damaged would explode from being banged against each other in the sea.
Swedish tourists who had been staying at Khao Lak but were fortunately on excursions inland when the tsunami struck told of a 7-year-old boy who lost his parents and two younger brothers. They found him at a Buddhist temple and were taking care of him.
I met another man whose toddler miraculously survived the big waves, but whose wife had been swept away and was still missing.
During these last interviews of the day, I unjournalistically teared up, my voice cracking. Then I regained my composure and continued to listen to their sad stories.
 Load-Date: December 29, 2004

 

End of Document
