

Combat artist: Art in the war zone and history in the making
January 17, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 615 words
Byline: By ELLEN KNICKMEYER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KANDAHAR, Afghanistan
Body




Bouncing across the Afghan countryside in a frigid sunset, the Marines on patrol keep their eyes moving over the shadowed landscape around them. Staff Sgt. Mike Fay, a 48-year-old artist in camouflage, watches as keenly as any of them.
Armed with a camera to catch moments he has no time to draw, Fay is keeping alive a Marine Corps tradition that dates back at least to World War I. He is a combat artist.
The gunner and radioman in the back of the Humvee in southern Afghanistan are making history, however small their part in it. Fay - with pen, pencil, ink and water color - is recording it.
"You're trying to capture that other reality - this Francis Ford Coppola thing," Fay says.
He refers to a night in which the Marines he traveled with found a bunker containing grenades and spotted - via thermal imaging - men emerging from another bunker that would subsequently be visited by U.S. Cobra attack helicopters and heavily armed light-armored vehicles.
At the Kandahar Airport, home to nearly 3,300 U.S. and coalition forces, Fay records the day to day that neither news cameras or writers will likely note.
Young Marines slouch near the base's front gate after days and nights on guard, collars pulled up and black watch caps pulled down for warmth. One man's flak jacket rests on the handle of a rocket launcher; in the background is a bombed-out hangar.
The airport's old blue mosque, with its new and old bullet holes, sits in the starlight with military latrines beneath it. The base's Afghan laborers squat on the ground, playing a game with stones and lines drawn in the dust.
What draws Fay's eye most on patrol is the mundane, not the heroic: young Marines down in a pit, wrestling with fuel barrels in a newly found fuel dump in the yellow light of sundown.
His spiral-bound notebook catches earlier moments of the trip over to Afghanistan: net-covered communications gear in Oman. Portraits of ship commanders mixed with some of the fighter pilots flying their first Afghan missions. Marines at rest at sea, snatching a private moment with a book in an out-of-the-way hiding place found atop a rolled mat.
"There's a youthfulness - that young-old look that some of the Afghans have. And these kids have it," Fay says.
Bound next for Kabul, Fay is traveling across the combat zone with Maj. Chris Warnke, a Marine historian. Both are attached to Marine headquarters.
Fay, an art instructor in Fredericksburg, Va., is a reservist called up to do for the Marines what he had done in active duty for himself. Deployed as a helicopter avionics expert for Desert Storm, for U.S. operations off Somalia and Yugoslavia, he drew.
What caught the eye of Marine artists was a sketch he drew of young Marines sprawled sleeping on a flight deck, T-shirts off and rags over their eyes, as they sped to Somalia to answer a U.S. Embassy SOS in 1991.
"A lot of the submissions they get is a lot of swords and sorcery - young men and women with bulging veins holding swords," Fay says. His work, he says, "was slice-of-life."
And death.
Marine artists are charged with unblinkingly recording what they see, including Marines retrieving the faceless, handless corpse of a colleague from the wreckage of a helicopter in South Korea, as one of Fay's colleagues did.
Fay's work, and that of the Marine historians, will wind up in Corps archives housed in the Marine Corps Museum in Washington. One day, future historians will be able to relive the Kandahar mosque and latrines by starlight. And someday, Fay says, so will the Marines who found their way through the scene by the light of chemical wands.
"Years from now, these guys will go, 'Oh - come here, kids … see this? Grandpa was here. I remember this scene."'
 Graphic



 
AP Photo XMDL101
 Load-Date: January 18, 2002

 

End of Document
