

Crackdown, intrigue and the might of the system challenge young king
February 13, 2001, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 805 words
Byline: By ELAINE GANLEY
Body



Associated Press Writer
 
RABAT, Morocco (AP) - Hope knew no bounds when King Mohammed VI took the throne in July 1999 and gave every sign of spinning Morocco into fast-forward.
Within four months he had fired Driss Basri, the iron-fisted interior minister in office for nearly 20 years, invited a leading opponent home from forced exile, and freed the top Muslim fundamentalist from a decade of house arrest.
To Morocco's needy - men like Khalid Rabani, an out-of-work parking lot attendant in Casablanca - Mohammed's promise to share the wealth made him "king of the poor."
Now some are asking whether the vision of a new, democratic and flourishing Morocco is but a figment from an Aladdin's lamp.
"We're witnessing a real regression," said Abdelhamid Amine, vice president of the Moroccan Association of Human Rights, who was beaten up by police at a demonstration Dec. 9 during which dozens were jailed for their unauthorized protest.
King Hassan II, Mohammed's father who died in July 1999, was an acclaimed statesman and adroit politician who steered his Atlantic coastal kingdom westward despite chronic poverty, corruption and pressure from Islamic conservatives.
Morocco became an anchor of stability in the often tumultuous Arab world, seemingly immunized against the nine-year Islamic insurgency in neighboring Algeria. In his last years he launched measured change, which was seen as a prelude to reforms that would get Morocco's economy and politics into sync with the West's.
But during his 38-year reign, Hassan kept his subjects, now 30 million strong, solidly in check.
Mohammed's enthronement at age 36 raised expectations that new blood would shake up the system. These expectations were shared across the Arab world as other aging leaders died and were replaced by their sons - Mohammed's friend, King Abdullah II, of Jordan, or President Bashar Assad of Syria.
Now, suddenly, in Morocco there is a sense of deja vu.
In December, police twice used truncheons against demonstrations - one by the human rights organization and one by an Islamic group. Dozens were arrested. That month three newspapers were banned, including Morocco's most widely read weekly, Le Journal, which had come to epitomize the effervescent atmosphere that took hold with the new king.
The bureau chief of Agence France-Presse, the French news agency, was expelled from Morocco.
A political intrigue cast its shadow over the troubled leftist coalition government of Prime Minister Abderrahmane Youssoufi, who banned Le Journal for printing a letter accusing him of being linked to a 1972 attempt to assassinate King Hassan.
Youssoufi is painted as an obstacle to a king intent on improving civil liberties. A year before legislative elections, which are seen as a test of liberal politics, he is accused of betraying his own leftist principles and governing from "the extreme right," in the words of Aboubakr Jamai, editor in chief of the banned Le Journal.
Experts like Mohammed Tozy, author of many books on Morocco, maintain that the kingdom's clock has slowed but is unlikely to stop.
"The king cannot be revolutionary," he said. But, "I don't think we can go backward."
Tozy and others say the king is held back by a hidden source of power, known as the "Makhzen," that emanates from family and advisers within the palace itself, and permeates political life. The "Makhzen" is seen as guaranteeing Morocco's stability but also keeping it conservative.
"The king is the key to the system but he has to work with the system," Tozy said. Those loudly seeking radical change are a "small elite … that does not reflect society."
The country boasts the Arab world's first McDonald's and one of its first stock markets, but its economy remains farm-based, and nearly 20 percent of Moroccans live on less than a dollar a day. Some 60 percent of the population is age 25 or less, and unemployment is 22 percent.
Mohammed is caught between the reformists' high expectations and the reality of poverty and the "Makhzen" system, William Zartman, North Africa specialist at Johns Hopkins University, said in a telephone interview.
The Justice and Spirituality movement of Abdesslam Yassine, the Islamic leader freed from 11 years of house arrest, sees Mohammed's reform gestures as "cosmetic," aimed at tiding people's hopes over the transition of monarchs.
"But the problems are so big, a blast of oxygen isn't sufficient," said movement spokesman Fathallah Arsalan. "The base must be rebuilt."
But for jobless, 31-year-old Rabani, living in a tin-roofed shantytown of dirt alleys and doorless hovels, hope is the only currency. It is exemplified by the king's picture which he keeps in a ragged wallet.
"The young king works hard. He's cleaning things up," he says. "In three or four years, everything will be marvelous. It's guaranteed."
End Adv for Monday, Feb. 19
 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY356-358 of Feb. 13
 Load-Date: February 20, 2001

 

End of Document
