

Crematoriums burn round the clock as the dead pile up
January 30, 2001, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 620 words
Byline: By NIRMALA GEORGE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: AHMEDABAD, India
Body




An electric crematorium in this earthquake-hit city was so overloaded that the hinges of the furnace door melted. Outside, wood-fired funeral pyres burned around the clock, overwhelming mourners with foul-smelling smoke.
"The bodies just keep coming in. Sometimes entire families, other times three or four members of a family," said Syed Zain, the operator of the electric furnace at the Ellis Bridge Crematorium in central Ahmedabad.
The awesome human toll extracted by Friday's earthquake in western India becomes obvious at Ahmedabad's 11 crematoriums, which have been overwhelmed by the unending stream of bodies. Hindus, the majority in India, believe that not cremating a body will leave the person's soul in limbo - a fate worse than hell.
Zain said he has lost count of the number of bodies he has cremated. Besides those who died in Ahmedabad, people have brought corpses from nearby towns.
Government officials said they had counted about 6,200 bodies, but estimates of how high the death toll could climb have varied from 10,000 to 100,000, with little hard information.
At the Ellis Bridge crematorium, the registry clerk said that from an average of three to six cremations a day, the numbers had risen to about 50 a day.
"I have never seen anything like this in 22 years that I have worked in this crematorium. The number have mounted with each passing day," said Zain, his eyes red with fatigue and fumes from the nearby wood-burning funeral pyres.
The proximity of the Ellis Bridge crematorium to the V.S. Hospital, one of the city's biggest, has meant that people who died of injuries have received the last rites here.
"I came here with my uncle's body on Sunday morning. I had to wait eight hours before his turn arrived," said Praveenbhai Parekh, a shopowner.
The electric furnace has been operating around the clock, Zain said. In the compound of the crematorium, 10 to 12 traditional funeral pyres of wooden logs burned continuously. At any given time, at least 10 or 12 bodies were being consigned to flames.
At the Saptarishi cremation ground, mourners lit incense sticks and threw sandalwood, sesame seeds and clarified butter into the flames in accordance with Hindu rituals. But the sweet combination could not hide the sulfurous, noxious smell of burning flesh.
The long wait and queues at the crematoriums have forced families to burn two or three bodies together.
Grain trader Manikbhai Shah's wife and their two children perished when their apartment block collapsed in Satellite, a western Ahmedabad suburb. Shah cremated the three together. "My children will have their mother with them," he said.
Aslam Mansoori, the operator of the electric furnace at the Saptarishi crematorium, said it was so overworked after the earthquake that that the hinges of its doors melted. The furnace had to be cooled down and the hinges replaced.
The electric furnace is maintained at more than 1,100 degrees Fahrenheit, but the temperature in its inner chamber goes up when corpses are burned.
In Bhuj, the town closest to the epicenter of the earthquake, workers used wood pulled from fallen houses to light funeral pyres.
The late night hours are the most hectic, said A.B. Mehta, manager at the Dudheshwar Cremation Home, the city's oldest facility. At night, bodies lying unclaimed in the hospital or found on the streets are brought to be burned.
The crematorium staff gather the ashes of the unclaimed bodies and give them to a welfare organization that will pour them at a holy site hundreds of miles away in northern India, where the Ganges and Yamuna rivers meet.
"They may have died all alone, but we ensure that all the rituals are done," said Mehta. "Maybe then they'll have a better life in their next birth."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos XAB101-107
 Load-Date: January 31, 2001

 

End of Document
