

Defining the limits of the new Europe
April 21, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 1789 words
Byline: By JEFFREY ULBRICH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LAPUSNA, Moldova
Body




Walnut farmer Elena Pirau knows she's European, even if the bigwigs in Brussels do not, even if some of them think Moldova is about 500 yards from the edge of the world, even if tortured reality is slowly sucking this little country away from its newly won freedom back into the Russian sphere.
Out here on the fringe, Europe means prosperity. For Moldova, which has achieved the dubious distinction of overtaking Albania as the poorest country on the continent, it means hope. But the European Union - the club of the prosperous - hasn't decided what Europe is or what the real limits of the continent are.
"I think that is one of the most fascinating questions which we never discuss," says Foreign Minister Anna Lindh of Sweden, current president of the 15-nation union.
Pirau does think about it, though. She has found a way to export her walnuts to Germany, opening a new lifeline for a struggling business in a small country that only a decade ago arose from the wreckage of the Soviet Union.
"Europe is absolutely everything for us, for the future," she says, taking time out from her 48th birthday party. "But we feel a bit pushed away. I think we are European because we are in Europe, but the mentality is the old Soviet mentality."
In school, everybody learns that Europe stretches from the Atlantic Ocean to the Ural Mountains, from the Arctic Ocean to the Mediterranean. They also learn that for half a century, Europe was split by a Cold War and the Iron Curtain into a West that flowered and an East that struggled.
Today, most of those former communist countries of central and eastern Europe are negotiating to join the EU, creating new democracies, reforming their economies, patching up differences with their neighbors. Over the next decade the borderless, largely single-currency bloc is supposed to swell from 15 member states to 27.
Then what? Is the prosperity line merely being shifted eastward? What about Ukraine? Belarus? Even Russia? And what about Moldova, half the size of West Virginia, whose 1999 per capita GNP of $590 was just one-twentieth that of Portugal, the poorest European Union country?
Beyond the old communist bloc, Turkey poses a different challenge to the definition of Europe. Officially, the EU is willing to consider it as a future candidate. But many Europeans are still unsure whether they want 65 million Muslims to join the club. And if Turkey joins, where does that leave the poor and hungry of the Caucasus?
The EU is probably the most powerful engine for change. One reason is the euro. It adopted a single currency two years ago and will begin using new euro coins and bank notes Jan. 1, which is sure to have a huge effect on its neighbors. Another is the criteria it sets for membership.
To join the EU, a country has to be a democracy and have a free-market economy. It has to reform its legislation using an EU manual of 80,000 pages and growing by the day. Even a country with only a distant hope of joining the EU has to start reforming itself now if its candidacy is ever to be considered.
One hundred twenty miles south of this Moldovan village, through beautiful rolling farmland streaked by wretched roads and dotted by muddy, rutted villages, Marc Ciolac has already had enough of democracy, of Western ideas.
Ciolac, 49, is from the minority Gagauz, Orthodox Christian Turks who make up 3.5 percent of Moldova's 4.5 million people. His cracked, callused hands testify to a lifetime of labor. He is a tractor driver on a collective farm - a holdover from communist times - and earns about $100 a year, paid in grain, not cash.
"In the Soviet Union, we lived," he says, explaining why many Moldovans are looking back nostalgically to the east. "Now, we are only surviving."
"It can't get any worse," says Ana Anghelcev, 62, a Gagauz woman wearing a blue babushka and carrying a bag of apples. "Only God can take care of me."
The EU doesn't seem interested in these people, European or not.
Javier Solana, the EU's foreign and security policy chief, says enlargement to 27, or possibly 28 with Turkey, will be the end of expansion for the foreseeable future. That means a new east-west dividing line that stops short of Belarus, Ukraine and Moldova. A new list of ins and outs. Of haves and have nots.
"That will be the extent of Europe for a long time," says Solana. "It may not be forever. Should we forever say no to Moldova? I don't know."
Squeezed between Ukraine and Romania, Moldova is torn between a longing to be southeast European and a fondness for its former masters in Moscow.
"We are 240 kilometers (150 miles) from the geographical center of Europe," says Moldovan President Vladimir Voronin, leader of a resurgent Communist Party that swept back into power in parliamentary elections in February. "We would be very smart to enter the European Union, but they won't have us. We don't want the border of Europe to be here."
The only alternative, Voronin and his communist followers believe, may be a reunion with Russia.
What about Russia itself?
Sprawled between western Europe and Asia, Russians have argued for generations about whether they are Europeans or have a unique national identity with strong Asian traditions. But as far as the European Union is concerned, Russia is not part of the its club.
"If Russia was a member of the European Union, it would be a completely different animal," Solana says. "Because Russia is so big, the institution would be a different institution."
Defining the new Europe is not just a question of economics and electoral systems.
Much of Europe's attention currently is focused in the Balkans. Vast amounts of energy are being expended just to contain the festering wound on the belly of the continent. This turf is clearly Europe, and the one corner of the continent where Europeans have been willing to send troops: 60,000 to Bosnia in 1995, and 45,000 more operating in and around Kosovo.
The generals, however, see Europe as an even bigger picture. The end of the Cold War and the decline of the Russian threat has changed the nature of the security game. The dangers today are on the periphery. Some military men speak of an "arc of potential instability" stretching from the southern Urals in Kazakstan through the Middle East and across North Africa to Morocco.
"Frontiers drawn from a purely economic point of view would differ radically from those that gave priority to defense and security," says Turkish Foreign Minister Ismail Cem. "Borders are generally drawn in relation to geostrategic goals. The decision of the EU on where it eventually sets its borders will therefore be defined by a mix of the interests that its member countries share."
Gen. Jean-Pierre Kelche, chief of staff of the French armed forces, sees no defined limits at all in Europe's area of interest.
"We have two problems of limits," says Kelche. "Europe can't ignore Africa. It is no doubt one of the elements of future security. And to the east, the big questions are the Caucasus. Should Europe get involved in the prevention of crises in the Caucasus, and under what conditions? That is the real question."
With today's mobile armed forces, geography and distance matter only marginally. It's no longer a question of lining up heavy tanks to defend against an onslaught across central Europe. The key elements today are time and strength, how quickly you can move forces and how hard you can hit when you get there, says Gen. Joseph Ralston, the supreme allied commander in Europe.
"If you deploy troops in a hurry, the geographic limit of Europe from a strategic point of view is not as important as it might have been at one time."
The threats themselves have changed dramatically, too. The survival of NATO members is no longer at stake. The Russians are still a worry, but not a threat. According to the alliance's new strategic concept, threats to Europe's security today are regional instability, ethnic conflict, terrorism, weapons of mass destruction.
During the Cold War, distant places like Central Asia rarely rose on the strategic radar screen. Today, the oil and gas reserves around the Caspian Sea define these areas as "vital interests" to the West.
Ask at NATO what the "Euro-Atlantic" region means, and they will point to the membership of the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council, a forum created in 1997 whose 45 members include Kazakstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan - far from what one thinks of as European area of interest.
Many of the problems of these Central Asian countries are similar to those of the emerging democracies in the West, and many of those problems are already leaking heavily into Europe, says NATO Secretary-General Lord Robertson.
"The old limits simply do not exist," Robertson says. "The world is moving with such speed."
"The Caucasus and Central Asia are certainly areas where there is genuine instability at the moment and where the problems all too easily spill over and we've got to be one step ahead of it," he says. "Eighty percent of the heroin that will be sold on the streets of Brussels tonight, or in Birmingham tonight, will come from Afghanistan, which is just beside these countries."
Again, where does Russia lie in this mix? Even as the Bush administration in the United States takes a harder line toward Moscow, the European allies are pressing to move closer. If Russia can't be a member of the EU, European thinking goes, it should at least be a partner.
"I think we should be prepared to make more concessions to Russia," says Patrick McCarthy, professor of European Studies at Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies in Bologna, Italy.
"Russia is not finished as a great country."
Given tensions with China and instability throughout Central Asia, Russia's only stable border is with Europe.
"Russia has no choice but to cooperate with the West because Russia traditionally has a geopolitical dilemma and several theaters of conflict," says Jiri Sedivy, director of the Institute of International Relations in Prague. "Russia needs the technology, Russia needs markets for selling its raw materials, it needs hard currency, Russia needs cooperation. This is pushing Russia to the West."
Robertson, the NATO chief, believes Russia must not only come closer to the West, but must also regain much of its old strength.
"A weak Russia is of no use to the West," Robertson says. "A strong, self-confident Russia that feels it's part of the international security family is a Russia that will bring good, will bring quite a bit to the party, and that in itself will bring stability and security."
---
On the Net:
European Union expansion: http://europa.eu.int/comm/enlargement/index.htm 
NATO: http://hq.nato.int 
Moldovan government: http://www.moldova.md 
End Adv for Sunday, April 22
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY300-301,354 of April 16
 Load-Date: April 22, 2001

 

End of Document
