

FARM SCENE: Women feel the strain of growing role on the farm
March 23, 2001, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News; Business News
Length: 529 words
Byline: By JOHN SEEWER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WAYNE, Ohio
Body




For Kim Snowden, doing chores around the farm no longer means just delivering meals to workers in the fields.
There are bills to pay, weather reports to watch and a stack of paperwork to be entered into the computer.
"There's absolutely no way I could get by without her," said her husband, Trent. "She reminds me of that all the time."
Women are taking a greater role in operating farms, and the increased responsibility is bringing more stress to an already stressful occupation, agriculture experts say.
Women are in charge of more farms than ever before - there were 165,102 female-operated farms in the United States in 1997, according to statistics released in December from the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
And women are handling nearly all of the marketing side of farming - monitoring the markets overseas and worrying about the low profits, according to a survey from American Agri-Women.
Snowden began taking over the paperwork a few years ago when her husband realized he couldn't keep up. He still takes care of most of the field work on their 1,000-acre farm in northwest Ohio. They grow corn, soybeans and wheat.
"Before, I didn't know we had these monster bills," she said. "I knew this is how we made our living, but that was it.
"My strains and stresses now come from keeping everything else going," she said.
Her mother-in-law helps too, watching the grain markets every day.
"She watches the weather in China and Brazil," Snowden said. "Farming is getting more and more complicated."
The farm's financial management often falls to women, because it's a chore the men would rather dump on the wife, said Bernard Erven, an Ohio State University professor who studies farm family businesses.
"The farm wife clearly has a more difficult role, more difficult responsibilities than the males," Erven said. "Not all men are competent managers."
Farm families often are under pressure from heavy debt and the uncertainties of crop prices and the weather. But the work farm wives handle often is done without notice, said Sereana Dresbach, a public health professor at Ohio State.
"She's the one who is running the operation," Dresbach said. "She knows how good off or bad off they are. But these are invisible jobs until something goes wrong."
A University of Minnesota study of women involved in hog production found many pessimistic and "culturally depressed."
"This isn't new for farm families, but the decline in their level of satisfaction with the farming lifestyle is a new trend," said Wynne Wright, a rural sociologist who conducted the study.
About 65 percent of women were less or much less satisfied with their farm income than they were five years ago, according to the study released in February.
More than half of all farm women also work another job so that the family can get company-paid insurance and pay the bills. Nearly half of a farmer's income comes from off-farm jobs, the U.S. Agricultural Department estimates.
"Most farm wives have two jobs," Dresbach said. "Only one is paid."
On the Net:
USDA Census of Agriculture: http://www.usda.gov/nass/ 
University of Minnesota: http://www.extension.umn.edu 
American Agri-Women: http://www.americanagriwomen.com 
 Load-Date: March 24, 2001

 

End of Document
