

For Israel, the wounds of the Holocaust remain fresh
The Associated Press
January 24, 2005, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1133 words
Byline: By RAVI NESSMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Though it ended six decades ago, the Holocaust remains a fresh trauma here, a tragedy that darkens Israeli society and forms an integral part of the national identity.
The Holocaust is everywhere. It is a tool used by hard-liners and doves to score political points and a reference point for cultural debates. It hovers over the Middle East conflict, where Israel, despite its military superiority, still fears being wiped out.
Thousands of Israeli high school pupils make annual pilgrimages to Auschwitz and other Nazi death camps to forge a personal link to the murder of 6 million Jews. Visiting foreign leaders are routinely brought to Israel's Holocaust memorial to directly confront the dimensions of the nightmare.
Israel maintains an informal ban on the works of Richard Wagner, Hitler's favorite composer. A planned speech by German President Horst Koehler in Israel's parliament next week sparked threats of a boycott by some legislators, who said it would be too painful to hear German in the Knesset.
As the world marks the 60th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz this week, Israelis say it's impossible to understand their national psyche without viewing it through the prism of the Holocaust.
"Auschwitz is a part of our daily life, not our past," said former Parliament Speaker Shevah Weiss, a Holocaust survivor. "In our society, our souls, our national spirit, everything is connected with the memory of the dark period of Auschwitz."
For many, that connection is direct. An estimated one in three Israelis is either a Holocaust survivor or the descendant of one. Jews of Middle Eastern origin, although not directly touched by the Holocaust, also strongly identify with it.
"It's part of the identity of an Israeli," said author Tom Segev, who has written about Israel's long, ambivalent relationship with the Holocaust.
In the early days of the state, the image of Jews as helpless victims was an affront to the emerging national mythology of Israelis as strong, heroic "new Jews" who would have fought back.
Many Israelis used to look down on the hundreds of thousands of survivors who immigrated here. The survivors, unable to cope with their own suffering, kept their scars hidden.
"There was no room for the story of the Holocaust in such an atmosphere," said Aharon Appelfeld, an Israeli novelist and survivor whose work focuses on the Holocaust.
That began to change in 1961, when Israel put Hitler lieutenant Adolf Eichmann on trial for the genocide of Jews. The trial was broadcast on national radio, and the testimony of survivors brought the tragedy out into the open, making it the focus of the entire country. Eichmann was hanged and his ashes scattered in the Mediterranean.
Israeli empathy for the survivors grew during the 1973 Mideast War, when many Israelis began to fear that the country could be destroyed and they could be slaughtered - just as Europe's Jews were.
In the 1980s, Holocaust history became part of the high school matriculation exam, and Yom Hashoah, Holocaust Remembrance Day, grew in importance.
Today, the army brings some of its officers to Auschwitz to motivate them to protect the nation from any future horrors. Schools invite survivors to speak. Every year, 21,000 youths - roughly 35 percent of seniors in Jewish public schools - take an eight-day trip to Poland to visit death camps, ghettos, abandoned synagogues and old Jewish cemeteries.
Adi Rosenzweig, who lost most of her grandparents' families in the Holocaust, was deeply affected. "I wanted to understand how a person can survive, can keep his happiness," she said.
The 18-year-old has written more than 50 songs about her trip in 2003, and the Holocaust constantly invades her thoughts, she said, making her proud to be Israeli. "I'm alive, and we have a country and the Nazis didn't win," she said.
Israel's ties with Germany are close and the Volkswagens that fill Israeli roads are testament to the thriving trade between the two countries.
Yet sensitivities remain raw, especially with an estimated 250,000 survivors still living in Israel.
Conductor Daniel Barenboim caused an uproar in 2001 when he broke the unofficial ban on Wagner - whose music and anti-Semitic writings influenced Hitler - and led the Berlin Staatskapelle Orchestra in a performance of part of the opera "Tristan und Isolde" in Israel. Before playing the piece, he asked the audience whether it wanted to hear it, eliciting applause, angry shouts and a 30-minute debate. Israeli officials later tried to punish Barenboim by blocking his acceptance of a prestigious prize, backing down only after he apologized if he had hurt anyone's feelings.
As the most emotive event in the country, the Holocaust is routinely hijacked for political purposes.
In the months leading up to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's assassination in 1995, opponents of the interim peace deals he reached with the Palestinians brandished posters showing him in a Nazi SS uniform.
Last year, settlers opposed to Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's plan to withdraw from the Gaza Strip sparked a national outcry by affixing orange stars to their clothing, reminiscent of the yellow Stars of David the Nazis forced Jews to wear. Even their supporters were angry.
Some Israeli doves have also invoked the Holocaust, likening Israel's occupation of the West Bank and Gaza and its treatment of the Palestinians to Nazi behavior.
The Holocaust also has shaped the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Many Palestinians try to minimize Jewish suffering, for fear that acknowledging the Holocaust would somehow diminish their own hardship, said Segev, the historian. This attitude prevents them from understanding Israel, he said.
Israelis, in turn, are overly afraid of the Palestinians' power, Segev said. Some Israeli officials have called Israel's borders before the 1967 Mideast war - when it captured the West Bank, Gaza and east Jerusalem - the "Auschwitz borders." "We are all afraid of becoming victims again," Segev said. "It's all irrational."
Appelfeld, the novelist, worries that Israel still has an immature attitude to the Holocaust and cannot begin to heal until it tries to understand it.
Much of his fiction has dealt with Holocaust, but he worries about the dearth of other novels, songs and art addressing the suffering. And he is concerned that Israel has not tried to deal with its aftermath in a positive way, perhaps by studying Yiddish or trying to revive some of the European Jewish culture that was wiped out.
Avner Shalev, the director of the Yad Vashem Holocaust Memorial, said the Holocaust remains a living catastrophe for the entire nation.
"It's in the air, you can feel it," he said. "The wound is there still. We are still mourning, we are still processing and trying to cope. The trauma is so deep and so painful, it is still going on."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos of Monday, Jan. 23: NY310-312
 Load-Date: January 27, 2005

 

End of Document
