

Former Indian tennis star says helping the U.N. is the highlight of his career
February 9, 2001, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 584 words
Byline: By EDITH M. LEDERER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Vijay Amritraj was a top-ranked tennis player, the first professional athlete from India in any sport.
He won of 16 pro tournaments and was a successful businessman and actor. But all these accomplishments were just a prelude to the greatest honor of his life - becoming a Messenger of Peace for the United Nations.
"This is Everest," he said in an interview on the eve of his appointment Friday by Secretary-General Kofi Annan to his new role of helping to focus worldwide attention on the work of the United Nations. "This is … the top of the mountain."
Since 1954, when the late U.S. comedian Danny Kaye became the first goodwill ambassador for the United Nations Children's Fund, leading personalities in the arts, sports, literature and public life have been traveling the world advertising the work of U.N. agencies. In 1997, Annan created a new title - Messenger of Peace - to try to raise global awareness of the U.N.'s primary work in promoting peace.
Amritraj becomes only the eighth Messenger of Peace, joining boxing great Muhammad Ali, actor Michael Douglas, basketball's Magic Johnson, opera star Luciano Pavarotti, Nobel Peace Prize winner Eli Wiesel, Italian author Anna Cataldi and French singer Enrico Macias.
"You can't even put any other kind of achievement in the same league," Amritraj said. "This is not just an honor to me. This is for my country, to have an Indian be able to do this."
Being a Messenger of Peace, he said, will give him the chance to work with children, especially those who are orphans and handicapped, to promote AIDS awareness, to focus on helping people in neglected areas of the world, and to try in a small way to promote peace.
The position is not a full-time job, nor is it a paid post. It is largely up to each Messenger - working with U.N. officials - to decide how to carry out the role.
As a child, Amritraj recalled, he spent about half of every year in the hospital because he suffered from a mild form of cystic fibrosis and dreamed of being a doctor and saving lives. When he was 10 years old, doctors advised him to play an outdoor sport, and because his parents loved tennis, that's what he chose.
"I'd play for one minute and sit for five minutes. I also started running. I'd run for 10 yards and sit down for 10 minutes," he said. But three years later, he was running 10 miles a day, and he was the No. 1 tennis player in Asia at the age of 17. Two years later, he was in the world's top 10.
The tennis accolades followed - 16 singles titles, 13 doubles titles, 20 years of Davis Cup for India from 1969-89, wins against tennis greats from Rod Laver and Arthur Ashe to Bjorn Borg, John McEnroe and Jimmy Connors.
After retiring in 1990, he started First Serve Entertainment, a sports and entertainment company with offices in Los Angeles, India and Sri Lanka. In his first movie, "Octopussy," he worked with Roger Moore, a UNICEF goodwill ambassador.
Throughout his career, Amritraj has helped raise money for a host of charities and AIDS awareness. He is chairman of The IndiaBridge.com, an Internet site catering to the Indian community that is currently collecting donations for the Prime Minister National Relief Fund for victims of the Jan. 26 earthquake.
At the age of 47, Amritraj said, his success in sport and business has now given him the opportunity to return to what he always felt was his vocation - helping people and trying to save lives - and doing it for "the greatest organization in the world."
On the Net:
http://www.theIndiaBridge.com 
 Load-Date: February 10, 2001

 

End of Document
