

From the outside, looking in: the world watches America's agony in awe and dismay
September 12, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 673 words
Byline: By TED ANTHONY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BEIJING
Body




She watched, in the dead of night, and Ji Jianhua couldn't reconcile the TV images with those in her mind. Five years ago, she had been there - 8,000 miles from Beijing and her home, right there atop one of Manhattan's gleaming towers of commerce.
The towers that weren't there anymore.
"It was such a dream building. I felt like I was touching heaven," Ji said Wednesday outside the U.S. Embassy in Beijing, while a friend applied for a visa to a suddenly uncertain land. "These buildings were a symbol of American development. And now they're rubble."
On a day when hyperbole seemed impossible, the planet watched the devastation being wrought upon America the Impenetrable and marveled at the tidal wave of insecurity submerging the place that considered itself the most secure of all. "Doomsday America," trumpeted the British newspaper The Independent.
And in a world that depends on the United States for so much, whether it likes it or not, the question resounded: Would America - impetuous, fascinating, arrogant, generous America - ever be the same?
"How can a country so powerful be reduced in an instant to chaos? It's incomprehensible," said Zhang Shihao, a 35-year-old medicine factory manager from Beijing.
Even many who deeply resent America agreed: This was an event that rippled into all corners.
"At first I said to myself, 'serves America right, you ugly and selfish America,' but after seeing what was going on the TV, I cried," said Jarunant Nakatong, 35, the owner of a Bangkok travel agency.
The world realized anew how interconnected it is.
On Wednesday, financial markets convulsed in a jangle of nerves. A bomb threat forced the evacuation of Malaysia's Petronas Twin Towers, the world's tallest. A cordon, complete with snipers, went up around the U.S. Embassy compound in Thailand. In Bangladesh, Bulbul Hossain anxiously awaited a phone call from his brother, a New York cabbie.
"If the only superpower is unable to prevent such a cynical act of terror, other countries are defenseless," the Russian newspaper Kommersant said. "The world simply cannot remain as it was before."
Part of it comes down to imagery - American imagery, beamed to the world by satellite news feeds and DVDs, and Hollywood productions that turned places like the Pentagon and the World Trade Center into icons.
"The Pentagon - I can't believe it. It seems straight out of a movie like 'Independence Day,' said Anupama Mohan, an English teacher in New Delhi, India.
America has become a planetary capital of sorts, where cultures converge on a grand scale. For much of the world, America is a vast menu of offerings - some delicious, some repugnant, most utterly fascinating.
Even those with no direct stake in America often feel possessive of it.
"To me, the United States was the world's No. 1 country," said Chung Dong-gil, 37, an office worker in Seoul. "I still think it's No. 1, but its international credibility and status have been ruined."
"Nobody would believe it could happen to America," said Jacob Tibio, a school director in Manila, Philippines.
The United States has, on the world stage, cultivated a sense of immunity bolstered by its sheer size and power. Other countries may resent America when it intrudes on their sense of nationhood, yet they grow fretful whenever it shows the slightest sign of withdrawing from the international foreground.
"I hope this doesn't become a reason for Americans to disengage from the world," said Simon Tay, a U.S.-educated independent member of Singapore's Parliament.
Others saw different changes at hand, chief among them a kind of comeuppance.
"God is now showing the United States that it is not the leader of the world. Allah is the leader of the world," said Animutu Abubakar, a resident of Kaduna, a city in overwhelmingly Islamic northern Nigeria.
Even as soot hung over lower Manhattan, though, the lure of America remained large. Lailani Navarro was unbowed.
"I just want to go to Disneyland as a tourist," said Navarro, an actress in the Philippines. "If something will happen, it will happen."
 Load-Date: September 13, 2001

 

End of Document
