

From Golda Meir to Maggie the Cat: The fall plays on Broadway
The Associated Press
September 2, 2003, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 482 words
Byline: By MICHAEL KUCHWARA, AP Drama Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




With the exception of 2003 Tony winner "Take Me Out," Broadway will be barren of new - or old - plays in September. But just wait.
The drought ends in early October when the first of a half dozen or so commercial productions scheduled to arrive before Christmas begins performances.
"Golda's Balcony" was a big off-Broadway hit last season for Manhattan Ensemble Theater, and the one-woman show about Golda Meir should find an audience at the Helen Hayes Theatre as well.
Tovah Feldshuh portrays the tough-minded Israeli prime minister in this drama written by William Gibson, author of "The Miracle Worker" and "Two for the Seesaw." The time is the 1973 Israeli-Arab war. Preview performances begin Oct. 3 with an opening set for Oct. 15.
The end of a marriage takes center stage in "The Retreat From Moscow," a drama by William Nicholson arriving Oct. 23 at the Booth. Eileen Atkins is the wife, John Lithgow the husband and Ben Chaplin the son who tries to put the broken pieces of their relationship back together. Preview performances start Oct. 2
It takes two to tango and to make "Six Dance Lessons in Six Weeks," a comedy by Richard Alfieri about an older woman who hires an instructor to teach her to dance. Polly Bergen is the pupil and Mark Hamill the teacher. Previews begin Oct. 7 and the play opens officially Oct. 29 at the Belasco.
Last year's big revival was a Eugene O'Neill classic - "Long Day's Journey Into Night." This season, New York will get a gold-plated Tennesse Williams drama, "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof" with an all-star cast.
Ashley Judd portrays the love-starved Maggie, Jason Patric her troubled husband, Brick, and Ned Beatty the patriarchal Big Daddy. Expect the Southern-fried family fireworks to start Oct. 9 with an opening set for Nov. 2 at the Music Box.
Another formidable woman gets into the spotlight Nov. 3 when Ellen Burstyn opens in "Oldest Living Confederate Widow Tells All." The play, adapted by Martin Tahse from the best-selling novel by Allan Gurganus, tells the tale of 99-year-old Lucy Marsden, from her marriage to a Civil War veteran to the end of her days at the appropriately titled Lane's End rest home. Preview performances at the Longacre begin Oct. 17.
Farrah Fawcett is a one-time beauty queen facing not only a mid-life crisis but a younger woman who is after her man? It could work. Fawcett portrays a former Miss Florida in "Bobbi Boland" in this play by Nancy Hasty. Previews start on Halloween at the Cort and the opening will be Nov. 24.
"I Am My Own Wife" startled audiences and pleased critics over the summer at off-Broadway's Playwrights Horizons and made them notice its star, Jefferson Mays. Now, Broadway will get a chance to see what all the fuss was all about. Doug Wright's play about a German transvestite who survived both the Nazi and Communist regimes transfers to the Lyceum Nov. 11 with an opening penciled in for Dec. 3.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY348 of Sept. 2
 Load-Date: September 3, 2003

 

End of Document
