

Green Zone is the center of the American-led occupation, ground zero for insurgents
The Associated Press
November 5, 2003, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 693 words
Byline: By SLOBODAN LEKIC, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAGHDAD, Iraq
Body




Concrete blast walls topped with rolls of razor wire, sandbag bunkers and signs threatening "deadly force" surround the complex of palaces and other government buildings that are the heart of the U.S.-led occupation.
For Iraqi insurgents, the area, known as the "Green Zone," is ground zero. Gunners fired mortars at the zone after sunset Monday and Tuesday, wounding three people in the second attack.
Neither barrage hit any major targets, and U.S. officials said there was no damage to Saddam Hussein's former Republican Palace - now headquarters of the Coalition Provisional Authority.
However, firing at the heavily guarded compound along the west bank of the Tigris River has great psychological value for the insurgents. The explosions that thunder through the heart of Baghdad call into question U.S. claims that security is improving in the capital.
Gunners hide amid the buildings of the city of 5 million, making it difficult for the Americans to detect the source of fire and shoot back.
The 2-square-mile Green Zone offers many tempting targets. Apart from the Republican Palace, it includes the Baghdad Convention Center, which houses the military's media center, and the headquarters of the Iraqi Governing Council, the country's U.S.-appointed interim administration.
The area also includes the Al-Rasheed Hotel, which was used by military and coalition civilian employees until a rocket attack Oct. 26 that killed a U.S. colonel and wounded 18 other people. Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz was in the hotel at the time, but escaped injury.
Inside the Green Zone are dozens of residences and office buildings - and even a hospital - where high-ranking members of the deposed Baath Party regime used to live. The area is intersected by wide, tree-lined avenues that wind through ornate victory arches and gates once manned by the elite Republican Guards.
A set of four massive busts of Saddam, wearing a tropical helmet and with his jaw jutting defiantly, overlook the palace office of the chief U.S. administrator, L. Paul Bremer.
Several buildings, including a giant conference center still under construction, were either flattened or badly damaged by coalition bombing during the U.S.-led invasion.
U.S. sentries around the perimeter of the Green Zone now glower sullenly at the huge traffic jams caused by blocked-off streets that once led through the area.
"No stopping, no parking, no standing; Violators are subject to deadly force," say signs propped up around the gates, which are defended by sandbagged bunkers and concrete dragons teeth and metal spikes designed to blow the tires of any vehicle that might try to enter.
Beyond the barriers lies an area of trees, grass and other greenery, part of the deposed dictator's effort to make the area a comfortable and scenic seat of power.
The Americans moved into the zone soon after the fall of Baghdad on April 9. During the final, turbulent days of Saddam's rule, U.S. tanks and troops of the 3rd Infantry Division seized the grounds of the Republican Palace and used it as a base for firing at targets on the eastern side of the Tigris.
After the war began March 20, but before American troops reached the capital, U.S. missiles and aircraft pounded targets in what is now the Green Zone every night for weeks.
Once the buildings were repaired and ordnance cleared, U.S. and coalition officials relocated from Baghdad International Airport on the western edge of the city and settled into the former regime facilities.
The move sent a subtle message to Iraqis that a new order had come to Baghdad. However, it also made coalition officials more vulnerable to attack.
Also at risk are thousands of Iraqi civilians who live in apartment houses on the edge of the Green Zone. Many of them also grumble that by diverting traffic around the restricted area, the Americans have created daily traffic gridlock.
Sadar Abdallah, a university professor, feels it's just a matter of time before a missile or mortar overshoots its target and hits an apartment complex.
"We never feel safe anymore," he said. "When we hear the first blast, we sit there waiting for the second one to explode in our building."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos ANS102-105 of Nov. 4
 Load-Date: November 6, 2003

 

End of Document
