

Heavy travel schedule for Bush on the way to the Republican convention
The Associated Press
August 27, 2004, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 711 words
Byline: By PETE YOST, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Bush, undertaking a heavy campaign schedule in key states in the run-up to the Republican National Convention, acknowledges a "miscalculation" of the difficulties the United States would encounter in the post-Saddam era occupation of Iraq.
In a six-day tour of battleground states starting Friday in Miami, Bush wants to demonstrate his ambition to reach beyond his conservative base and appeal to undecided voters. In doing so, he is advancing the argument that the country will be safer with him in charge because he makes the tough decisions and sticks with them.
In an interview with The New York Times, Bush said for the first time that he made a "miscalculation of what the conditions would be" after U.S. troops went to Iraq and toppled the regime of President Saddam Hussein in May 2003. The insurgency, he maintained, was the unintended result of a "swift victory" that led to Iraqi troops disappearing into the cities and mounting a rebellion.
Separately, he told the Times that he did not believe his Democratic opponent, Sen. John Kerry, had had lied about his service in Vietnam. The group Swift Boat Veterans for Truth has aired advertisements challenging Kerry's account of his service, and claiming Kerry lied about circumstances surrounding his war medals. Kerry has accused Bush of using the group as a front to run a smear campaign.
"I think Senator Kerry should be proud of his record," Bush said. "No, I don't think he lied."
The president carries his message about the war in Iraq and the other big issue in the campaign, the economy, to seven states before the convention. Ohio, with its spotty economic recovery, is such an important part of his re-election strategy that he is visiting it twice between now and his arrival in New York City.
The states Bush is campaigning in look like a recipe for deadlock: Bush and Democrat John Kerry are running close in Florida and West Virginia, and recent polls in Ohio, New Hampshire, Michigan and Iowa show the two candidates tied.
Bush is driving home his arguments by resorting to star power, letting Republican luminaries such as former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani and Arizona Sen. John McCain do some of his talking for him.
On terrorism, "We can't change our mind this day and the next day and the day after," Giuliani, the man inextricably linked to New York's recovery from the Sept. 11 attacks, said Thursday. "The leadership of this president has truly been a blessing." He introduced Bush at three campaign stops in New Mexico.
Bush is happy for the help from high-profile figures who can draw a crowd.
"Thank you all for coming. Gosh, I appreciate so many coming out to say hello to Rudy," the president said to laughter from a crowd in Albuquerque.
Among the qualities he emphasizes about himself, Bush most often mentions decisiveness.
"The president has to make hard decisions," Bush said when asked by USA Today how the impending toll of the 1,000th U.S. fatality in Iraq will affect his campaign.
"My job is to confront problems, not pass them on," he added. The president told the newspaper he believes voters won't deny him a second term even if they disagree with the war.
On Saturday, Bush will make the third bus tour of his campaign in Ohio, visiting Troy, Lima and the Toledo-Maumee area. On Wednesday, Bush will rally supporters in Columbus, Ohio, before heading East for New York.
The president goes to a rally Sunday in Wheeling, W.Va.; on Monday is in Nashua, N.H., and then flies to Michigan for an event in Detroit; and Tuesday addresses the American Legion in Nashville, Tenn., before heading for Alleman, Iowa, where McCain will join him, after a convention address by the senator the night before.
Following his convention speech Thursday night, Bush is bolting for the campaign trail. His campaign has yet to announce his post-convention schedule.
During the campaign blitz of the next six days, new policy pronouncements will have to wait until the convention and beyond.
As for Bush's convention speech, "I think we'll have real news," says White House communications director Dan Bartlett, who wouldn't give up any details.
Bush worked on the speech at his ranch in Texas this week. The speech is in the editing stage.
On the Net:
Bush campaign: http://www.georgewbush.com 
 Load-Date: August 28, 2004

 

End of Document
