

In Iraq, more thunder from the bombers, silence from the investigations
The Associated Press
October 13, 2003, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 630 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: BAGHDAD, Iraq
Body




The crack of rifle fire, the double thunder of explosions: In an instant, another bloody message was delivered against the U.S. occupation in Iraq.
The car bombings have come with numbing regularity, seven now since early August, all unsolved, killing more than 140 people. The mysterious attacks have stretched from Irbil in the north to Najaf in the south, but this time they struck right in the traffic-choked center of Baghdad, and in close earshot of journalists at a hotel a quarter-mile away.
Rushing toward the billowing black smoke at midday Sunday, they found the driver of a passing car, its windows blown out. What happened? they asked.
The crewcut man, ragged and thin, looked up, opened his mouth, then dropped his head on the steering wheel and sobbed. "I'm afraid," a shaken passenger said. "I'm afraid the Wahhabis will come after me if I talk about what I saw."
Once again, the victims were Iraqis - six dead and 32 reported injured, four critically, plus one or two suicide car bombers. Although two explosions were heard, the U.S. military remained uncertain on Monday whether a second driver killed was part of the attack. A second explosion may have been his gas tank igniting.
A fusillade of gunfire from guards stopped the attack just short of its target, the Baghdad Hotel, home to members of Iraq's interim Governing Council, U.S. occupation staff and - Iraqis believe - officers of the CIA.
Once again, no one claimed responsibility, and suspicions ranged widely: to Wahhabis, the ultraconservative Saudi Muslim sect that spawned Osama bin Laden and al-Qaida, to homegrown religious militants, to diehard supporters of the ousted Saddam Hussein.
Although they may not know who was behind Sunday's bombing, some Iraqis clearly believed the United States bore part of the blame. They shouted as much into the faces of U.S. soldiers who roared up in their Humvees to the chaotic scene near the Baghdad Hotel.
"Hey! Hey! Al-Hukuma fashalet!" You've failed us, two dozen Iraqis chanted in Arabic, along sidewalks strewn with broken glass, twisted hunks of automotive metal, bloody bits of human flesh.
It's a sentiment expressed across Iraq: The U.S. invasion in March brought down a detested tyrant, but unleashed a plague of ordinary crime and political violence that it's the Americans' responsibility to bring under control.
The U.S. administrator for Iraq, L. Paul Bremer, issued a statement Sunday within two hours of the bombing. "We will work with the Iraqi police to find those responsible and bring them to justice," Bremer said.
But earlier investigations, of the earlier suicide bombings, have borne little fruit, as far as can be learned from public statements. Most of those investigations have involved the FBI.
The bombings began Aug. 7 with an exploding car outside the Jordanian Embassy in Baghdad, which killed 19 people. Two weeks later, a truck bomb devastated the U.N. headquarters here, killing the chief U.N. representative, Sergio Vieira de Mello, and 22 other people. Then, on Aug. 29, a car bomb killed a prominent Shiite leader and more than 85 others in the shrine city of Najaf.
In September, the mysterious bombers targeted a U.S. intelligence compound in the northern city of Irbil and the Baghdad U.N. complex again, and last Thursday a police station in northern Baghdad. A common thread links the targets: They're either American or are perceived as having cooperated with the U.S. occupation.
Asked after last Thursday's blast at the police station whether any progress has been made in finding whoever is behind the string of suicide attacks, Bremer demurred.
"These questions should be more properly addressed to the Iraqi police," he told a news conference. But the Iraqi police are silent, too. For now, only the thunder is being heard.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos BAG102-103,110
 Load-Date: October 14, 2003

 

End of Document
