

In the 'Iowa of opium,' the harvest will go on, despite ban by U.S.-backed government
February 25, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 498 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: LASHKAR GAH, Afghanistan
Body




The government of Helmand province, the biggest opium-growing region in the world, will allow this year's poppy crop to bloom and be harvested because Afghanistan's new regime is too weak to stop it, a key provincial official said Monday.
"This year we're not able to destroy the crops. If we try to enforce a ban on the farmers, it wouldn't be good for us," said Haji Pir Mohammed, top deputy to the provincial governor.
The interim Afghan government of Hamid Karzai, installed in December after a U.S.-led military campaign ousted the previous Taliban regime, announced last month a ban on the cultivation of opium poppy.
Foreign drug-enforcement agencies have been watching to see whether the new leadership would enforce the ban, as it struggles to maintain popular support and the allegiance of regional warlords and tribal chieftains, some of whom are tied to the opium trade.
Afghanistan in the 1990s became the world's leading source of opium, from which morphine and heroin are produced, providing more than 70 percent of the global supply.
More than half of that poppy - some 80,000 acres - was grown here in the southern province of Helmand, much of it on irrigated land. Narcotics became the largest source of income for Helmand and all Afghanistan.
The government of the Islamic radical Taliban enforced a ban on poppy cultivation that cut production to almost nothing last year. But during the anti-Taliban war last fall, farmers quickly replanted the opium-bearing flowers, ending what specialists described as the most successful anti-narcotics effort in the world.
After the new Karzai administration announced its own ban - at the behest of the U.N. Drug Control Program - groups of Helmand farmers trekked to this desert capital to appeal to Gov. Sher Mohammed not to uproot their plants.
"These people are poor people, and they've spent money to plant and cultivate their poppies," Pir Mohammed told The Associated Press.
"They suggested that the United Nations buy the opium - to burn or use as medicine - and next year they'd promise not to grow poppies." Recent farm prices for the opium gum scraped from poppy pods suggest that such a buy-out program would cost more than $200 million in Helmand alone.
At the least, the provincial official said, the international community should provide farm equipment, build new electricity grids, rehabilitate irrigation systems and undertake other development projects to make it easier for Helmand farmers to switch from their illicit crop, which usually earns them at least 10 times as much income per acre as wheat and other commodities.
The only concrete step the Karzai government is known to have taken thus far against the trade was to shut down opium-selling shops in the southern city of Kandahar, in neighboring Kandahar province. Similar shops still operate here in Lashkar Gah.
Trying to block the opium harvest here is simply not an option, Pir Mohammad said. "Our government is still not stable. When it is, we'll have a plan."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo AGB102
 Load-Date: February 26, 2002

 

End of Document
