

In the police blotter of postwar Baghdad, the mundane and the surreal mix
The Associated Press
June 4, 2003, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 659 words
Byline: By TIM SULLIVAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAGHDAD, Iraq
Body




They fought the battles, overthrew the dictator, occupied the cities. Now, American forces are finding out that police work on the streets of postwar Baghdad isn't all that different from anywhere else.
To read the local police log - issued daily, courtesy of the U.S. military's media machine - is to peer into the combination of neighborhood normalcy and gun-saturated surrealism that is postwar Iraq.
"It's just like being back home, except with bigger guns," said Sgt. Chris Colon, a 37-year-old Lees Summit, Mo. police officer and reservist in an Army military police unit during a patrol of west Baghdad.
The city has it all: traffic violations, stolen cars, domestic disputes and safety lectures to schoolchildren. In Baghdad, though, any routine patrol can turn unusual - and turn up anything from high-powered rifles to gold bars.
Take, for instance, a recent traffic stop.
"A patrol of 549th Military Police Company soldiers observed a vehicle making a quick U-turn on a street in Baghdad," read a recent report in the daily police log issued by the U.S.-led occupation force, the Coalition Provisional Authority. A search of the car turned up a Russian assault rifle and ammunition.
A seizure like that is nothing unusual for Iraq, which was flooded with weaponry with the collapse of Saddam Hussein's 23-year regime, and where, for a time, a decent machine gun could be had for less than $50.
Then there was the traffic stop near Iraq's border with Syria, which turned up 2,000 40-pound bars of what is believed to be gold - with a value that could reach $500 million.
Most often, though, police work is quieter here. It's raiding houses and coming up empty, responding to vague reports about weapons caches and scolding people out past the 11 p.m. curfew. With thousands of patrols every day, sometimes what's going on is a lot of nothing.
Not that Iraq isn't a dangerous place. American forces have repeatedly been targeted in hit-and-run attacks since they forced Saddam from power, and Baghdadis say that while the postwar crime wave has ebbed, the city is still hardly a bastion of security.
Sometimes, apparently, the Iraqis try to make it more secure on their own. The police log shows a number of disputes that appear to end with traditional Iraqi justice, like the Baghdad family that summoned U.S. authorities because a man was threatening them.
American forces couldn't find the man, but he was later dropped off at one of their positions. He had, as the report dryly noted, "suffered numerous gunshot wounds."
Now and then, traditional American police customs can seem out of place in this poor, gun-laden and dictator-weary culture.
Meeting local police officers is a staple of grade-school life in many American towns, with friendly uniformed officers visiting elementary schools to talk about such things as traffic safety and not taking candy from strangers. The underlying lesson: "The police officer is your friend."
In Iraq, though, the police were never viewed as friends.
While not an arm of the Baath Regime's brutality - repression and torture were the domain of other branches of the country's vast security infrastructure - Baghdad's police officers were yet another ill-paid, corrupt bureaucracy that had to be faced down.
So it can seem incongruous when the police log notes that U.S. Marines recently "conducted a well-received public safety day attended by 300 children" in the city of Karbala, where they talked about the importance of staying in school, avoiding unexploded bombs and "trusting the police and firemen."
Still, the intention is clear. And in a city where there are probably hundreds of American police officers now serving as reservists in the military, it's an attempt to break old stereotypes.
"We love our job," said Colon, the police officer from Missouri. "We love doing this stuff."
Still, he admits, there is one police-officer staple that Baghdad lacks: doughnuts.
"That's too bad," he said. "I do miss those."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY111-113

 

End of Document
