

International observers in the West Bank tread warily on the front line
November 14, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 690 words
Byline: By STEVE WEIZMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HEBRON, West Bank
Body




Armed only with notebooks and cameras, international observers in gray-and-blue uniforms dodged stones as they patrolled the twisting streets of this divided city.
The observers have been logging violent incidents in tense Hebron off-and-on since 1994 and believe they may serve as a model for a broader peace force in the Palestinian areas in the future.
Yet they have angered Jewish settlers and fallen short of Palestinian expectations.
The 91-member Temporary International Presence in Hebron (TIPH) - made up of observers from Norway, Denmark, Sweden, Turkey, Italy and Switzerland - is not allowed to intervene in confrontations, drawing complaints from Palestinians that the foreigners are useless.
"Why don't you do something?" an elderly Palestinian man berated observers patrolling Tuesday on the border between the Palestinian and Israeli-controlled zones of divided Hebron.
To the Hebron settlers, the observers' mere presence is an irritant.
"We've always viewed TIPH as a very negative element. Their mandate clearly shows that they are here to protect Palestinian security," settler spokesman David Wilder said.
The observer force was set up under an agreement between Israel and the Palestinians in the wake of a 1994 massacre of 29 Palestinian worshippers at a Hebron mosque by an Israeli settler who was beaten to death by survivors.
The city is still a place of high tension, where fewer than 500 settlers live in fortified enclaves amid 130,000 Palestinians. About 20 percent of the city is controlled by Israel, with the remainder under Palestinian self-rule.
The settlements have come under repeated gunfire from Palestinians on the ridges above, prompting Israel to send troops into the Palestinian-ruled section for 10 days last month, until Palestinian security forces pledged to restore order.
The level of violence has since dropped, although there have been sporadic shooting incidents.
Palestinian police could be seen Tuesday patrolling the hilltop Abu Sneineh neighborhood, where bullet-scarred houses bear witness to the urban warfare.
The observers were greeted with smiles and waves, particularly from small children. In the old market, the foreigners were pursued by a flock of youngsters practicing their English. "How are you? How are you?" they chanted.
But many adult Palestinians are disappointed, saying that while they appreciate the observers' goodwill, they offer no protection against settler vigilantes.
"We want to see the mandate changed so they can stop what is happening to us and not just observe," said Hebron resident Khaled Nasr a-Din.
The settlers' distaste for the force was made evident during a foot patrol of the Arab market. Stones were hurled from the windows of adjacent Jewish homes at observers. Nobody was injured.
Wilder said that the Hebron Jewish community decries such behavior.
At one point on Tuesday's patrol, Israeli soldiers formed a protective cordon around observers near a Jewish enclave. Observers said they are regularly subjected to settler harassment, including stone throwing and pushing and shoving.
Sometimes more than stones fly. Observers have been forced to scramble for cover as they found themselves caught in the cross fire between Israeli troops and Palestinian gunmen, mission spokesman Lars Tore Kjerland, from Norway, said.
Despite the danger and criticism, mission head Karl-Henrik Sjursen said his team could form the model for a broader force to monitor a Mideast cease-fire.
"I think that if the two sides really want international observers, then this mission could serve as a useful expression of how that could be done," he said.
Israel has consistently rejected the idea of a monitoring group while the Palestinians are keen to see foreign observers deployed.
Palestinian Cabinet Minister Nabil Shaath has said the European Union has submitted a new Mideast peace plan to U.S. officials, which included the deployment of international observers to the Palestinian territories.
Recommendations made by a committee led by former U.S. Senator George Mitchell say that TIPH personnel could form the nucleus of such a group, but only if Israel and the Palestinians agree.
 Graphic



 
AP PHOTOS NY120-123
 Load-Date: November 15, 2001

 

End of Document
