

Into the tunnel - on patrol with the U.S. Army Special Forces near Kandahar
January 8, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 521 words
Byline: By SUSAN SEVAREID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KANDAHAR, Afghanistan
Body




Shining his flashlight down a 20-foot hole, one of the U.S. Army's elite Green Berets shouted to his teammate: "Ray, why don't you bring your pistol and come on down this way!"
After stopping the dusty pickup to peer into one empty, dry well after another in a valley outside Kandahar, Steve, a master sergeant from Kansas, finally saw what he'd been hoping for - a hole with tunnel entries at the bottom of the garbage-strewn pit.
Searching Afghanistan's myriad caves for Taliban fighters or documents providing insight into Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida terror network has been a primary mission for U.S. Army Special Forces soldiers operating here since the Taliban regime was ousted last month.
The Taliban long sheltered bin Laden, the man accused of masterminding the Sept. 11 terror attacks in New York and Washington.
The Army's elite special forces teams, like the one known as Python 36 operating in the Kandahar area, played a central role in training Afghan allies and supporting them in ground combat, calling in overwhelming air bombardments to defeat the Taliban.
The United States' war on terrorism relied on the highly trained soldiers to overpower the Taliban without involving conventional U.S. ground troops.
Ray, a master sergeant from North Carolina, made his way down the 40-foot narrow, sloping entry to a ledge. From there, Steve used a thick rope hooked to the pickup truck above to scale another 20 feet down to begin the search.
Under Pentagon ground rules for covering the special forces, the men could not be identified fully.
A room full of garbage to one side, Steve sloshed through foot-deep stagnant water into another tunnel, rifle ready, shining a flashlight into the darkness.
"This is a serious excavation here," he said. "The ceiling is so smooth and rounded."
Finding no signs of life and seeing no papers in the glow of his light down the 250-foot tunnel, Steve made his way out and back up the rope to continue the search elsewhere.
Though clearly unused for years, Steve said the tunnel was the most extensive he'd seen.
Teams in the area also have been searching for unexploded ammunition, and found a valley with so many piles of tank rounds, mortars and other heavy ammunition believed abandoned by Taliban fighters that, as Ray put it, "It's almost like Easter egg hunting."
Special operations commanders have said soldiers throughout the country - even in the cave-riddled eastern Tora Bora region - have seen nothing of the elaborate network bin Laden reputedly had or the tunnels created to connect caves.
Still, they don't rule out that such a complex has yet to be found.
Gen. Tommy Franks, commander of the U.S. war effort, told The Associated Press at his Florida headquarters that the weekslong search through the Tora Bora complex would end soon if bin Laden was not found.
He said searchers did, however, uncover evidence that bin Laden recently was holed up there with Taliban supporters.
An undisclosed number of U.S. special forces soldiers also are in Pakistan to coordinate the pursuit of fugitive al-Qaida or Taliban leaders, Franks said, but there is no hard proof bin Laden is there.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos FRA112-114,117,118
 Load-Date: January 9, 2002

 

End of Document
