

Iran might be the best friend that Iraq's Shiite government has in the region
The Associated Press
June 16, 2005, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 595 words
Byline: By KATHY GANNON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TEHRAN, Iran
Body




Iran might be the best friend Iraq's Shiite-led government has in the Middle East - even if Baghdad would rather that were not the case.
Analysts say Iran's quarrel with what is happening in Iraq is not with its Shiite-dominated government, but with the U.S. military presence there.
And Iran's presidential elections on Friday are not likely to change that, regardless of whether the winner is the pragmatic, former president Hashemi Rafsanjani, the hardline former national police chief Mohammad Bagher Qalibaf, or even the reformist former Cabinet Minister Mostafa Moin.
"The State Department is wrong to say that Iran would want to destabilize Iraq. A Shiite government in Iraq is in Iran's interest," Ray Takeyh, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations in New York, told The Associated Press in a phone interview.
Iran had the only Shiite-dominated government in the Middle East until the Jan. 30 elections in Iraq produced a government representing its Shiite majority.
Iran was seen as a supporter of fiery anti-American Shiite cleric Muqtada al-Sadr, who lay siege to U.S. coalition forces. Iran also has close ties to the more moderate top Iraqi Shiite Muslim cleric, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani.
"So long as Shiites are the leading component of a government in Iraq, it is not in Iran's interest to destabilize it, because that could just further the involvement of the U.S. presence, or cause an American-Iranian confrontation or even the resurgence of a Sunni government," Takeyh said.
The Iranians "don't mind, for the sake of stability, to have Sunni involvement in an Iraq government, but they don't want a Sunni-dominated government," he said. However, there is little chance of that in the immediate future. Sunni Arabs, who dominated Iraq during President Saddam Hussein's rule, have been relegated to minority status since his overthrow.
However, Iraq's government is likely to want to keep its distance from Iran, regardless of who wins Friday's elections, says Iranian political analyst Davoud Hermidas Bavand.
"In Iraq, the Shiite political system knows that its future lies with accommodating American political designs, both in Iraq and in the region, and because of this they would try to disassociate themselves from Iran," Bavand said.
For most Iraqis, the only good news out of Friday's Iranian election would be a president that could do business with the United States, says Mohammed Hosseini, a Tehran-based member of Iraq's Islamic Amal Organization, which is close to Iraqi Grand Ayatollah al-Sistani.
Hosseini said that if the new Iranian president manages to establish better relations with Washington, it would be positive for relations with Iraq.
"In that case Iraq would not be a battleground between the two countries (Iran and the United States)," Hosseini said.
And the United States might get along better with Iraqi Shiites "because there would no longer be any excuse for Americans to be suspicious that Iraqis are in collusion with an outside country," Hosseini added, referring to Iran.
At least two of the candidates in Friday's polls have promised to improve Iran's relations with the United States: front-runner Rafsanjani and the reformist Moin.
Even if one of them wins, Washington is unlikely to respond quickly to his overtures, analyst Takeyh said.
"There is no appetite in the State Department, or in the National Security Council, to deal with Iran," Takeyh said. "The attitude is: 'We are not going to legitimize this regime."'
---
Associated Press reporter Nasser Karimi contributed to this report from Tehran, Iran.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo VAH113
 Load-Date: June 17, 2005

 

End of Document
