

Iraq and Kuwait hold talks over the fate of people missing since the 1990-91 Gulf crisis
The Associated Press
January 8, 2003, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 372 words
Byline: By SHAFIKA MATTAR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: AMMAN, Jordan
Body




Iraqi and Kuwaiti officials held their first talks in four years Wednesday on the fate of more than 600 people missing after the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait in 1990-91.
Iraqi and Kuwaiti delegates refused to talk to reporters after the five-hour meeting. The International Committee of the Red Cross, which sponsored the talks in its Amman offices, said the two sides agreed to get together again on Jan. 22.
"The fact that the meeting lasted five hours is on its own a positive development," ICRC spokesman Mu'in Kassis told reporters. He described the talks as "very constructive and positive."
In a statement, the ICRC said it hoped the negotiations would lead to ending "the anguish of families that have waited all too long to know what has become of their loved ones."
Kuwait says the Baghdad government must account for more than 600 Kuwaitis and other nationals who disappeared in the emirate during the Iraqi occupation.
Iraq insists it is holding no such detainees. In recent years, Iraq has accused Kuwait of failing to account for more than 1,000 Iraqis who disappeared during the Gulf crisis. Kuwait's government says it cannot be held to account for people who disappeared during the Iraqi occupation.
Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990. It was evicted at the end of February 1991 by a coalition of forces led by the United States.
Wednesday's meeting was also attended by officials from Saudi Arabia, which has a few citizens missing from the Gulf crisis and is represented on the international commission set up in 1991 to look into the fate of the missing persons. The United States, France and Britain are also members of the commission.
Iraq withdrew from the negotiations in January 1999. It objected to the presence of Americans at the talks and said the commission was not applying pressure on the Kuwaitis to account for missing Iraqis.
Iraq's decision to resume negotiations reflects the generally more cooperative attitude it has taken since it came under increased pressure over its weapons of mass destruction program late last year.
Last month, Iraq said it would allow the U.N. special envoy, Yuli Vorontsov, to visit Baghdad for talks on the missing persons. For nearly two years, Baghdad had refused to meet him.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos

 

End of Document
