

Just don't call the first lady … the first lady
The Associated Press
February 28, 2004, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 877 words
Byline: By DEB RIECHMANN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Bush's wife doesn't like labels. Even the title of first lady doesn't suit her.
"Too artificial," she says. "I'd just rather be called Laura Bush."
It's not that she doesn't relish and respect her role and the platform to promote what interests her. She just thinks it's superficial, maybe even plain wrong, to typecast someone.
She's not ready to give her legacy a tag line, either.
Hillary Clinton's bumper sticker was "It Takes A Village." Nancy Reagan's "Just Say No" became synonymous with anti-drug campaigns.
"I probably don't have a catch word," Mrs. Bush told The Associated Press in an interview about life in the White House, her rising visibility in her fourth year as first lady and the role she will play in her husband's re-election campaign. "But I hope that people will have a greater appreciation for reading and education when I'm through."
Laura Bush was hailed as "comforter in chief" for her reassuring words after the Sept. 11 attacks. Her picture was splashed across newspapers when French President Jacques Chirac kissed her hand in Paris.
She will be in the public spotlight more this year because of the presidential race and because she has expressed a desire, her aides say, to be more deeply involved discussing issues, especially reading.
Generally, though, Laura Bush has kept a low profile the past three years. She has raised awareness of heart disease, especially in women; urged the preservation of America's cultural and historic sites; and talked about the plight of women who lived under the repressive Taliban rule in Afghanistan, a nation she hopes to visit. 
Education, an issue that threads her life, has been her trademark cause.
"My mother said she knew I'd become a teacher when she heard me scolding my dolls for not paying attention," said the former public school teacher and librarian who has promoted reading from California to Moscow.
"When it comes to getting things done on behalf of children, she takes the velvet hammer approach rather than the jackhammer approach," says Noelia Rodriguez, the first lady's former director of communications.
Laura Bush is not any less influential than Hillary Clinton or Rosalyn Carter, says Paul Costello, a former spokesman for Rosalyn Carter and Kitty Dukakis, the former Massachusetts first lady whose husband was the 1988 Democratic presidential nominee. "Mrs. Bush has simply chosen a quieter path," he said.
Laura Bush's White House phone is answered "Mrs. Bush's office," not "Office of the First lady." That shows she has put her stamp on the position, Costello says, adding that he thinks Laura Bush has a lot of "character" and "spunk."
Asked who answers the phone when it rings in the middle of the night, Laura Bush did not hesitate to take a playful shot at people who question the president's intellect.
"We have phones on both sides of the bed," she said, sarcastically. "He actually can pick up the telephone. He's actually very, very competent in a lot of ways."
Carl Sferrazza Anthony, a historian and student of America's first ladies, said Laura Bush's work has been eclipsed from the beginning by world events - much like Pat Nixon was overshadowed by Watergate and Lady Bird Johnson by the Vietnam War.
On Sept. 11, 2001, the day Laura Bush was to make her policy debut testifying before Congress on early childhood learning, terrorists stuck America. In February 2003, a literary symposium she was sponsoring was canceled after some poets planned to express their opposition to war with Iraq.
"Any time you have a president who is serving during war or at a time when he is being implicated in some kind of controversy, you usually see the spouse walking an extremely cautious line," Anthony said.
World events aside, Laura Bush, 57, always has been careful not to appear to be formulating White House policy, although she says it hard for her to avoid it altogether.
"I live there, right above the shop with the president," she said, sipping water on a couch in the private quarters of her plane, called Executive Fox Trot One. "I'm very aware of a lot of different issues that are being discussed.
"Sure, I make suggestions sometimes. A lot of times I don't. But do I put in my two cents? Sure."
Laura Bush has contributed more than pennies to the Bush-Cheney re-election treasury, now holding more than $150 million. At events in 16 states, she has raised more than $5 million since June 2003.
She does not seem to mind the role of standing in the shadow of her husband, whom she heaps high with praise.
"He does everything better than I do," she says, "He's a much better athlete, he's a much better card player, he's a much better Scrabble player."
Who's better at the finances?
"Oh, he's much better at the finances," she said. "I'm not a numbers person in the least."
But don't mistake her loyalty for subservience, says Regan Gammon, good friends with Laura Bush since they were teenagers. The first lady just doesn't feel the need to compete with her husband, Gammon said.
"She's very independent," Gammon said.
She's very direct too. While happy to reiterate the president's position on gay marriage, Laura Bush firmly declined share her personal views on the subject.
"Let's just leave it at that," she said.
On the Net:
Laura Bush's office: www.firstlady.gov 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos WX110-114 of Feb. 26
 Load-Date: February 29, 2004

 

End of Document
