

Life inside the White House: a 'new normal' as Bush leads the nation into war
September 19, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 721 words
Byline: By SANDRA SOBIERAJ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




In a suit and tie, Jim Wilkinson works on communications strategy from the first-floor White House office he's already had to evacuate once. He awaits an order to change into his Navy uniform and ship out to war.
At the White House Physician's Office, where aides normally go for aspirin, there are now counselors. Hundreds of employees in White House offices closest to sidewalk and street traffic are being relocated to safer property.
Such is the "new normal" of life inside the gates at 1600 Pennsylvania Ave.
The week after the suicide attacks in New York and at the Pentagon, there were but small signs of normalcy returning to the White House.
Press secretary Ari Fleischer skipped a meeting on how to rescue the airlines and, instead, went to a synagogue for Rosh Hashanah. The in-house Weight Watchers group led by presidential counselor Karen Hughes regrouped for its regular session. Aides who worked 20 hours at a time in the immediate aftermath of the terrorist strikes are back on schedules more normal - or what White House spokesman Gordon Johndroe called "a new normal."
"Obviously, nothing is normal any more," Johndroe said.
This was supposed to be the back-to-school season for pushing Bush's education bill through Congress. Now, domestic policy adviser Margaret Spellings and a deputy or two in the White House Office of Legislative Affairs are the only ones paying any attention to the legislation.
All focus is on the fallout from last Tuesday - plotting war on the terrorists and building an international coalition behind the United States, bolstering the airline industry and the economy at large.
Deputy White House chief of staff Josh Bolten leads a new "domestic consequences group" that meets every morning wherever it can - in the Roosevelt Room if that's not taken, or in the Eisenhower Executive Office Building. Bush's daily schedule, which is now distributed among aides only on a "need-to-know" basis for security reasons, newly includes a daily FBI briefing on the investigation into last week's twin attacks and prime suspect Osama bin Laden.
Midlevel deputies still fan out on Capitol Hill trying to nudge along Bush's free-trade agenda, the farm bill and 13 spending bills that must be enacted to keep the government running after Sept. 30. Aides say for the record that planning continues for Bush's trip to Asia next month but no one seriously expects the president to step foot off American soil anytime soon.
"My time and everybody's time has been spent in meetings to sort of deal with the most important things on our plate right now," said Hughes.
The Secret Service has beefed up its midnight shifts and everyone is more aware of routine security measures that seemed before, if noticed at all, like time-consuming inconveniences. One aide described how he and some colleagues watched with fresh appreciation as dogs sniffed a vehicle at the White House gate.
The war planning goes on in secret in the basement Situation Room. But for Wilkinson, who before last week had manned what he called a "war room" on the federal budget, these war councils carry an especially personal impact.
His brother is on active duty with Army intelligence in Europe and, for three years, Wilkinson himself has trained with the Naval Reserves. His mobile public affairs unit, which coincidentally served on the USS Cole before it was attacked last year by bin Laden's organization, is due to drill in Norfolk, Va., this weekend.
On Monday, Wilkinson paid off all his credit cards, just in case.
"They haven't called up my unit yet. But I took an oath and I'm ready to serve this president wherever he needs me," he said.
A similar rush of patriotism had White House workers eagerly decorating their lapels with the small American flag pins that were put out in bowls last Friday.
Nights in the upstairs residence, Bush is sleeping OK but finding it harder than usual to escape the weight of the day. He makes calls. He rang Hughes at home several times Monday night. "The phone kept ringing," she said. "My son was like, Mom, what is going on?"
Bush and his wife, Laura, try not to talk too much about war. They look to their two dogs and a cat for distraction. "This will probably sound funny," said Mrs. Bush. "Since our children are not there to be with us and to entertain us, we let our three pets entertain us."
 Load-Date: September 20, 2001

 

End of Document
