

Linking the Abu Ghraib prison scandal with women soldiers and the battle of Jericho;
The Associated Press
June 14, 2004, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Lifestyle
Length: 710 words
Byline: By RICHARD N. OSTLING, AP Religion Writer
Body




R. Albert Mohr Jr. is among the Americans repelled by the "moral depravity" of some U.S. soldiers' deeds at Iraq's Abu Ghraib prison. While fellow moral conservatives use the moment to denounce America's pornography industry, Mohler cites another issue.
He believes the scandal raises "most urgently" the issue of women serving alongside men in combat.
Mohler is president of Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, in Louisville, Ky., a prestige school in America's largest Protestant body, and commentator for Christian radio and his denomination's Baptist Press, which issued his Abu Ghraib article.
"Christian moral teaching holds that military service is for men - not women," he asserted. "The inclusion of women in combat military units is a challenge to the moral character of the American people."
Abu Ghraib showed that "women do not raise the moral level of men in warfare. To the contrary, it looks as if the men lower the moral status of the women," he wrote.
"The presence of women in combat forces degrades humanity, putting women in the line of fire while sending all the wrong messages about family, gender and moral honor. … Christians have understood this pattern for centuries, even if some appear confused in the present."
He cited only one biblical passage, Joshua's directive during preparations for the battle of Jericho:
"Your wives, your little ones, and your cattle shall remain in the land which Moses gave you beyond the Jordan; but all the men of valor among you shall pass over armed before your brethren" (Joshua 1:14).
It's an intriguing example of hermeneutics (biblical interpretation). Is Joshua's practice 32 centuries ago required for 21st-century believers? And if so, must society follow the biblical rule?
Those questions also rage, of course, about whether to legalize same-sex relationships. To date, despite religious liberals' exertions, most U.S. churches resist cultural pressures and believe the Old and New Testament commandments against same-sex behavior remain in force for both church and society.
Yet on other matters, Christians agree that biblical tenets were time-bound and don't apply today. Famous ancient examples were the New Testament's removal by divine revelation of the Old Testament's circumcision and dietary laws (at least for non-Jewish converts).
However, the Old Testament ban on usury (charging of interest on loans) mentioned in Exodus 22:25 and Deuteronomy 23:19-20 only disappeared after extended struggle. Theologians eventually decided the economics of ancient subsistence farming didn't apply to modern markets, so usury was redefined as unfairly high interest.
On women and warfare, Mohler cited Harold O.J. Brown of Reformed Theological Seminary, who said that "within Judaism and Christianity, indeed almost universally in all human culture, the military profession has been reserved for males."
Historically, that's undoubtedly true. However, the question is whether that's a God-given pattern, binding for all centuries and cultures.
Unlike with homosexual behavior, the Bible depicts military division of labor as an edict from Joshua, not from God, whose commandment regarded possession of the Holy Land. Many if not most Bible scholars would reject Mohler's interpretation.
The broader topic of women's role in church and society has been hotly debated among conservative Protestants in recent decades.
To Mohler, "the Bible presents a comprehensive pattern of differentiation between men and women" in which "men are to protect women, even as women bear a special responsibility as nurturers as wives and mothers."
In 2000, his Southern Baptist Convention revised its official statement in faith to specify that "the office of pastor is limited to men" and that "a wife is to submit herself graciously to the servant leadership of her husband." Southern Baptist leaders see those as biblical requirements.
But evangelicals in Christians for Biblical Equality - which is gearing up for a 2005 international conference at Pennsylvania's Eastern University - argue that the Bible allows women pastors and says husbands equally must submit to their wives.
---
On the Net:
Mohler's page: http://www.albertmohler.com 
Christians for Biblical Equality: http://www.cbeinternational.org 
th Carolina; and the
 Load-Date: June 15, 2004

 

End of Document
