

Man of the People?: China's Hu stakes out an image as champion of the poor
The Associated Press
January 17, 2003, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 779 words
Byline: By JOE McDONALD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BEIJING
Body




Bundled up in winter coat and muffler, the new leader of China's Communist Party picked a decidedly humble setting for a highly publicized outing - a tent on windswept grasslands, where he sat on a stool and chatted with a family of traditional herders.
That image of Vice President Hu Jintao was splashed across state television and newspaper front pages last week. Its message was clear: Hu cares about the poor.
It's a theme the party is anxious to promote these days. Two decades of economic reform have given millions of Chinese a chance to lift themselves out of poverty, but left behind hundreds of millions more. The growing gap is fueling protests by laid-off workers and violent clashes in the countryside between farmers and tax collectors.
The Communist Party has launched a fundamental policy shift aimed at spreading prosperity - concentrated for now in China's eastern cities - to the workers and peasants who formed the foundation of its 1949 revolution.
The timing could hardly be better for Hu, 60, who succeeded President Jiang Zemin as party general secretary in November. The chance to craft an image as champion of the poor lets Hu contrast himself with the 76-year-old Jiang, who is likely to be seen meeting foreign corporate bosses or christening a new microchip factory.
"Hu Jintao wants to be the symbol of this new orientation," said Jean-Paul Cabestan, director of the Hong Kong-based French Center for the Study of Contemporary China. "He wants to develop an image as closer to the people and in touch with the ups and downs of life."
How much of this reflects Hu's personal concern and how much is changing party policy isn't clear.
The former engineer has won a reputation as smart, poised and a consensus-builder. But his own views are a mystery - a legacy of the bland but capable image he has cultivated as a way to avoid attracting enemies during his climb to power.
Nevertheless, the change in the system that Hu could wind up leading for the next 15 years is more than image. Since the late 1990s, the party has talked with mounting urgency about shifting development from the booming, export-oriented east to the farming hinterland.
The transformation is prompted in part by unease at growing unrest among the rural poor and laid-off workers. At the same time, diplomats and foreign analysts say, many party leaders are genuinely distressed at the plight of millions of Chinese in poverty while incomes in the financial capital of Shanghai have surged past $3,000 per person.
Beijing has launched a giant "Develop the West" campaign aimed at promoting growth in its isolated regions - many inhabited by restive ethnic minorities. It calls for spending billions of dollars building roads, railways, gas pipelines and other facilities.
The new orientation is reflected, intentionally or not, in the choice of Hu and other leaders installed at a Communist Party congress in November as part of a planned handover of power to a younger generation.
Hu, who also is expected to replace Jiang as president this year, spent his early career in Tibet and the northwestern desert province of Gansu - two of China's poorest areas. Wen Jiabao, a member of the party's ruling Standing Committee believed to be in line to replace Premier Zhu Rongji, spent a decade in Gansu as a geologist.
By contrast, Jiang and Zhu are both former Shanghai mayors who made their careers in the urban east.
The new leadership declared its back-to-basics focus by taking a highly symbolic "study trip" in early December to Xibaipo, a town southwest of Beijing where the party Central Committee met in 1949 on the eve of their victory. State media repeated communist founder Mao Zedong's appeal to party members to be "modest, prudent and self-disciplined."
Hu was quoted as urging party members to "share the people's joys and sorrows." He reinforced that theme with a visit Jan. 4 to the Inner Mongolia region in China's north, where he visited the tents of ethnic Mongols and, according to state media, asked about the hardships of rural life.
This week, Vice Premier Wu Bangguo spent two days in the northern province of Shanxi visiting "disadvantaged coal miners," according to the official Xinhua News Agency. On Wednesday, the state television news devoted an unusually long 10-minute report to showing another Standing Committee member, Zeng Qinghong, on a trip to poor villages in the northwest.
It isn't clear yet how much money the party can put behind its stated goal of improving life for the poor - or how much time Hu can personally devote to the issue.
Once Hu takes over as president, Cabestan said, "how much time he really will have to travel around remains to be seen."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY112

 

End of Document
