

Negotiators reach the final critical hours in deciding the future of Cyprus
The Associated Press
March 31, 2004, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 698 words
Byline: By ESRA AYGIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: FUERIGEN, Switzerland
Body




The leaders of Greece, Turkey and divided Cyprus worked to overcome disagreements over refugees and Turkish troops Wednesday after all-night talks to determine the island's future before ceding authority to the United Nations.
But the Greek side expressed pessimism that a deal could be met by the Wednesday midnight deadline.
"As things stand now, the chances for an agreement are poor," Greek government spokesman Theodoros Roussopolos said.
The sides were debating a plan presented by U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan to end three decades of division before Cyprus joins the European Union on May 1.
The plan envisages a federation of two states - one Greek and the other Turkish - with a loose central government.
Annan reserved the right to settle any issues that the sides are unable to agree on. His plan will then be put to referendums in the two communities in less than three weeks.
"Our only aim is to come out with a positive, win-win outcome," said Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan. He said negotiators have been working "hand in hand, shoulder to shoulder, night and day" to find an acceptable solution.
Negotiations went on all night at the Swiss mountaintop resort of Buergenstock and continued Wednesday morning, U.N. spokesman Stephane Dujarric said.
Annan was expected to present the final version of his reunification plan to the parties later Wednesday, and make it public shortly after.
Cyprus has been split into the Greek Cypriot-controlled south and the occupied north since Turkey invaded in 1974 in the wake of a short-lived coup by supporters of union with Greece. The breakaway state is only recognized by Turkey, which maintains 40,000 troops there.
Annan's previous plan - presented Monday - provoked joy from the Turkish media, which perceived that most of Turkey's demands had been met.
But the Turkish side was demanding further limitations in the return of refugees, more time before they have to give up territory and protection from legal action by Greek Cypriots who couldn't use their homes in the north following the Turkish invasion.
The Greek side had more to complain about. The current Annan plan foresees further cuts in refugee returns and a possible permanent presence of Turkish troops on the island.
"This is the most critical moment in Cyprus' history. It is human for us to be disappointed as we expected a lot of different things. But the consultations are continuing," former Cypriot president George Vassiliou said.
According to a copy of the document obtained by The Associated Press, the two parties would agree that "the tragic events of the past shall never be repeated" and that they "renounce forever the threat or the use of force or any domination by or of either side."
They also would acknowledge "each other's distinct identity and integrity and that our relationship is not one of majority and minority but of political equality where neither side may claim authority or jurisdiction over the other."
It said general elections should be held in Cyprus on June 13.
If either community rejects Annan's plan in the referendums, Cyprus will join the European Union on May 1 as planned, but EU rules will only apply to the internationally recognized southern, Greek Cypriot part of the island.
Even though Annan has the final say, the opinions of the political leaders of both sides will influence the votes of the Cypriot people on both sides.
Another major player ion the final day of talks likely will be EU enlargement commissioner Guenter Verheugen. That's because Annan's plan requires a permanent change to EU law to limit the rights of Greek and Turkish Cypriot refugees to return to live in the regions they fled after the 1974 invasion and own property there. Normally, EU law allows citizens to live and own property in any part of the bloc.
Verheugen's spokesman, Jean-Christophe Filori, told reporters in Brussels, Belgium, on Tuesday that there were "signs of rapprochement" in the talks.
The Turkish side says no deal is possible without a guarantee of a permanent change in EU law. The Greek side rejects any deal that changes basic EU principles.
---
Associated Press writer Alex Efty in Fuerigen contributed to this report.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos
 Load-Date: April 1, 2004

 

End of Document
