

New U.N. envoy says his top priority in Iraq will be to ensure that the interests of the Iraqi people come first
The Associated Press
May 27, 2003, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 644 words
Byline: By EDITH M. LEDERER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Sergio Vieira de Mello, the new U.N. envoy to Iraq, said Tuesday his top priority will be to ensure that "the interests of the Iraqi people come first" in rebuilding their country, but law and order must be restored.
Without security, "it will be impossible" to start building democratic institutions and a culture of human rights - the cornerstones of Iraqi self-government, Vieira de Mello said at his first news conference since his appointment on Friday.
"I intend to hit the ground … on Monday morning at the latest with a relatively small team because the conditions in Baghdad are still not ideal, both in terms of accommodation and office space, not to say security," de Mello said.
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, who chose Vieira de Mello as his special resentative in Iraq for four months, said it was hard to let him leave his post as U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights for that short time "since human rights has been at the top of my own agenda."
But he said Vieira de Mello's "exceptional and unique experience" in running post-conflict U.N. operations in Kosovo and East Timor, and his reputation "as a good team builder and a consensus builder" made him the perfect choice to launch the U.N. operation in Iraq.
Annan said it will be the first time that "we are working on the ground with an occupying power side-by-side trying to help the population in the territory."
Under the mandate of the Security Council resolution adopted Thursday, Vieira de Mello will coordinate U.N. humanitarian and reconstruction efforts and work with the U.S.-led coalition and the Iraqi people to help build a democratic government in Iraq. He also is charged with promoting legal and judicial reforms and human rights, and assisting in building a civilian police force.
"As I hit the ground priority number one will be to establish contacts with … representative Iraqis, Iraqi leaders, representatives of the media, of civil society, and there are many," Vieira de Mello said.
"Iraqi society is rich - and that richness has been suppressed brutally for the last 24 years but they are there, or are returning as we speak, and they are my priority."
The 55-year-old diplomatic troubleshooter from Brazil said his second priority is to "establish good working relations" with the U.S. and British occupying powers and their coalition members. His third priority is to visit all 18 Iraqi provinces to find out what people want for the future, he said.
Vieira de Mello, who made a name for himself in hotspots from Bangladesh to Lebanon and Cambodia, was the top choice of the United States, which lobbied quietly for his selection. He also is highly respected internationally and by human rights groups.
"Sergio de Mello is an extremely able man," U.S. deputy ambassador Richard Williamson said Tuesday. "He's got a big job and we look forward to working with him."
France, Russia and Germany had wanted the United Nations to take the lead in forming the new government and won a somewhat stronger role in the final resolution.
Annan and Vieira de Mello made clear that other top U.N. priorities will be to ensure that the new Iraq ensures human rights and the rights of women - especially their full participation in any political process.
"The people of Iraqi … have suffered enough," Vieira de Mello said. "It is time that we all - the Iraqis first, the coalition authority, and the U.N. - come together to ensure that this suffering comes to an end and that this Iraqi people take their destiny into their own hands … as quickly as possible."
Asked whether he worried that having just four months and being a lame duck would hurt his effectiveness, Vieira de Mello said he wasn't a lame duck during his two-month stint running Kosovo.
"I'm going there with my team to do immediate, important, urgent work, and you will see that we won't be lame ducks in any way or fashion," he said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos

 

End of Document
