

Now playing globally: outrage and praise for 'The Passion of the Christ'
The Associated Press
April 3, 2004, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1146 words
Byline: By BRIAN MURPHY, Associated Press Writer
Body




An Islamic leader says it reveals Jewish "crimes." European Jewish leaders are troubled by it. Israeli theaters don't plan to show it.
"The Passion of the Christ," Mel Gibson's crucifixion epic, is moving into cinemas around the world, and into the international tempests whipped up by terrorism, war and clashing religions.
"It's not going to help quiet things down," said Giorgos Moustakis, who teaches theology and Christian ethics at the American College of Greece. "There are fundamentalists in every religion - Christians, Muslims and Jews. Films like this get extremist feelings going. That cannot be good."
"The Passion" has gone global as Christians prepare to celebrate Easter week. But the coming week is also the Jewish holiday of Passover, which could sharpen the focus on what some perceive as the movie's anti-Semitism.
For many around the world, as in the United States, the core issues of the film are the blood-soaked depiction of Christ's last hours, and the emphasis on Jews clamoring for the Romans to crucify him.
Gibson and many clergy who praised the film deny it has any anti-Semitic overtones.
Many in the Arab world welcome the film, seeing it as an anti-Jewish message gaining worldwide currency at a time of escalating Palestinian-Israel clashes.
"The Jews are most upset with the movie because it reveals their crimes against the prophets, the reformers and whoever contradicts their opinions," said Hamza Mansoor, secretary-general of the Islamic Action Front, a hard-line political party in Jordan.
The film has opened to packed houses in Jordan, Syria and Lebanon. Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat watched the film at his West Bank compound with a group of local Muslim clerics and Christians from the United States, Canada and Britain.
"The Palestinians are still daily being exposed to the kind of pain Jesus was exposed to during his crucifixion," a top Arafat aide, Aub Rdeneh, said in a statement after the March 20 viewing.
Muslims revere Jesus as a prophet, not as the messiah, and some Arab countries have banned the film because a strict interpretation of Islam frowns on portraying its prophets as flesh-and-blood characters. But pirated DVD versions are circulating widely.
Moreover, the Quran insists that, regardless of what the New Testament says, Jesus did not die on the cross and thus did not save humanity.
The film will not be seen in Israel, either. Shapira Films, which has the Israeli distribution rights, "decided this was not the appropriate time to screen it," spokeswoman Orly Ben Eliyahu said.
But that does not mean it is being ignored in the Jewish state.
"Given the damage he's done to Christian-Jewish relations, I wouldn't want to be Mel Gibson on Judgment Day," wrote Yossi Klein Halevi in the Jerusalem Post.
In France, the film's opening Wednesday coincided with a European Union report which showed that among member nations experiencing anti-Semitic acts and threats, France had the sharpest increase - a six-fold jump from 2002 to 2003.
France's Liberation newspaper warned that the film could "exacerbate anti-Semitism." French Roman Catholic bishops worried it "could be used to comfort anti-Semitic opinions." Three Jewish brothers tried but failed to get a Paris court to block the movie as inflammatory.
The film, showing in more than 500 theaters across France, cannot be shown to children under 12. In Britain, the age limit is 18.
In Germany, Charlotte Knobloch, vice president of the Central Council of Jews, warned that the movie's "suggestive power … will give a further push to the current resurgence of anti-Semitism."
The movie has equally firm defenders.
Miikka Ruokanen, a professor of theology at the University of Helsinki, called it "the best biblical film" and rejected accusations of anti-Semitism.
"It was about the human condition, about human suffering," he said. "Jesus happened to be a Jew and the same fate would have befallen the son of God in other societies."
Italian theaters will not screen the film until April 7. But Pope John Paul II saw it at a private screening in December, and later blessed Jesus' portrayer, actor Jim Caviezel, a devout Roman Catholic. Vatican officials openly praised it.
Not so the Roman Catholic archbishop of Paris, Cardinal Jean-Marie Lustiger, who described the film as "ridiculous" for its graphic attention to the beatings and abuses suffered by Jesus.
Others, too, recoiled at the violence.
"It is downright gruesome," Oslo Bishop Gunnar Staalsett said on Norwegian state television. "It made me out and out nauseous."
Finland's leading tabloid, Ilta-Sanomat, called it "one of the most cruel and violent films ever made."
But that is just what some advocates say is needed to draw attention to Christianity's core beliefs.
Bishop Marc, a spokesman for the Moscow Patriarchate, called the film "heavy-duty medicine."
"Many of our compatriots have plunged into materialism and are afraid of asking themselves the meaning of life and death - and these are the very questions that the movie sets forth," he said following an advance screening.
The movie opens in Russia on Tuesday.
In the Philippines, where some faithful are nailed to crosses in Easter reenactments, Bishop Ramon Arguelles wondered whether Gibson "may beat Mother Teresa" as an evangelizer.
Manila Archbishop Gaudencio Rosales, in a pastoral message, called the film "a serious labor of love, painstakingly made, of genuine artistic and religious value."
He cautioned viewers against reading an anti-Jewish message into the film: "Anti-Semitism may not be justified ever, the church teaches us, and the terrible crimes anti-Semitism has led to, culminating in the Holocaust of the last century, are surely crimes in the eyes of humanity and God."
Some European churches, like American ones, have encouraged the public to see the film, hoping it will reverse declining religious faith. A poll in December 2002 by the Pew Research Center found 59 percent of Americans consider religion "very important" in their lives. The closest Western nation was Britain at 33 percent.
In southern England, five churches - three Anglican, one Baptist, one nondenominational - joined forces to block-book 3,000 tickets and offer them free on the Internet.
"The film will open people's eyes to the Christian faith, so they can look seriously at Jesus as an option for their life," Anglican Rev. Eric Delve was quoted as telling the Church Times, an Anglican weekly.
"The average church program does not grab a lot of people. Hollywood has rather sanitized the life of Jesus in the past."
But the Rev. Geoff Crago, communications officer for the Anglican diocese of Gloucester, told the paper he doubted the film would revive religious faith.
"It's not saying the sort of things I believe are right for presenting the gospel in the 21st century," he said.
---
Brian Murphy is an Associated Press correspondent based in Athens, Greece.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos PAR112, DAM101, HK101, NY480 of April 1
 Load-Date: April 4, 2004

 

End of Document
