

Now starring at the Olympics: the little guy
The Associated Press
August 16, 2004, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 720 words
Byline: By NIKO PRICE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ATHENS, Greece
Body




Let's hear it for the little guy.
The Summer Games are only three days old, and already they are delivering up an Olympic tradition that goes back as far as the four-horse chariot race: showdowns in which David leaves Goliath squirming on the mat.
Just look at the Puerto Rican basketball team, a no-name crew with a 40-year-old center that left a collection of millionaire celebrities with egg on their face.
How about the Iraqi soccer squad, who were airlifted out of what's left of their country to make the quarterfinals of the world's most popular sport?
And consider the South African swim team, which watched the world media wonder whether the Americans would reclaim their gold from the Australians - and then swam to a new world record.
Are we having fun yet?
"I think people see in them something that they'd like to be," said Bud Greenspan, the filmmaker who has documented countless Olympic underdogs.
The upset was historic in basketball, where the Dream Team had an Olympic record of 24-0 since it added pros in 1992, and a record of 109-2 overall.
If there is a Goliath of the games, these guys are it: Tim Duncan, Allen Iverson and other A-list celebrities who passed up the Spartan accommodations of the Olympic village - where the Puerto Ricans are sleeping two-to-a-room - to bunk aboard the Queen Mary 2.
Puerto Rico made them look like amateurs Sunday night with a 92-73 wallop that was the most lopsided basketball loss in U.S. Olympic history.
Puerto Rican point guard Carlos Arroyo pulled at the words "Puerto Rico" on his jersey, a gesture coach Julio Toro said was "him telling his island of 4 million people he was very proud to beat the big colossus from the north."
The loss left the American team - which has dominated the sport for three-quarters of a century - tied for last place with Angola and four others.
"Never say never," Iverson said. "Anything can happen."
Tell that to the Iraqis. Their soccer team stirred sympathy and smiles when the Australian air force plucked them from the middle of a war so they could compete in the Olympics. The shocker was that they qualified; nobody actually expected them to win.
That is, until they went 4-2 against Portugal, one of the favorites, and then shut out Costa Rica 2-0 on Sunday, guaranteeing them a spot in the quarterfinals. NBC announcer Bob Costas called the performance "a wonderful mystery."
Fans were so excited during Sunday's match that they stormed the field in celebration, briefly halting the game. Iraqi Olympic Committee president Ahmed Al Samarri said he didn't approve of the disruptions, but he understood them.
"They were very excited," he said. "Especially for the Iraqi people, they miss such happiness."
There was happiness and excitement, too, in South Africa after a stunning upset by four swimmers so unknown that NBC called the team two days earlier to ask how they pronounced their names.
One of the highlights of the Sydney Olympics was the swimming rivalry between the Americans and the Australians. All eyes were on a repeat Sunday night, with a head-to-head between teams that included Ian Thorpe and Michael Phelps, considered the best male swimmers in the world.
But the South Africans left both in their wake, getting the gold and setting a world record in the process in the 400-meter freestyle relay. The Americans got the bronze; the Australians finished sixth.
"You have no idea how small we are and the obstacles we have to go through," South African anchor Ryk Neethling said Monday.
Of course, upsets are as much a part of the Olympics as ill-advised mascots.
In the first modern Olympics in 1896, an unknown Greek water-carrier named Spyridon Louis outlasted a field of favorites to win the marathon.
In the last Summer Games, American wrestler Rulon Gardner, in only his second major international competition, defeated Russian legend Alexander Karelin, who had a record of 59-0 in the Olympics and world championships.
And who could forget the 1980 "Miracle on Ice" victory by the U.S. hockey team over the Soviet Union? Not many - year after year, the upsets are the most memorable and satisfying moments of the games.
Perhaps U.S. basketball forward Lamar Odom put it best.
"You shouldn't feel bad for us," he said. "You should feel good for Puerto Rico."
---
Niko Price is correspondent-at-large for The Associated Press.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo OLY105
 Load-Date: August 17, 2004

 

End of Document
