

On the ground in Afghanistan, the search for terror suspects is producing little but bad publicity
February 15, 2002, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 745 words
Byline: By ROBERT BURNS, AP Military Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The military's search for Osama bin Laden and his top lieutenants has produced little of late but frustration, though Army special forces are still on the hunt and Navy and Air Force warplanes are prowling the skies daily.
More than 400 suspected al-Qaida and Taliban members are in U.S. detention in Afghanistan or Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, yet bin Laden and other key terror operatives remain at large, their trail gone cold.
Other, less dramatic aspects of the U.S. military's work in Afghanistan, including support for humanitarian relief efforts, interrogating prisoners, collecting intelligence and assisting local civilian authorities, are producing results. Capturing or killing al-Qaida leaders is the part that has hit a lull.
The most notable ground action in recent weeks was a nighttime assault that proved to be a mistake - the Jan. 23 raid on two suspected al-Qaida compounds that killed at least 15 Afghans and resulted in the capture of 27 others. All 27 were let go when it was determined they were not al-Qaida or Taliban figures. The Pentagon has yet to say what it knows about the ones killed.
The only known American attack since then was a Feb. 4 missile strike by a CIA-operated drone aircraft on three suspected al-Qaida leaders. Villagers near the site claim the victims were innocent men scouring a former al-Qaida redoubt for scrap metal. The Pentagon and CIA say they remain certain they hit a valid target, although they have yet to determine the identities of their victims.
Whatever the case, U.S. forces have not captured any al-Qaida or Taliban figures in weeks, although Pakistani and Afghan authorities have handed over some suspects their own forces captured. The man who served as the Taliban's foreign minister, Mullah Abdul Wakil Muttawakil, turned himself in on Feb. 8. The whereabouts of the top Taliban leader, Mullah Mohammed Omar, are unknown.
"It's slow and fitful in its progress," Rear Adm. Craig Quigley said of the ground search. Quigley, chief spokesman for the U.S. Central Command that is running the war in Afghanistan, said U.S. soldiers are still conducting patrols based on intelligence clues to the whereabouts of al-Qaida figures.
"The effort has not slowed down a bit," he said.
U.S. strike aircraft and bombers are still flying daily missions over Afghanistan in case a target emerges, but none has dropped a bomb (other than to intentionally destroy crashed U.S. aircraft) since Jan. 14, the last night of air attacks on Zhawar Kili, the al-Qaida camp in eastern Afghanistan.
The United States has more than 4,000 troops in Afghanistan and thousands more in neighboring countries.
Quigley discounted suggestions that the hunt for bin Laden and other al-Qaida and Taliban leaders may be reaching a point of diminishing returns. He said the campaign will not slacken until the last remnants of al-Qaida resistance are eliminated and top al-Qaida and Taliban leaders are killed or captured.
Rumsfeld has sought to cast the mission in the brightest possible light. On Feb. 12 he told reporters, "We continue to gather in additional people, senior people, in the Taliban and al-Qaida." Other officials said no senior Taliban or al-Qaida figures have been captured by U.S. forces in weeks.
Vincent Cannistraro, a retired CIA officer who specialized in counterterrorism, has a theory why U.S. troops are coming up empty-handed.
"Anybody in al-Qaida who is anybody of prominence is already out of Afghanistan," he said in an interview. Cannistraro believes bin Laden himself fled Afghanistan to Pakistan and possibly beyond.
"We may never find them," says Loren Thompson, a defense analyst at the Lexington Institute, a think tank.
Rumsfeld's own description of what remains to be done in Afghanistan sometimes sounds confusing.
In a recent interview with National Public Radio he said al-Qaida operatives had slipped away. "We didn't catch them all," he said. "We didn't kill them all, as hard as we've tried. And it is not possible to do that." He then said it remained the military's goal to "run them down," and that this was "going to take time."
Some in the Bush administration have begun stressing that although bin Laden remains at large, his organization has been neutralized.
"They don't have their territory to operate on and that's the most important thing, is to disrupt the capability of this network to operate," Condoleezza Rice, President Bush's national security adviser, said in an Associated Press interview on Thursday.
 Load-Date: February 16, 2002

 

End of Document
