

Only five of 24 countries in the Americas provide adequate protection and treatment to the disabled, new report says
The Associated Press
August 25, 2004, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 572 words
Byline: By EDITH M. LEDERER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Only five of 24 countries in the Americas provide adequate protection and treatment to their disabled citizens, according to a new report by a coalition of disability groups.
The United States, Brazil, Canada, Costa Rica and Jamaica were ranked as the "most inclusive" countries in dealing with the disabled in the report released Tuesday while Belize, Bolivia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Nicaragua, Paraguay and Surinam were judged the "least inclusive."
The 441-page International Disability Rights Monitor Regional Report of the Americas was released during a two-week meeting of a U.N. committee drawing up a treaty to protect the rights of an estimated 600 million people worldwide suffering from disabilities. The next report, to be released in December, will focus on the Asia-Pacific region.
Ecuador's U.N. Ambassador Luis Gallegos, the chairman of the drafting committee, said the report recognized "the advances that have been made, but also that we have a long road to work on the disability issue" to end discrimination.
Ecuador was among 10 countries classified as "moderately inclusive" in the report, along with Argentina, Chile, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Mexico, Panama, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela.
At present, the treatment of people with disabilities varies widely from country to country. Some nations have model legislation that mandates the fair and equal rights of people with disabilities to access, education and employment; other countries subject people with disabilities to horrific and degrading treatment, warehousing them in institutions designed to remove them from society.
The report card on the 24 countries in the Americas is based on 11 questions covering six issues: support for the U.N. treaty, legal protections for the disabled, education and employment opportunities, accessibility, health services and housing, and communication.
Brazil ranked first with the highest marks on all six issues. The United States had the highest marks on five issues, but was second because President George W. Bush's administration has voiced opposition to a global treaty to protect and promote the human rights of disabled persons, saying national action is more effective.
The report also found that the national constitutions of 50 percent of countries in the Americas specifically protect the rights of people with disabilities, that less than one third of all children with disabilities are likely to attend school and that close to 70 percent of people with disabilities do not have jobs.
Gallegos said poverty is a major issue because 450 million disabled "live in the underdeveloped world," but he said culture is also very important.
The global reporting project is an ongoing effort of the International Disability Network, Disabled Peoples' International, and many disability groups including The Center for International Rehabilitation, which operates in collaboration with the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago and Northwestern University and helps the disabled in some of the world's poorest countries.
William Kennedy Smith, the center's founder and chairman, said in a statement: "The tremendous disparity in disability law from one country to the next is astounding.
"The only way to ensure that every government in the world provides equal treatment and respect to its citizens with disabilities is to hold them accountable to a set of standards established through a convention."
 Load-Date: August 26, 2004

 

End of Document
