

Pandemonium in the press room: Reporters break all the rules at briefing to announce Iraq election results
The Associated Press
February 13, 2005, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 364 words
Byline: By JASON KEYSER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAGHDAD, Iraq
Body




The rules for journalists packed into a news conference to announce Iraq's historic elections results were laid out well in advance: Switch off cell phones. No loud talking. Do not leave the room once the briefing starts.
Instead, it was pandemonium.
A man shouted results into his cell phone, drawing annoyed shushes from some of the hundreds of reporters attending the tense standing-room-only briefing at the convention center inside Baghdad's heavily fortified Green Zone.
Others spotted result sheets circulating before the end of the briefing and darted across the room, not even bothering to duck when they leapt in front of the television cameras carrying the event live to the world. An official guarding a stack of results tried to block their path and wagged a disapproving finger. To no avail. Others sneaked behind and swiped copies.
In the middle of it all, a stunned elections commission spokesman Farid Ayar went silent at the podium. The pause and his wrinkled expression forced him to explain for the cameras that there was a disturbance in the room.
As the results from local races were rapidly read out in a hypnotic stew of numbers and unfamiliar party names, reporters struggled to scribble it all down in notebooks. Many just gave up.
Most of the numbers were mangled in a simultaneous Arabic-to-English translation. And no one could get a straight answer from the election officials on how seat allotments in the newly elected National Assembly would be calculated.
A reporter asking the question for a third time said he had a Ph.D. in physics and still couldn't figure it out.
"We're all going to get it wrong," he said, pleading for an explanation.
Apparently, the pair of election officials couldn't make sense of it either. They referred the befuddled reporter to the "Regulation 17" handout, which ran through a series of calculations that were boiled down to the equation: X=(A/B)+C.
But at least one thing seemed clear: a mostly Shiite political faction had won the bulk of the votes, and Iraqi journalists in the crowd let out a small cheer as the number was announced.
"May the mighty God bless the prophet Muhammad and his family," several reporters said in unison.
 Load-Date: February 14, 2005

 

End of Document
