

Powell says the past is the past, United States and Russia wrangle over sanctions
The Associated Press
May 7, 2003, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 898 words
Byline: By EDITH M. LEDERER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Washington unilaterally lifted some of its economic sanctions against Iraq on Wednesday and pressed its demand for the United Nations to likewise lift penalties against Baghdad.
A senior Russian official said, however, Moscow only wants a suspension of the embargoes on food and medicine.
As Washington prepared to put a draft resolution on Iraq to the U.N. Security Council, the opposing views set the stage for a possible replay of the battle within the council over the U.S.-led war against Iraq, though with a somewhat different lineup.
Washington said it lifted some of its sanctions in order to help efforts to rebuild the country and provide humanitarian aid.
"The easing of U.S. sanctions will bring much needed aid and humanitarian relief to the Iraqi people as they begin the process of rebuilding their lives after more than two decades of brutal dictatorship," Treasury Secretary John Snow said.
The lifting of the restrictions will allow humanitarian aid to flow to Iraq from the United States and allow people in the United States to send up to $500 a month to friends and family there. But special permission will be required to export to Iraq certain goods controlled for national security purposes.
The sanctions issue and the U.N. role in postwar Iraq were on the agenda later Wednesday when Secretary of State Colin Powell and U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan met in New York.
Powell emerged from the meeting to say the United States was working on a resolution that would define a vital role for the United Nations and salve the deep differences that arose within the Security Council over the U.S.-led war in Iraq.
"Whatever happened in the past is in the past. We are not now talking about a matter of war. We're talking a matter of peace. We're talking about a matter of hope. We're talking about helping the Iraqi people. And this resolution has that as its singular purpose: to help the Iraqi people obtain a better life for themselves and their children," Powell said.
The Bush administration was expected to present its resolution to lift sanctions to the 15 council members on Friday or Monday, a U.S. official said on condition of anonymity. White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said Wednesday the United States wants action before the current phase of the U.N. oil-for-food humanitarian program expires on June 3.
"The position the president has taken is that the sanctions should be removed," Fleischer said.
The oil-for-food program had been feeding 90 percent of Iraq's 24 million people before it was halted before the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq on March 20. Most of the council wants to ensure that food supplies don't disappear just as people are trying to resume their lives after the war.
The Security Council imposed sanctions after the Kuwait invasion and modified them in 1996 with the oil-for-food program, which allowed Iraq to sell unlimited quantities of oil to pay for humanitarian goods and reparations for the first Gulf War.
Lifting U.N. sanctions would enable the United States to use Iraq's oil riches to pay for its reconstruction - but Russia and France, which both opposed the war and had lucrative contracts with Saddam Hussein's government, are dragging their heels.
Under council resolutions, U.N. inspectors must certify that Iraq's nuclear, chemical and biological weapons programs have been eliminated along with the long-range missiles to deliver them before sanctions can be lifted. But the United States has deployed its own inspection teams to search for weapons of mass destruction - and top U.S. officials have said they don't want U.N. inspectors to return any time soon.
Russia's Deputy Foreign Minister Yuri Fedotov said Wednesday that Moscow wants sanctions lifted as soon as possible, but in accordance with council resolutions, meaning the world body must be certain Iraq has no weapons of mass destruction.
"So far, this issue is unclear," the Interfax news agency quoted Fedotov as saying. He was repeating President Vladimir Putin's position set out more sharply last week that Saddam may still be alive and possess deadly weapons.
"It is obvious that developing a procedure for lifting these sanctions is going to take some time," Fedotov said. Russia favors a "temporary solution" involving a resolution that would suspend sanctions on goods including food and medicine.
Russia has already circulated its own draft resolution calling for Annan to run the entire oil-for-food program, including taking charge of Iraq's petroleum sales and future development of its oil fields until an internationally recognized Iraqi government comes into power.
France also has made a proposal that doesn't meet U.S. wishes.
It wants to suspend the sanctions, phase out the oil-for-food program, have U.S. and U.N. inspectors work together, and lift sanctions when a legitimate Iraqi government is in place.
The U.S. State Department sent an envoy to Moscow and Berlin on Wednesday - Kim Holmes, the assistant secretary for international affairs - in an attempt to rally support at the United Nations.
While council members talk about finding consensus on postwar issues, and Annan has been pushing for council unity, another showdown can't be ruled out.
The split over the war - the United States, Britain and Spain vs. France, Russia, China and Germany - has not been healed though there were indications that Germany might not be an obstacle this time.

 

End of Document
