

Powell warns Taliban it could face the wrath of the United States if it harbors Osama bin Laden
September 16, 2001, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 504 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Secretary of State Colin Powell reached out Sunday to Taliban leaders "to help us destroy" Osama bin Laden's terrorist organization, warning they face the wrath of the United States if they do not expel him from Afghanistan.
A Pakistani government delegation is expected to go to Kabul, the capital of Afghanistan, on Monday to press the U.S. expulsion demand. Powell said the United States would make its own overture to Taliban officials in the next few days.
"They must expel this organization," he said of the terror network bin Laden directs from his sanctuary in Taliban-ruled Afghanistan. "They must help us destroy this organization."
Taliban, a Muslim fundamentalist movement, "will be held accountable for the help they have given the organization," Powell said on CNN "Late Edition."
The choice for Taliban, he said, is "either help us rip them up" or suffer "the full wrath of the United States and other countries."
Reaching out for diplomatic, economic and potentially military support, President Bush spoke with Indian Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee on Sunday, a day after speaking with Pakistani President Gen. Pervez Musharraf.
Musharraf has agreed to the delicate role of interceding with neighboring Taliban despite some potent fundamentalist sentiment in his country.
Over the weekend, Powell telephoned the foreign ministers of Greece, Turkey, Mexico, and the Netherlands.
Abroad, American diplomats met over the weekend with officials in host countries and the assistant secretaries of state called foreign ambassadors to the State Department on Friday.
Only Iraq has been excluded from the diplomatic roundup. Powell said Sunday that the United States has no evidence that its leader, Saddam Hussein, had any involvement in last week's terrorist attacks in New York and Washington.
So broad is the coalition the administration is trying to put together that help is being sought from Syria, which is listed as a sponsor of terrorism by the State Department, and even Iran may be solicited.
But, Powell said of the Iranians: "If they are interested in fighting terrorism, it has to be terrorism not just related to this incident but terrorism of the kind that they have sponsored in the past."
Iran provides weapons to Hezbollah fighters in Lebanon for their attacks on Israel.
Last April, in its report on terrorism, the State Department said there were indications Pakistan was providing Taliban with material, fuel, funds, technical assistance and military advisers.
Responding to reports Pakistan is conditioning its cooperation on excluding India and Israel from any coalition, Powell said, "We understand the sensitivities that would be involved in anything that might involve India or Israel."
"We do not have a multinational force going anywhere yet," he said.
On CBS' "Face the Nation," Powell characterized Saddam as "an irrelevant leader sitting there with a broken regime."
"We will keep his regime under sanctions and we will do what is necessary when it becomes necessary and when we choose to," he said.
 Load-Date: September 17, 2001

 

End of Document
