

Public glimpses the Tennessee machines that fueled the atomic bomb used over Japan
The Associated Press
June 14, 2005, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 444 words
Byline: By DUNCAN MANSFIELD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: OAK RIDGE, Tenn.
Body




The government is offering a rare glimpse of the massive machines used to enrich uranium for the "Little Boy" bomb - the first atomic weapon used in war, dropped 60 years ago in August on Hiroshima, Japan.
Inside the high-security Y-12 nuclear weapons plant remain the last of 1,152 calutrons that once filled nine buildings. The machinery was part of the top-secret bomb-building Manhattan Project, which turned this rural countryside about 30 miles west of Knoxville into a "secret city" of 75,000 people between 1942 and 1945.
"Don't you know the people in Knoxville wondered what in the world was going on out here," Department of Energy guide Ray Smith said Monday. "All this material was coming in, truckload after truckload, and nothing ever left."
About 50 kilograms of highly enriched uranium were produced in Oak Ridge over a year's time for the Little Boy bomb - all carried in briefcases by plainclothes couriers to Los Alamos, N.M., where the bomb was partially assembled before being moved to Tinian in the Northern Marianas Islands and loaded onto the B-29 Enola Gay for the bomb run over Hiroshima on Aug. 6, 1945.
Many of those questions remain in this still highly classified environment, where today nuclear warhead parts are dismantled and refurbished and bomb-grade uranium is stockpiled.
For the first time, the public will be allowed to see the old calutron machines - devices used for separating out fissionable uranium for reactor fuel or bombs - in tours this weekend as part of Oak Ridge's annual Secret City Festival.
The tours quickly filled in advance with more than 600 people signing up.
Even many who worked here didn't know exactly what they were working on until the bomb was dropped on Hiroshima, killing more than 100,000. Japan surrendered less than a month later.
"I wouldn't have known what an atomic bomb was. I had never heard of it," said Gladys Owens, 80, of Harlan, Ky., who was among scores of young women hired to control electric current in the calutrons on orders from the engineers.
The calutrons separated fissile Uranium 235 for the bomb using huge magnets and vast quantities of electricity from the government-owned Tennessee Valley Authority.
Owens, who was 19 and just out of high school when she worked here from January until August 1945, said she didn't piece together her place in history until she attended the festival last year, saw her picture in the historical displays and was given a private tour.
Her reaction?
"Mostly, I thank God the state of Tennessee is still on the map," she said, with a laugh. "Because I was right here at the controls. At 19 years old."
---
Y-12 plant: http://www.y12.doe.gov/bwxt/y12.html 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos TNWP601-603
 Load-Date: June 15, 2005

 

End of Document
