

Ranger killed in Pakistan crash 'wanted to be the best soldier in the U.S. Army'
October 21, 2001, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 630 words
Byline: By TOM LACEKY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HELENA, Mont.
Body




One of the Rangers killed in the crash of a Black Hawk helicopter was tired of training, and ready to fight. The other quit ROTC last year because it wasn't tough enough for him, and enlisted in the Army instead.
"He wanted to be the best soldier in the U.S. Army, and the best soldiers in the Army are in the Ranger battalion," said Lt. Col. Jim Clegg, head of the ROTC program at the University of Montana, where Pfc. Kristofor Stonesifer went to school.
The Pentagon announced Sunday that Stonesifer, 28, of Missoula, Mont., and Spc. Jonn J. Edmunds, 20, of Cheyenne, Wyo., were killed in Pakistan when the helicopter crashed Friday. They served with the 75th Ranger Regiment based at Fort Benning, Ga., the Army said.
John Steichen, whose son Jamie had played paintball and lifted weights with Edmunds, said he had spoken on the phone with his son's friend a few weeks ago.
"He was stationed in Georgia and was looking forward to doing something," Steichen said. "He said all they do all day is study and shoot guns and get ready."
Steichen said Edmunds, whose father was in the Army, was always in a good mood. He wanted to be a Ranger and "wanted to be where the action was," Steichen said.
"He was ready. He didn't regret being in, I know that."
If he had to die, he would have wanted to die fighting, Steichen said.
Clegg said Stonesifer dropped out of ROTC after his junior year and enlisted in the Army because the ROTC unit wasn't intense enough for him. Stonesifer joined the program at the Missoula campus in August 1999 and continued until his enlistment in May 2000, Clegg said.
"He was a very mature and focused young man, one of my top two cadets in a very challenging year, that's the junior year in an ROTC program," Clegg said. "He was a little older, and he had been around a little bit. He made better decisions than some of the younger cadets made."
Stonesifer was "a solid student" academically and "was learning the skills required to be a second lieutenant, leadership skills," Clegg said.
Stonesifer grew up in Doylestown, Pa., and attended Central Bucks West High School. He moved to Missoula, Mont., several years ago with his girlfriend and best friend, according to his father's fiance, Dr. Roberta Diamond.
"He was an adventurer," she told The Intelligencer of Doylestown. "He was an expert… Kris could tell you which ants to eat and which roots and herbs to eat too."
Stonesifer's father, Ric, of Doylestown, and his mother, Ruth, of Kintnersville, Pa., declined comment to The Associated Press on Sunday night.
Diamond said Stonesifer studied briefly at the University of Delaware and attended a survival school in Asbury, N.J.
Tim Woodard, Edmunds' drivers education teacher at Cheyenne East High School, said he was "a very nice young man" who liked playing intramural sports.
"He was very competitive. He played hard," said Woodard, whose children went to school with Edmunds. "His goal was to go into the military. He really wanted to do that."
Cheyenne East High social studies teacher Wayne Korhonen remembers Edmunds in a psychology class as an excellent but quiet student, who was popular. "He had this incredibly dry sense of humor," he said. "He would straight-face these one-liners sometimes that would really make you laugh."
Edmunds joined the Future Business Leaders of America his senior year, and graduated in 1999.
Officials would not disclose the role of the Black Hawk, but some believed it was preparing to cross into Afghanistan in the event any Rangers had to be rescued.
Capt. Elizabeth Ortiz, an Air Force spokeswoman in Europe, said the bodies were flown to Germany's Ramstein Air Base. "Appropriate military honors were rendered when they arrived," she said Sunday.
She declined to say when the remains would be returned to the United States.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo WYCHE101 and MTMIS801
 Load-Date: October 22, 2001

 

End of Document
