

Restaurants: Proposed shrimp tariffs won't hurt the consumer for the time being
The Associated Press
July 30, 2004, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News; Business News
Length: 510 words
Byline: By CAIN BURDEAU, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW ORLEANS
Body




If you love shrimp, don't fret just yet: Restaurant prices most likely won't be going up overnight after the Bush administration proposed tariffs on shrimp imports.
Several restaurant chains said they do not expect prices on shrimp entrees and cocktails to go up for at least a few more months thanks to agreements with suppliers to keep the flow coming at current prices.
"We're anticipating in the absolute maximum come November a 10 percent increase," said Roger Berkowitz, president and CEO of Legal Sea Foods, a restaurant chain that spans the Atlantic coast.
And price increases would only come if they were unavoidable, he said. "I'm going try to hold the line on it."
On Thursday, the Bush administration proposed imposing tariffs on canned and frozen warmwater shrimp ranging up to 68 percent on shrimp imports from Brazil, Ecuador, India and Thailand. Earlier this month, the U.S. Department of Commerce proposed tariffs on imports from China and Vietnam. The antidumping case against the six countries is valued at about $2.3 billion.
The rulings, which found that shrimp was dumped at artificially low prices, are significant because the six countries make up about 75 percent of shrimp imports. And imported shrimp grown in lagoons in the developing world are what most Americans eat: Nearly 87 percent of shrimp on the market comes from overseas.
Opponents of the tariffs - importers, seafood distributors and restaurant and grocery chains - have argued that prices could go up dramatically if tariffs were approved at the levels sought by Southern shrimpers and processors who filed the antidumping petition. But the Commerce Department proposed tariffs at much reduced levels, and that could soften the blow.
Shrimp became the No. 1 seafood in 2002 when it dethroned tuna - long the country's favorite seafood.
Some restaurant chains have dodged the tariffs. Popeye's Chicken and Biscuits Restaurants, which does robust sales of popcorn shrimp, gets all its shrimp from Central and South American countries not targeted by the antidumping petition, said Dan Cheatham, the company's director of protein procurement.
But there are indications that the proposed tariffs are already having an effect.
According to Urner Barry Publications Inc., which tracks shrimp prices, the average price of wholesale white shrimp inched up about 30 cents since the July 6 ruling on China and Vietnam.
Although preliminary, the rulings are likely to stand but some of the duties could change, either up or down.
The Commerce Department is expected to issue a final ruling by the end of the year.
Last February, the U.S. International Trade Commission issued a preliminary ruling saying the tariffs had hurt U.S. shrimpers and processors. The objective of the duties is to bolster the price of domestic shrimp and level the playing field.
"I hope that the shrimpers who brought this case will feel vindicated," said James Jochum, assistant commerce secretary for import administration. But he said it was unclear if the duties would have an "immediate benefit to the shrimpers."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos LAWH601-602
 Load-Date: July 31, 2004

 

End of Document
