

Some Jews and Christians believe the removal of Gaza settlers violated the Bible
The Associated Press
September 5, 2005, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Lifestyle
Length: 682 words
Byline: By RICHARD N. OSTLING, AP Religion Writer
Body




Some Jews and Christians say the removal of Israeli settlers from Gaza was not only bad security policy but a violation of the teaching of the Bible, even while many other Jews and Christians reject such applications of the Scriptures to the current Mideast.
Religious Zionists are biblical literalists who put Gaza and the occupied West Bank permanently within Israel due to passages such as Genesis 15:18-21: "The Lord made a covenant with Abram, saying, To your offspring I assign this land, from the river of Egypt to the great river, the river Euphrates." ("River of Egypt" referred to a wadi southwest of Gaza, not the Nile.)
The Promised Land, as further defined in Numbers 34:1-12, Deuteronomy 1:6-8 and Joshua 1:1-4, extended to sectors of present-day Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria.
One Holy Land maximalist is Rabbi Binyamin (Benny) Elon, a member of Israel's Parliament and Moledet (Homeland) Party chairman, who was ousted from the Cabinet last year for opposing Prime Minister Sharon's Gaza plan.
Elon states his case in a book, "God's Covenant With Israel: Establishing Biblical Boundaries in Today's World," issued just as the Gaza pullout was completed. The book comes from the pro-Israel Balfour imprint of the conservative Protestant New Leaf Press in Green Forest, Ark., which specializes in creationism and Bible prophecy. Other militant titles from Israeli authors include "Muhammad's Monsters" and "The Roadmap to Nowhere."
Elon's poorly written, poorly edited book will persuade only those already in agreement.
He says that "Jews have rights to this land and the biblical covenant is true." Gaza was assigned to Judah in Joshua 15:47, so Sharon's pullout, with U.S. complicity, violated God's design.
Elon's purportedly biblical "right road to peace": Israel annexes all land west of the Jordan River, including the West Bank and Gaza, while ceding its biblical right to lands east of the Jordan. The Palestinian Authority and Palestinian refugee camps are eliminated. Jordan becomes the only representative of the Palestinians. Arabs who remain within the newly expanded Israel become Palestinian (Jordanian) citizens.
Such biblical interpretation is hardly the agreed-upon view among biblical conservatives. For example, Meredith Kline, retired professor at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary in Massachusetts, writes that God's land covenant with Abraham was succeeded by a new and "universal covenant" with the coming of Jesus Christ, encompassing Jews and Gentiles alike.
A vastly different view, with growing support on the Protestant and Catholic left, is Rosemary and Herman Ruether's "The Wrath of Jonah," a polemic published by the Evangelical Lutheran Church's Fortress Press.
Relying on liberal Bible scholars, the Ruethers say Abraham's covenant was merely a "religious myth" developed for nationalistic purposes when David was king, long after Abraham and Joshua. Working from there, they champion Palestinian grievances and excoriate policies of Israel and the United States.
To them, Israel's "punitive violence" against Palestinians "far exceeds any actual military threat" Palestine has posed to Israelis' security. The Jewish state has been a "moral debacle" from its 1948 founding, when Israelis expelled Palestinians from their land, and constitutes a "racist, colonial state" akin to South Africa during apartheid.
The Ruether peace plan: Israel surrenders Gaza and the West Bank permanently, withdraws to the borders before the 1967 war and unites people of all religious and ethnic groups.
That prospect seems just about as likely as Elon's game plan.
Further on Gaza: The city is one of the world's oldest, mentioned in the Bible's primordial history following Noah's flood (Genesis 10:19). It stood along one of the world's oldest military roads, connecting Egypt with Asia. The Bible mentions the site numerous times.
Gaza was part of the city-state federation of the Philistines, Israel's archenemies, who moved in from Aegean Sea regions around the time of Joshua's invasion. In biblical accounts, Israelites controlled Philistine areas only briefly.
 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY630-NY631
 Load-Date: September 6, 2005

 

End of Document
