

Some questions and answers about the confrontation in the Korean Peninsula
The Associated Press
January 4, 2003, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 715 words
Byline: By SANG-HUN CHOE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SEOUL, South Korea
Body




Tensions over North Korea's nuclear programs intensified when the communist government expelled U.N. inspectors amid rising concerns the North was resuming nuclear weapons work.
U.S. intelligence experts say North Korea could produce several nuclear bombs in a matter of months, and Washington seeks to muster international pressure on North Korea to abandon any atomic ambitions.
Here are some questions and answers about the roles of North Korea and the United States in the Korean Peninsula:
Q. Why are U.S. troops in South Korea?
A. The United States keeps 37,000 military personnel in South Korea under a mutual defense treaty. The U.S. presence dates to the 1950-1953 Korean War, during which the United States led U.N. forces to defend South Korea from North Korean invaders aided by China and the former Soviet Union.
The war ended in an armistice, not a peace treaty. U.S. troops have remained in South Korea to serve as a deterrent against North Korea across the world's most heavily armed border.
The U.S. military presence in South Korea, as well as Japan, also plays a vital role in maintaining stability and U.S. economic interests in a region with a history of conflict and some of the world's most vibrant economies.
Q. Why is North Korea urging South Korea to stand with it against the United States?
A. It is North Korea's long-standing strategy to drive a wedge between South Korea and its chief ally, the United States. North Korea often calls South Korea a colony of the United States and urges South Koreans to rise against "U.S. imperialists." South Korea dismisses that as communist propaganda.
North Korea claims Washington keeps U.S. troops in South Korea to prepare for a northward invasion and to hinder efforts for Korean reunification. Both Washington and Seoul say U.S. troops are meant to deter a North Korean attack.
North Korea also may be trying to capitalize on widespread anti-American sentiment among many young South Koreans, who believe the U.S. military presence raises tensions and blocks reconciliation with the North. But a majority of South Koreans still support the U.S. military presence.
Q. Why is North Korea developing nuclear weapons?
A. North Korea has never publicly said it is, although it has said it has the right to develop atomic weapons. According to U.S. diplomats who visited Pyongyang in October, North Korean officials told them the North has a nuclear weapons program using enriched uranium.
Experts believe North Korea is developing nuclear weapons as a deterrent against what they consider U.S. military threats. It also could use atomic weapons as a bargaining tool to win badly needed economic aid and diplomatic recognition from Washington.
U.S. officials believe North Korea built at least one nuclear bomb before it froze its plutonium-based nuclear program under a 1994 aid deal with the United States. It is that program that North Korea said in early December it would reactivate.
Q. What are the prospects for defusing the tensions?
A. North Korea claims the United States is plotting a pre-emptive nuclear attack on it. It says it will resolve international concern over its nuclear programs only if Washington promises a nonaggression treaty with the North.
Washington says it cannot reward North Korea for flouting international agreements, including the 1994 accord under which it promised not to develop nuclear bombs. It says it cannot trust North Korea and will open dialogue with the Stalinist regime only after it abandons nuclear weapons programs.
Both Russia and China, two regional players, call for a nuclear-free Korean Peninsula and urge the United States and North Korea to resolve the dispute through dialogue. South Korea, which wants a bigger say in issues on the peninsula, is trying to mediate a peaceful settlement.
Q. How serious is North Korea's security threat?
A. Besides nuclear weapons, North Korea also has a large arsenal of biological and chemical weapons, U.S. and South Korean officials say.
North Korea also is the world's most active exporter of missiles parts and technology to the Middle East, U.S. officials say. North Korea also alarmed the world by firing a test missile over Japan and into the Pacific in 1998. It is further believed to be developing missiles that could reach parts of North America.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo BEJ106

 

End of Document
