

South Koreans increasingly learning Chinese as language of the future in the work world
The Associated Press
March 22, 2005, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 570 words
Byline: By IN-YOUNG BANG, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SEOUL, South Korea
Body




Yeo Ji-eun once felt the English and Japanese classes she struggled through were enough to land a good job.
Now, the 24-year-old electronics worker is in a crash course to learn the language of a country that South Koreans once considered backward - China.
"I realized I've got to study Chinese these days. No matter which country you work in, no matter which company you work for, you have to think about doing business with China," says Yeo, who goes to twice-a-week Chinese classes offered by her local government.
With China surpassing the United States as South Korea's biggest trading partner, young South Koreans facing a tightening domestic job market are rushing to master Chinese as the language of the future.
There is no definitive estimate of how many South Koreans are studying Chinese, and English remains the most widely taught foreign language, but billboards along the streets of Seoul are increasingly crammed with signs advertising Chinese language courses.
More than 35,000 South Korean students attended Chinese colleges or graduate schools as of late 2003, making them the largest expatriate student community in China, according to the latest data available from the Chinese Embassy in Seoul.
In comparison, about 74,000 South Korean students studied in the United States in 2003. They were the second-largest group of foreign students after 81,000 Japanese, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security says.
As South Korean companies push into the Chinese market, more students are figuring its language will help land a job.
"Not only our company, but all corporations are interested in China," says Park Kyung-min, an employee at Samsung SDI, a subsidiary of Samsung, South Korea's largest conglomerate.
Kim Soo-young, who teaches international studies at Seoul's Kookmin University, says fluency in Chinese can guarantee a job in South Korea, especially at small- and medium-size enterprises that rely more on trade with China.
"It is obvious that people see the future belongs to China," she says.
Kwak Seung-jun, 23, is studying Chinese at Yanbian University in China's Jilin Province. "If you want to study aboard, it's either in the United States or in China these days, because those are the most powerful countries."
The Seoul city education department hopes to increase the number of Chinese teachers from 63 to 92 in its junior and senior high schools, where the language was recently adopted as an elective.
"Not many students choose to learn German or French anymore," says Joo Young-rim, an education official. "We actually had to reduce the number of those teachers."
Behind the desire to learn Chinese also lurks South Koreans' fear of their giant neighbor's fast-growing economic might.
"Because of China, my business will fold in several years," worries Kwak Chan-woo, who runs a textile company in Seoul.
He says the Chinese competition has made him give up on ever again making the profits he once did. "The only surviving method is making high-priced articles that China doesn't make. Otherwise, companies will go bankrupt," he says.
Though learning Chinese could be a fad, many South Koreans think the interest in China and its language will hold up.
"This phenomenon doesn't only apply to Koreans," says Chung You-ree, who has taught Chinese for four years in Seoul. "I think learning Chinese is required for everyone in the world. You've got to target China to survive in the business world."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo APN SUNDAY ILLUSTRATIONS: Subscribers get 2 photos of
 Load-Date: March 28, 2005

 

End of Document
