

Staking out the administration's hard line, Wolfowitz is a mathematician who favors the worst case
September 26, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 828 words
Byline: By RON KAMPEAS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Paul Wolfowitz, the man whispering "broader war" into President Bush's ear, is a mathematician who factors worst-case scenarios into his policy equations.
The deputy defense secretary, in Brussels on Wednesday to consult with the United States' NATO allies on post-Sept. 11 strategies, had raised eyebrows earlier when he said that "ending states who sponsor terrorism" should be one goal and suggested an Iraqi front was likely.
It shouldn't have been a surprise: Wolfowitz has long argued that preparing for war is safer than relying on peace.
The administration has since softened its tone considerably, and those advocating a narrower offense against terror - chief among them, Secretary of State Colin Powell - are winning the argument for now.
On Wednesday, however, Wolfowitz was again emphasizing the link between terror networks and sponsoring states. A NATO official briefing reporters in Brussels said Wolfowitz told defense ministers of an alarming connection between states that harbor terrorists and the states with programs to develop weapons of mass destruction.
Overcoming resistance is not usually a problem for Wolfowitz, described by friends and colleagues as a workaholic salesman who pitches his ideas with a soft-spoken, insistent logic.
"He's earned the confidence of the president by virtue of the depth of the sophistication of the advice he's given the president," said Richard Perle, who was a Wolfowitz colleague in the Reagan administration.
He's not humorless: Criticizing American complacency, Wolfowitz has sometimes quoted Alfred E. Neuman - "What, me worry?" - a reference all the more striking for his resemblance to Mad Magazine's youthful, jug-eared icon.
Wolfowitz is the only deputy who attends top level meetings on the crisis, and Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld thinks enough of him to have him speak for America at NATO.
Even Powell calls him "tough-minded" in his autobiography, recalling their debates under the previous President Bush.
On another page, Powell ribs Wolfowitz as a "right-wing nut."
Indeed, Wolfowitz has described himself as a "conservative ideologue" but insists his preference for assuming the worst will happen is based on hard evidence, not ideology.
As a junior Pentagon official in 1977, he outlined a scenario in which Saddam Hussein would invade Kuwait and threaten Saudi Arabia. That outline, which became a reality 13 years later, sharply alienated other Carter administration officials who saw Saddam as a moderating influence.
Wolfowitz now describes Saddam as a "leopard who won't change" and advocates overthrowing his government - the goal he was apparently referring to when he spoke of "ending states."
In 1998, testifying before Congress as a military analyst, he advised the United States to set up an opposition government in southern Iraq.
Laurie Mylroie, an Iraq analyst and friend of Wolfowitz, says he made up his mind on Iraq when she shared with him circumstantial evidence linking Iraqi intelligence to Ramzi Yousef, the planner of the 1993 World Trade Center bombing.
"Wolfowitz takes the long view of Saddam," she said.
In a 1996 interview with "Studies in Intelligence," a CIA journal, Wolfowitz described "managing uncertainty," his policymaking manifesto.
"In his view … the serious policy-maker cannot ignore a 10-percent likelihood that could have a major impact on U.S. security, much less a 40 percent likelihood," CIA analyst Jack Davis wrote.
Worrying about unlikely threats also has made him one of this administration's most outspoken advocates of missile defense.
Not taking into account the worst that could happen is a "gamble with our children's future," he told Congress in July. "We can't know who may challenge us in the future, or where, or when."
Wedding mathematical probabilities to political analysis is natural for Wolfowitz, whose first degree was in mathematics.
His father, a noted mathematician, was less than approving when his son chose political science for his doctorate.
Wolfowitz sometimes argues political beliefs as if they were scientific certainties; he still derides Clinton's peacekeeping policy in Bosnia as overblown, although its success has defied his dire 1995 prediction of a "catastrophe."
Still, his intellectual prowess is such that Clinton in 1995 appointed his most withering foreign policy critic to a commission on intelligence gathering. His Senate confirmation this year was unanimous and swift.
In person, Wolfowitz is a gentleman who hears everyone out, no matter how low they may be in the hierarchy, said Eliot Cohen, who worked under Wolfowitz during his recent leadership of the School of Advanced International Studies.
Cohen also cited Wolfowitz's integrity, saying he doubled the school's endowment even as he resisted some donor-demanded appointments.
"He knows how to resist pressure to do things that don't make sense," Cohen said.
On the Net:
Defense Department's Wolfowitz biography: http://www.defenselink.mil/bios/depsecdef-bio.html 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos WX103-104
 Load-Date: September 27, 2001

 

End of Document
