

Starting North Korea reactor sends message, but the real test is the processing
The Associated Press
February 28, 2003, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 743 words
Byline: By H. JOSEF HEBERT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




By restarting its nuclear reactor, North Korea is sending a message that it has the capability and is prepared to produce plutonium for a formidable nuclear arsenal.
But nuclear experts said Thursday the real test is if the Koreans start up a processing facility next door where plutonium would be extracted from the used fuel, or from thousands of used fuel rods that have been in storage since the mid-1990s.
Over time, the small, 5-megawatt reactor at North Korea's Yongbyon nuclear complex could produce enough plutonium for three warheads every two years, U.S. nuclear experts said. The processing facility could separate enough plutonium for a warhead a month as long as plutonium were available.
"They're saying, 'Look were starting things up … and we're going to produce more plutonium," said David Albright, president of the Institute for Science and International Security, who has closely followed North Korea's nuclear weapons program over the years.
While the North Korean government has asserted its startup of the reactor was to produce electricity, U.S. officials - as well as private nuclear experts - scoffed at such claims, saying the small reactor at Yongbyon eats up as much power as it produces. A typical commercial U.S. power reactor is 1,000 megawatts.
"The only reason to operate a reactor like this is to produce spent fuel that can then be turned into plutonium for weapons," State Department spokesman Richard Boucher said Thursday.
That's where the processing facility, also at the Yongbyon complex, comes into play.
The process of converting uranium into weapons-grade plutonium starts with slugs of easily obtained natural uranium, encased in a magnesium cladding, and placed into the gas-graphite cooled reactor. The fission process over a number of months converts the uranium into various radioactive isotopes including plutonium.
Unlike large, commercial power reactors, the reactor at Yongbyon can easily be "optimized for plutonium production," said Edwin Lyman, a nuclear engineer and president of the Nuclear Control Institute, an anti-proliferation advocacy group. "It's easy to shut down and it's easy to unload the fuel."
When the fuel slugs are removed from the reactor, they are stored under water, ideally for three or four years, to protect against their high radioactivity before they are taken to the processing facility.
There the cladding is stripped and the fuel is chopped and dissolved in nitric acid. A series of additional chemical processes separate the plutonium from the uranium and other isotopes. The plutonium, which then is more easily handled, is then taken out as a metal and machined for use in a nuclear weapon.
While the startup of a reactor is fairly easily detected - the clue with the North Korean reactor was a telltale steam plume from its cooling tower - it is harder to detect the operation of a processing plant such as the one at Yongbyon, government sources acknowledge.
So far, according to U.S. officials who spoke on condition of anonymity, there is no evidence North Korea has taken the next step and begun processing plutonium.
But it's not that they are lacking the spent reactor fuel.
Since the mid-1990s, there have been nearly 8,000 spent fuel rods from the same reactor kept in storage, also at the Yongbyon facility.
Those fuel rods altogether contain about 60 pounds of plutonium, enough to make at least five nuclear bombs at the rate of a bomb a month if the processing facility were started up, says Albright.
"No one is going to argue that once they separate out this plutonium they'll have five to seven nuclear weapons." For more than that, more plutonium will have to be made. North Korea's weapon designs are believed to require about 11 or 12 pounds of plutonium.
A North Korea with plutonium for a larger nuclear arsenal poses a dramatically greater danger than one with only one or two warheads, as is believed to be the case now, nuclear proliferation experts believe.
With more warheads, Korea could use some of its weapons and still have other warheads in reserve. Also, some U.S. officials fear, a North Korea with extra plutonium could afford to sell a nuclear device to another country or terrorist organization.
This is in some sense the greatest danger," said Lyman of the Nuclear Control Institute. "Korea hasn't shown any hesitation to sell missile technology to other nations. The prospect of supplying a bin Laden with plutonium is the thing I'm most concerned about."

 

End of Document
