

State Department denounces Syria as being "on the wrong side" of the terrorism issue
The Associated Press
December 6, 2005, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 399 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The State Department drew links Tuesday between Syria and the Palestinian group that claims responsibility for five terror attacks on Israel and charged that Syria was on the side of terrorists.
Palestinian Islamic Jihad has offices in Damascus and there are "regular interactions" between Syria and the group, spokesman Adam Ereli said. "That should be of sufficient concern to anybody who wants to see peace and fight terror."
In the past, the State Department has called on Syria to close the Damascus offices of terrorist groups. The latest statement, issued as Israeli officials said the Israeli army would target Islamic Jihad operatives on the West Bank, ramped up the U.S. rhetoric.
"The issue is Syrian leadership making the decision on the right side or the wrong side of an issue," Ereli said. "Right now, they are on the wrong side. They are on the side of terrorists who kill innocent people and undermine the hopes and aspirations of the Palestinian people."
Islamic Jihad has claimed responsibility for five attacks on Israel since Israel and the Palestinian Authority agreed on a cease-fire in February. The latest was outside a shopping mall in Netanya that killed five people. The group, labeled a terrorist organization by the State Department, said it had acted in response to Israeli violations of the cease-fire.
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, traveling in Europe, and Richard Jones, the U.S. ambassador to Israel, renewed a two-year-long call for Palestinian authorities to uproot terror groups.
Israel, meanwhile, imposed a travel ban that will keep thousands of Palestinian merchants and laborers from reaching jobs in Israel from the West Bank and Gaza and rounded up militants on the West Bank.
The Bush administration, clearly jarred by the recurrent violence, consulted with other governments on how to persuade Palestinian leaders to act against terror groups.
The Israeli closure dampens U.S. hopes for freedom of movement for Palestinians, a goal Rice appeared to have advanced last month by overseeing an agreement between Israel and the Palestinians that opened Gaza's borders.
Transit of Palestinians and Israelis points the way toward expanded trust and confidence, Ereli said.
"All that is threatened by groups like Palestinian Islamic Jihad and that is why we are so emphatic about the need to act decisively against them and the actions they take," Ereli said.
 Load-Date: December 7, 2005

 

End of Document
