

Taiwanese marchers demand the government ditch the name 'Republic of China' for 'Taiwan'
May 11, 2002, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 427 words
Byline: By WILLIAM IDE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TAIPEI, Taiwan
Body




Thousands of Taiwanese protesters marched in the capital on Saturday, demanding that the island's official name be changed from the Republic of China to Taiwan. Pro-China demonstrators scuffled briefly with the demonstrators.
About 8,000 people marched in Taipei, many wearing purple headbands that said in Chinese: "The parade for Taiwan's correct name." Large banners read, "We are Taiwanese" and "We love Taiwan, we hate the Republic of China."
The issue of renaming the island is extremely sensitive because such a change could provoke China, which has repeatedly threatened to attack if Taiwan makes bold moves toward independence.
The two sides split more than five decades ago amid civil war, but Beijing still claims that self-governing, democratic Taiwan is a province of China under the Communist Party's rule.
The pro-independence marchers tussled with a small group of China supporters who pulled up in a van topped with loudspeakers. Protesters threw clumps of grass, rocks and a bowl of instant noodles at eight men standing on a platform atop the van, which sped away after a few minutes.
Wearing a white t-shirt with the English slogan "Taiwan yes and that's good," junior high school math teacher Yang Jeng-horng said it made more sense for the island to be called Taiwan than the Republic of China - the name used by Taiwan and the mainland before the Communist Party took over China and the island began resisting Beijing's rule.
"We're all Taiwanese, not Chinese," Yang said. "Look at the American President Bush. He's an American, not an Englishman."
Most Taiwanese families immigrated to Taiwan from China during the past 400 years. Many believe that Taiwan - which has had loose ties with China throughout Chinese history - has evolved into a separate country and should never unite with China.
However, most polls show the majority of Taiwanese would not support changes in its name or political status that could start a war with China, instead favoring the status quo: de facto independence with the option of joining with China if the Communist Party collapses and the mainland becomes democratic.
Candidates who overtly supported Taiwanese independence have done poorly in recent legislative and presidential elections. President Chen Shui-bian's Democratic Progressive Party was once a strong supporter of independence, but the party and the president have significantly softened their views on the issue.
Former President Lee Teng-hui convened the march, but the 79-year-old did not take part, saying the heat might aggravate his heart problems.
 Load-Date: May 12, 2002

 

End of Document
