

Tel Aviv's partygoers say rare attack in the city won't keep them off the streets
March 5, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 584 words
Byline: By JASON KEYSER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TEL AVIV, Israel
Body




Hours after a Palestinian shot and stabbed partygoers, killing three at a nightspot popular with models, soccer players and singers, the workers at the Seafood Market restaurant quietly grieved Tuesday - and planned for another busy night.
While many in Israel despair at the violence, attacks have been relatively rare in Tel Aviv during 17 months of fighting, and many of the city's young people have been able to remain at least partly insulated from the region's battles.
"Nobody can break us," said Yanait Lev, 39, a promoter for the Seafood Market's Monday "Mediterranean Night," which hosts musicians playing Israeli and Greek music.
Lev sat inside the restaurant with co-workers beside a giant plastic orange statue of a shrimp, occasionally dropping her head into her hands.
Her resolve to go on as normal was mixed with distress as she remembered the image of customers, some whom were celebrating a bachelorette party, bleeding on the floor. "I'm still in shock. I didn't sleep all night," she said.
About eight hours after the attack, workers were sweeping up the last bits of glass. People on their lunch breaks streamed past for a look. White and orange orchids and a few candles lay beside a window.
Yaron Ben-Haim, a 27-year-old film student, came down with his video camera to get some shots for a Tel Aviv diary project. He was bothered by curious onlookers, who he said missed the reality of the destruction and looked at the restaurant "like a peep show."
What's worse, he said, was that even after the latest carnage people in Tel Aviv still barely seem to realize the full extent of the conflict.
"People are indifferent. That's the bottom line," he said, with an eye to his camera's viewfinder. "The biggest issue is not terror in Tel Aviv, it's the unemployment rate."
Tel Aviv is Israel's largest city, and its location on the Mediterranean coast, somewhat distant from the Palestinian areas of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, makes it more difficult for Palestinian militants to strike here.
The shooting was a reminder that Tel Aviv is not immune.
Grasping for a positive word, a Monday show on Israel's Army Radio, which normally carries minute-to-minute bulletins about attacks and military operations, asked listeners to call in with happy stories.
Another radio show on Tuesday mulled possible names for the conflict. Among the suggestions was the "Oslo War," a reference to the shattered peace process that began with a Palestinian-Israeli agreement signed in 1993 after negotiations in Oslo, Norway.
Despite the gloom, Tel Aviv seemed ready to rattle on for now.
Pierced and tattooed young people strolled along Sheinkin, Tel Aviv's trendy boulevard, lined with clothing and shoe boutiques. There, cafe life went on uninterrupted and dance music thumped from shops.
Behind the counter of the Krembo Records shop, Amit Fine, 24, insisted life would not be disrupted.
"Tel Aviv is different from all Israel. It's a different country," he said.
A friend, Ronnen Gutman, interrupted: "It used to be until yesterday. … Everyone is getting paranoid."
Fine disagreed, saying the city's young people are resilient and the attacks have had little noticeable effect, though certain slang is no longer appropriate. A good party used to be referred to as "the bomb," Fine said.
The city has bounced back before, even after a suicide bomber killed 22 people waiting in line at a seaside disco last June. Days later a memorial was placed out front and inscribed with the words, "We will keep on dancing."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos JRL125,126
 Load-Date: March 6, 2002

 

End of Document
