

The numbers behind the Kerry-Dean flap over health insurance
The Associated Press
May 7, 2003, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 616 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER GRAFF, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MONTPELIER, Vt.
Body




Democratic rivals John Kerry and Howard Dean have scrapped over the Iraq war and the long-term pre-eminence of the U.S. military.
Now the two presidential hopefuls are at odds over what Dean's team touts as his principal accomplishment as governor - the expansion of health care coverage to almost all in Vermont.
The two candidates and their campaigns have been lobbing rhetorical volleys for weeks. During Saturday's Democratic debate in South Carolina, Kerry said the number of insured in Vermont decreased during Dean's 11-years in the Statehouse, a broadside on an issue that is the centerpiece of Dean's presidential bid.
The numbers, though, suggest otherwise.
During the debate, Kerry said: "You know, Governor Dean, who prides himself as a doctor in approaching this - and I respect that - I completely do. He did good things for children in the state of Vermont. But when (he) became governor, 90.5 percent of the citizens of Vermont were already covered. … When he left as governor, 90.4 percent of the people of the state of Vermont were covered."
Dean didn't make things clearer when he said that "96.4 percent of all our people are covered today." That figure is the percentage of Vermont children with health insurance and not the total for the state; the latest estimate for adults with health insurance is 91.6 percent.
Kerry's numbers came from the U.S. Census Bureau, but his first figure is from 1990. Dean didn't become governor until 1991. The same Census Bureau report Kerry cited also said 87.3 percent of Vermonters had health insurance that year, which would mean the percentage of insured climbed from 87.3 percent in 1991 to 90.4 percent in 2001.
But even so, health analysts say the Census Bureau figures on health care coverage, especially from the early 1990s, are unreliable because of the survey's small sample size. Robert Mills, a Census Bureau researcher, wrote last year that this particular Census Bureau survey "is not designed primarily to collect health insurance data; it is largely a labor force survey."
Steven Kappel, a health analyst with the nonpartisan Joint Fiscal Committee of the Vermont Legislature, said the Census Bureau's figures are especially suspect in small states. Kappel said more accurate surveys show the percentage of Vermont's insured climbed from 89 percent in 1993 to 93 percent in 1997 before dropping to 91.6 percent in 2000.
Dian Kahn of the state health care administration said Vermont's greatest strides in the past decade have been in providing access to health care to children. "That's where we shine," she said, noting that 96 percent of those under 18 have access to health insurance.
The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation rates Vermont as No. 1 in the country for providing health care to children. Under the state's Dr. Dynasaur program, children through age 17 in families with incomes of 300 percent of poverty levels are entitled to heath care.
Robert Gibbs of the Kerry campaign said Monday that the overall adult numbers of uninsured in Vermont did not change much in the 11 years that Dean served as governor. He stepped down in January.
"I think he leaves people with the strong impression that he dramatically decreased the number of uninsured throughout Vermont - children and adults - and the numbers simply prove that is not true," Gibbs said.
He said it is misleading for Dean to imply that he can translate what he did to expand health care for children in Vermont into a national solution for health care. "The problem of going from 42 million uninsured to zero is not simply a problem with children," Gibbs said. "It is a problem with children and adults."
Dean plans to detail his national health care plan next month.

 

End of Document
