

The unhinged mind comes to grips with the new normal in 'No Towers'
The Associated Press
October 11, 2004, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Lifestyle
Length: 620 words
Byline: By DILSHIKA JAYAMAHA, Associated Press Writer
Body




"In the Shadow of No Towers." By Art Spiegelman. Pantheon. Unpaged. $19.95.
---
Just past the black-on-black silhouettes of the Twin Towers on the cover of "In the Shadow of No Towers," author Art Spiegelman begins: "I tend to be easily unhinged."
This large-format comic book-style exploration of Sept. 11 and its aftermath is Spiegelman's effort to get "rehinged" and the reader's chance for an unparalleled post-Sept. 11 journey.
After receiving the 1992 Pulitzer Prize for "Maus: A Survivor's Tale," a two-volume "comic book" tracing his parents' horrific journey through World War II, Spiegelman dropped out of the "comix" world for a decade. The tragedy of the fall of the Twin Towers brought him back to the cartoon medium, and "No Towers" proves he is still the chief conjurer of life through illustrations.
A longtime resident of lower Manhattan, Spiegelman lays bare his panic after the first plane struck a few blocks from his daughter's school. His real-life terror and relief as a survivor of Sept. 11 is quickly matched by horror at the political expediency he sees turning the tragedy into a travesty of government injustice and war.
Vivid, broadsheet-sized cartoons chronicle the chaotic range of emotions, thoughts and fears Spiegelman experienced between Sept. 11 and the current political campaigns.
He chronicles New Yorkers' resilience in the aftermath of the attack, but notes that despite resuming "the rhythms of daily life," New Yorkers remain "stunned pigeons." Describing himself as an "obsessive and paranoid monkey," he wonders whether he'll live long enough for his cigarettes to kill him or to complete "No Towers," each page of which takes at least a month of work.
Politics runs through "No Towers." Spiegelman illustrates the invasion of Iraq as a distraction from the real terrorist threat and acknowledges that he belongs to the half of the country "doubled over in pain after the coup d'etat in 2000."
Spiegelman describes in the introduction an early realization of the administration's political maneuvering and his futile attempts to do something. In one panel, Spiegelman clutches an upside-down peace sign in a vain effort to protest war. In another, an overwhelmed Spiegelman, "equally terrorized by al-Qaeda and by his own government," distracts himself by scouring century-old comic strips. The style of these colorful broadsheet newspaper inserts inspires the eventual shape of "No Towers" and fills it with new incarnations of old characters.
In one strip, Spiegelman is a modern-day Jiggs from "Bringing Up Father," obsessing about the news, developing conspiracy theories, and seeing his wife as a turbaned and bearded "terrorist" when she comes out of the morning bath.
Other comic inspirations include the "Mars Attacks!" series from Spiegelman's former employer, Topps Inc., and the 1950s Weird Science creations of Wally Wood and EC Comics. Wood's shapeless, bile-oozing aliens populate an Operation Iraqi Freedom-style deck of cards, but the monsters here represent George W. Bush, Donald Rumsfeld, John Ashcroft and Dick Cheney, as the "Architects of Armageddon."
The 10 "No Towers" plates are followed by an essay on early comics and seven examples of newspaper strips from the early 20th century. He notes that many of the old cartoons, dealing with war, patriotism, Arabs, and lower Manhattan buildings threatening to fall, could have been written today.
The rich artwork, nonlinear narrative, and complex levels of satire inspire repeated readings of "No Towers." Unique in the crowded landscape of post-Sept. 11 art and literature, this unhinged exploration of reality without self-imposed limits and social taboos somehow puts a chaotic world into some kind of perspective.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY631, NY632
 Load-Date: October 12, 2004

 

End of Document
