

The battle is 'of the bands' on the USS Theodore Roosevelt as crew enjoys day of R&R
December 16, 2001, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 345 words
Byline: By ANDREW ENGLAND, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ABOARD THE USS THEODORE ROOSEVELT
Body




After weeks of sending U.S. fighter jets off to pound al-Qaida forces in Afghanistan, sailors gathered on this carrier's flight deck Sunday for hamburgers, volleyball and music.
None of USS Theodore Roosevelt's 70 aircraft took off as the ship's 5,500 crewmembers were given a day off to adjust to a new work schedule. For nearly three months the crew worked nightshifts, but now they are switching to days.
The move follows the arrival of the carrier USS John C. Stennis in the northern Arabian Sea. The Stennis, which has taken over the nightshift, is replacing the USS Carl Vinson, which will head back to its home port in Bremerton, Wash., in a couple of days.
On the Roosevelt's flight deck Sunday, the roar of jet engines was replaced by the music of two bands challenging each other in a "battle of the bands" competition, and young men and women playing basketball and volleyball.
"It's wonderful because it's a break from the stress," Aviation Ordnanceman Benton Henderson said after shooting baskets.
The 19-year-old from Dallas said he was looking forward to getting into a day routine, but added he didn't mind the hard work endured by the crew since the Roosevelt left its home port.
There have been just four no-fly days since the carrier left port in Norfolk, Va., on Sept. 19.
For the ship's dozen Muslims, the day had an extra significance because it was Eid al-Fitr, the feast that marks the end of the holy month of Ramadan when Muslims abstain from eating, drinking, smoking and sex between sunrise and sunset.
The Roosevelt's work schedule has made it difficult for Muslim crew to follow their customs.
Petty Officer 3rd Class Michael Davidson fasted for about 10 days until it became too complicated to fast and pray at the right times. His work schedule started in the evening of one day and ended in the morning of the next.
"A lot of us did not fast because we are traveling. Allah understands. I had the time to do it, but not the way I really wanted, not with the devotion I wanted, because I kept getting sidetracked," said Davidson, 22, from Madison, Wis.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos pursuing
 Load-Date: December 17, 2001

 

End of Document
