

The world worries about living with the American giant; NY352-356 of July 7
The Associated Press
July 7, 2003, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1938 words
Byline: By BARRY RENFREW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




History has seen many superpowers, from the empires of Rome and ancient China to the vast colonial conquests of Britain and France. But never has a single nation so dominated the planet as America at the start of the 21st century.
This, in the eyes of many around the world, is far from a good thing. They worry that America is a superpower out of control, "unrestrained by any laws or any conventions other than its national interest," said James Rubin, a former U.S. assistant secretary of state who lives in London.
In the wake of the Iraq war, even some of America's closest friends and allies worry that too much power and influence has fallen into the hands of one nation. They fear the consequences for the international political system and for humanity.
"It does worry me that we are in a world today where we only have one huge superpower which does not need anybody and can follow whatever policy it wants," said Axel Poniatowski, a conservative member of the French parliament.
American power is indeed enormous. Its armed forces circle the planet, dwarfing the strength of other nations. The American economy is the biggest player in the global marketplace. American ideas and culture are everywhere, whisked by movies, television and the Internet to every corner of the world.
With the end of the Cold War and the demise of the Soviet Union, no other nation or likely alliance of nations can match American power.
And America's critics worry about what the United States will do with that power. Since George W. Bush became president, they have watched with mounting concern as America spurned the Kyoto protocol on global warming, rejected the standing of the international criminal court to try Americans, shunned arms control treaties.
All, they say, with an arrogance that told the rest of the world it didn't matter.
Traits that make Bush popular at home, such as simple, straight talk, can appear frightening abroad. Top officials such as Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld add to the apprehension with their bluntness - a bluntness some critics interpret as disdain for the views of other nations.
"We are all rather uncomfortable with Bush - our pro-American loyalty has been quite heavily strained by the Bush administration," said Menzies Campbell, a leader of the Liberal Democrats, a British opposition party.
Of course, few nations see America as a threat to their sovereignty. Many foreign critics of American policy consider America a relatively benign superpower. There is no suggestion, except in the most paranoid circles, of U.S. ambitions to conquer the world.
There is also great friendliness and good will in most countries toward Americans - as opposed to the U.S. government. Polls in Europe and elsewhere show that more unites Americans and most nations than divides them.
"We don't need to dramatize these problems," said Vladimir Baranovsky, deputy director of the Institute of World Economy and International Relations in Moscow.
But at the same time, there is rising unease about America, and rising criticism of the sole superpower. "The imperious and arrogant in Washington believe the rights of man come not from God but from the generosity of Uncle Sam," wrote The New Straits Times in Malaysia.
The sentiment is bolstered by growing anti-Americanism, some of it based on ignorance about the United States. Thus America is seen as a battleground populated by gun-crazed gangsters and murderers, a land where a few have immense wealth amid poverty and suffering, a nation that does not value learning or culture. It is an image seemingly gleaned from the cheapest kind of American action movies that are so popular around the world.
"I think that most people get obsessed with the U.S. because of its immense wealth and power," British foreign minister Jack Straw said in a BBC interview. "It has become fashionable, this kind of anti-Americanism, and it is a convenient parody."
Washington is blamed for everything from global warming to genetically altered crops, even as the world does its best to emulate American lifestyles. Abroad, McDonald's and Starbucks are madly popular and yet often the first targets in any political protests.
The rich and powerful are always denigrated by the envious who have less or simply want to blame somebody else for their shortcomings or misery. And many Americans are deeply unhappy about the same problems that foreigners blame on America, such as ill effects of globalization.
Opposition to the United States is nothing new. Similar views abounded during the 1960s and throughout the Vietnam War, when U.S. foreign policy was seen as arrogant and incompetent, alienating rather than winning friends. Eugene Burdick's 1958 best seller, "The Ugly American," gave a name to the overbearing Americans overseas.
But the stereotype of the Ugly American has had a resurgence. It is reflected in editorials and speeches and informal conversations that betray a concern around the world that Washington wants only to serve American interests - that its only interest in other countries is how they can boost U.S. security and prosperity.
"We have created an impression throughout the rest of the world that the U.S. is the bully of the playground, and that does not do well over the long term," said Ted Galen Carpenter, an analyst at the Cato Institute, a think tank in Washington.
Even nations that want America to be the world leader, and their ranks are extensive, are concerned when one nation has so much power. Friendly governments say it's fine sleeping with a very friendly elephant, until it rolls over in the night.
"I am not concerned that the U.S. is too strong, I am sometimes concerned how they use their strength," said Karsten Voigt, adviser to German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder.
The U.S. attack on Iraq crystallized those fears, even among many of America's friends, such as France and Germany.
America's motivation - born in the attacks of Sept. 11 - is not widely embraced or understood. Many around the world don't comprehend how deeply the attacks shook the United States, shattering its sense of security. Though many Americans believe they are locked in a war for survival, Europeans, especially, saw it as just another terrorist attack.
In some quarters, America was seen as wanting war at any price, trampling international bodies and laws designed, no matter how imperfectly, to avoid war and ensure peace collectively.
It was a system the United States played a major role in creating after World War II, with bodies such as the United Nations. Traditionally, U.S. foreign policy has stressed building alliances, consulting others and seeking peaceful solutions.
There are those who see recent American actions as the death knell for a system that has lasted more than a half century. "The United Nations is nothing anymore," lamented Sher Aga, who teaches aviation at the Air Force Academy in Kabul, Afghanistan.
Is America willing to remain first among equals, many wonder, or has collegiality been replaced by a raw, menacing assertiveness some saw in America's campaign against Saddam Hussein?
"The Americans need to see that we need to be consulted, they are just one part of the world," said Ulrike Guerot, an analyst on the German Council on Foreign Relations.
Most nations see good relations with the United States as a top priority no matter what the cost, fearing what they might lose if they try to stand up to Washington. Even critics of U.S. policy don't want to risk a confrontation that could cost them trade or the shelter of Washington's defense umbrella.
Allies like Britain have for years backed America in almost any situation, often so they could retain their sway with Washington. Prime Minister Tony Blair risked his political career in the face of massive domestic opposition to back Bush over Iraq because he insisted it was the only way to influence Washington and have any hope of countering its more aggressive policies.
Others, mainly France and Russia, speak of creating a "multi-polar" world where U.S. power is countered by alliances, principally the European Union.
But the EU was badly split over Iraq, with many of its members backing Washington, and rarely manages a united voice on foreign policy. And Russia and France, would-be leaders of any coalition to counter U.S. power, are themselves viewed suspiciously by other nations.
Even those who want a coalition to counter America, such as French President Jacques Chirac, want to work with Washington. There is no desire to again divide the world into rival camps, as in the Cold War and its constant threat of world war.
For all the global angst, the problem is not as severe as it may seem. U.S. military power is massive, but it is not wielded promiscuously. Most nations know they need not fear it.
In many areas, America cannot go it alone. The United States is dependent on the global economy for its prosperity. And it needs cooperation with the rest of the world in everything from the fight against terrorism to the free movement of peoples and ideas in an ever shrinking and interdependent world.
"There is no reason why the interests of the U.S. and the interests of the rest of the world need diverge. When it comes to global threats of terrorism, weapons of mass destruction, crime, drugs, global warming, disease - if America acts to blunt those threats, the world is better off," said Rubin.
There are American policy-makers who say that the United States should be prepared to go it alone in pursuit of its interests. But other foreign analysts believe that Washington must consult with allies and others to build consensus and ensure that its leadership is wanted rather than endured. The primacy of international law and bodies such as the U.N. must be reasserted, they say.
"The rules should have universal application. If the United States has the right to carry out a preventative war, then other countries should have the same right," said Sergio Sarmiento, a leading Mexican newspaper columnist and analyst.
And America's friends and allies must do a better job of influencing Washington by putting forth a united front on key issues and working with the United States, analysts say.
"They must make it plain that the U.S. must act within the framework of international … law and that unilateral action outside the law, however justified in the short term … could well bring their country into disrepute and that would be a tragedy for all," said Douglas Hogg, a former British government minister.
Less optimistic observers doubt that the United States will return to the old patterns of consultation and consensus-building. Already, there is the threat of trade wars with the European Union, whose combined economy is larger than America's.
"I am deeply troubled by the way we seem to be moving backward - historically away from a world of collective security and international community back toward something that looks more like self-help, each for his own," said Charles Kupchan, a professor at Georgetown University in Washington.
Still, many analysts believe Washington will work out its differences with its friends and natural allies and restore the traditional consensus, just as splits over the Vietnam War or the 1980s protests in Europe against U.S. cruise missiles, were mended.
As Joost Lagendijk, a Dutch member of the European Parliament, put it: "There will be rapprochement again between the Americans and the Europeans, and sooner than some skeptics want to believe."
Barry Renfrew, the AP's London bureau chief, has covered world affairs for 20 years from AP bureaus in Russia, Pakistan, South Korea, South Africa, Australia and England.
 Load-Date: July 8, 2003

 

End of Document
