

The Shiites' time has come in Iraq and it's a new era for the Kurds, but now the question is what will they do with newly found
The Associated Press
February 13, 2005, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1408 words
Byline: By ROBERT H. REID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAGHDAD, Iraq
Body




The Shiites' time has come in Iraq and it's a new era for the Kurds as well. The question now is what those two long-repressed groups will do with their newly found power, and how their goals might affect the Sunni Arabs, who largely stayed away from Iraq's elections.
There was dancing in the streets in Kurdish cities on Sunday after elections results were announced, and a strong but quiet satisfaction among Shiites - both groups that suffered not just politically but with their peoples' lives under Saddam Hussein's brutal rule.
Yet even as they danced and claimed their rights, the Kurds - and especially the Shiites - are mindful they must move cautiously if they want to reach out to the Sunni Arabs and other Iraqis to form a new and inclusive government and thus work toward the stability that Iraq still so clearly lacks.
"This is a new birth for Iraq," election commission spokesman Farid Ayar said, announcing the results of the first free elections in Iraq in more than 50 years and the first since Saddam fell. Iraqi voters "became a legend in their confrontation with terrorists."
But now they must become a legend in working to tame this country's still-smoldering ethnic and religious tensions - and a virulent insurgency that claims American lives. One U.S. soldier was killed Sunday in Samarra just as the results of the Jan. 30 elections were being announced.
The Shiites' 48 percent of the vote fell short of the two-thirds majority needed to control the 275-member National Assembly, meaning they have no choice but to build alliances - possibly with the Kurds - in order to govern Iraq's 26 million people.
Interim Prime Minister Ayad Allawi, the secular Shiite chosen by the United States to lead this country for the last eight turbulent months, fared poorly - his ticket finishing a distant third behind the religious Shiites and Kurds.
President Bush, who portrays Iraq as a test of democracy in a region not known for self rule, praised Iraqis and said America and its allies should be proud for making the election possible. "I congratulate the Iraqi people for defying terrorist threats and setting their country on the path of democracy and freedom," he said in a statement. "And I congratulate every candidate who stood for election and those who will take office once the results are certified."
The Shiite-dominated United Iraqi Alliance ticket received 4,075,295 votes, or about 48 percent of the total cast, officials said.
The Kurdistan Alliance, a coalition of two main Kurdish parties, finished second with 2,175,551 votes, or 26 percent, and the Iraqi List headed by Allawi stood third with 1,168,943 votes, or nearly 14 percent.
Parties have three days to lodge complaints, after which the results will be certified and seats in the new Assembly distributed. Seats will generally be allocated according to the percentage of votes that each ticket won. It appeared only 12 coalitions would take seats. The Shiites stand to gain up to 140 seats with the Kurds could end up with about 75.
"This is a great victory for the Iraqi people," said Ahmad Chalabi, a former Pentagon protege and member of the Shiite ticket who is lobbying for the prime minister's post. "We will have an assembly which is elected by the people and the government which is completely legitimate and elected by the people."
Other leading contenders for the top post include fellow Shiites Ibrahim Jaafari, a vice president; Finance Minister Adel Abdul-Mahdi; and former nuclear scientist Hussain al-Shahristani.
Abdul-Mahdi told al-Arabiya that the next Iraqi government is burdened with "difficult and complicated responsibilities that require national unity and the wide support of the national assembly," and the presidency. He said his alliance is "seeking to realize a wide national harmony in choosing" for those positions.
But the results also highlighted the sharp differences among Iraq's ethnic, religious and cultural groups - many of whom fear domination not just by the Shiites, estimated at 60 percent of the population, but also by the Kurds, the most pro-American group with about 15 percent.
In the oil-rich, ethnically mixed city of Kirkuk, Iraqi Kurds danced in the streets and waved Kurdish flags when results were announced. Thousands more Kurds - a people who were gassed and forced from their homes by Saddam's forces - turned out in Sulaimaniyah, firing weapons in the air and carrying posters of their leaders.
"I feel that I am born again," said Bakhtiyar Mohammed, 42. "I am very happy because we suffered a lot. Now I can say that I am an Iraqi Kurd with pride."
The results also draw attention to the close and longtime ties between now-victorious Iraqi Shiite leaders and clerics in neighboring Iran. The Shiite ticket owes its success to the support of Iraq's clerics, including Iranian-born Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani.
In contrast, many Sunni Arabs, who make up an estimated 20 percent of the population, stayed home on election day, either out of fear of violence or to support a boycott call by radical clerics opposed to the U.S. military.
Overall, national turnout was about 60 percent, the commission said - but only two percent of the eligible voters cast ballots in Anbar province, the Sunni insurgent stronghold that includes Ramadi and Fallujah.
Turnout was also low in the Sunni Arab provinces of Ninevah and Salaheddin, both insurgency centers.
After results came out Sunday, some Sunnis again rejected the whole process.
"The elections were held to fight the Sunnis and were led by the Americans with the Kurds and Shiites," said Ramadi mechanic Abdullah al-Dulaimi. "The election results will lead to a sectarian war."
Mohammed Bashar of the anti-American Association of Muslim Scholars said he questioned the figures because few international or U.N. monitors were present in Iraq for the vote.
"Those who boycotted the elections are more than those who took part in it," Bashar said on Al-Jazeera television.
No date has been set for convening the new assembly. Its first task will be to elect a president and two vice presidents by a two-thirds majority. So far the only declared presidential candidate is a Kurdish leader Jalal Talabani. The three will choose a new prime minister subject to assembly approval.
Mindful of such tensions, Shiite leaders went out of their way Sunday to assure disaffected Sunnis, as well as Turkomen, Christians and others, that they would have a place in the new Iraq and a role in drafting the new constitution.
Finance Minister Abdul-Mahdi, the member of the Shiite ticket mentioned as a possible prime minister, insisted that Shiite leaders do not want "an Islamic government."
And the Shiite ticket's leader, Abdel-Aziz al-Hakim, told Iraqi television: "We believe in the need for participation and will seek harmony among all segments of the Iraqi people."
Al-Hakim, who lost 19 family members to Saddam's executioners, sat and wept as he heard the results.
But finding credible Sunni leaders - who can speak for both average Sunnis and also reach out to the insurgency - could prove difficult.
Although the Shiite ticket included some Sunnis, prominent Sunni Arab politicians fared poorly due to the boycott: The list headed by interim President Ghazi al-Yawer, a Sunni Arab, won only 150,680 votes. The ticket led by Sunni elder statesman Adnan Pachachi gained only 12,728 votes.
Pachachi, who had pleaded with the Bush administration to delay the election to allow time to win Sunni support, said it was now clear "a big number of Iraqis" did not vote.
Because relatively few Sunnis will end up in the assembly, some Iraqi politicians have suggested appointing Sunnis to advisory committees to help draft the new constitution.
But the Association of Muslim Scholars, believed to have some ties to the insurgency, has demanded tough conditions for accepting such a role - including a timetable for the withdrawal of U.S. troops. The group also wants to end purges of members of Saddam's Baath party from the government.
Many Shiites and Kurds - with bitter memories of Saddam's repression - have opposed opening government ranks to former Baathists. And in general, those groups also have said they want U.S. troops to stay for now.
"The issue is about policies and strategies," Shiite politician Mouwafak al-Rubaie told CNN's "Late Edition." "The issue is not about appeasement policy, appeasing the old Baathists or old criminals who have committed crimes against our own people."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos BAG111, 114; AP Graphics IRAQ ELN RESULTS, IRAQ ELN ROUNDUP
 Load-Date: February 14, 2005

 

End of Document
