

Three decades later, fall of Saigon remembered anew; George Esper covered the war in Vietnam for The Associated Press for 10 years. He now teaches journalism at West Virginia
The Associated Press
April 28, 2005, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 752 words
Byline: By GEORGE ESPER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam
Body




A modern sculpture of a mother holding her child lies in a small park in Ho Chi Minh City's Central Square today, symbolic of unity, not war.
At the former National Assembly building, workers are hurrying to prepare a stage to host celebrations for the big day - Saturday, April 30, the 30th anniversary of the fall of the U.S.-backed Saigon government.
The red and yellow flag of Vietnam and red bunting heralding the communist regime's victory dot the boulevards and buildings once heavy with sandbags and barbed wire.
The Continental Hotel is busy as tourists feeding its market economy pour into its restaurant for breakfast before heading out into the plush countryside, safe from the deadly land mines and ambushes along the highways.
That day 30 years ago a rear guard of 11 U.S. Marines, their escape covered by tear gas and smoke grenades, jumped aboard a U.S. helicopter, the last remaining American troops to leave Vietnam. It ended a painful and divisive American era of involvement in Vietnam.
The last two Americans killed on Vietnamese territory, Marine Cpls. Charles McMahon Jr., 21, of Woburn, Mass., and Darwin Judge, 19, of Marshalltown, Iowa, died in a three-hour rocket and artillery attack on Tan Son Nhat Air Base.
The incoming teletype in The Associated Press bureau clicked off an urgent message from Wes Gallagher, then the president of the wire service, advising that a final helicopter might be returning.
"Any of you want to leave if it works out?" he asked of me and my colleagues, Peter Arnett and Matt Franjola.
"Thanks for your offer," I messaged back. "We want to stay, but have some nervous Vietnamese (who) want to get out, please. FYI, the U.S. Embassy promised me they would take care of them, but in the chaos they were unable to get into the embassy to board helicopters."
No longer propped up by the U.S. military, and unwilling to fight on, the Saigon government announced its surrender. South Vietnamese troops marched from their outposts on the outskirts of Saigon to stack their weapons.
I rushed down four flights of stairs from the AP bureau in the Eden Building to the central square to interview weary South Vietnamese soldiers and police officers. As I approached one officer, I could see his eyes were crazed with fear. He waved his arms wildly, yelling, "Fini! Fini!" The war is over, he said in French. We have lost.
As I took notes, his hand nervously fingered his holstered pistol. I feared that he was going to shoot me, and, that after 10 years of covering the war for the AP, I would die on this last day out of revenge. The South Vietnamese were angry the Americans had abandoned them to face the wrath of the victors.
The police officer did an about-face and saluted a war memorial statue of South Vietnamese marines in the park, pulled his pistol from his holster, raised it to his head and fired.
Within hours, North Vietnamese troops destroyed the memorial with sledgehammers, part of a campaign to remove the legacy of the Americans and their South Vietnamese allies. Today, on the same site, stands the sculpture of the mother holding her child. Saigon would be renamed Ho Chi Minh City, after the legendary communist hero.
A South Vietnamese mob stole dozens of embassy cars and looted the apartments of the Americans. Others yelled at the Americans, "We want to go, too," as they fired their rifles into the air.
"They were nothing more than hoods … running around with weapons, not even defending their own country," one of the 11 final Marines, Sgt. Maj. Terry Bennington, would say later.
Hundreds of South Vietnamese stampeded the embassy and tried to scale its 14-foot wall to reach evacuation helicopters. U.S. Marines and civilians beat them back with their boots and rifle butts. Thousands of South Vietnamese deserted, fleeing with their families.
I had written about the nameless, faceless communist soldiers for 10 years, without ever seeing them except in death or as prisoners of war. On that day 30 years ago, two North Vietnamese soldiers walked into the AP office, showing us photos of their families and telling us how much they missed them and wanted to get home.
I thought to myself, American, South Vietnamese, North Vietnamese. We're all the same, feeling the same loneliness and not wanting to die. Yet the war had taken its toll: Nearly 60,000 American dead; nearly 224,000 South Vietnamese killed; 1.1 million communist fighters killed; and nearly 2 million civilians killed.
That's the way the war ended for me 30 years ago, April 30, 1975.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos RJV102 NY113-114
 Load-Date: April 29, 2005

 

End of Document
