

Truth and fiction part of the battle for public opinion in the Muslim world
October 27, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 475 words
Byline: By JOHN J. LUMPKIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A pile of wheels and twisted metal become a Taliban claim that their forces shot down two U.S. helicopters.
Taliban reports of heavy civilian casualties are dismissed as lies by the United States.
Misdirection and propaganda have quickly made truth a casualty in the U.S. war on terrorism.
Americans and other Westerners aren't the targets of Taliban propaganda, U.S. officials say - most in the West have made up their mind that the strikes as justified.
The Taliban claims could, however, fracture the delicate coalition the United States has formed with Muslim nations.
The Western media treat with skepticism Taliban claims of mass civilian casualties, but they make front pages in Pakistan, where some religious leaders blame Israel for the Sept. 11 terror attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon.
The Pentagon this week briefed military reporters on what it says are Taliban techniques to create news that makes the United States looks bad.
In one case, the Taliban moved a helicopter next to a mosque near the western city of Herat.
That could have one of two outcomes, said the senior defense official giving the briefing: The helicopter would be avoided by U.S. bomber pilots who didn't want to risk hitting the mosque, or the bombs would hit the helicopter, damage the mosque and fan anti-U.S. sentiment.
The official, who spoke under ground rules shielding his identity, said reporters should be wary when the normally reticent Taliban opens up a bomb damage site. The country has been bombed so much during decades of war that there's little guarantee that an American bomb was the cause.
Some Taliban claims have the ring of at least some truth. The United States has owned up to bombs going astray and causing some civilian casualties.
And the wheels held up by Taliban troops apparently did come from a U.S. helicopter damaged in last weekend's Ranger raid near Kandahar.
The Pentagon said an Army MH-47 helicopter struck an unknown barrier while it was taking off, shearing off its front landing gear. It returned safely and no one aboard was injured - but, notably, the U.S. acknowledgment came only after the Taliban made its claim.
The United States is also waging a propaganda campaign of its own - to sway public opinion in the Islamic world. Food packets and leaflets are falling from cargo planes over Afghanistan. Senior U.S. officials are appearing on al-Jazeera, an independent Arab television network based in Qatar, to defend American policy.
The U.S. military has also used deceptive tactics in the past.
In the Persian Gulf War, defense officials gave reporters broad access to Marines offshore from Kuwait preparing for a potential amphibious assault, suggesting to Iraq that the thrust of the U.S. invasion of Iraq would come from the sea.
That was a feint; the main attack came from Army units moving overland from Saudi Arabia.
 Load-Date: October 28, 2001

 

End of Document
