

U.S. forces battle to turn on water in Iraqi city which saw some of the fiercest fighting of the war
The Associated Press
April 26, 2003, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 705 words
Byline: By ALEXANDRA ZAVIS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NASIRIYAH, Iraq
Body




Squatting by a putrid pool full of garbage, Hayat Ali syphoned water from a leaking pipe and set off for home carrying it in a tin basin balanced on her head.
"This is dirty water and we have to drink and clean in it," she said crossly Friday, securing her long, black cloak against an approaching sand storm.
Restoring a clean water supply is a key challenge facing U.S. forces in the rebuilding of Nasiriyah after battling through the southern provincial capital in some of the fiercest fighting of the Iraq war. Buildings have collapsed, power lines are severed, medicine stocks looted and the city's managers have fled.
As days go by, frustration is mounting in the city, with some residents questioning the United States' motives for invading their oil-rich nation.
"We hear that they are going to help us, but we have yet to see it," said Hamad Bredy, who was among the crowd collecting water. His home was destroyed in the bombing, forcing him to crowd in with relatives on the outskirts of the city, set in a date-growing region on the banks of the Euphrates River.
U.S. forces meet regularly with those officials who remain to coordinate the rebuilding effort, but they're trying to let Iraqis take the lead in getting the job done. As aid groups start returning to the city, the military hopes to hand over much of the effort to them, but will continue to provide transportation and other logistic support.
Slowly, life is starting to pick up again in the city. There is bread in the bakeries, and a few thatch stalls have reopened at the once bustling market, offering bags of grain, rows of women's chadors, colorful wool mats, and piles of onions, garlic and potatoes.
But residents still spend long hours in search of water, which they have to boil before drinking.
Heavy bombing shattered pipelines and destroyed the electrical system powering the city's water pumps and filtration plants. Large pools of seeping sewage have formed across the area - many of them in the same places where sheep graze and children play.
Desperate residents wade through the stinking mess to scoop up water from squirting pipes - or from the same river and canal where animals drink.
Diarrhea is spreading - both Ali and Bredy's children are sick - and there is a risk of cholera outbreaks.
U.S. Marines, humanitarian groups and Iraqi workers have been working round the clock to restore the power needed to get the water and sanitation systems running again.
Residents fired shots into the air to celebrate late Wednesday when lights went on in some parts of the city.
Doing the rounds Friday, Maj. Robert Carr of the Marines 4th Civil Affairs Group found a water treatment and a distribution plant both running at about half capacity.
But the treatment plant was running out of chlorine, and guards there complained they were having trouble fending off looters after U.S. officers confiscated their guns. Carr promised to take care of both matters.
The water now coursing through the pipes is helping to flush out the system in some places, but elsewhere it has caused more pipes to burst, aid workers said.
To make matters worse, there are acute shortages of key medicines and vaccines after the main pharmaceutical warehouse for the region was badly damaged in the orgy of looting after the overthrow of Saddam Hussein.
Two of the city's three hospitals - already rundown before the war started - survived the fighting largely because the staff continued working even as U.S. troops traded gun, tank and artillery fire with Saddam loyalists dressed in civilian clothes.
As power returns to the city, one of the residents' biggest complaints is about the chaos in the streets. Stores, offices and warehouses have been looted down to the last stick of furniture. Even now, people are still carting off door frames and floor tiles.
About 400 members of the several-thousand-strong police force have returned to the job, watched closely by Marines.
Iraqi traffic police in blue and white uniforms were back at major street corners Friday, trying to sort out the tangle of beat up pickup trucks, crowded buses and donkey carts. Others patrolled the city in shiny police cars - but none have been issued with guns yet.
Marines say that is just a matter of time.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY117

 

End of Document
