

U.S. to Israel: with the Palestinians, it's the economy
March 3, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 925 words
Byline: By RON KAMPEAS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




It's nothing new for Israel to hear accusations that its siege of the Palestinian economy is a hindrance to peace.
Hearing it from its closest friends is.
Secretary of State Colin Powell's linkage of the recent unprecedented Palestinian economic devastation to the increase in Palestinian violence was a new voice echoing a long-standing claim: You can't nurture peace in fallow ground.
"If people are not able to get to their jobs, they become more frustrated," said Powell, who flinched last week when he saw tanks blocking roads from Israel into the West Bank. "Frustration leads to anger, and then anger to violence."
Such bluntness from a U.S. secretary of state, delighting Palestinian leaders, was not an oversight. The message - economic warfare may limit violence now but could cause chaos later - has been a staple of recent State Department talk.
Ambassador Martin Indyk, a trusted U.S. official among Israelis, brought the point home again Friday in a talk with Israeli businessmen.
"The Palestinian economy is on the brink of collapse," he said. "A state of semianarchy and gang rule is engulfing the West Bank and Gaza."
As for Powell, his aim was to shore up U.S. credibility among Arabs ahead of new efforts to isolate Iraq, but the criticism did not come in a vacuum.
The European Union and human rights groups have made the point and even the apolitical World Bank unexpectedly turned a Palestinian loan request into a grant to help counter the "severe economic shock" caused by the shutdown.
There are even murmurs among Israel's closest allies - American Jews.
Leo Kramer, a Washington businessman well known for negotiating deals with labyrinthine Third World bureaucracies, was asked by Israel in 1994 to help spur Palestinian investment. He's still at it but expresses profound frustration - and blames Israeli obtuseness.
"The insensitivity was amazing," he said, recalling a day spent at a Gaza-Israel crossing watching citrus rotting in the sun while Israeli security officials took breaks. "Here, there would be a scandal."
Israelis say they are keenly interested in Palestinian economic success as an underpinning for peace, but security is paramount.
"Israel will not allow Palestinians to come and work in Israel if those Palestinians will attack and harm innocent Israeli civilians," Israeli Embassy spokesman Mark Regev said in response to Powell's comments.
Western criticism of Israel is usually about settlement expansion and excessive firepower. Previous economic shutdowns have elicited little more than routine, and mild, State Department protests.
Linking economic openness to Palestinian peacefulness shouldn't surprise Americans, said Dore Gold, a senior adviser to Prime Minister-elect Ariel Sharon.
"Over the years, the more the security situation deteriorated, the more Israel had to implement closure policies," he said.
A shutdown after a series of bus bombings killed dozens of Israelis in 1996 promptly ended the carnage and ate into Palestinian popular support for the bombers.
Critics say the current closure is unprecedented. A U.N. report counts 67 days of closure out of 84 working days from the launch of the uprising on Oct. 5 until Jan. 31 - an 80 percent shutdown. By contrast, in 1996 the shutdown rate was 32 percent.
This time, the U.N. report says, Palestinian production has been halved and the Palestinian Authority, the largest employer inside the territories, is on the verge of bankruptcy.
Before the uprising, 130,000 Palestinians, the overwhelming bulk of the work force, worked inside Israel. In January, on the few days the roads were open, the number barely reached 40,000.
American officials are worried.
"It creates a bitter sense of deprivation, and recruits for Islamic militants," said Stuart Eizenstat, who brokered economic agreements between the Palestinians and the Israelis when he was deputy treasury secretary.
"Having an economic basket case on your border is not a recipe for peace."
Israelis say they are not to blame for the collapse of an economy run by a Palestinian government that is profoundly corrupt. Even the Palestinian legislature has repeatedly demanded that the government clean up its act and accused Cabinet ministers of filching charitable funds for personal use.
"As negligent as the Israelis have been, the Palestinians are most troubled by corruption and monopolies among the leadership," said David Schenker, who monitors Palestinian politics for the Washington Institute for Near East Policy. For instance, he said, "Cement can only be bought from one broker. What does that do for the building trade?"
Gold, the Sharon adviser, said that if the crackdown is unprecedented, so is violence he said is largely initiated by the Palestinians. Fighting sparked by Sharon's visit to a sensitive Jerusalem shrine has killed 342 Palestinians, 58 Israeli Jews and 15 others.
Palestinians say the siege is the latest chapter in an effort to keep them under Israel's yoke.
Saeb Bamieh, a senior Palestinian trade official, said Israeli port officials, who control 90 percent of Palestinian trade, have kept containers in their docks even after they have cleared security.
"They are using collective punishment on the whole population, pushing it toward starvation," he said.
The new Western interest is welcome but not enough, Bamieh said. He wants the United States and Europe to consider economic sanctions against Israel.
"The next day, the doors would open," he said.
On the Net: Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics: http://www.pcbs.org 
Israeli Embassy: http://www.israelemb.org 
 Graphic



 
AP Graphic MIDEAST ECONOMY
 Load-Date: March 4, 2001

 

End of Document
