

U.S. ambassador says criticism of U.N. shouldn't detract from its importance to the U.S. and the world
The Associated Press
January 13, 2005, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 560 words
Byline: By EDITH M. LEDERER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




U.S. Ambassador John Danforth said Thursday that criticism of the United Nations shouldn't detract from the organization's importance to the United States and to the world.
In a moving farewell speech to the Security Council, Danforth said that during his six month stint as U.S. envoy he came to believe that the United Nations is "even more important than I thought it was when I came here."
The 68-year-old former Republican senator from Missouri announced in early December that he would resign on Jan. 20 at the end of President Bush's first term. He said he wanted to return to his home in St. Louis and spend time with his wife, Sally, who is still recovering from a serious fall about 1 1/2 years ago.
Looking back on his decision to accept the ambassadorial post, Danforth said that when Bush asked if he would represent the United States, "I asked the president whether he believed this was an important job, and whether he thought the United Nations was important."
"He assured me that in his view it was, and on that representation I agreed to take this job. And the experience that I've had serving here has proved to me that the United Nations is indeed very, very important," he said.
"I think it's important to the world and I think it's important to the United States," Danforth said.
His short tenure at the United Nations has coincided with perhaps the strongest attacks against the world body in its nearly 60 year history - allegations of corruption in the U.N. oil-for-food humanitarian program for Iraq, widespread sexual abuse by U.N. peacekeepers especially in Congo, and a vote of no confidence by U.N. staff in senior management to name a few.
"A lot of people have criticized the United Nations, especially recently, and there's a lot to criticize in the United Nations - the oil-for-food issue, the problem of abuses by peacekeepers, especially in the Congo, and there will be always be things to criticize," Danforth said.
"But those points of criticism should not detract, and do not detract, from the essential value of the United Nations," he said.
Danforth pointed to the various peacekeeping efforts that the Security Council initiated and the massive relief effort it is coordinating for victims of the Dec. 26 earthquake and tsunami that swept from southeast Asia to Africa.
His primary focus was on one goal - bringing peace to Sudan, a goal he also pursued as U.S. envoy to the African nation before taking the U.N. job.
In November, when he presided over the Security Council as its president, Danforth organized a council meeting in Nairobi, Kenya - only the fourth outside the United States - and got a signed commitment from southern rebels and the Sudanese government to end their 21-year civil war by Dec. 31.
That agreement was signed in Nairobi on Jan. 9 and Danforth has expressed hope that it will lead to peace in the western Darfur region which has been engulfed in conflict for nearly two years.
Argentina's Foreign Minister Rafael Bielsa, whose country holds the Security Council presidency this month, said Danforth "will likely best be remembered" for taking the council to Nairobi where its presence and the U.S. ambassador's leadership were critical in getting the parties to sign the agreement.
"With respect to Sudan, the Security Council did play an instrumental role," Danforth responded. "The parties recognize that."
 Load-Date: January 14, 2005

 

End of Document
