

Welcome to 'The Garden' where the legends grow
The Associated Press
August 12, 2004, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 605 words
Byline: By LARRY McSHANE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




It's known simply as "The Garden," a perfect appellation for a place where legends grow.
To millions, those two words mean just one thing: Madison Square Garden, billed in typical New York hype as "the world's most famous arena."
Another two words are often all that's necessary to summon its magic: Ali-Frazier. Bruce Springsteen. Stanley Cup. Willis Reed. The Stones.
On so many nights, across 125 years, the Garden has been THE place to be, bigger than the Empire State Building and greater than the Great White Way. Its capacity is 19,763, but thousands more claim they were inside on those unforgettable evenings.
"It doesn't matter if it's Michael Jordan, or Muhammad Ali, or Sinatra or the pope," said George Kalinsky, the Garden's official photographer for 38 years. "They know the stage is brighter here than anyplace else."
Jordan knew better than most. Some of his greatest games, including his 55-point "double nickel" torching of the New York Knicks in 1995, came at the Garden.
The bright lights can burn, too. Sinead O'Connor was booed off the stage in 1992, shortly after she shredded a picture of Pope John Paul II on "Saturday Night Live." (The pope appeared at the Garden in 1979.)
The Garden is now in its fourth incarnation and its third location, site of the Republican National Convention beginning Aug. 30. But nothing can alter its history.
It's where Willis Reed, dragging a wounded leg, willed the Knicks to the NBA title in 1970.
Where Joe Frazier knocked out Muhammad Ali, while Frank Sinatra snapped pictures at ringside in 1971.
Where John Lennon paid off a bet to Elton John by joining him onstage in 1974 for a duet on "I Saw Her Standing There" - the late Beatle's last live performance.
Where Mark Messier broke a 54-year-old "curse," delivering on his guarantee that the New York Rangers would win the Stanley Cup in 1994.
"The Garden is more than a building," Kalinsky said. "The history is so rich, and people want to be a part of that history."
At the 1924 Democratic convention, keynote speaker Pat Harrison told the party elite, "What this country needs is another Paul Revere." The crowd cheered wildly - their Prohibition-era ears had heard the Mississippi senator proclaim, "What this country needs is a real beer!"
When George Harrison hosted a benefit for the starving people of Bangladesh in August 1971, he brought Eric Clapton, Ringo Starr and Bob Dylan to the Garden.
Thirty years later, after Sept. 11, 2001, the same stage hosted a benefit for victims of the World Trade Center terrorist attack and featured Keith Richards, Mick Jagger, The Who and Billy Joel.
Whether sitting in a locker room or waiting in the wings, athletes and artists view the Garden as the pinnacle: the best venue in the biggest city before the brightest audiences.
It wasn't always so.
The Garden opened in 1879 at Fifth Avenue and 23rd Street, an abandoned railroad shed converted into a sports arena. "Grimy, drafty, combustible," Harper's Weekly wrote.
The funky first Garden gave way in 1890 to a $3 million edifice designed by renowned architect and womanizer Stanford White. His twin pursuits collided in the Garden's rooftop restaurant, where an ex-girlfriend's jealous husband shot him to death in 1906.
The Garden moved uptown in December 1925, relocating to 50th Street and Eighth Avenue. The current Garden debuted 17 blocks south in 1968, rising over Penn Station.
Since then, performers from Elvis Presley and Jimi Hendrix to Frank Sinatra and Barbra Streisand have played the newest Garden, but no one has performed there more than Elton John - a record 55 times.
On the Net:
Madison Square Garden: www.thegarden.com 
 Load-Date: August 23, 2004

 

End of Document
