

White House: The truth is the best way to sell America to the world
The Associated Press
January 24, 2003, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 438 words
Byline: By HARRY DUNPHY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The head of the White House Office of Global Communications said Friday he would use accurate, truthful and overt messages about the American people and their government to sell U.S. policies to an international audience.
Tucker Eskew, who oversees the office of about a dozen people, said his mission was not to supplant the State Department's public diplomacy and public affairs efforts but to make sure the administration's message was coordinated, consistent and clear.
He told international journalists at Foreign Press Centers in Washington and New York that the office was not a new press operation that would answer questions on a daily basis but would try to facilitate their access to White House and other officials.
"We are in the business of working with you to provide facts, stories that are accurate and reflect something true about the intent of our government," Eskew told an audience that included European, Middle Eastern and Asian journalists in Washington and New York.
Asked about a Pentagon office meant to influence public opinion that was shut down last February amid reports it might spread false information, Eskew said his office would "deal with overt information."
The Office of Global Communications played a central role in a generating a document released Tuesday that catalogues administration allegations on how Iraq has long tried to deceive the international community.
The office has been running for at least six months, quietly working with foreign news media outlets to get the American message out. It was an outgrowth of an earlier administration effort to build public support overseas for the war on terrorism. President Bush signed an executive order Tuesday formalizing its functions.
Eskew said the office would send "teams of communicators to international hot spots, areas of media interest," to explain U.S. policies as it did the early on in Afghanistan. But he said no such teams were on the ground today. He said he and his staff consult, sometimes on a daily basis, with Britain and other allies.
The office produces a one-page fact sheet and sends it worldwide to "disseminate key points and daily activities on global issues." Friday's edition contained one-paragraph excerpts from the joint news conference Thursday of Secretary of State Colin Powell and British Foreign Secretary Jack Straw, a two-paragraph brief on the history of arms inspections from a newspaper opinion piece by Condoleezza Rice, Bush's national security adviser, and the times of State Department and White House briefings.
On the Net:
The White House Office of Global Communications. www.whitehouse.gov/ogc 

 

End of Document
