

Women deployed in the Gulf changing the face of U.S. Marines
The Associated Press
March 16, 2003, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 709 words
Byline: By ALEXANDRA ZAVIS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: IN THE GULF REGION
Body




When Ramona Cook joined the U.S. Marines 20 years ago, there were only a few women in the corps and most of them stayed in the office.
Today, she is Sgt. Maj. Ramona Cook, one of about 600 women in the Persian Gulf with the 3rd Marine Aircraft Wing, deployed for a possible war against Iraq.
More female Marines have jobs in the Gulf buildup than in any previous conflict - including positions that could take them into combat. Piloting attack helicopters, driving heavy trucks and leading troops, they represent the changing the face of one of America's elite fighting forces.
"Because there are so many females on this deployment, I think this is going to be the one that really proves we are here to stay," says Cook, 40, of Murrieta, Calif.
After the 1991 Gulf War, Congress eased rules excluding women from combat, creating thousands of new opportunities for them. Women still make up a mere six percent of the Marine Corps, but there are 1,500 female Marines deployed in the Gulf - a third more than in the last Gulf War.
Women are not allowed in positions where they are most likely to see ground combat - including in artillery and tank units - but they can drive trucks delivering supplies to troops on the front lines, or train the people who will be fighting there.
A growing number have also become helicopter and jet pilots. If President Bush gives the order, some women could be ferrying infantry and equipment into combat, or protecting them from the air.
"Women aren't just sitting behind the desk any more. Women are out there, doing almost everything that men can do, and are in lead roles, too," says 1st Lt. Vernice Armour, 29, from Memphis, Tenn.
Last year, Armour made history by becoming the military's first African-American female combat pilot. She flies the Marines' famed AH-1W Super Cobra attack helicopters, now lined up at a secret desert air base about 30 miles from Iraq.
In her unit are two other women piloting UH-1N utility helicopters. The flight surgeon is also a woman.
1st Lt. Natalie Escovar could be taking her unit forward to establish a refueling point so aircraft don't have to return to base when they run low on fuel.
With 63 Marines under her command, she is the first woman many of the men have worked with.
"Marines look at you differently as a female," says Escovar, 25, of Tujunga, Calif. "You're always being watched." But when women do a good job, they earn respect, she says.
A thick skin is also helpful, she adds.
Marines like to make fun of each other, and they aren't always polite about it. But over the years, women agree, much has changed in the way men treat their female counterparts in the corps.
When Cook first enlisted, she says, "There was no such thing as a sexual harassment policy."
When a superior officer began threatening to withhold letters from her husband unless she kissed him, she was too afraid to complain. The men in her crew eventually reported the officer, who was court-martialed and jailed for six months.
And Cook's problems didn't end there.
"The really bad thing was, when I checked into my next unit, nobody would talk to me. They were all like, 'Yeah, we heard you got this Marine burned,"' she recalls. "It's a double-edged sword."
Today, sexual harassment is no longer tolerated in the Marines, she says. Pornography is also banned.
"I think you're almost better off in the military, because we have training in sexual harassment," says Capt. Jodi Maroney, from Oconomowoc, Wisc., who pilots CH-53E transport helicopters.
Despite the strides made by women, the public perception of the Marines has been slow to change.
Growing up, Capt. Jennifer Knotts never considered joining the corps. Her impression of the Marines was shaped by the rigid-looking, white, male face appearing on recruitment posters.
But when her husband enlisted, she discovered another side to the corps.
"I found out they were people, too, a family," says Knotts, 29, from Miami, who commands an 87-member air traffic control detachment. "You realize some of the horror stories you see on (television) aren't the whole story."
Four years ago, she signed up. Now, she's the one who could be headed off to war while her husband stays behind with his squadron in Japan.
"I guess that's a sign of the times," she laughs.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos JJX101-111

 

End of Document
