

'Dylan Thomas' Provides a Portrait of the Artist and the Man
The Associated Press
May 22, 1992, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 325 words
Body




DYLAN THOMAS: In the Mercy of His Means.  By George Tremlett. St. Martin's. 206 Pages. $ 21.95.
George Tremlett's biography of Dylan Thomas dispels several myths about the Welsh poet.
Thomas did not die in abject poverty, Tremlett makes clear, although he constantly sponged off others, left his wife without funds for daily needs, and often wore dirty, shabby clothes. He was a prominent poet and making good money when he died. Neither, the biographer says, did Thomas have the infinite capacity for drink often attributed to him, although he did indeed spend much of his time in bars and brawling.
Tremlett, who earlier wrote with Thomas' widow Caitlin an account of her life with her husband, questions some conclusions other biographers have made about Thomas.
Thomas, born in 1914 to Swansea Grammar School's senior English teacher, had his first book of poems published at age 18 after it won a prize. He was immediately hailed as a fresh voice worth attention.
He spent his whole life writing. But he was more than a writer: He had a spellbinding voice and a generation of British youngsters grew up listening to Thomas read poetry over the BBC.
Throughout it all, Tremlett suggests that Thomas never learned how to handle fame.
So much for Thomas the artist. Thomas the man is pictured as another matter: constantly using his friends, constantly quarreling and fighting with his wife (she could give as good as she took, it seems), badly dressed, always talking poor and asking to borrow money, determined not to be drafted during World War II.
Tremlett does not like all of Thomas' work. He singles out as particularly fine perhaps 20 poems; autobiographical short stories, most of them to be found in "Portrait of the Artist as a Young Dog"; the "magical" play for voices "Under Milk Wood"; and some radio pieces.
They are, he says, "proof enough of what the world loses when fame kills an artist in his prime."
 
 By Prudence Heller
 
 ociated Press Writer

 

End of Document
