

'Ethnic Cleansing:' In the Balkans, Only the Term Is New
The Associated Press
April 7, 1993, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 650 words
Byline: By GEORGE JAHN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TUZLA, Bosnia-Herzegovina
Body




Hundreds of people are forced out of their homes in Bosnia every day, swelling the ranks of the 3.5 million people uprooted by war in former Yugoslavia.
Western governments and human rights groups have catalogued thousands of atrocities - mass murders, rapes, mutilation and torture on all sides.
"Ethnic cleansing," the euphemism for forced expulsion to create ethnically pure areas, ranks high among them. It is changing the map of Bosnia and leading many Serbs, Croats and Muslims to believe that they will never be able to live together in peace again.
"So-called ethnic cleansing was practiced by Serbian forces in Bosnia on a scale that dwarfs anything seen in Europe since Nazi times," the U.S. State Department said in January.
Serbs and Croats use the word "ciscenje," meaning "cleaning" to describe the forced expulsion of rival ethnic groups. The term "ethnic cleansing" came into wide use after foreign diplomats, aid workers and the media used it to describe the expulsions.
The brutal practice is not new in the Balkans. During their 400 years of domination, the Ottoman Turks forced hundreds of thousands of Slavs to either flee or accept Islam. During World War II, Croatia's pro-Nazi regime slaughtered tens of thousands of Serbs, Jews and Gypsies.
In Bosnia, Serbs, Croats and Muslims fighting each other wiped out scores of villages in a chilling foretaste of things to come 50 years later.
In moves condoned by the Allies, Italians on the Adriatic coast were driven out. At war's end, about 300,000 of the half million ethnic Germans in fertile northern Yugoslavia were expelled.
Today, more than 3.5 million Muslims, Croats and Serbs have been forced to abandon their homes in Croatia, Serbia, and Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Some of the refugees have been forced to leave at gunpoint, others left to search for food after blockades by friends-turned-enemies. Intimidation and murder uprooted thousands more.
In many cases, villagers began to flee during the artillery bombardments that preceded militia attacks. After troops moved through the villages, people were often forced to sign papers saying they were leaving voluntarily and giving up their possessions.
Most victims end up in dingy refugee camps like those of Tuzla, less than 12 miles from the front line of eastern Bosnia.
Hailing from different villages, on the run for a few days or almost a year, Tuzla's displaced tell eerily similar tales.
"Serbs came into Kamenica April 6 and destroyed or set on fire the houses," said Hajreta Selimovic, a Muslim woman.
"They said, 'We will kill you and push your bodies into the river,"' Sabera Bosancic said of the Serbs who came to her village of Nova Kasaba near the Serbian border.
In Tuzla's mental hospital, Saban Djinic, 51, babbled as he tried to absorb the loss of five sons at the hands of his neighbor and former friend, a Serb.
"Boro Lukic … he built my house, and it was a good house. All Serbs are good people. I will live with my neighbors again, and Boro will hang himself," Djinic mumbled.
"From the outset, the object of the war has been the wholesale transfer of civilians," said U.N. refugee agency spokesman Ron Redmond. "So the argument could be made that all the displaced are the victims of ethnic cleansing."
All three ethnic groups have been accused of forcibly expelling civilians, but Muslims have been displaced disproportionately in Bosnia, where half the prewar population of 4.3 million are refugees, the U.N. agency says.
Bosnian Muslims are largely the descendants of Slavs who converted during the Ottoman conquest. There have since been repeated attempts to re-assimilate the Muslims with rival Christian Slavs - either Roman Catholic Croats or Orthodox Serbs.
Muslims were recognized as a Yugoslav nationality under the late Communist dictator Josip Broz Tito. But many Serbs and Croats remain resentful of the Muslims, who are seen as vestiges of the Ottoman conquest.

 

End of Document
