

'The Hour the World Had Awaited Was at Hand'
 The Associated Press
September 1, 1995, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 871 words
Byline: By SPENCER DAVIS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: USS MISSOURI, TOKYO BAY
Body




Two nervous Japanese formally and unconditionally surrendered all remnants of their smashed empire to the Allies today, restoring peace to a war-battered world.
Surrender hour was cool and cloudy, but the sun broke through the overcast 20 minutes later as Gen. MacArthur intoned, "These proceedings are closed."
Foreign Minister Mamoru Shigemitsu, who signed for the Japanese government, doffed his top hat and nervously fingered his fountain pen before he firmly signed the two copies of the surrender document - one for Japan, one for the Allies. Shigemitsu penned his name in English on one document.
Gen. Yoshijiro Umezu, for the imperial staff, also nervous, signed hurriedly; quickly stepped aside. A Japanese colonel wiped his eyes. All of the Nipponese present were tense and drawn.
Then MacArthur signed, deliberately, using five pens. The first two - silverplated especially for the occasion - he handed in turn to Lt. Gen. Jonathan M. Wainwright and to British Gen. Arthur Ernest Percival, who were forced to surrender Corregidor and Singapore, respectively, in the war's darkest hours.
Wainwright and Percival smiled; saluted snappily. They had been rescued only a few days ago from Japanese prisoner-of-war camps.
"It is my earnest hope and indeed the hope of all mankind that from this solemn occasion a better world shall emerge out of the blood and carnage of the past," MacArthur said.
The historic signing took place on a long table on the galley deck.
The 45,000-ton Missouri, which less than a month ago was blasting Japanese war industries with her 16-inch guns, had those rifles pointed skyward and her bow pointed toward the heart of Japan for the ceremony. Flags of the United States, the United Kingdom, China and Russia fluttered from the spic veranda deck.
Once there was a slight delay when it appeared someone had signed on the wrong line. Gen. Sir Thomas Blamey, representing Australia, signed the Japanese document first - by error - then shrugged as if it really made no difference now.
All Allied representatives were sober-faced, but obviously glad it's over. Soldiers, sailors and Marines, some of whom had fought their way across the Pacific, hardly could hide a trace of exuberance on their serious faces.
MacArthur's hand shook slightly as he reached "Dou-" in his first signature. His face twitched but his voice was strong although he appeared to be under great emotional strain.
After the Japanese signed, he said dramatically, "Will General Wainwright and General Percival step forward while I sign?"
The scene in Tokyo Bay was largely obscured by clouds which hung fairly low amid the surrounding hills.
More than 100 high-ranking military and naval officers of the Allies were in the colorfully uniformed group watching the ceremony.
After New Zealand's signature, less than 20 minutes from the start of the ceremony, the sun broke through the clouds, and MacArthur formally and in a firm voice declared the proceedings closed.
The Japanese prepared to depart immediately, their bitter chore accomplished.
MacArthur informed the Japanese that "as Supreme Commander for the Allied powers I announce it my firm purpose in the tradition of the countries I represent to proceed in the discharge of my responsibilities with justice and tolerance, while taking all necessary dispositions to insure that the terms of surrender are fully, promptly and faithfully complied with."
The hour which all liberty-loving lands the world over had awaited for long and terrible years was at hand - V-J Day was here.
Yet, at the hour of triumph, the world was sobered by the knowledge of the price which civilization paid to achieve this day, and that theme rang through the messages of America's commanders.
"Our first thoughts, of course - thoughts of gratefulness and deep obligation - go out to those of our loved ones who have been killed or maimed in this terrible war," President Truman told the world from a broadcasting room in the White House in Washington.
And there, where the Japanese warlords had once boasted they would dictate their own peace terms, Truman spoke these determined words:
"We shall not forget Pearl Harbor. The Japanese militarists will not forget the USS Missouri."
And, after he had proclaimed the peace "a victory of liberty over tyranny," the scene shifted back to this bay near Japan's ruined capital where MacArthur told his countrymen:
"Today the guns are silent. A great tragedy has ended. A great victory has been won."
The Supreme Allied Commander said he spoke "for the thousands of silent lips, forever stilled among the jungles and beaches and in the deep waters of the Pacific which marked the way."
"As I looked back on the long tortuous trail from those grim days of Bataan and Corregidor," he continued, "when an entire world lived in fear, when democracy was on the defensive everywhere, when modern civilization trembled in the balance, I thank a merciful God that he has given us the faith, the courage and the power from which to mold victory."
Possibly thinking of the atomic bomb that hastened Japan's decision to surrender, MacArthur declared that the war had become so utterly destructive that unless an equitable system of peace was devised "Armageddon will be at our door."
 Load-Date: September 1, 1995

 

End of Document
