

--- Pollution Problems Test your reading comprehension by reading the story below and answering the questions that follow.
The Associated Press
June 26, 1995, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 610 words
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




The Soviet Union developed industry with little regard for the environment, and now all of Russia's big cities have unhealthy air and half its people drink unsafe water, according to a new report.
Of Russia's 148 million people, 40 million to 50 million are exposed to air pollution 10 times higher than normal, the report said.
Car exhaust accounts for almost 44 percent of urban pollution. The worst exhaust-choked cities are Moscow and St. Petersburg.
The Soviet government paid little attention to environmental protection, developing huge industrial centers that polluted as they produced.
The industrial slump that began with the Soviet collapse has led to some decrease in waste, and environmental awareness has grown, but the government still lacks funds to adequately protect the environment.
"Sometimes, it leads to sad consequences," said Viktor Danilov-Danilyan, minister of environmental protection. "We spotted the oil spill in Komi republic only three weeks after it occurred."
That spill last year sprang from a series of leaks on an aging pipeline. Greenpeace and the World Bank say at least 30 million gallons of oil spilled, making it one of the largest spills ever.
The spill polluted the rivers and streams around Usinsk, home to 70,000 people, and has reportedly reached the salmon-rich Pechora River downstream.
In fact, most Russian rivers are highly polluted, the report said, especially near industrial cities.
The quality of drinking water has deteriorated as protection zones around rivers and lakes have shrunk, giving way to rapidly expanding construction and farming.
The environment ministry report also warned that virtually all of Russia's radioactive waste storage facilities are overfilled and fail to comply with modern standards.
 
Use information from the story to answer the following questions:
 
 1. Why is the former Soviet Union responsible for Russia's pollution problems?
2. Name two environmental problems found in Russia's big cities.
3. How many Russian citizens are exposed to air pollution 10 times higher than normal?
4. What causes nearly 44 percent of urban (city) pollution?
5. According to Greenpeace and the World Bank, where did one of the world's largest oil spills occur?
6. Why do you think it took so long for the oil spill to be discovered? Explain.
7. What kind of damage was caused by the 30 million gallon spill?
8. Who is Viktor Danilov-Danilyan?
9. Why does the Russian government have such a hard time protecting the environment?
10. If you were living in St. Petersburg, how might you be affected by the unsafe air and water? Explain.
 
 --------------------------------
Answer key: (Wording may vary)
 
 1. The Soviet Union developed large industrial centers with factories that polluted the environment.
2. Russia's big cities have unhealthy air and unsafe water.
3. About 40 million to 50 million Russian people are exposed to air pollution 10 times higher than normal.
4. Car exhaust causes nearly 44 percent of urban pollution.
5. One of the world's largest oil spills occurred around Usinsk in the Komi republic.
6. Answers will vary.
7. The spill polluted rivers and streams.
8. Viktor Danilov-Danilyan is the Russian minister of environmental protection.
9. The Russian government is having trouble protecting the environment because it lacks the money to do the job.
10. Answers will vary.
 
 PART TWO
 
 NO TIME TO WASTE:
Imagine that a member of your family is living in Moscow. After reading this article, you decide to write a letter to your relative. Explain how Americans reduce waste by recycling items such as newspaper and glass. Why not use recycled stationery?
 
 End Advance for use Monday, June 26 and thereafter
 Load-Date: June 26, 1995

 

End of Document
