

A Call For Breaking Down The Lingering 'Wall in the Head'
The Associated Press
October 3, 1994, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 543 words
Byline: By FRANK BAJAK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BERLIN
Body




A Germany still psychologically divided along the former Iron Curtain marked four years of unification on Monday with a call by its president for better understanding between eastern and western brethren.
President Roman Herzog's appeal came in a speech to 1,200 guests at the country's main observances in Bremen. He called reunification a fortuitous gift that will take more patience and courage to complete.
With potentially pivotal national elections due Oct. 16, Herzog acknowledged vaguely that "overblown expectations" have "in some places become transformed into disappointment."
That disappointment is expected to hurt the Christian Democratic Union - the party of both Herzog and Chancellor Helmut Kohl - at the polls.
Many east Germans blame Kohl for creating those high expectations and moving too quickly with what has proven to be an expensive and traumatic binding of Germans who lived under alien systems for two generations.
Leftist rioters tried to spoil the national holiday in Bremen, pelting police with stones, burned several vehicles and smashed storefront windows on Sunday night, injuring 11 officers, four seriously, police said.
In Berlin, some 2,000 leftists marched Monday to protest the social dislocation and unemployment that followed unification.
Bremen police spokesman Ronald Walther said 250 demonstrators were arrested in the western port Sunday and Monday, when many were rounded up trying to march on the observances at the Congress Center.
In the center, a Polish writer gave the keynote address, thanking the Germans for tearing down the Berlin Wall and finishing the revolution Solidarity began in Poland in 1980.
"I think that Europe will now truly begin to exist," said the writer, Andrzej Szczypiorski, now that "the Soviet fortress" in former East Germany has been dismantled and the Poles, Czechs, Slovaks, Hungarians and eastern Germans have rejoined the Western world they never left culturally.
Szczypiorski's keynote address highlighted Germany's desire to bringing its immediate eastern neighbors into the European Union and NATO, a desire not shared as ardently by many of its Western partners.
The rioting in Berlin marred otherwise peaceful observances throughout Germany highlighted by a three-day Berlin street festival attended by some 100,000 people but dampened by a lashing rain on Monday.
On Sunday night, Elton John headlined an international rock concert at the Brandenburg Gate.
In his speech Monday, Herzog urged Germans to ask themselves less "what divides us and much more what already unites us - and most of all how we can use our diverse life experiences in the future."
Other leading western politicians expressed concern over the persisting "wall in the head" syndrome dividing Germany's 17 million easterners from its 63 million westerners five years after the Berlin Wall fell.
Parliament speaker Rita Suessmuth worried aloud over the lack of trust many east Germans have for democracy, which many easterners complain has made their lives less secure in spite of material improvements.
Many western politicians blame this mistrust for the popularity of the reconstructed Communists in the east, the Party of Democratic Socialism, where polls show it getting nearly 20 percent of the vote on Oct. 16.
 Load-Date: October 4, 1994

 

End of Document
