

A Chronology of Events in the Last Week in the Gulf Crisis
The Associated Press
February 22, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 335 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Here is a chronology of the last week of key developments in the Persian Gulf crisis:
Feb. 15 - Iraq offered a strings-attached plan for a Kuwait pullout, but President Bush dismissed it as a "cruel hoax." The Security Council met in closed session to discuss Iraq's conditional offer to withdraw from Kuwait. Some nations said the Iraq statement merited a cease-fire; others dismissed it as a ploy to buy time.
Feb. 16 - Iraqi foreign minister Tariq Aziz planned to go to Moscow on Monday, on the heels of Soviet envoy Yevgeny Primakov's discussions with Saddam Hussein in Baghdad.
Feb. 17 - Aziz headed for Moscow and a meeting with Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev.
Feb. 18 - Aziz met for 3 hours in Moscow on with Gorbachev in a last-ditch effort to avert a full-scale ground war. Aziz headed home with a new peace proposal the Soviets said included a call for an "unconditional withdrawal from Kuwait."
Feb. 19 - Aziz returned home, carrying the Soviet peace proposal. The Soviet U.N. ambassador told the Security Council that Moscow's peace plan seeks rapid pullout of Iraqi forces from Kuwait, with full compliance of U.N. resolutions. President Bush rejected the peace proposal, saying there must be no negotiations and no concessions to gain Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait.
Feb. 21 - Iraq and the Soviet Union agreed on steps that could lead to an Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait, a Soviet spokesman reported. The announcement came after more than two hours of talks between Gorbachev and Aziz on the terms of a Soviet peace plan proposed earlier this week. Bush was said to have "raised serious concerns about several points," said a White House spokesman.
Feb. 22 - Bush told Saddam to begin withdrawing his forces from Kuwait by noon Saturday and finish in a week if he wants to avoid a ground war. The Soviets modified their own peace plan in an effort to make it acceptable to the allies. Bush said he appreciated the Soviet effort, but that the first version of the proposal contained unacceptable conditions.

 

End of Document
