

A Look at the New Soviet Government
The Associated Press
September 5, 1991, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 456 words
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Here is a brief look at the new government of the Soviet Union, approved today by the Congress of People's Deputies. The government has been described by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev as an "interim" structure until a loose confederation of sovereign states is formed:
 
 STATE COUNCIL - The highest government body, led by the Soviet president and consisting of the leaders of all the republics. It will coordinate decisions on questions of domestic and foreign policy affecting "the common interests of the republic." It will run defense, security, law enforcement and foreign affairs. Its decisions are legally binding. There is no vice president; if the president is unable to fulfill his duties, the council will elect an acting leader.
INTER-REPUBLIC ECONOMIC COMMITTEE - To coordinate the national economy and implementation of the economic reforms. Its chairman will be named by the president, with the agreement of the State Council.
 
 SUPREME SOVIET - The highest legislative body, consisting of two chambers, the Council of the Republics and the Council of the Union. The total number of deputies in this body will depend on how many republics decide to participate.
Each republic will send 20 deputies to the Council of the Republics. They will be chosen from the Soviet Congress of People's Deputies and republics' legislatures. In addition, autonomous areas - the smaller political subdivisions - in each republic can send one representative. The Russian Federation will have the most deputies, 52, to reflect all the autonomous districts, regions and national minorities in the vast republic. No matter how many deputies a republic sends, however, each delegation has only one vote.
The deputies in the Council of the Union are chosen by republics' legislatures, based on the number of lawmakers each now has in the Congress of People's Deputies.
The Council of the Republics and the Council of the Union jointly decide changes in the Soviet Constitution, accept states into the new union, hear the reports of the president on the most important domestic and foreign issues, confirm the union budget, declare war, and conclude peace.
The Council of the Republics decides on the organization and activities of union organs, and ratifies and annuls international treaties of the union.
Laws adopted by the Council of the Union take effect after they are approved by the Council of the Republics.
 
 POWERS LEFT TO THE REPUBLICS - The legislatures of the republics have the right to suspend on the territory of the republic those laws adopted by the Supreme Soviet of the U.S.S.R. that contradict the constitutions of the republics. All republics must approve any changes in the Soviet Constitution that are passed by the Supreme Soviet.

 

End of Document
