

A New Chapter for Church of the Rich and Poor
The Associated Press
October 13, 1994, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 865 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti
Body




Whether in rags or Ralph Laurens, Haitians heard the same Gospel last Sunday in their crowded slum chapels and comfortable hillside churches.
"Give away all that you have to the poor," Jesus tells the rich young man, "and come follow me."
Same passage, but different messages. In the slums, a message of hope. In the upland enclaves, one of fear.
The rise and fall and resurrection of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, poor man's priest and deposed president, has been the most dramatic chapter in the 30-year story of "liberation theology," the struggle by Roman Catholic clergy and lay activists to reshape Third World societies.
Aristide's triumphant return to power this Saturday will turn a new page in that story - either to peace within the deeply split Haitian church, or to deeper division and rancor.
"There are two churches in Haiti really, the church of the rich and the church of the poor. That's what Aristide must reconcile," said Canadian priest Rene Giroux, a slum pastor.
Haiti is as Catholic as it is poor. It is a place where church bells wake the roosters on Sundays, where bright slum murals show technicolor Christs breaking the chains that enslave the people.
In such a country, the Aristide story becomes almost a parable - of a fiery young priest who presses the people's case against repression; of a brave pastor who survives assassination attempts, including one that kills a dozen parishioners; of a defiant cleric expelled from the Salesian order for preaching "class struggle"; of an unlikely candidate swept to the presidency in an election landslide; and of a helpless president chased into exile by a military coup.
Aristide comes home Saturday under the protective wing of the U.S. government, which forced Haiti's military leaders to surrender power. But the people who adore Aristide feel their savior is not the U.S. Army but "Pe Titid" - "Little Father Aristide."
"The change in Haiti would have never happened without the Little Church," said Ernst Charles, a peasant activist.
The "Ti Legliz" - Little Church - is the Haitian model of liberation theology. It developed around hundreds of young activist priests, brothers and nuns and more than 1,000 groups of faithful who met to discuss applying the Bible to everyday life.
The message was justice: social and economic reform in a land where the tiny elite flew to Miami, New York and Paris to shop, while the masses lived in the most desperate poverty in the Western Hemisphere.
After decades of dictatorship and bloody repression of democrats, the Little Church offered the only strong voice of dissent inside Haiti.
Some in the Haitian Catholic hierarchy of 11 bishops favored reform. Some conservatives opposed it. But almost all seemed to recoil from Aristide's open bid for power, which violated the Vatican policy against priests in politics.
When Aristide was elected in December 1990, the political schism widened. He was vilified as a "Bolshevik" in a sermon by Archbishop Francois Ligonde of Port-au-Prince, whom Aristide once denounced as a "zealous servant" of the old Duvalier family dictatorship. A pro-Aristide mob burned down a historic church and threatened Ligonde.
After the Haitian military overthrew Aristide in September 1991, the bishops persuaded the Vatican to recognize the new regime - the only nation to do so.
The cold war within the church became solidly entrenched, and some experienced observers believe it is not about to thaw.
"The Haitian hierarchy is not at all in favor of Aristide's return," said the Rev. Roger Hallee, an American who runs the Oblate Fathers missionary order in Port-au-Prince.
Hallee cited an incident last week, when the bishop in the northern city of Cap-Haitien ordered a sudden halt to a church-managed development project.
"He doesn't want people to get the idea that Aristide's return is helping to improve life," said Hallee, a 31-year veteran of Haiti's church politics.
The same northern bishop, Msgr. Francois Gayot, has refused for three years to ordain new priests, presumably because young seminarians' politics are suspect.
Others, however, see reason for optimism.
The Rev. Gerard Jean-Juste, a prominent Aristide supporter, insisted Aristide "is sincere about reconciliation" with Haiti's bishops.
"I will urge him to make some kind of gesture," he said.
Bishop Joseph Lafontant, the Haitian church's most powerful prelate, did not respond to requests for an interview with The Associated Press. But a cleric familiar with the bishops' thinking noted some positive signs.
"I think Aristide will be coming back more moderate. He has learned a lot in the United States," he said, speaking on condition of anonymity.
The clatter from a U.S. Army helicopter echoed through the priest's office, in the shadow of Port-au-Prince's pink-and-white cathedral.
"Aristide is a much better-advised politician now," he said. "I think that will be the basis for reconciliation."
Haiti's bishops have met for days behind closed doors, pondering what is to come. They issued a long pastoral message this week, never once mentioning Aristide or his Little Church, but calling on all Haitians to work "in a spirit of open collaboration, to build together a better future."
 Load-Date: October 13, 1994

 

End of Document
