

A Refugee Official's Nightmare: Bodies On the Ground, In the Air
The Associated Press
July 29, 1994, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 504 words
Byline: By MORT ROSENBLUM, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: GOMA, Zaire
Body



With Rwanda-Disaster on Hold, Bjt
 Ray Wilkinson's bad days are worse than most people's, and Thursday was his worst.
It began at 5:30 a.m., with no time for breakfast, which was normal. Then he drove north to Kibumba, where 300,000 Rwandan refugees are now vulnerable to cholera.
Wilkinson is spokesman in Goma for the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees, after five months in Sarajevo and 30 years as a foreign correspondent. He went for a close look at the calamity and got one.
"We spent the whole afternoon watching a bulldozer try to dig a grave for 400 bodies, including a pregnant woman with a baby half out, and it didn't make a scratch in the volcanic rock," he said.
"These bodies are so bloated they are about to explode. What will that add to this terrible mess? The HCR staff was in tears. We can't even give these people a decent burial."
At least 20,000 people have died in 10 days. Only some of them have been buried in the mass grave French soldiers dug in a banana grove near Goma airport. Every 45 seconds, there is another body.
"I saw a man with a bicycle, and I thought it was a hopeful sign and then he suddenly fell dead," Wilkinson said. "Then I patted a kid on the head, and he keeled over dead."
The road from Kibumba is lined with endless rows of bodies so close to the pavement that a bus in front of Wilkinson's jeep crunched over a long line of them.
Farther along, the jeep stopped because of an accident - a desperately needed water tanker hit another relief vehicle. Suddenly, a woman from CARE in the back seat started to scream.
"A truck was hurtling straight for us at 40 miles an hour," Wilkinson said. "A body truck. It missed us quite literally by an inch and smashed into a ditch. Bodies flew out at us."
The careering truck killed two people along the road. Before it spun to a stop, corpses were scattered across the hard black rock.
"It was too much, the image of a body truck creating yet more bodies," he said. "And all these people flung out onto the ground. There is not even dignity in death here."
Wilkinson, 50 and British, left Newsweek in 1993 after 13 years, mostly based in Africa. He spent 17 years traveling the world with United Press International.
Over the years, he has covered most Third World tragedies and many of its wars. He had not yet seen anything like Goma. "Africa is used to death, but, my God, on this scale?" he said.
Corpses are so commonplace that refugees seem not to notice them. Wilkinson watched families sitting down to eat next to bundled bodies.
"My wife used to accuse me of being too unemotional in situations like this," he said, still shaking with emotion. "After 25 wars, I've never had a more disgusting day."
In his new role as spokesman for the humanitarian effort, Wilkinson tries to explain the difficulties behind delays and foulups that often dominate headlines.
"I've tried to rationalize slow responses and lack of interest," he said. "People expect things to happen overnight. But why can't you make a miracle overnight? This needs a miracle."
 Load-Date: July 29, 1994

 

End of Document
