

A Sharp-Tongued Bush Hit the Rails in the Midwest
The Associated Press
September 28, 1992, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 608 words
Byline: By DAVID ESPO, AP Political Writer
Dateline: GRAND BLANC, Mich.
Body




By the time the "Spirit of America" reached the last stop, George Bush was rolling.
Bill Clinton was "that Arkansas taxer," the Democrats in Congress were "these maniacs" who had sent him 33 bills to veto, and Americans deserved "freedom from the long arm of the tax man."
This was pungent language, uncharacteristic of any president. But Bush is well behind in the presidential race, and his rhetoric grew steadily more pointed as his 21-car train rolled past model suburban developments and modest mobile homes over two days of campaigning.
Take the chicken, for example; it was everywhere. A Clinton supporter in a bright chicken costume, it was intended as a taunt to Bush for refusing thus far to agree to terms for a debate. On Saturday in Bowling Green, Ohio, the president said, "I'm not sure if that chicken is from Oxford, England."
That reference to Clinton's Vietnam-era enrollment at Oxford University may have been a little too obscure, so when the presidential entourage pulled into Grand Blanc about 24 hours later the line went: "I can't figure out if that chicken is about the draft."
Bush's aides said they were pleased with the result of the train tour, which was designed to shore up the president's shaky base in Republican regions of Ohio, where aides say the race is close, and Michigan, where GOP officials concede a deficit of slightly less than 10 points.
The president spoke before thousands, and many hundreds more turned out for a glimpse of the special train as it went past. Many had their video cameras trackside to record the event.
Less clear was how well the crowds would translate into votes for the man asking for four more years.
A reporter's unscientific survey of 10 people in Holly, Mich., turned up the following results: four votes for Bush; one for Clinton; and five undecided, many of them inclined toward the Democrat.
"I'm kind of leaning toward Clinton. I kind of think the president let us down," said Pat MacDermaid, one of the undecideds. "He's done a great job on foreign policy but he doesn't seem to care about the people of this country until it was time for an election," she said. A Bush voter in 1988, she said, "I'm disappointed."
Ann Austin, a Holly resident, said she liked what Bush had to say "if it's the truth."
"You hear promises from everybody all the time," she said, adding her name to the list of undecided voters. Her concern, she said, was "mainly about the jobs and the way the things are going with the economy."
Clinton's draft controversy? "That's over and done with. He was a young man then. I guess we all have something that we did as kids."
Said Gary Watson, a 1988 Bush supporter: "I haven't made up my mind yet. I'm still debating his foreign affairs ability and the lack of progress on the economy."
Bruce Merrill of Holly was a firm Bush supporter. "The last time I voted for a Democrat I didn't work very well for a few years," he said as he sat on a curb flanked by his young son and daughter. "It left a lasting impression on me and my family."
Although Harry Truman is the patron saint of whistlestop tours, Bush never uttered his name at any of nearly a dozen stops along his route. Instead, he talked repeatedly of other Democrats, in not very flattering terms.
One of the pillars of Clinton's candidacy is his claim to being "different" from other recent Democratic nominees, meaning he's no tax-and-spender, and more conservative.
"But what's different about him?" Bush asked in Holly, Mich. "George McGovern - he worked for him. Jimmy Carter - he voted for him. Michael Dukakis - he nominated him. And he didn't forget Walter Mondale - he borrowed the tax increase from him."

 

End of Document
