

A Startling - and Heroic - Perspective on the King Who Lost the Colonies
The Associated Press
September 23, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 703 words
Byline: By MICHAEL KUCHWARA, AP Drama Critic
Dateline: STAMFORD, Conn.
Body




George III was more than the king who lost the Colonies.
American audiences will be startled to discover a gallant, almost heroic figure in Alan Bennett's intriguing "The Madness of George III," now touring the United States courtesy of Great Britain's Royal National Theater. And in Nigel Hawthorne, they will find an actor who gives a gallant, almost heroic performance as the monarch who struggles against a mental affliction that Bennett suggests was physiological and not psychological.
Yet this fascinating evening of theater won't be seen on Broadway. The play's stop at the Rich Forum here, its American premiere, will be followed by engagements in Brooklyn, Baltimore and Boston before the production returns to London in November.
"The Madness of George III" is not a history lesson, but rather the portrait of a simple, stubborn man being dragged through pain by a cabal of politicians and physicians. Bennett portrays them as ambitious men, more intent on gaining power or money for themselves than in finding a cure for their king.
As staged by Nicholas Hytner and designed by Mark Thompson, the play has the look and feel of a historical pageant, humanized by the king's suffering. From his first appearance in his military finery to his unnerving descent into madness while dressed in a soiled nightshirt and dirty stocking cap, George anchors the play.
His mental illness materializes in fits and starts as peculiarities that the playwright drops suddenly into George's conversation. Hawthorne carries off the man's increasing lunacies with the skill of a high-wire performer working without a net.
And his horrific torture at the hands of doctors determined to bleed, burn and purge him of his sickness is unflinchingly portrayed by Hawthorne, who never lets the audience forget the man behind the crown. The actor invests the king with such a sympathetic spirit that it is impossible not to root for him during his travails.
"When you get to know somebody, you do form an attachment and I certainly did with George," Hawthorne said in an interview. "And not just knowing what he went through when he was ill, but also his loyalties. He had a great loyalty to his wife, Charlotte.
"He was an honest man, really honest, and with the Colonies he felt that they belonged to us and therefore, they must pay taxes," Hawthorne added. "He never came to America and had he, maybe he would have seen things in a proper light. And he wouldn't have made so many mistakes. He certainly blundered, but I don't think he was a villain. He was foolish unto himself."
George dominates the play so completely that the rest of the characters almost seem like props, theatrical devices to illuminate the king and Hawthorne's bravura performance.
Still, impressions are made by Julian Wadham as the icy, alcoholic Prime Minister William Pitt and Nick Sampson as the Prince of Wales, George's overeager offspring ready to take over from his ailing father.
Hytner, best known as the director of "Miss Saigon," has staged "The Madness of George" with a flourish. Designer Thompson has placed the action within two large gold picture frames, with many of the scenes looking like paintings that have come to life. He also utilizes a wide staircase that fills the stage, a provocative effect that - with a minimum of fuss - evokes the grandeur of court life.
Hawthorne has been an actor for more than 40 years, but Broadway didn't notice him until he played writer C.S. Lewis in "Shadowlands." His performance won a Tony Award in 1991 and led to his appearance in "George III," surely the performer's best role in a long, but late-blooming career.
"It was hard to get work when I was a young actor," Hawthorne recalled. "I was quite a plain boy. Directors would look at me and wonder what I could play. I didn't give them any clues.
"I suppose as I started to get older, the vulnerabilities and the weaknesses and the strengths all started to dodge around a bit," he added. "I've never been afraid of being vulnerable on stage. It's a large part of life, and I think it's being dishonest to disallow an audience to see that side."
In "The Madness of George III," those vulnerabilities come blazingly to life. It's a performance not to be missed.
 Load-Date: September 23, 1993

 

End of Document
