

After 70 Years of Marx, Will Soviets Take to the Marketplace?
The Associated Press
September 18, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1144 words
Byline: Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




For 70 years, the people of the old Soviet Union were bombarded with a Marxist-Leninist message: Communism was good and capitalism evil. Now, overnight, they're expected to become hard-working, risk-taking, money-grubbing capitalists.
Will it work? Can free enterprise sprout today where it was illegal yesterday? Has the entrepreneurial instinct been stifled?
Or is competition such an instinctive trait that it will spring forth, fresh and combative, once the heavy hand of state control is lifted?
Murray Weidenbaum, an economic adviser to Ronald Reagan, said that when he visited Poland to ease its conversion to free enterprise, "that question worried the hell out of me."
"Everyone was in favor of a market economy, but they had grown up hating capitalism," Weidenbaum said. "The attitude was, if you've made a success you must have done something crooked."
Others worry about it, too. But at the same time, they point out:
- Even under capitalism, everyone need not be a capitalist. For most people, going to work is going to work, no matter what the economic system.
"The beauty of capitalism," says economist David Lipton, adviser to the Polish government as it started its transition from communism, "is that it works without many people understanding it. It works when people just go about their business. People are creative by nature and the communist system stifled creativity."
- Even in the darkest days of Stalin, when millions of peasants were killed so that their farms could be collectivized, the underground economy flourished. Later, perhaps as much as 50 percent of Soviet output was produced by the black or the gray market, with moonlighting workers and bartered raw materials.
- And even in the state-controlled economy, to overcome bureaucratic impediments, "the Soviet manager, just to survive, had to hustle much more than managers here in the U.S.," Yuri Maltsev points out. Maltsev was a Soviet economist. He defected in 1989 and now teaches at Carthage College in Kenosha, Wis.
"The most enterprising entrepreneurs on this planet" are the people who figured out how to make money under communism, he said.
Jeanine Braithwaite, a Russian-speaking economist from Michigan's Kalamazoo College who spent two years in the Soviet Union, says attitudes are going to have to change if the economic system is to change.
"There is a baseline attitude that those who involve themselves in buying low and selling high are fundamentally dishonest people," she said. "When an individual finds something at a low price and resells it, this is 'spekulatsiya,' a moral crime. We (Americans) call people who do that smart, go-getters, rainmakers."
She notes a Russian proverb: Don't be the one high stalk in the wheat field. The Russians have a core belief that it is not right to be better off than other people, she said.
Former Treasury official Paul Craig Roberts - an architect of Ronald Reagan's supply-side economics - recalls an old Russian joke to illustrate his concerns about Soviet attitudes. It tells of the genie-in-the-bottle who appears before a peasant and offers to grant one wish. The wish? "Kill my neighbor's cow" - pull down the other fellow to my level.
Still Roberts agrees with Maltsev: "You had to be an entrepreneur to survive even within the official planned economy," he said.
"The economy was notorious in its inability to supply the managers of state factories with the promised inputs," Roberts added. "If you were making consumer goods and you relied on the state's promises to supply you, you would fail. You wouldn't get your bonus. Under Stalin, you'd be shot. So managers would hire 'fixers' to find the resources so they could meet production quotas.
"Some factories became completely integrated; they produced their own inputs. Others would find ways to barter surpluses with other people. Entrepreneurial activity was endemic in the Soviet system."
Lipton says that the same concern about capitalism's acceptability were expressed not long ago about Poland, now well on the way toward a free market system.
"It was said that people were accustomed to a system of having everything provided for them and having to take minimum social risks, that people were not entrepreneurial and would not respond to market incentives," Lipton said. "It was even said that people liked and were accustomed to standing in lines and if the alternatives were higher prices they'd prefer lines.
"None of those fears have come to pass. The Polish people very much enjoy the new economic environment. They are worried, as they should be, as people in any country have to worry, about the ups and downs of the market economy but there is tremendous entrepreneurship. People are delighted they don't have to stand in line."
The Soviet Union is different, Lipton concedes: more isolated, less exposed to the West, in some ways more rural. "But," he said, "the average citizen will work hard when there is something to be gained by hard work."
Public opinion seems as divided as the experts. In a recent poll among residents of the Russian republic, only 64 percent said they favored the right of an individual to own and sell property at the price he sets. In July, another poll said 54 percent of the Russians favored efforts to establish a free market economy while 32 percent opposed.
Weidenbaum proposes that one way to plant capitalistic ideas in the Soviet Union is to send not more platoons of economic experts, but battalions of retired American workers who came to this country as immigrants and who still know the language of the old country.
They could teach the habits and rewards of hard work. "Workers are in a better position to get that message across than professors," said Weidenbaum.
Frank Farley, a University of Wisconsin psychologist, thinks the problem is deeper, however. He says the Soviet people are so adverse to taking risks that capitalism may not take hold.
Farley theorizes that some nations exhibit what he calls "Type T (for thrills) behavior." They're willing to engage in the unknown. "Great entrepreneurs are driven by the excitement of it all," he said.
"To me, the whole market system is embedded in this psychology. The United States is a Type T nation. We were founded by adventurers and explorers. We have had this quality come down through our genes. Immigrants tend to be Type T's," Farley said.
"In Russia, ever since 1917 you've had generations growing up in a system of rules and structure - Type T's probably ended up alcoholic or in the Gulag - and I fear its going to be extremely difficult for them to shift gears."
Maltsev, the defector, buys none of that. He said the Soviet labor force "is skilled and not spoiled and for reasonable money they will work like hell" - and take risks. He recalls a Soviet expression - "I was undermilked" - and says: "Imagine an 150 million-member labor force that was undermilked."

 

End of Document
