

AFTER THE COLD WAR: What About the 'Peaceniks'?
The Associated Press
October 23, 1994, Sunday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 828 words
Byline: By PAUL TOLME, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ALBANY, N.H.
Body




It's been a tough half-century for peaceniks.
The World Fellowship Center - where weenie roasts and campfire tales make way for veggies and talk of war and peace - has survived ridicule, the imprisonment of a former director during the Red Scare and headlines labeling it as a communist retreat.
Now, it faces another challenge: redefining itself after the Cold War.
As the summer camp looks back at its 54th session and prepares for next year, director Christoph Schmauch finds the retreat tackling a passel of new topics. The camp's nightly seminars and programs this year included multiracial families, health care, AIDS, the environment and the global economy.
Still, the camp's main objective remains peace, which has proven elusive, Schmauch said.
When the Soviet Union collapsed, there was a sense that a major breakthrough was at hand, he said. Then came the ethnic cleansing in the former Yugoslavia, the war in the Persian Gulf and the re-emergence of fascism in Germany. The threats seem to cover every front: famine, intolerance, environmental problems, the inequitable distribution of wealth.
"Things, in a way, have become more difficult," Schmauch said.
The camp has a main lodge, several homes and campsites, and space for more than 100. Accommodations are rustic - shared bathrooms, bunks, cafeteria dining - but attendees say they don't expect a quaint bed and breakfast inn.
Homemade bread and vegetables grown in Schmauch's organic garden are served in the dining hall, where the food is primarily vegetarian.
Campers' days are loosely structured. The mornings and afternoons are left free for people to hike nearby Mount Chocorua, do yoga on the lawn, relax, or walk the 371 acres to the shores of a pond on the property.
People of all ages attend, spending a week or more, and many bring their children. Nat Ross, 90, who went to the South in the 1930s to help in the civil rights movement, said he spends his days reading and conversing.
"People mingle here - black, white, Hispanic, young and old," he said. "People accept one another here."
The camp was formed in 1941 by Charles and Eugenia Weller, who felt peace could best be discussed in peaceful surroundings.
The Wellers were pioneers in the peace movement, establishing seven fellowships in the Chicago area in the 1920s and organizing events at the World's Fair of 1933-1934; start-up money was provided by Lola Maverick Lloyd, an advocate of world government and founder of the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom.
Schmauch says the camp has always been neutral - it doesn't advocate any philosophy of government, and peace is its sole objective.
But through the years, the outside world has often been mistrustful.
The sign out front has been toppled numerous times, plastered with Ku Klux Klan stickers, riddled with bullets and burned down.
Willard Uphaus, who preceded Schmauch as camp director, was greeted with the newspaper headline "Pro-Communist Takes Over World Fellowship" in 1953.
During the Red Scare of the 1950s, communists weren't to be negotiated with or listened to. Suspected communists and their sympathizers were blacklisted from their jobs and called before a congressional hearing conducted by U.S. Sen. Joseph McCarthy.
The fever touched the World Fellowship Center in the 1950s when the state Legislature passed the Subversive Activities Act, which outlawed the Communist Party and other organizations considered threats to U.S. security.
In the mid-1950s, the state commissioned then-Attorney General Louis Wyman to root out subversives. Wyman questioned 131 people, some of whom complained that their phones were tapped and that they were being harassed at jobs and spied upon. Though no subversives were identified during the 15-month investigation, several people were jailed.
The most notable case involved Uphaus. Wyman asked Uphaus to give him a list of people who had attended the center, but Uphaus refused.
The 69-year-old pacifist was jailed for contempt.
He spent a year in jail, prompting protests in and out of state. Appalled by the prospect of an indefinite sentence, a judge released him.
Times have changed for the better, Schmauch said.
"Twenty-five years ago, most people were indifferent or hostile," he said of the locals. "We have developed a lot more understanding now."
Schmauch ran afoul of the communist youth movement in his homeland of East Germany in the 1950s and came to the United States after living in the former West Germany. At first, the locals suspected he was a communist, as well.
But he has become an accepted member of the community. Perhaps it's because he is the first director to live in town year-round.
His children attended and graduated from the public schools, and the family goes to church, buys its groceries and runs its errands locally.
Schmauch joked that he finally was accepted after winning a local contest for the best garden.
"If you know how to grow vegetables in New Hampshire," he said, "you can't be all bad."
 Load-Date: October 24, 1994

 

End of Document
