

After the Deluge: Romanians Mourn Flood Dead, Assess the Damage
The Associated Press
July 30, 1991, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 691 words
Byline: By CHRIS RIBACK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BACAU, Romania
Body




Residents of northeast Romania who survived flash floods and a dam burst described fleeing to the hills when roaring waters awoke them, then watching the flood sweep away their homes and kill what lay in its path.
On Tuesday, the survivors mourned their dozens of dead and collected the scattered remnants of their lives. Entire villages were washed away, crops were flattened and bridges and highways were destroyed.
Authorities could not yet provide a firm figure on casualties. One official said at least 118 people were reported dead or missing after the dam burst early Monday and additional floods elsewhere.
Maria Ghiurca stood crying, ankle-deep in mud covering what used to be her kitchen in the village of Fundu Vaii Racaciuni, 200 miles north of Bucharest, the capital. Of the furnishings, only two beds and a table remained for her 10 children.
"We have no animals, no clothes, no food, no nothing," said her husband, Grigore.
More rain was feared as dark clouds gathered in the evening.
In the village of Gisteni, about 25 miles south of Bacau, Teresa Feer, 24, wore a black shawl of mourning. Her father was swept away, missing and presumed dead. Her cousin, Lenuta Freer, 19, lost her home.
"We were sleeping and we heard the water coming, so we ran to the hills," she said. "While we were sitting there, we saw the house being swept away."
Premier Petre Roman visited flooded villages on Tuesday, and relief helicopters made hourly tours of the area, distributing water, bread and medicines to the homeless.
Some villages were so badly flooded that helicopters could not land, so they dropped the food, pilots said.
Maj. Virgil Saramet, a military pilot, told of rescuing people from a field surrounded by water. Three shepherds refused to board until Saramet promised to return later for their sheep, he said.
Health officials warned of the danger of disease. Dr. Vasile Lezeriuc, a senior official of the Bacau county health department, said regional health officials were taking steps to stave off potential epidemics of dysentery, typhoid fever or viral hepatitis.
The deluge washed out dozens of villages in Bacau county. On Tuesday, state radio reported new flooding in 15 villages of neighboring Neamt county, but mentioned no new victims.
The disaster unfolded when torrential rainfall and a surge of water escaping from a burst dam hit the region around Bacau. The dam break emptied the Belci reservoir, leaving only puddles.
"We have people who escaped with only what they had on their backs. Everything else was destroyed," said Lezeriuc, who flew over the region. "From the helicopter I saw complete villages under water. Nothing was left alive."
Many villages got as much rain in 24 hours as they normally get in a year, Lezeriuc said.
Estimates varied as to the number of casualties as rescue and government officials took stock of the catastrophe. After arriving in the area, Roman spoke of "100 victims," according to the state Rompres news agency.
It was unclear whether he meant those killed or the total of dead, injured and missing.
According to a list issued by the government, officials had registered 46 dead in the Bacau region and 63 were reported missing. Seven were reported dead in five other counties where another two were reported missing.
Damage figures varied. Bucharest radio said 811 houses in 30 towns and villages of Bacau county, an oil-producing region, had been destroyed. Roman estimated damage at $ 33 million.
Political parties, unions and social organizations took up collections and donated money and food to the afflicted areas. U.S. Ambassador Alan Green Jr. announced that the United States was giving $ 25,000 to help the homeless.
Five hundred soldiers and 20 army helicopters were sent to the area to help with the rescue operation. Men and boys bore sacks of food brought by the relief helicopters through fields of mud to makeshift distribution centers.
In the brilliant sunshine that followed the rain, Teresa Feer hung the few clothes she had salvaged on the porch railing of what had been an uninhabited run-down house before the flood.
"What can I do?" she said. "We will have to remake our lives."
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto BUC2

 

End of Document
