

After The Hype Comes the Criticism
 The Associated Press
November 18, 1995, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 388 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body




The initial hype was quickly dampened by criticism on Saturday - and there are still two days to go before Princess Diana's television interview is aired.
There were signs of disapproval from BBC governors who weren't told about the British Broadcasting Corp.'s big scoop; reports that Diana's press secretary, who also wasn't told, will quit; and uncertainty about a Diana-tells-all video catching Christmas buyers.
And then there were the hints of the interview's contents, seized on here as the first leaks from someone who might have seen the interview.
Barbara Walters of ABC News, which bought the U.S. rights, said on the David Letterman show that the 34-year-old princess says in her first solo television interview that she doesn't want a divorce from Prince Charles.
"She is very nice and has the most gorgeous legs," said Walters. "She says in this interview, by the way, that she does not want to divorce Charles," Walters said.
The BBC will screen the closely guarded Diana interview in an hour-long program on Monday night. ABC will broadcast it at 9 p.m. EST on Friday.
Diana met with the interviewer without telling the royal family, increasing speculation of revenge on Charles, 47, and a new attempt to boost her image.
The prince has acknowledged being unfaithful during their unhappy marriage. They separated in December 1992.
Lord John Wakeham, chairman of the Press Complaints Commission, said Britain's media watchdog could offer no protection to Charles and Diana, who must bear the consequences of choosing to make their private lives public.
"If we court publicity, or reveal matters that should remain private, we run the risk of finding ourselves in a spotlight which may prove harsh and intrusive," Wakeham told the Mail on Sunday newspaper.
The staunchly pro-monarchist Daily Telegraph said BBC chairman Marmaduke Hussey, whose wife is a lady-in-waiting to Queen Elizabeth II, is miffed that no one told him about the interview.
Buckingham Palace called published reports that Diana's press secretary, Australian Geoffrey Crawford, will quit, "speculation."
The Daily Mail newspaper said Diana stymied a BBC plan to rush out the video, retailing at $ 20.40 apiece.
The BBC replied pointedly: No decision yet about the video, no pressure from the princess, and, it added in a statement: "The BBC owns the copyright."
 Load-Date: November 18, 1995

 

End of Document
