

American Experts Assess The Soviet Future
The Associated Press
August 22, 1991, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1338 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Mikhail Gorbachev is back in power. The plotters who sought to oust him have fled in disgrace. Now what?
It has been an eye-opening week for U.S. experts who study the Soviet Union. The Associated Press asked some for their assessments of the Soviet future in the aftermath of the attempted coup:
---
Jack Matlock, former U.S. ambassador to the Soviet Union
Matlock said Russian Republic President Boris Yeltsin stands to gain power because of a failed coup.
"It's left him frankly in a very powerful position," said Matlock, who left Moscow Aug. 11 and soon begins a one-year appointment as senior research fellow at Columbia University in New York City.
"If he can move ahead with reforms, the prospects are good they can root out the Communist Party functionaries and give him leverage," Matlock said.
Matlock, who was appointed ambassador in 1987 during the Reagan administration, said the future of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev is uncertain.
"Obviously we can not be certain how things will develop, but I imagine the way back to constitutionality is to restore him and let him have power again," Matlock said.
"If this happens, it will give him a chance to rid the hard-liners who held back the reforms.
"On the other hand, the republic leaders will have much enhanced authority and prestige."
---
Herbert Ellison, University of Washington, Seattle
"The Gorbachev era is over," said Ellison, a professor of Russian history at Washington's Jackson School of International Relations. "The scene of action will shift to the republics, so whoever's in (Gorbachev's) role will be in a weaker role. The real locus of power will be at the republican level, and the head of the Russian Republic will be the most powerful.
"Yeltsin's courageous advocacy of self-determination rights for other republics makes him the natural leader of an unfinished revolution. Yeltsin has built a cooperating relationship with Gorbachev and will seek to continue working with him."
---
Janos Radvanyi, Mississippi State University, Starkville, Miss.
"This is a historical turning point, in my opinion," said Radvanyi, a professor at MSU's Center for International Security and Strategic Studies. "I don't know whether there will be a Soviet Union as we know it after this. There will be a different Russia and I don't know what it will be. I expect it will be a loose confederation. Obviously, a very democratic one. I'm very upbeat. I think there will be a basic change. It will be a complete collapse of the Communist Party."
Gorbachev "will gain a great deal of legitimacy. His future depends on whether he continues his hesitant line."
Of Yeltsin, he said: "He's the hero. He won the whole battle. He will most probably be the most revered man in Russia."
---
Richard Pipes, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass.
Pipes, a professor of Russian history, said the future course of the Soviet Union was hard to predict.
"The menace from the right has been lifted for a long time to come. The Soviet Union can start organizing itself in a democratic way. But they don't have a tradition of democracy, and the country is poor, so it's hard to predict what will happen. A lot depends on individuals like Yeltsin and Gorbachev."
"The central government has lost power, and the independence of the republics is assured," he added. "Gorbachev will probably be free from the conservative threat, but he probably realizes he couldn't win a popular election, so it's hard to tell what he might do."
---
Richard Thomas, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas
"All the people I have spoken with in the Soviet Union realize that the system has to change," said Thomas, director of the Texas Engineering Experiment Station's Center for Strategic Technology.
"What we're going to see is a modest retrenchment to provide the basic needs of the citizens. The Soviets will have to force discipline to make the distribution system work so they can feed and clothe themslves. I think there will be a period of time where they will assimilate the changes Gorbachev brought to them. Five or six years from now another Gorbachev will appear to take them to a new level."
---
John Lepingwell, University of Illinois, Champaign, Ill.
Lepingwell, a professor of political science, said Gorbachev "will have to share power with the people who led the resistance movement and break decisively with those who supported the coup leaders. In effect, we may see the creation of a round table government as occurred in Eastern Europe after the revolutions there."
---
Myron Rush, Cornell University, Ithaca, N.Y.
Rush, a Soviet specialist and State Department consultant, said the failed attempt will be a boost to Yeltsin and other reformers.
"Yeltsin is the big winner, but I think Gorbachev is also a winner," he said. "The question is, can they continue to cooperate?"
---
Dmitry Mikheyev, Hudson Institute, Indianapolis
Mikheyev, a Soviet-born scholar, predicted that Gorbachev's return to power would be temporary. "This coup demonstrated that the Soviets can do without him. He has no support, no legitimacy and no popularity. He appointed the people who led the coup and that damaged his reputation badly."
"Boris Yeltsin, he's just the hero. The way he behaved politically and personally was flawless. He risked his life. He is a true leader at the peak of his power right now. He said he won't run for president of the Soviet Union and I don't think he will. He doesn't need to. He has power now."
---
Steve Hanke, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore
Hanke, a professor of applied economics, said he thinks the coup was planned all along by Gorbachev to convince the West to send his country more financial aid.
"The KGB could have cut communications of the Soviet Union to the rest of the world within hours. They didn't do it and so you have to start asking yourself what's going on here."
---
Alvin Rubinstein, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia
"One would like to be optimistic that Gorbachev … will push reform, which will be painful but essential if the Soviet Union is to move along a democratic and modernizing path. This was one of Gorbachev's biggest failures," said Rubinstein, a professor of political science.
"Yeltsin must emerge a much stronger president of the Russian republic, and he will be the dominant political personality on the Soviet domestic scene."
---
Leonid I. Mihalap, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, Va.
"The coup itself was a blessing in disguise," said Mihalap, a Russian emigre who just retired from Old Dominion. He was a member of the revolutionary Russian Liberation Army that sought Stalin's ouster in World War II.
"It showed not only to the people of the Soviet Union, but to the whole world that the Russian people don't want dictatorship anymore and they appreciate the solid Western support for Gorbachev as well as for freedom."
---
Walter D. Connor, Boston University
Connor, a professor of political science and international relations at BU and a fellow at Harvard University's Russian Research Center, said the coup plotters vastly underestimated Yeltsin.
"Yeltsin becomes the person who stood at the bridge and said, 'This far, you go no farther," Connor said. "This immensely increases his power and charisma."
---
Theodore Taranovski, University of Puget Sound, Tacoma, Wash.
Taranovski, an associate professor of history, said he thinks the coup attempt will force new reform. But he warned that a hardliner backlash may still come.
"It's certainly a victory for Yeltsin," he added. "He probably will be seen as a political savior. Yeltsin may well emerge as a national leader. Yeltsin might eventually be the next president of the Soviet Union."
---
Jeremy Azrael, the Rand Corp. in Santa Monica, Calif.
Azrael, senior social scientist at the Rand Corp., said the failed coup strengthened Yeltsin and weakened Gorbachev.
"The so-called nine-plus-one union treaty will be signed and implemented, and implemented on Yeltsin's terms."
"Generally, Gorbachev will remain in office, but with greatly weakened powers, and he's going to play an increasingly symbolic role."

 

End of Document
