

Arafat Says PLO Will Play Behind-the-Scenes Role in Peace Conference
The Associated Press
October 21, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 782 words
Byline: By DALIA BALIGH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




PLO leader Yasser Arafat said today his group will coordinate closely with Palestinian delegates at next week's Middle East peace conference, even though PLO officials are barred from the talks.
Officials of the Palestine Liberation Organization also said the foreign ministers of the PLO and Israel's Arab neighbors would meet Wednesday to discuss coordinating policies for the conference.
In addition, Arafat said he appointed the principal Palestinian negotiator for talks with Secretary of State James A. Baker III that set terms for the conference. While widely suspected, it was the first time Arafat claimed to have picked Faisal Husseini to represent Palestinians in talks with Baker.
However, Arafat made no claim of a PLO role in naming Palestinian delegates to the actual conference.
Arafat's comments came a day after Israel's Cabinet approved participation in the peace conference in a 16-3 vote, while repeating the government's stand that Israeli delegates would not negotiate with known PLO members. Israel considers the PLO a terrorist organization.
In Amman, Jordan, today, Soviet Foreign Minister Boris Pankin welcomed the Israeli decision to attend the talks, scheduled for Oct. 30 in Madrid, Spain.
Pankin, whose country is a co-sponsor of the conference with the United States, said the decision "indicates that Israel will take a serious position during the peace talks."
The Cabinet's decision came the same day three Israeli soldiers were killed in Israeli-occupied southern Lebanon by Arab extremists opposed to talks with the Jewish state, raising fears of heightened violence as the conference nears.
In Iran today, Iranian and Palestinian speakers at a conference on Palestine rejected peace talks with Israel. Iranian Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Velayati said the only solution for the Palestinian problem was the elimination of Israel, the Islamic Republic News Agency reported.
With Syria, Iran's staunchest Arab ally, favoring the talks, Iran has become almost completely isolated in its bitterly anti-Israeli stance. Among Arabs, only Libya has openly denounced the conference.
A radical Iranian newspaper today condemned Spain for agreeing to be host for the conference, which is opposed by some Iranian and Arab factions that fear the talks will strengthen Israel. The Farsi-language Jomhuri Islami warned of dire consequences for any nation that helped the negotiations.
The bombing attack by the pro-Iranian Shiite Muslim group Hezbollah prompted Israeli shelling of two nearby villages Sunday and an air raid on a Hezbollah command post in southern Lebanon today.
Arafat, the PLO chairman, said today that his group would be actively involved in the peace talks even if not at the conference physically. He said the Palestinian delegates attending as part of the Jordanian delegation would coordinate with PLO officials in Madrid and represent the PLO's interests.
"Each and every person among the Palestinian people represents the PLO," he said.
Arafat spoke with reporters after conferring for 90 minutes with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak about the conference. He met with Jordan's King Hussein on Sunday.
Arafat said he and Mubarak "agreed on greater coordination, particularly among the five front-line Arab parties" - the PLO, Syria, Jordan, Lebanon and Egypt. PLO officials said the foreign ministers of the five would meet in Damascus, Syria, to discuss common stands at the talks.
A senior PLO official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said Arafat was "seeking an Arab commitment not to sign separate peace treaties with Israel before a just and comprehensive solution to the Palestinian problem is reached."
Along with trying to end Israel's long conflict with its Arab neighbors, the conference will attempt to set up a measure of self-rule for Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, which were seized by Israel in the 1967 war.
Despite the Israeli Cabinet's approval, many in Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's right-wing government have reservations about the Madrid conference, the first full-fledged regional conference since one collapsed in 1973.
Israel's greatest concern is that the talks will force it to give up land seized in the 1967 Middle East war, but Health Minister Ehud Olmert said Israel could best defend its right to the land at the conference.
The government maintains it will not trade land for peace, as Palestinians and the United Nations demand.
One small ultra-nationalist party protested the Cabinet's decision by annoucing it would leave Shamir's coalition. The Tehiyah party, which has three seats in the 120-member parliament, said it would make the break when the peace talks begin. Shamir would still have a 63-seat majority.

 

End of Document
