

Army Out To 'Break The Mold' of Reduction, Failure
The Associated Press
March 1, 1992, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1005 words
Byline: By SUSANNE M. SCHAFER, AP Military Writer
Dateline: BAUMHOLDER, Germany
Body




Ramrod straight and saluting, the soldiers insisted they were celebrating a victory but moist eyes and froggy voices hinted otherwise.
In a historic moment, two U.S. Army divisions that stood Cold War guard against the Warsaw Pact were dissolving, part of the Army's worldwide overhaul.
"This ceremony marks a significant effort to reshape our Army," the service's top general, Gordon Sullivan, told hundreds of soldiers, families and German friends and officials who gathered for a wintry farewell recently.
Just one year ago, many of these soldiers were part of the largest armored battle in history against Saddam Hussein's Republican Guard. Now, the 8th Infantry Division and the 3rd Armored Division were to be no more.
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney has ordered the military to reduce 25 percent by 1996, and in the Army that means:
- Troop cutbacks of more than 250,000. That's three times as many "layoffs" as at General Motors.
- Active duty divisions will shrink from 18 to 12. Reserve forces will be slimmed down 10 divisions to six, with two skeletal "cadre" divisions that would balloon to full strength in the event of war.
- Putting off a new generation of helicopters and tanks.
Sullivan insists the cuts will not translate into lesser fighting power.
"We are not now, nor will we be, just a smaller version of a Cold War army," the former tank commander said.
"Our challenge is to reshape ourselves in a balanced way, and eliminate unnecessary force structure, so we keep a trained and ready army to respond to the needs of this nation," he said.
The smaller Army of the future will base the majority of its 535,000 soldiers Stateside, build far fewer high-tech weapons and rely on a near-equal-size force of reserves should the nation again call its sons and daughters to war.
Rather than preparing for a global East-West confrontation that would spawn major land wars in Europe or Asia, the Army is tailoring what it calls a "mix" of forces flexible enough to do battle, if need be, in a variety of flash-points around the globe.
That means a combination of heavily armored units for major land combat; lighter airborne, assault or infantry troops that can be deployed quickly in a crisis, as well as the "special operations" forces popularly known as the Green Berets to deal with specific threats.
While some say this shift may put the Army at odds with the Marine Corps' charter to maintain a versatile, expeditionary force, Sullivan and the Marine Corps Commandant, Gen. Carl Mundy Jr., have quietly worked behind the scenes to keep their roles distinct.
The force of the future must also recruit and keep top-quality soldiers, give them realistic battle training and, despite the weapons cuts, keep the technological edge over potential enemies.
But that all costs money, and the fat Reagan-era budgets are long gone. The Army's slice of the Pentagon's budget pie is expected to drop from $ 73 billion annually to the $ 50 billion-range before the end of the decade.
In a recent study, the Congressional Budget Office said the Army has two choices, given its budget pressures: even steeper reductions in personnel, or delays in expensive modernization programs.
The Pentagon has chosen the latter course.
Put on ice are two items that had been at the top of the Army's wish list - the Comanche scout-attack helicopter and a next-generation tank known as the "Block 3."
By deferring production of the chopper, and making do for now with improvements on the existing Apaches, the Army hopes to save $ 3.4 billion. Putting off the tank is supposed to glean $ 400 million in savings, while terminating an air defense anti-tank system known as ADATS will save $ 1.7 billion over the next five years.
The Gulf War also taught the Army that it must upgrade its family of support vehicles - since its trucks and transports couldn't keep up with the faster-moving armor during the war, which could have been a critical supply problem had the war dragged on. Adequate transport by air and sea are other worries, addressed in the new budget with orders for new ships and money for the C-17 transport aircraft.
The Army is also intent on cutting its force of 1.2 million reservists by 300,000, something Congress has little stomach for doing, since that will hit hometown jobs during recessionary times.
"We have to do this, we have to bring the reserves down," said Gen. Colin Powell, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
In order to bring down the active duty rosters, the Army is taking fewer men and women into the military, raising standards to make it harder to stay in, and offering a wide range of incentives - primarily financial - to encourage younger and midcareer officers to leave. They have also set up boards to select certain types of officers for early retirement.
Even though the service is attempting to avoid ordering people to leave, "It's still a very painful process," said the Army's top civilian, Secretary Michael Stone. From tightening enlistments to enforcing tougher performance standards, "We're using every technique" to slim the force down, Stone said.
Still, some on Capitol Hill say the Pentagon isn't doing enough to pare the size of the military, given the current international situation.
"What countries or contingencies are going to demand forces three times the size we needed in order to defeat Iraq?" Sen. Jim Sasser, D-Tenn., complained to Powell as he argued for a 1.6 million-strong military.
Sullivan says he has no quarrel with a smaller Army, but he argues vehemently against forcing the military to become too small, too quickly.
The general is a history buff who plies his visitors with books. One details the outbreak of the Korean War when ill-equipped and ill-trained U.S. soldiers suffered 6,000 casualties in the first month of hostilities and were nearly pushed into the sea by invading North Koreans.
"History tells us that every war since the Revolution, the U.S. Army has diminished in effectiveness - and paid for it in blood years later," he warns. "My challenge is to break the mold."

 

End of Document
