

As the Worm Turns: Hungarians Crushed by Fertilizer Scheme
The Associated Press
December 5, 1994, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 1064 words
Byline: By DANA MILBANK
Body




The Wall Street Journal
PAKOZD, Hungary (Wall Street Journal) - The Communists told Ferenc Safian that worms could make him rich. He bought 200,000 of them. Now the Communists are gone. So are the worms.
And what does Mr. Safian have to show for his investment?
"Worm droppings," he says, sinking ankle-deep into a field covered in the stuff. Behind him stands a 10-ton heap of the same. "It's worth nothing - absolutely nothing," Mr. Safian moans. "This is a fraud."
This is the great Hungarian worm scandal. It is a tale of lost fortunes so terrible it will make even the most hardened free marketeers squirm.
Would-be entrepreneurs thought they could produce rich compost for export as fertilizer. Instead, the worm farmers claim they reaped this grim harvest: 50,000 ruined farmers, including some two dozen suicides. Forty-million dollars lost. And 10 million cubic meters of worthless worm waste.
"The wrongdoing against the worm people is such a scandal that the pen is crying out loud in my hands," rails the introduction to "Worm Mafia," a 174-page book on the scandal just published by the Bio-Humus Producers Association, which represents the worm farmers. "The nation will not forget," it vows. To help the nation remember, the association gave a copy of the book to each member of Parliament. A parliamentary investigation is under way.
People in this part of the world are no strangers these days to failed plots to get rich quick. In Romania, the Caritas pyramid scheme swindled some four million people. Thousands of Russians were ruined when their shares in the MMM investment plan plummeted overnight. The scandals have undermined faith in free-market reforms. They are also nursing a grassroots nostalgia, one reason behind the former Communists' renewed popularity in places such as Hungary.
"I felt better before the transition," laments Aranka Ozsvath, who lost $ 2,000 in the venture. Now, she says, "I have no money. I have to choose between buying a new dress and eating."
But this free-market scandal was different; it started under the Communists. Back in the 1980s, researchers at state-run agriculture institutes came up with a theory: If Hungarian worms were fed a diet of specially-treated manure, they would convert the waste into a rich humus. That would remove unwanted farm waste while creating an organic fertilizer that could be sold abroad, bringing Hungary hard currency. The Communist government's Agriculture Ministry liked the plan, and funded the research.
"There were many articles in Hungary praising the good results," says Daniel Beza, head of bad debt for OTP Bank, Hungary's largest bank. "Even the Ministry of Agriculture said this was a professional and well-founded procedure. This enabled banks to think this was an investment that was worth financing."
All a prospective worm-farmer needed was 200,000 of the slimy creatures and 1,000 cubic meters of manure, available for about $ 2,000 - no small sum in a country where the average income is about $ 3,000 a year. OTP and three other government banks agreed to lend money. By 1990, some 50,000 people, mostly peasants, had taken loans totaling about $ 40 million. Enterprising middlemen agreed to procure worms for the farmers, and later to buy back the humus, which they planned to resell at a profit.
Hungarians doted on their worms, watering and feeding them daily. Some quit their jobs to become full-time worm farmers. Gyorgy Viza, a retired auto mechanic from Pakozd, wanted only the best for his worms. He washed the manure for them and kept their soil at just the right acidity. "I worked like an animal," he says. Mr. Viza and 50 neighbors waited eagerly for the golden droppings. Swept away by the new easy-money spirit in Hungary, "we didn't realize there was also more opportunity for fraud," he says.
The worm project withered quickly. The worms produced less humus than promised, and its quality was poor. Worse, there were no customers. It turns out nobody had bothered to do market research beforehand. The middlemen who sold the worms to the farmers reneged on their promise to buy back the humus; most claimed bankruptcy or disappeared.
Worm gurus think the scheme was doomed from the start. "People all over the world have tried to cultivate worms for profit but most don't succeed," says Win Didden, a soil biologist at Wageningen Agriculture University in the Netherlands. "Worms should be left in peace, not produced on a mass scale. It's too expensive."
Hungarian worm scientists reached the same conclusion. But their findings, published in 1990, came too late for the indebted farmers. Istvan Pocs, an author of the study, says he "disapproved" of commercializing worms from the start. Dr. Pocs, who notes that he publicly spoke out against the project, says his research was scientific, not commercial.
The Agriculture Ministry admits it supported the plan but says it made no promises about profits. Zoltan Kis, a state secretary in the ministry, blames the middlemen for making "profits from small people."
The small people tried suing the middlemen, but those companies either couldn't pay or couldn't be found. Hungarian courts are now trying to track them down. The banks forgave half the value of loans, but many farmers couldn't even manage that. This month, banks are expected to begin repossessing homes and farms.
"A lot of lives went down the tubes because of this," says Mr. Safian, the former worm farmer. After the worm project collapsed in 1991, his son, Ferenc Jr., left home and threw himself in front of a train, becoming another statistic in Hungary, which has one of the highest suicide rates in the world. Mr. Safian says, "I'm certain this whole scandal was the reason behind the death of my son."
Now Mr. Safian leads the fight for restitution. His group persuaded OTP to give $ 1 million to help the most desperate farmers and currently is seeking a similar amount from the government. At the groups' headquarters, a backyard shed near the railroad track in the town of Szekesfehervar, are 3,600 copies of the book "Worm Mafia" and piles of letters from ruined worm farmers.
"We were betrayed," says worm farmer Dezso Ujvari. "We were stuck with billions of worms and humus - and no buyers." On his own, Mr. Ujvari tried peddling his worm droppings all the way to Chernobyl, but he was unsuccessful. Now Mr. Ujvari sells the worms themselves - as bait.
 Load-Date: December 5, 1994

 

End of Document
