

At the Movies: 'The Advocate'
The Associated Press
August 18, 1994, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 503 words
Byline: By BOB THOMAS, Associated Press Writer
Body




An undercurrent of prurient interest always stirs in the movie business when the Ratings Board hands a new film an NC-17 rating, meaning no admittance to those under 17. The distributor protests loudly, threatens to sue and vows not to cut a frame. When an appeal is denied, a few snips are made, and the movie is released with an R.
The British-made "The Advocate" underwent that process and now is coming to theaters with an R, after 12 erotic seconds have been excised. Reviewers were shown the uncensored version, which seems no more explicit than mainstream movies that earn an automatic R.
"The Advocate" has been talked about for the wrong reason. It is, in fact, a spectacular directing debut for British TV veteran Leslie Megahey, full of superior acting and packed with scenes that haunt the memory.
Megahey, who also wrote the script, has the filmmaking skills to bring credibility to the outlandish premise that during the Middle Ages in France, the law could be applied to animals as well as humans. Thus, a donkey could be hanged for committing a cardinal sin.
This is news to Richard Courtois (Colin Friel), who has left the venality of Paris to defend the poor and helpless in a farming village. Instead of the simple life, he encounters brutality, wantonness, corruption and ignorance. And he discovers his clients can be a dog or a pig.
At first, Courtois tries his cases with a degree of clever humor. But as he observes the workings of the court, he is appalled by the rampant superstition. His fear that evil forces are at work leads him to the castle of the seigneur (Nicol Williamson), the secret controller of village happenings. The lawyer's life is complicated by his love affair with an Egyptian beauty (Amina Annabi), member of an outcast gypsy tribe.
"The Advocate" is too eventful to synopsize. Art Director Bruce Macadie has captured the medieval period with rich verisimilitude, and the gallery of peasant faces contributes to the film's effectiveness. It is filled with scary images, but it also offers the most bawdy fun since "Tom Jones."
With his handsome face and one-day beard, Colin Firth is perfectly cast as the lawyer whose ideals are sorely tried. He is surrounded by the best of British actors, especially Donald Pleasance as a weary prosecutor, Williamson as the crafty seigneur, and Ian Holm as a lascivious priest.
The Miramax Films release was produced by David Thompson, John Smithson and Claudine Sainderichin. The R rating is well-deserved because of eroticism, full frontal nudity, blunt language, violence and children in jeopardy. Running time: 102 minutes.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Load-Date: August 18, 1994

 

End of Document
