

At the Movies; 'Remains of the Day'
The Associated Press
November 2, 1993, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 795 words
Byline: By DOLORES BARCLAY
Body




"Remains of the Day" is a truly exceptional movie, a film of depth, quality, intellect and beauty. It is an exquisite film, with brilliant direction, and shattering performances.
It is the type of movie that stays with you long after viewing, and indeed another glorious gem in the filmmaking crown worn by James Ivory, Ismail Merchant and Ruth Prawer Jhabvala.
A splendid adaptation of the award-winning novel by Kazuo Ishiguro, "Remains of the Day" offers a beguiling and compassionate portrait of an English butler and the master-servant relationship. It also graciously indulges us in a study of manners and repressed love.
Stevens (Anthony Hopkins) is the quintessential gentleman's gentleman, a star butler who runs Darlington Hall like a well-oiled machine. After three decades in service at Darlington Hall, he looks back at life and relationships - to his employer, Lord Darlington (James Fox), his head housekeeper, Miss Kenton (Emma Thompson), and his father (Peter Vaughan).
It is now 1958. Lord Darlington has died and the new owner of Darlington Hall is a former American congressman, a Mr. Lewis (Christopher Reeve), who has retained Stevens. In a drive across England to once again seek the assistance of Miss Kenton, Stevens recalls the first time he met Mr. Lewis, back in the 1930s when Lord Darlington played host to a series of international meetings.
Doubts begin to erode Stevens well-preserved image of Lord Darlington, and attack his loyality because he realizes - through his reminiscences - that Darlington was involved with the Nazis.
And as his mind travels through those years, he also sees that he greatly compromised his personal life and feelings, that Darlington Hall and service to the lord took priority over his dying father and whatever emotional ties could have developed between him and Miss Kenton.
Miss Kenton is a passionate sort who barely can hide her affection for Stevens. There's a wonderful scene in which Miss Kenton intrudes on Stevens in his quarters. He is reading a book and she insists on seeing what it is he's reading; the book, perhaps, might give her a more intimate look at this man who wears privacy like a coat of armor. Stevens is taken aback, yet intrigued.
The civilized banter between the two is as electric as it can get with two lovers. Only their love is undeclared, unspoken - forbidden in a sense. And their relationship is a test of wills.
After leaving Darlington Hall, Miss Kenton marries and runs a country inn with her husband. Now her marriage has ended, and old feelings die hard. The repressed love is too deeply imbedded to ever erupt, and so Stevens returns to his mistress, Darlington Hall.
Stevens was born to butler. His father was a butler and died a butler. As he says, "A man cannot be contented unless he has done all in his power to please his employer."
James Ivory is a masterful director, eliciting such compelling and moving performances. So much is done with nuance, as when Stevens displays how shocked and hurt he is, by a mere and slight movement of his face, as though a psychic fist has punched him in the jaw. It is mere nuance, but so very effective.
Hopkins is brilliant. His Stevens is at times insufferable, but he's also pathethic because his sense of duty has imprisoned him in a way of life and mindset he's unable to escape. The actor draws us to his bosom and locks us in his soul.
Thompson is the perfect Miss Kenton, and once again proves a worthy match for Hopkins. What a wonderful screen duo; a great follow-up to their performance together in "Howards End."
Thompson brings a humanity to the efficient Miss Kenton. She also allows us to see her vulnerablities without losing her pride, honor and duty. There is much control in her performance, a control that ultimately tugs at our hearts.
Ivory directed from a screenplay by Ruth Prawer Jhabvala. Tony Pierce-Roberts provides enchanting photography. John Ralph and Ian Whittaker should be commended for their art direction and set decorating, and Richard Robbins' score is superb.
There are excellent support performances all around, especially Vaughan as the elder Stevens.
"Remains of the Day" is a clear front-runner for mutliple Academy Awards, and deservedly so. Produced by Mike Nichols, John Calley and Ismail Merchant, the Columbia Pictures release is rated PG. Running time: 2 hours, 14 minutes.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Load-Date: November 2, 1993

 

End of Document
