

At the Movies: 'A Walk in the Clouds'
The Associated Press
August 9, 1995, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 571 words
Byline: By BOB THOMAS, Associated Press Writer
Body




Mexico's Alfonso Arau created a stir in the international film world with his magical comedy-drama "Like Water for Chocolate," which in 1993 had the biggest gross in history for a foreign language film.
Arau's magic is missing, however, with "A Walk in the Clouds," a Hollywood movie with an impressive cast.
What emerges is an intense drama that falls short of its ambitions. In the end it remains as unconvincing as its sunset-splashed landscapes, which seem like postcards created by computers.
Paul Sutton (Keanu Reeves) returns from World War II for a sour reunion in San Francisco with his floozy wife (Debra Messing). Also disillusioned by the prospect of returning to his old job of selling chocolates (an allusion to Arau's previous hit?), he boards a bus for Sacramento to seek a better future.
He meets Victoria Aragon (Aitana Sanchez-Gijon), a Berkeley student returning to her family's vineyard in the Napa Valley. Sutton defends her from a pair of mashers, a scene that appears standard in star vehicles. He is thrown off the bus for his trouble.
Down the road he again finds Victoria, who has debarked at her stop and is crying. Sutton learns she is pregnant by an amorous professor. Now she must face a stern father, convinced he will kill her for bringing shame on the family. The ex-GI gallantly volunteers to pose as her husband.
This situation would play better in comedy than in turgid drama.
When the plot meets Victoria's hyperactive Mexican-American family in their vineyard, Giancarlo Giannini attacks the role of the bombastic father with Italian gusto. He is matched in expansive gestures by Anthony Quinn as the patriarch of the movie. In the battle of acting giants, neither wins.
Will Sutton stay or won't he?
Reviled by the father, getting drunk with the grandfather, tempted by his growing affection for Victoria - can the married, discharged soldier make things honorable? Scriptwriters, like painters of pastel sunsets, can overcome any obstacle.
The writing is credited to Robert Mark Kamen and Mark Miller & Harvey Weitzman (the ampersand meaning the latter pair are partners). The writers, however, required the actors to speak some of the clunkiest lines in recent time, often arousing unwanted laughter at a screening.
When Sutton finds a man in his wife's bedroom, the man hastily dons his clothes and says, "This is not what it seems."
Reeves has followed the hit "Speed" with "Johnny Mnemonic," a critical and box-office bomb, and now "A Walk in the Clouds." This is not the route to superstardom, and his agents should exercise care in future selections.
Spain's Sanchez-Gijon is lovely and sympathetic as the pregnant student. The rest of the cast performs within the limits of their ethnic stereotypes.
Arau is obviously a director of extraordinary talent. This time out, he has failed to capture the American idiom.
The Twentieth Century Fox release was produced by Gil Netter and David and Jerry Zucker. Rated PG-13 for language and adult situations. Running time: 102 minutes.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Load-Date: August 9, 1995

 

End of Document
