

At the Movies: "The Power of One"
The Associated Press
April 1, 1992, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 604 words
Byline: By DOLORES BARCLAY
Body




With "The Power of One," Hollywood once again has decided to view the horrors and problems of South Africa's apartheid through the eyes of a white. And once again, the Hollywood history lesson is that blacks can only overcome oppression through a white savior.
Right.
In this case, the white savior is PK, a South African lad of English heritage who is left orphaned at an early age. He likes to box. He also has a conscience. Indeed, what we have here is the Karate Kid meets Nelson Mandela, or Rocky goes to Africa.
John Avildsen, the filmmaker who gave us "The Karate Kid" and "Rocky," pulls together an international cast that includes John Gielgud, Armin Mueller-Stahl, Stephen Dorff and Morgan Freeman for this sweeping drama of South Africa in the 1930s.
The South Africa of the '30s is surprisingly not very different from the South Africa of just a few years ago. The filmmakers take pains to label the British as the creators of racial segregation, but also let us know that the Dutch refined the concept and took it to inhuman heights.
As a child, PK is hated by the Afrikaners because of British persecution. Afrikaner youth, who take up Hitler's cause as the world goes to war, taunt and torture PK, who is played by three different actors during three stages of his life. Stephen Dorff portrays the 18-year-old PK.
Once orphaned, PK is befriended by Doc (Mueller-Stahl), a kindly and cultured German who is sent to a prison camp once World War II breaks out. PK visits him daily and meets Geel Piet (Freeman), a black inmate who teaches him how to box.
Boxing restores PK's self-confidence, just as the martial arts did for the Karate Kid. It also makes him something of a legend in the eyes of the Zulus, who look to him as a savior because of a concert he once conducted at the prison camp. The original work had Zulu insults of the Afrikaners who are too dense to figure them out.
Once in high school, where Gielgud is cast as the headmaster St. John, PK is a formidable fighter. He trains at a gym where both whites and blacks box - but bouts in the townships between the two races are strictly forbidden.
Not only does PK sneak off to the townships, but also falls in love with the daughter of a rabid Afrikaner. So strong is the attraction, that he is able to turn around her thinking regarding blacks; together, with black friends from one of the townships, they teach other blacks how to read and write in a clandestine evening school.
"The Power of One" moves all over the place and does not really have a keen focus. Is this a film about a boy coming of age? Is it a boxing movie? Ia it a war movie? Is it a film about British students? Is it a political statement?
And how did Gielgud ever find himself acting in this jumble?
Making matters worse is a cloying score by Hans Zimmer that thunders in a lovely but overdone choral work just about every 15 minutes. Johnny Clegg provides the African music.
However, there are good performances all around. Freeman's accent, though, is a little baffling.
Avildsen directs from a screenplay by Robert Mark Kamen.
The Arnon Milchan production has Steven Reuther, Graham Burke and Greg Coote as executive producers. The Warner Bros. release is rated PG-13.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.

 

End of Document
