

At the Movies: 'M. Butterfly,' 'Cool Runnings'
The Associated Press
September 28, 1993, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1268 words
Body




'M. Butterfly'
 
 By PATRICIA BIBBY
Associated Press Writer
"M. Butterfly" - the story of a French diplomat who falls for and is betrayed by a Chinese opera diva - is a fascinating treatise about how little you can really know the object of your desire, right down to his or her sex.
But like a treatise, the film comes off as grindingly academic and never emerges from its cerebral cocoon to become the delicate love story it so desperately wants to be.
"M. Butterfly" obviously has high ambitions, adapted from Henry David Hwang's Tony-award winning Broadway play that in simplest terms is a reversal of Puccini's opera "Madama Butterfly." Instead of an American soldier cavalierly leaving his Asian lover, a Frenchman is ruthlessly dumped by his Chinese lover. Only there's a major twist - the Chinese woman, Song Liling or Butterfly, is really a man.
The film is based on the true story of French diplomat Bernard Boursicot's espionage trial in 1986. He was accused of smuggling secrets to his Chinese lover, Shi Pei Pu. Boursicot apparently discovered during the trial that Shi Pei Pu was not only a spy, but a man.
"M. Butterfly" opens in Beijing in 1964 in the rather dismal world of Rene Gallimard (Jeremy Irons), a bookkeeper in the French Embassy. He's captivated one balmy night by the star of a Chinese production of "Madama Butterfly."
After the performance, he meets the husky-voiced diva, Song Liling (John Lone), and is transfixed by this creature who brashly challenges his notions of imperialism and Asian-Caucasian relations.
The married Gallimard initially rejects Butterfly's advances (beautiful notes sent in painstaking calligraphy), but then reverses his fortune to become hopelessly addicted to Butterfly's strange ways.
When the couple broaches sexual intimacy, Butterfly claims ancient customs prevent her from shedding her robes and revealing her body. Instead, she satisfies him in unorthodox positions.
Despite this intriguing backdrop of the fragility of communication between cultures and lovers, "M. Butterfly" deteriorates into a confused story of treachery and betrayal that ultimately rings hollow.
The biggest problem is the lack of development of Gallimard's obsession for Butterfly. Just what keeps this man coming back? We see him systematically destroying everything around him, but there's little indication why. Their relationship revolves around Gallimard stumbling into Butterfly's boudoir at all hours (incredibly, she's always awake and perfectly poised) and having kinky sex.
Certainly, one hopes, a man wouldn't forsake everything merely for this feast of the flesh. Isn't there something - anything - that Butterfly is feeding him that satisfies the soul?
It doesn't help that Irons' acting skills seem to spring from the minimalist, fill-in-the-blank-stare school of emoting. And although he appears pained in his portrayal of the obsessed diplomat, with his gauntly drawn cheeks and sallow complexion, his pain seems to stem from a physical ailment, not actual lovesickness.
Director David Cronenberg ("Dead Ringers," "Naked Lunch") also lets major elements slip away while introducing others with no explanation. Gallimard's wife, for instance, disappears. We learn later she's left him, but there never are any scenes of conflict.
Later, we see a Chinese man harvesting dragonflies in the middle of the night. He animatedly explains what he's doing and hands Gallimard a dragonfly. A beautiful moment, except that its meaning is lost to everyone who doesn't speak Chinese. It works only as a gratuitous oddity.
But it's the film's maudlin ending that seals this as a hopeless exercise. Irons' performance as a tormented man is so over-the-top that it has delicious camp appeal. These final silly moments are no doubt meant to be haunting, but it's likely the only one who will be haunted by them will be Irons himself.
Produced by Gabriella Martinelli, the Warner Bros. film is rated R.
---
'Cool Runnings'
 
 By DOLORES BARCLAY
AP Arts Editor
About midway through "Cool Runnings," a comedy from Walt Disney Pictures, the coach of the American Olympic bobsled team stares in disbelief at the dedraggled bobsled team from Jamaica and says: "This is embarrassing."
So is this movie.
Loosely - very loosely - based on the story of the real team from the Caribbean nation that competed in the 1988 Winter Olympic games at Calgary, Alberta, "Cool Runnings" condenses what could have been a wonderful story of sportsmanship, tenacity and invention into a minstrel show.
Here's the Disney version:
Derice Bannock (Leon) is a sprinter who misses his opportunity to compete in the summer games after a freak accident during the trials. Undaunted, he figures out another way to get to the Olympics - a bobsled team.
He persuades a dishonored former gold medalist, Irv (John Candy), to train the team, none of whom has ever seen snow or ice.
With no sponsorship and not even a sled in which to train, the team heads off to Calgary, where they are met with ridicule and scorn by the other teams and much of the public, which considers them a major oddity. But they surprise all with a splendid performance during the heats, only to disqualify after their ancient sled falls apart. In the end, they win the hearts of all.
Here's the real version:
Jamaica was not the only country without snow to participate in 1988. The U.S. Virgin Islands sent two bobsled teams and a luge racer; the British Virgin Islands sent one bobsled team; Puerto Rico and the Philippines sent lugers.
The Jamaica team was put together by an American business consultant. Unlike the movie, the U.S. Bobsled Federation was very supportive and sent a coach, two bobsledders and two sleds. Eight Jamaican sledders were selected from a tryout field of 40. (The movie showed many showing up but all disappearing except one once a film clip about sled accidents was shown.)
Unlike the movie, which had the team going directly from sun and sand to ice and wind without ever having been in a bobsled, the real team competed in the World Cup at Igls, Austria, in December 1987, placing 35th in a field of 41.
Directed by John Turteltaub, whose claim to fame is "3 Ninjas," and produced by Dawn Steel, "Cool Runnings" presents us with a set of characters straight out of central casting: the pensive, responsible dreamer; the pampered rich kid who struggles to prove himself; the street tough; the buffoon. And it is the latter who is most offensive, a character named Sanka (Doug E. Doug).
Sanka is the quintessential shuckin' and jivin' stereotype, a character who takes the movie over the top and denigrates any real meaning it may have had. As one character tells him in the film: "You're going nowhere, Sanka, and you're thrilled to death about it."
Doug plays him as a sniveling idiot. The movie would be better without him.
Still, there are some good performances by Leon, Rawle D. Lewis and Malik Yoba. Candy is in his butch-but-sensitive Uncle Buck persona and is just fine as the down-and-out medalist.
Disney has rated this one PG, hoping to snare some younguns. If you do take your children, try to rent a copy of the '88 Olympics so they'll know that the men who made up the Jamaica team weren't a bunch of clowns.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Load-Date: September 28, 1993

 

End of Document
