

At the Summit, Eurospeak Takes The Burn Out Of Hot Issues
The Associated Press
December 9, 1991, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 340 words
Byline: By ABNER KATZMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MAASTRICHT, Netherlands
Body




As if the European Community's nine languages are not enough, bureaucrats roaming the hallways of the EC summit talk a code-filled jargon for the complexities of political and monetary union.
The new political shorthand, called Eurospeak, is part metaphor, part acronym, part euphemism - and entirely incomprehensible for the uninitiated.
It's aimed less at simplifying difficult concepts than at sugarcoating bitter political pills for some EC states.
"Cohesion," deals with Spain's demand for a transfer of wealth from the rich northern countries to the poorer southern EC members.
Under the "negative assent procedure" - or veto - the European Parliament, the EC assembly, gets some legislative powers.
And "Social Policy," refers to standardizing minimum wages, maximum working hours and other labor practices, a concept fiercely resisted by the British.
Borrowing a term from nuclear physics, the Eurocrats - or EC bureaucrats - describe a majority of states favoring a single European currency as the "critical mass" that will trigger the new monetary system.
As for acronyms, there's a bunch.
A British official emphatically and succinctly expressed London's reservations by telling reporters,
"We do not want QMV on CFSP" - qualified majority voting on common foreign and security policy. Britain wants unanimous European approval on those issues.
Language, even stripped of its Eurobabble, has always been a point of contention within the European Community.
At the EC headquarters in Brussels, the working language is French and, as a rule, meetings are translated as necessary. But key documents appear in all nine languages: Danish, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Italian, Portuguese and Spanish.
Last year, French President Francois Mitterrand reportedly wrote a letter to the EC executive Commission to object to the increasing reliance on English at its headquarters.
The EC's daily press briefings in Brussels are conducted in French even though English is increasingly the preferred language of many, if not most, journalists there.

 

End of Document
