

At the Movies: 'Son of the Pink Panther'
The Associated Press
August 24, 1993, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 504 words
Byline: By BOB THOMAS, Associated Press Writer
Body




Aside from record-setting grosses, the remarkable thing about the 1993 movie summer is the absence of blockbuster sequels. Follow-ups to "Star Wars," "Indiana Jones," "Batman" and others always had their premieres in hot weather months.
This year "Hot Shots Part Deux" had a fair run ($ 38 million), but "Weekend at Bernie's II" died. "Another Stakeout" and the umpteenth "Friday the 13th" appear destined for a brief shelf life.
Now comes "Son of the Pink Panther."
And there may be life in the old franchise yet.
Following the 1960s hits "The Pink Panther" and "A Shot in the Dark," Blake Edwards directed and co-wrote sequels in 1975, 1976 and 1978. Peter Sellers, the series' chief asset as the clumsy, odd-talking Inspector Clouseau, died in 1980.
Edwards' subsequent efforts were released in 1982 and '83 to unanimous ennui.
In his latest sequel, "Son of the Pink Panther" (actually Pink Panther was the name of a jewel in the first film), Italian comic Roberto Benigni stars as Jacques Clouseau's illegitimate son, who's as accident-prone and almost as funny as his predecessor.
The new Clouseau resulted from his father's dalliance with an Italian beauty. He pursues his career as a gendarme on the Riviera at a time when an Arab princess is kidnaped by terrorists.
The long-suffering Commissioner Dreyfus (Herbert Lom) is dispatched from Paris to take over the case. To his horror, he's subjected to the blunders of the second-generation Clouseau.
The investigation rambles from France to a desert kingdom for the climactic battle. Along the way, Benigni employs his fluid body and shattered English in an endearing way. He's a brilliant pantomimist and a top star in Italy.
His movie "Johnny Stecchino" is the top-grossing film in that nation's history, and it earned $ 35 million despite limited international distribution.
This is his biggest role in the United States so far - his parts in Jim Jarmusch's "Down By Law" and "Night on Earth" were well received but not widely viewed.
"Pink Panther" veterans make welcome returns: Claudia Cardinale, who was the princess in the original, as Jacques' mother; Burt Kwouk as the athletic manservant Cato, and Lom, his old twitchy self. Robert Davi, the former James Bond nemesis, provides excellent menace.
"Son of the Pink Panther" suffers from overplotting. Edwards and co-writers Madeline and Steve Sunshine try to cover too much territory, and the comedy suffers.
Still, Benigni is a wise choice to carry on the Clouseau banner, and his return (next summer?) would be welcome.
The MGM-United Artists release was produced by Tony Adams. Rated PG for suggestiveness.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.

 

End of Document
