

Author Of 'Bridge on the River Kwai,' 'Planet of the Apes', Dies
The Associated Press
January 31, 1994, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 303 words
Dateline: PARIS
Body




Pierre Boulle, the French novelist who wrote "Bridge on the River Kwai" and "Planet of the Apes," has died at age 81.
Boulle, whose best-selling books became world famous motion pictures, died overnight Sunday, his associates said today. No cause of death was immediately made public.
Born Feb. 20, 1912, in Avignon, Boulle (pronounced Bool) obtained an engineering degree at the Ecole Superieur d'Electricite and went to work at a rubber plantation in Malaysia.
In 1939, Boulle joined the French army in Indochina and the French Resistance in Malaysia before he was captured by the Japanese. His experience as a forced laborer before his escape in 1944 led him to write numerous books.
In Boulle's "Bridge on the River Kwai," which was made into a 1957 movie starring William Holden and Sir Alec Guinness, Allied prisoners of war at a Japanese prison camp in southeast Asia during World War II build a bridge for their captors.
A team of Allied saboteurs tried to blow up the bridge and is thwarted by the British commander at the prison. But the commander, played by Guinness, realizes his error and, mortally wounded, falls atop the detonator to blast the bridge apart as he dies.
The book was a dramatization of the plight of Allied POWs forced to build a 258-mile railway line, which passed over the bridge. About 400 men died for every track laid in the line, which became known as the Death Railway.
Japan wanted a rail link between Thailand and Burma as an alternate to the to the vital sea route that had become increasingly vulnerable to Allied submarines.
Boulle's futuristic book "Planet of the Apes," the story of a world where talking apes have power over man, was made into a motion picture in 1968.
Boulle was a chevalier of the Legion of Honor, received a War Cross from World War II and a Medal of the Resistance.
 Load-Date: January 31, 1994

 

End of Document
