

BCCI, One Year Later: The Wreckage Smolders
The Associated Press
June 27, 1992, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1328 words
Byline: By ROB WELLS, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




A year after international regulators seized BCCI, calling it a full-service bank for drug lords and dictators, history's biggest banking scandal remains far from over.
The case exploded in the public eye on July 5, 1991, when worldwide branches of Bank of Credit and Commerce International were padlocked amid charges of fraud, money laundering and infiltration of the U.S. banking system.
Regulators said the Third World's largest bank had served as a banker for terrorists and helped finance trade in narcotics and weapons.
Since its shutdown, BCCI-controlled Independence Bank of Encino, Calif., failed in January. First American Bankshares, which is Washington's biggest bank and which was secretly acquired by BCCI, struggled throughout 1991 as it tried to convince the public it wasn't run by the outlaw bank.
BCCI has pleaded guilty to federal racketeering charges in the United States, agreeing to forfeit a record $ 550 million in U.S. assets.
Four federal indictments have been returned naming 17 BCCI officers, Colombian drug dealers and a jailed savings and loan executive on schemes ranging from racketeering to illegal coffee sales.
Numerous lawsuits are pending as investigations continue in cities like New York, Atlanta and Miami, where the bank had actively operated. Hundreds of thousands of BCCI depositors await the return of their money.
A focal point in the BCCI story is the tiny Persian Gulf emirate Abu Dhabi. Sheik Zayed Sultan al-Nahyan, the country's ruler, contributed $ 500,000 to help start up BCCI in Pakistan in 1972.
Critics accuse the Abu Dhabi government and ruling family, who were BCCI's largest shareholders, of having knowledge of the bank's fraud from the beginning - charges they've denied.
"Abu Dhabi is liable, liable, liable," said Adil Elias, chairman of the BCCI Depositor's Protection Association. He is one of many with life savings tied up in BCCI.
"They knew about all the illegal activities of the bank," said Elias, of Heathrow, Fla. "They were part of it."
Depositors like Elias are furious with a proposal crafted with the help of Abu Dhabi to repay 250,000 of BCCI's depositors in 40 countries. The plan, reached with Touche Ross and Co., an accounting firm appointed by British courts to liquidate BCCI, would pay depositors 30 cents to 40 cents on the dollar for their savings.
"I think they are buying peace very cheaply," Elias said.
Some charge the payback plan is a cover-up because depositors endorsing the deal must sign away their right to sue.
They also accuse Abu Dhabi of impeding investigators by keeping key BCCI executives and documents beyond the reach of U.S. investigators.
Ahmed Al-Sayegh, a representative of the Abu Dhabi government investigating BCCI, defends the country's role.
Abu Dhabi, he said, "had no involvement in the frauds perpetrated by BCCI, which went on for some 18 years while (Abu Dhabi's ruling family and government agencies) were passive, minority shareholders."
In fact, Abu Dhabi is the biggest victim of the BCCI fraud, with losses upward of $ 6 billion, he said.
Al-Sayegh, who testified before Congress in May, said Abu Dhabi has agreed to provide $ 1.7 billion toward the global payback plan for BCCI depositors. Further, Abu Dhabi and others signing the agreement are not immune from criminal charges if the agreement is approved, he said.
Al-Sayegh, who also is director of the Abu Dhabi National Oil Company, disputed allegations that his country was stonewalling U.S. and British investigators.
The country's ability to cooperate over the past two years has been severely restricted by its limited resources, the complexity of the BCCI affair and bank secrecy laws, he said. Demands of the Gulf War, and intensive negotiations on a payout plan to depositors, also limited its cooperative efforts, he said.
Al-Sayegh said Abu Dhabi arranged access to BCCI staff and documents for Federal Reserve Board investigators, allowing them to unravel BCCI's puzzling ownership of First American Bank and bring a civil complaint against BCCI.
But critics contend U.S. and British investigators have been prevented from interviewing 18 key BCCI officers for fear they would provide damaging information about Abu Dhabi's role.
Swaleh Naqvi and Zarar Iqbal, both former BCCI chief executive officers, have been confined in the comfortable Abu Dhabi Police Officers Club since Sept. 8. They haven't been formally charged yet, but Iqbal's wife told The Associated Press last week that the government's prosecutors interrogated all but one of the officers.
Key investigators agree Abu Dhabi has been little help in their investigations.
"At this point, we're having tremendous difficulty getting answers because of the lack of cooperation from Abu Dhabi," said Jonathan Winer, an investigator for Sen. John Kerry, D-Mass.
"Their motivation for that is a matter of speculation," Winer said. "Certainly, if they had something to hide, this would be one way of hiding it."
John Moscow, an assistant Manhattan District attorney, said his office has been seeking the emirate's cooperation since November 1990.
It was Moscow's boss, District Attorney Robert Morgenthau, who blew the lid off the BCCI case last summer with a wide-ranging indictment. Morgenthau had pursued the case after a disgruntled congressional investigator provided key information on BCCI's fraud.
"I'm not aware of any cooperation from Abu Dhabi as of yet," Moscow said. He declined to say if the BCCI majority shareholders have impeded his investigation.
"We don't know what evidence they have to offer, so we don't know how far along we would be if we had access to evidence," Moscow said.
A senior U.S. Justice Department attorney, Ira Raphaelson, had only this to say about cooperation: "We haven't said anything yet."
A March report by The Wall Street Journal cast further doubts, saying BCCI loan documents show Abu Dhabi ruler Sheik Zayed and his family received more than $ 1.5 billion in BCCI loans.
The Justice Department on Thursday sought to seize $ 100 million the Abu Dhabi ruling family held in U.S. accounts, contending the money was invested in BCCI.
A spokesman for the sheik, who declined to be identified, said that while Zayed had loans with BCCI, a review of loan records didn't confirm the newspaper's figure. The sheik's spokesman also has said the campaign to discredit Abu Dhabi is an attempt to unravel the depositor payout plan.
Depositors voted overwhelmingly in early June to reject the plan. But so far, the agreement has won approval by courts in England and the Cayman Islands, the home of a key branch of BCCI.
Approval of the payout plan is pending before a court in Luxembourg, BCCI's home branch and the last court to endorse the agreement before it's presented to creditors for a vote.
Abu Dhabi holds 12 percent of the votes for the deal, leaving liquidators to woo 39 percent of creditors for a simple majority approval, Touche Ross said.
Some believe Touche Ross pursued a flawed strategy by not suing those closely involved with BCCI from the beginning: Abu Dhabi, BankAmerica Corp., a founding shareholder of BCCI, and BCCI's accountants, Price Waterhouse and the firm now known as Ernst & Young.
Such a lawsuit could reap millions, raising the possibility of a higher payback to depositors, said Eric Peters, an investigator for the San Diego law firm Milberg, Weiss, Bershad, Specthrie & Lerach.
"They have not taken a lot of the actions open to a liquidator," Peters said.
His firm's multimillion-dollar BCCI class action lawsuit was dismissed as too vague in January by a federal judge in Los Angeles, much to the delight of Price Waterhouse, BankAmerica and Ernst & Young, all of which denied any responsibility for BCCI's criminal history.
George Westropp, a spokesman for Touche Ross, said depositors are flirting with disaster if they reject the plan and pursue litigation.
"Creditors are likely to get 10 cents on the dollar, if they're lucky," he said. "And that 10 cents may come in the next century."

 

End of Document
