

Books and Authors: Memoirs on Integration - One Searing, the Other Cool
The Associated Press
June 10, 1994, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 858 words
Byline: By TOM PARSONS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LITTLE ROCK, Ark.
Body




On the 40th anniversary of the 1954 Brown vs. Board of Education decision, two participants in the Little Rock Central High School integration turmoil that followed in 1957 offer new books - one devastating, the other detached.
The difference between the two books reflects both the differing roles of their authors, and the different tasks they set themselves in writing the volumes. Both succeed.
Melba Pattillo Beals' "Warriors Don't Cry" sears the reader with its narrative of her junior year in high school, 1957-58. That year, she was one of the Little Rock 9, the group of black students who integrated Central over the vocal and violent protests of mobs and fellow students, and despite the efforts of then-Gov. Orval E. Faubus.
In "Civil Rights and Wrongs," Harry Ashmore attempts to provide an overview of the decades-long war for civil rights in this country. The book's subtitle is "A Memoir of Race and Politics, 1944-1994."
Ashmore is remembered in Arkansas as the editorial page editor of the Arkansas Gazette who won a Pulitzer Prize for his editorials on the Little Rock crisis in 1957, when the Gazette also earned a Pulitzer Public Service medal for its coverage.
The author is billed on the flyleaf as "an observer and participant on the front lines of the civil rights movement." That he was usually one, but not the other, is made clear by the simultaneous publication of Beals' book.
Ashmore's effort might be likened to that of a colonel on the Allied staff in London during World War II: He's not really on the front lines, but he believes he's making the decisions that set the course of the war and he's in a good position to write a history.
Beals, though, has provided a detailed account of one battle, a battle that lasted nine months. Hers is the perspective of a foot soldier under fire every day - and under orders not to shoot back at the enemy.
"We were well aware that school officials were waiting for any excuse to kick us out," she recalls. "Repeatedly we were told, 'Don't give anyone the slightest opportunity to accuse you of being out of line."'
Her book tells of daily vilification by the segregationist students fighting to keep their school all-white: racial slurs regularly uttered before teachers who acted as though they'd heard nothing; curses and shoves; feet and hands thrust out to trip or to spill books. It recounts the physical injuries inflicted or intended - by the pointed end of a stick bearing the Confederate flag, by sharpened pencils, by hurled rocks and food, and even by acid flung in her face.
The account could have led readers to fury, or despair. That ultimately it doesn't is traceable to Beals' forgiveness and understanding, and to her recollection of the occasional beams of generosity and goodness that shone through the hatred.
She tells of "Link" - not his real name - one of the students who had set out to make life miserable for Beals and the other pioneers, but who eventually could stomach no more. He provided an escape when she had unthinkingly allowed herself to be trapped by several young punks after school. And, with violence escalating as the school year drew to a close, he even acted as a spy in the midst of the racists' planning sessions, tipping her by telephone to areas and activities where she would be in danger, "feeding me vital information that could help me survive."
"We played a cloak-and-dagger game, passing notes in books and such," she writes. "But we never spoke to each other in school, or walked near each other, or acknowledged each other except with our eyes for fear he would get caught."
Ashmore's longer volume arouses none of the passions generated by Beals' book. He does, however, provide a historical context for the battle she fought.
He sets a foundation with the closing years of the 19th century and the early 1900s, contrasting the accommodationist views of Booker T. Washington with the more confrontational approach of W.E.B. Du Bois.
But he locates the real roots of the modern civil rights movement in the 1930s and Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal. That's a decade earlier than the postwar years most often cited as the source of the turbulent activities and sweeping changes of the late 1950s and '60s.
Not coincidentally, Ashmore himself came of age in the 1930s, so he is able to provide commentary from a personal perspective beginning with that era. Given the central role he frequently recalls playing, the suspicion arises that, were he a decade older, he might have discovered the movement's roots in the 1920s or, if 10 years younger, he might be part of the consensus assigning primacy to the postwar period.
Ashmore is best at analyzing the politics and pressures and attitudes that produced the violence and the triumphs of the '50s and '60s, and the dissipation of energies that followed in the decades since. The context he provides is largely political, as chapter follows chapter tracing the "Retrograde" Nixon years, the "Interlude" of Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter, and the "Dead End" of Reagan's ascendancy.
Beals and Ashmore together offer the opportunity to understand some of the basics of how we got from there to here.
 Load-Date: June 10, 1994

 

End of Document
