

Books and Authors: True Confessions - Louis Begley In Peacetime "One had to talk, one could not only talk about books, one had to be ready to talk about oneself. Which self? The issue was the limit of one's inventiveness and memory, because the lies had to be consistent - more consistent … than the truth." - Louis Begley, "Wartime Lies." ---
The Associated Press
February 5, 1993, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 951 words
Byline: By HILLEL ITALIE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Louis Begley still looks out from his 25th-floor office some days and wonders how he got here. Could the Polish boy lucky to get out of Europe alive really have become the polished lawyer and novelist calmly taking in the Manhattan skyline?
"My life has been, if you like, a marvelous, eventful success story," he says in his soft, accented voice; his hooded eyes twinkling, his lips gentling smacking.
"You could say my first six years of existence were very happy. My next five years were very difficult and dangerous. Then, a few years of turmoil and fun and I just zoomed ahead. I don't mean to say every one of my days has been a barrel of laughs, but I have been extraordinarily fortunate."
Interviewed recently at a law firm where he's a senior partner, Begley, 59, carries himself with the grace, the deference, of a man who's spent his whole life in the winner's circle. His modesty has a sense of Old World richness, like a millionaire with an infinite number of dollar bills to hand out.
He greets you at the reception area and guides you to his office, making sure to let you walk in front. Once there, he offers you coffee and hangs up your coat. He's a mumbler, he warns, making it clear you shouldn't hesitate to tell him so. He lights up a cigarette, but only after asking permission.
The life of Begley can be summed up this way: Harvard University. Harvard Law School. A prestigious law firm. An apartment on Park Avenue and two houses in the Hamptons. A National Book Award nomination for his first novel, "Wartime Lies," published in 1991.
That was after the war. Before came the "difficult and dangerous" years, the ones lived by young Ludwik Begleiter, the son of a wealthy Jewish doctor. There was occupation and separation, hiding out in boarding houses, dodging bullets in Warsaw.
Then came liberation and emigration, first to Paris and then New York. He received a scholarship from Harvard and graduated as an English major, summa cum laude, in 1954.
"I loved, genuinely, loved Harvard. It liberated me. I was an only child and I had been supervised, always, kept under control, always. Suddenly, there was no one to keep me under control," he recalled.
"But I always knew about the shock of all the changes, about the incompleteness of my preparation, about the holes they could poke through everything I wrote, about the miserable, insecure, lonely me inside me. Of course, I knew about that."
Begley wrote in college, but "ran out of steam" and instead studied law. He married, divorced and married again. There were children and grandchildren. Friends remembered little discussion about the war.
About three years ago, he tried fiction again, and like a long repressed nightmare the past returned. What emerged was a fascination, even obsession, with appearances, deception, the way people invent and reinvent themselves.
"Wartime Lies" told of a Polish boy and his aunt making their way through Nazi occupation, hiding out, improvising like actors in a play in which everyone knows the lines but them. At the end of the book, Begley announces the child ceased to exist after the war, replaced by a man with no past.
"I found it rather exhilarating to write the book," he said, "but some things I wrote moved me very deeply, caused waves of great emotion. I was writing about the last happy times the little boy has with his grandfather, about the loss of paradise."
The author's current novel, "The Man Who Was Late," is constructed like a Jamesian ghost story. The narrator, Jack, is sorting through the papers of his late, mysterious friend, Ben, a European immigrant who loses his roots and eventually his life.
Ben is a Harvard graduate, who marries a woman with two children. He becomes a prosperous businessman, well-spoken, with a memory that could rival a floppy disk. Underneath, however, he's profoundly unhappy, detached from himself and others.
His downfall begins after he has an affair with Jack's beautiful, troubled cousin, Veronique. She is willing to leave her husband, but Ben is unable to make up his mind. He avoids her, then seeks her out, but the otherwise punctual man has decided too late.
"I am very much interested in how people see themselves, how they become what they are, how they construct themselves," Begley said.
"Ben's flaw, as I see it, is a lack of courage, being willing to take the best of life, being willing to move to the future. There's a lack of acceptance of who he is. He sees that Veronique is trouble. Perhaps a different man would have taken a chance with trouble. There is something about him that he cannot bear to take more than he gives."
What inspired this book? First of all, Begley notes, it should not be considered a sequel to "Wartime Lies." Ben is neither the adult version of Maciek, the boy in his first novel, nor a fictionalized version of himself.
But Begley says he did base the story on something from his own life. Many years ago, a relationship was damaged. Begley patched it up, but later wondered what would have happened if he had been less "optimistic," less "resourceful."
He describes this all very vaguely, declining to give details. He refers to a "series of circumstances," to a relationship of "upmost importance." You imagine high-level meetings, men with briefcases, stacks of classified documents.
Writing has helped him open up about the past, but after so many years caution can become as instinctive as putting on gloves in winter. Like a skilled undercover man, Begley has the gift of revealing and protecting himself at the same time, confessing secrets without telling you anything he doesn't want you to know.
 
 "The Man Who Was Late" was published by Alfred A. Knopf and has a suggested retail price of $ 21.

 

End of Document
