

Boris Yeltsin's Speech to the Russian Congress
The Associated Press
April 7, 1992, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 3160 words
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Here are excerpts from the text of Boris Yeltsin's speech to the Congress of People's Deputies on Tuesday, as translated by The Associated Press:
In the five months since the Fifth Congress, major changes have taken place in Russia. … The endless period of expectation of changes has ended. Today reforms are a fact of our life. … They are beginning to bring the first results, both positive and negative.
… It became clear at the end of last year that the tendencies of fragmentation, breakup in all spheres of public life, had reached the critical point. …
The last stronghold of the command system, the rationing of staple goods, fell by the end of last year. The ruble was in mortal danger. The threat of social chaos and ruin loomed over Russia. …
Anxiety was growing in the country. It was anxiety for the next weeks and days rather than for the future. The remaining goods had disappeared from the shelves of the stores, huge lines were waiting to buy anything, even bread was in short supply. People were waiting in horror for the winter.
In those days the situation was forcing us to prepare ourselves to the worst. Only two options remained. One was to introduce emergency rule. The other was to start reforms at once.
Emergency rule … would have resulted in a deep split in society. Civil war could have become a reality. That solution was rejected.
I'd like to remind the deputies that it was here, in this hall, that you took the only correct decision at the last Congress. It was to start reforms.
We told the people of Russia honestly that they will be tough. We bravely embarked on the route of reforms. A young government received the mandate. For the first time in years a team of reformers headed the executive branch of power. …
The government came to the conclusion that the situation could be stabilized if the time for starting the essential market mechanisms was brought down to a minimum, if budgetary and fiscal policies were toughened, if hyperinflation was prevented.
Unfortunately, the road of soft, gradual and painless reforms was not available to us. The newly formed government assumed huge responsibility for transformation of the Russian economy - not for patching up holes, as before.
From the start, criticism was poured on it from the right and from the left. Beginning with the first days, some "well-wishers" insisted that the reform Cabinet should resign. Even at this Congress, voices are raised in favor of its replacement. I am sure that each minister would be happy to do it, if he could be sure that a new government would be able to pursue the (reforms) and would do a better job, would not just waste six critical months.
I am convinced that the Fifth Congress took correct decisions, including those relating to the additional powers and the head of the government. Now we have a precise (program) for deep economic transformations.
-For the first time in many years, we have forced the economy to talk in terms of finances;
-Monetary and fiscal policy is beginning to act as the determining factor of (the economy);
-We have given up senseless military spending …
-We have managed to achieve some sort of political accord between the republics and sign the Federation Treaty.
-Russia has won international recognition and support for its reforms.
In three months, the government has shown that it is capable of pursuing the chosen policies consistently, without panic. … There have been miscalculations, but the course approved by the Congress has been implemented consistently. The government never wavered.
We started the reform together and it would be a major political mistake to have some sort of antagonism. At this difficult time, we have no right to play political games, a fight for illusory priority. Provoking disputes is the ultimate in irresponsibility.
It's not true that the people have abandoned hope, that they are bound by apathy and mistrust, that they want to return to the past. The worst danger to Russia is a return to recent past - the pseudo-reforms of the union government. As president, I will do my best to prevent such reversal.
It's too early to draw conclusions even from the initial and, perhaps, most difficult period of reforms.
Freeing prices was not the beginning of Russia's reform, but an inevitable conclusion to the policies of the Ryzhkov-Pavlov (Soviet) Union governments. Their long efforts have brought the Russian economy to such a state, have left such deep scars in our economy, that we had to draw a line under their work before beginning to clear space for our own reforms.
(The decline in production) did not begin in January 1992, nor even in January 1991, it began much earlier. Statistics show that … rates of decline compared to 1991 have practically not changed. …
But this is what deserves note: Prices are beginning to reflect incomes and demand. It is one of the first signs of market mechanisms.
Most important, we have managed to start the rusty mechanism … based on monetary circulation. We have restored interest in the ruble that has become a real … means of purchasing goods.
The status and credibility of the ruble is improving. Talk about its inevitable death has stopped. The ruble has somewhat ousted the dollar from the internal market.
One of the noticeable results of the government policy is the reduction of the budget deficit. It had to be done, above all, to save the ruble. To an extent, this task is being fulfilled. (The ruble) is beginning to gain real purchasing power in the internal market.
Early introduction of a single ruble exchange rate is a priority for the government. As a preliminary measure, two rates will be introduced: a single floating exchange rate for current operations and a permanent rate for capital movement.
At the same time we're not overestimating what has been done. The turning point has yet to be reached. Our economy was and continues to be loss-making. It has abnormal interests and no owner.
"Grab more" - that's its greedy law.
Instead of lining prices up with market demand … manufacturers are beginning to build up their profits. … Theoretically, the market ought to correct that. But it will not happen overnight. In the meantime, whole industries and regions may be ruined.
The destructive potential of the loss-making economy has proved to be so powerful, that it literally broke through all lines of defense. Today, however, we have a basis for launching a blow on the loss-making economy.
General principles of controlling losses will form the basis for modifying the taxation policy. It is clear today that taxation rates ought to be cut down.
There will be other ways to modify the reform program:
The government and the central bank have concluded an agreement on reducing the debt of enterprises. Part of the funds for loans will be passed on to local authorities. … (It) will give us time and opportunity for improving (the situation) in loss-making industries.
The emphasis is shifting from short-term tasks to … a long-term strategy of renewing the Russian economy and its integration into the international economy.
The stability of economic reforms, formation of a reliable social basis, improving the efficiency of all market mechanisms - all depend on how fast we can create a powerful private sector in the economy, (and the) implementation of the privatization program. We're not satisfied with its progress. So far, it has been slow and ugly. … We have to admit that this is a serious strategic shortcoming of the government, the president as well as the Supreme Soviet.
A major task of the next stage of privatization is to open personal privatization accounts for the people. Each citizen of Russia is to receive his own privatization account before the fourth quarter of 1992. We need millions of property owners. … Only in this case will the reforms gain broad support and extensive social foundations.
The social force that is capable of pulling Russia out of the crisis is a large group of entrepreneurs. The government will offer support to each individual who decides to embark on this route. That will allow us to create a new important sector in the economy, a sector of small- and medium-sized businesses that will become an important instrument of anti-trust policies.
At present we are laying the foundations of new relations between the state and the agricultural sector. They will be based on a rejection of administrative controls (and) on support of all forms of entrepreneurship. …
However, it meets with some legislative obstacles. … The existing legislation is contradictory, especially the part relating to the land reform and the right to create individual farms.
State credits may become … an efficient instrument in the support of agricultural producers. … One of the main conditions for giving credit will be that it is partially repaid in agricultural produce. … The government has allocated 20 billion rubles for social structures in the countryside. The government and the Central Bank have been instructed to submit proposals on additional credits for seasonal work on the land amounting to 70 billion rubles.
The agricultural sector will be getting hard currency from funds received from international financial institutions.
The considerable modification of tasks at the new stage of the reform will require modification of our views about executive power. We do not need bureaucratic commanders, we need civil servants who work on a contractual basis. It is largely up to the parliament to decide when we can have such a system. The draft of the law has been submitted to the Supreme Soviet.
Crime growth has become an issue of major political and economic significance. We expected to run into this problem, but it has assumed a larger scale than could be expected. Organized crime, corruption … in conjunction with state and power structures are trying to dictate their rules of the game. They are doing considerable harm to the formation of a civilized market (and) creating a negative image of Russia and the Russian people in the eyes of the international community.
A key question … is the social price of reforms. … The transition to a market economy has turned out to be so painful because the entire cumbersome system of equal social support for everyone has been broken.
On the whole, we managed to prevent a collapse of social policies, an avalanche of demands capable of devaluating every measure and disorganizing reforms. We were engaged in an organized retreat on issues of social support. But we managed to hold on to the most important positions.
We'll be using funds received from privatization of federal and municipal property … for health services, support of mothers with small children. Health insurance is in the orders of the day.
On the army: As you know, Russia took a long time to decide to form its own army, hoping until the last moment to preserve the single commonwealth army. We did not manage to do that, however.
At present, a state commission has been established. It will be headed by Col. Gen. (Dmitri) Volkogonov and has been instructed to carry out initial work for creating a Russian army and fleet. All units and military installations on the territory of Russia as well as the troops in Germany, Poland, the Baltics, Mongolia and in the Caucasus, in the (former Soviet) republics, will be taken under the jurisdiction of Russia.
Of course, it will be a large army. We will be cutting it down, as we said before in our obligations, by 700,000 people, but only on condition of unconditional social support for every serviceman. In future we intend to have an army and fleet of less than 1.5 million people. The defense ministry will be gradually transformed into a civilian (agency). After a transition period, the army will be formed on a (professional) contract basis.
We are firmly in favor of cutting down nuclear weapons on the basis of agreements between Russia and the United States. In two years, weapons of this type must be left only in Russia, of all the commonwealth states. We have proposed more than once to conclude an agreement on security with the republics of the commonwealth. All conflicts, including those relating to the Black Sea Fleet, could be resolved on its basis.
Today the Black Sea Fleet is a cause for concern, that is why, I think, (commonwealth military commander) Yevgeny Shaposhnikov will inform you about the present situation after last night and this morning's decisions.
The organization of the Russian army and fleet will be finished in near future, and we shall take care of them in the best Russian traditions.
The creation of the Commonwealth of Independent States gave us new problems to deal with. Some of these issues require immediate resolution. Often they are explained by a lack of legislative foundations for the operation of the government in the new conditions.
I am sure we all share the opinion that 25 million of our compatriots in the (commonwealth) states must not and will not be forgotten by Russia.
It would be fair to say that the foreign service of the executive branch was unprepared for … international relations within the commonwealth, especially with Ukraine and the Central Asian republics.
As for our international relations, our main efforts will be concentrated on:
-Creating favorable external conditions for political and economic reforms;
-Overcoming the heritage of global antagonism …
-Establishing stable partnership with the democratic states of the world.
We have made the following first steps:
First, we managed to win support and understanding for the democratic reforms in Russia.
Second, we have managed to win recognition as the legal successor of the Soviet Union, including the rights and duties as a nuclear power and a permanent member of the U.N. Security Council.
Third, bilateral relations … have been freed of ideology.
Our concept of foreign policy is based on … natural (and) carefully defined national interests. These interests require assurances of the security, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Russian Federation, creation of a stable … economy, firm institutions of democracy, protection of the rights and dignity of the people of Russia.
We must see the difference between the growth of national identity and … the desire to preserve individual power under the slogans of transforming Russia as a federation.
We have supported the buildup of the status of republics and regions of Russia, and we will continue to do so. But we will never encourage … the initiatives of some leaders trying to present their personal interests as those of their nations.
We consider the signing of the Federation Treaty as an act of good will by the organs of state power … designed to preserve unity and to restore Russia. The signing gives reason to hope that we will be able to preserve the country and the unity of Russia.
Now the ideas and principles of the Federation Treaty require constitutional confirmation. The new constitution must reflect the considerable increase of the status of the (autonomous) republics (inside Russia) … More authority and appropriate resources ought to be concentrated at the local level, and naturally, more responsibility.
At the same time federal authorities must not just be there for decoration. They must and will ensure compliance with Russian laws and the rulings of the constitutional court, presidential decrees and regulations issued by the government.
A civic society is only just emerging in Russia. The multi-party system has yet to be formed completely. An independent judiciary is still in the stage of formation. In these conditions, a strong executive power can guarantee Russia's integrity and the consistency of reforms. That is why the Third Congress of People's Deputies established the presidency, acting on the results of the national referendum. That choice was confirmed at the Fifth Congress, which gave additional powers to the president which are necessary in the present conditions of crisis.
Attempts to review these decisions by amending the present constitution or adopting a new constitution oriented toward a parliamentary republic with merely decorative presidential powers, are, I think, contradictory to the reforms. It could plunge the country into chaos, feuds born of political ambitions, and regional separatism. I think the people will not remain indifferent to the threat of such a turn of events. Our people are capable of expressing their will in a moment of danger. I think that the Congress must pay very serious attention to these issues when you consider the draft of the new constitution.
We do not need just another law in line with the new political fashions. Russia needs a truly new constitution. Strict limits must be established for state intervention into private and public life. We need reliable legal safeguards from arbitrary (interference) of the state and its organs. We need to establish rigid frames for state control of economic processes.
We need a constitution for a federative state. The constitution must establish mechanisms protecting the legislative, the executive and the judiciary from interference in each other's affairs. We need the constitution of a strong state capable of providing reliable safeguards for the security and prosperity of its citizens. In other words, the basic law of the state must be a fundamental document which would not only confirm the achievements of democratic processes, but would open further prospects for Russia's movement along the route of freedom it has chosen. Perhaps, for a final decision, the constitution should be submitted to a national referendum.
Dear deputies. Each Congress was a serious test of political maturity of the deputies as a body and each individual deputy. The people of Russia are expecting that this time you will once again demonstrate your vast potential for reforms.
Today we need:
First, to confirm the correctness of the strategic course of reform.
Second, to confirm the right of the president, parliament and the government to carry it out and guarantee their ability to implement it even further.
Third, to give a strong reponse to attempts to give up the reforms under any pretext.
The government intends to continue its policy, no matter how tough it may be with all the harsh criticism and opposition from conservative forces. We are prepared to listen attentively to all remarks and proposals, we are open to fair and constructive discussion. Your consistent adherence to the transformation and revival of Russia is the strongest argument to counter those who say that the deputies have reached the limit (of their potential).
I believe, I am convinced, that the reforms that we have started will be successfully implemented, and that despite the fact that the best time for Russia has not come, it will take its place among the civilized, advanced states of the world. This is the purpose and content of our work, our patriotic duty. This is the responsibility each of us bears to the people.
Thank you.

 

End of Document
