

Bosnia Peace Plan Flawed, But So Far The Only Way To End War
The Associated Press
February 4, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 714 words
Byline: By ALISON SMALE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: VIENNA, Austria
Body




The peace plan touted as the way to end war in Bosnia does nothing to disarm combatants or punish criminals, and contains the seeds of future conflict.
But it is the only plan around, and if Washington fails to endorse it the war will rage on. The international community - America, Russia and other powers - would then have to figure out a better peace plan.
International negotiators Cyrus Vance and Lord Owen are trying to persuade President Clinton to back the plan, currently under discussion at the United Nations, at a time when the administration is formulating a position on ending the tangled ethnic warfare in the former Yugoslavia.
Vance and Owen have toiled for five months, with frequent trips to the Balkans. Their plan divides Bosnia-Hercegovina into 10 ethnically mixed, largely autonomous provinces. Muslims, Serbs and Croats each dominate in three provinces; the 10th is the city of Sarajevo, where the three groups once lived together in harmony.
Only the Croats have said yes to the deal. Bosnia's Serbs, under pressure from their patrons in Serbia proper, agreed to drop their demand for the right to secede, but are unlikely to sign the Vance-Owen package unless the Muslims do.
The Muslims, 44 percent of Bosnia-Hercegovina's population before many were forced to flee the war, are increasingly inclined not to agree, for several reasons:
-The plan grants such wide autonomy to the 10 provinces that an independent Bosnia-Herzegovina, for which the Muslims are fighting, would cease to exist in all but name. The Serbs and Croats would be tempted to unite their parts with Serbia and Croatia, and to divide up the scattered Muslim territories.
-Although the Serbs would relinquish some territory they have gained in war, they would keep substantial chunks. In other areas, it is unlikely that Muslims, driven out by Serb rebels, will return to live in harmony with Serb neighbors.
-The Muslims detect increasing hestitation in Washington over the Vance-Owen plan. They hope Clinton, who criticized the Bush administration for doing nothing in Bosnia, will back U.S. intervention or, better still, a lifting of the arms embargo. The badly outgunned Muslims would then get weapons from Islamic nations and even the odds against the Serbs.
The Clinton administration, sharing the concern about human rights expressed by some Americans, has objections to the Vance-Owen plan.
Washington cannot see that the plan will work, since it fails to disarm the warring sides, nor how it will stop atrocities, since it fails to mandate punishment for war criminals.
Europeans also are unhappy. But the European Community endorsed the plan on Monday as the only way to stop the daily carnage.
The war hits Europe in ways it has not hit America.
There are 4,800 French and 2,700 British troops on the ground and both forces have suffered casualties.
Hundreds of thousands of refugees from the former Yugoslavia have fled to safety elsewhere in Europe.
Yet Europe cannot bring peace without the backing of America and Russia. Balkan politicians, practiced in realpolitik, respect only the really big stick.
That leaves Clinton with the dilemma of supporting an imperfect plan that might halt the killing now, or rejecting it and devising an alternative backed by Moscow, a traditional ally of Serbia.
Any alternative presupposes the three sides actually want to end the war. The desire for revenge grows the longer the killing goes on - and more than 18,000 are already dead, tens of thousands missing and hundreds of thousands homeless.
In 1878, the Austro-Hungarian Empire was awarded the right to rule Bosnia-Herzegovina. Vienna discovered the only way to do so was to dispatch tens of thousands of troops.
Nonetheless, in 1914, a Serb shot the heir to the Austrian throne in Sarajevo, and ignited World War I.
In 1993, the United Nations has come to play the policing role that used to belong to individual imperial powers. So far, the best solution the United Nations has been prepared to offer for Bosnia is the Vance-Owen peace plan.
If America wants another deal, it will have to be prepared, like the Austro-Hungarians of old, to put muscle behind it - and face the prospect that even then, it could fail.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Vienna bureau chief Alison Smale has covered the Balkans since 1986.

 

End of Document
