

Breaking Through The 4-Minute Barrier
The Associated Press
April 17, 1994, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 1566 words
Byline: By ROBERT BARR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: OXFORD, England
Body




In 1954, running a mile in 4 minutes was the most tantalizing goal in athletics. Human bone and muscle seemed incapable of breaking through the barrier.
Gundar Haegg's record of four minutes, 1.4 seconds, had stood for nine years. But the men who ran the best miles of the day saw 1954 as the year of opportunity. John Landy in Australia, Wes Santy in the United States and Roger Bannister in Britain were threatening.
"As it became clear that somebody was going to do it, I felt that I would prefer it to be me," Bannister recalled.
He had two other incentives: He had missed winning a medal in the 1,500-meter race in the 1952 Olympics, and soon his life would be consumed in the grinding demands of a medical career.
On May 6, 1954, Bannister clocked 3 minutes, 59.4 seconds on the Iffley Road track in Oxford. It made him a 20th-century celebrity, right up there with Charles Lindbergh and Edmund Hillary.
At the end of the year, Bannister quit at age 25.
The idea of cracking 4 minutes at an age past 40, the milestone recently achieved by Eamonn Coghlan, leaves Bannister bemused. Coghlan, 41, was running on an indoor track.
"Well, I wonder what else he might have done with his life?" Bannister said, settling in an armchair. "...He obviously doesn't do it unless he enjoys doing it, so good luck.
"But I myself had lots of other things that I wanted to do and couldn't envisage myself going on training."
Sir Roger Bannister, editor of "Brain and Bannister's Clinical Neurology" and another textbook called "Autonomic Failure," former chairman of Britain's Sports Council, has recently retired as master of Pembroke College, Oxford.
Still trim and lively, he has the easy manner any patient would welcome in a doctor.
Earlier this year, Bannister and his wife, Moyra, moved into a ground-floor apartment in north Oxford, where he can look out the parlor window and see his granddaughter jogging in the schoolyard across the street.
Before meeting a reporter, he spent the morning at the Radcliffe Infirmary, applying new magnetic resonance imaging techniques to one of his old interests - hydrocephalous, or the abnormal accumulation of fluid in the cranium.
"I don't feel under particular pressure from deadlines, and it is now my hobby rather than my career, if you like," he says.
Forty years ago, Bannister thrived under the double pressure of studying medicine and chasing world records, but in a way that now seems almost languid.
"Now everybody trains two hours a day … I trained half an hour a day, five days a week."
Athletics offered relief from the dreariness and austerity of a country still recovering from World War II. Few could travel because of currency restrictions, but as a runner Bannister visited Germany, New Zealand and the United States.
"If things had gone according to plan, I would have retired in 1952, because I had set my heart really on trying to get a gold medal in the Olympic games in the 1,500 meters," he says.
"But my plans went awry, which is always a very valuable lesson in life ..."
His half-hour workouts hadn't prepared him to run heats, semifinals and finals on consecutive days.
"When I got to the last corner in the final, absolutely in the right place, just on the shoulder of the leaders, ready to sprint, which I had always been able to do before, I suddenly found that I couldn't sprint," he says.
"A great surprise to me, very disconcerting …
"So I said, 'Well, how long can I go on running?' I was qualifying as a doctor in '54, I would then be doing an internship. You cannot train and run if you are up all night as an intern, so I set that as my limit.
"The limit really was the Empire Games and the European Games. And the rest of it, doing the 4-minute mile, sort of slotted into that."
Round numbers have their own magic, and 4:00.0 had loomed larger with every passing year.
"Gundar Haegg held the world record, and the fact that it stuck for nine years was used as an argument for some people to say, 'Well, there has to be a barrier somewhere. Maybe this is the barrier,"' Bannister says.
Landy was coming to Scandinavia that summer aiming at the record, so Bannister planned to strike in the season's first meet, the Amateur Athletic Association vs. Oxford University on May 6.
Only when the wind calmed close to starting time did Bannister decide to go for it.
With Chris Brasher setting the pace, they ran a lap in 57.5, then 60.7 - 1:58.2 for the half-mile. Chris Chataway, a distance specialist, paced a third lap of 62.3 - 3:00.4 - and the chase was on.
Brasher remembers the crowd being all over the track by the time he finished. The public address announcer called out every record that had been broken, from the Iffley Road mark to the world record, before giving the time.
"THREE ..."
The rest, Brasher recalls, was drowned in pandemonium.
The sensational record, so long beyond reach, would stand just 46 days.
Chataway accepted an invitation to run against Landy in Turku, Finland on June 21. In "First Four Minutes," his memoir published in 1955, Bannister said he was "a little upset" by the thought that his pacemaker might bring out Landy's best.
With Chataway trailing all the way, Landy clocked 3:58.0.
"Seeing Chris on his heels (Landy) took flight as he had never done during his solo runs," Bannister wrote. "Almost for the first time, under the stimulus of real competition, he unleashed a tremendous finish."
"The conditions were very good, it was a very good track, and so, maybe he would have done it anyway," Chataway said recently. "But I suspect that my being there and panting along behind him, audibly at least, for the first 3 laps might have had an effect."
Bannister says he always knew his record was vulnerable. "I think I had used the well-known historical phrase, 'apres moi, le deluge."'
And after Landy, a classic confrontation: He and Bannister met Aug. 9 in the "Miracle Mile" at the Empire Games in Vancouver, Canada.
"I only ran five races that year, but the race before the Empire Games was the British championships and I ran a last quarter in 52 to make him (Landy) realize that unless he led, he didn't have a chance of winning," Bannister says.
Always a front-runner, Landy set a hot pace, leading by as much as 15 yards before Bannister caught up as the bell rang for the final lap.
"Around the last bend, I think the crowd was making so much noise he couldn't hear whether I was behind, or whether he'd dropped me, and he looked over his left shoulder, and I passed him on his right shoulder," Bannister says, relishing the recollection.
"It was a coincidence of events, a rather strange coincidence, that in that split second he was looking left, I decided to overtake. When he looked to the front, I had already seized a minor advantage of surprise, but he did not then attack."
Bannister ran the race of his life, 3:58.8. Landy became the first man to break 4 minutes and lose a race.
"In theory, it wouldn't have mattered in Vancouver if the time had been 4:10, I mean it would have been an outcome of one of us winning. The only thing is that it would have disappointed everybody," Bannister says.
His brilliant summer ended with victory in the European Championship in the 1,500 meters, in a games record of 3:43.8.
As Bannister remembered those last races, there was a flash of the competitive intensity that once drove him. "They settled the question of whether, at that particular time, I was able to cope with the various opposition," he says.
Just after his race in Vancouver, Bannister applied his medical training to a teammate, Jim Peters, who collapsed in the marathon.
"I went to the hospital afterward to look at his electrocardiogram because I was so interested in this problem," he says.
It came up again after he was inducted into the army in 1957 and spent time in Aden, then a colony caught up in rebellion.
"We were flying out unacclimatized troops, and expecting them to climb mountains and start fighting," Bannister says. "A number of them died of heat illness."
Back in London, he lined up a heat chamber and some volunteers from the army.
"Nowadays you have to get ethical permission to do the kind of experiments I was then doing," he says. He injected volunteers with pirogens, an agent which raises body temperature, to test his idea that a low-grade infection prevented victims from sweating, which keeps the body cool. He injected himself too, stoking his temperature to 103.
Ian McColl, now Lord McColl and professor of surgery at the University of London, was one of Bannister's volunteers. "It's good to know what it feels like to have a roaring temperature. It makes you more sympathetic as a doctor," McColl said with a chuckle.
He remembers Bannister as "such an outstanding bloke … a very precise sort of scientist, as well as a good doctor."
Bannister combined medicine and sport again in his work with the Sports Council, created in 1964.
"At that time, I realized that anabolic steroids were going to be a plague on the sport, so there had to be some way of testing for them," he says.
A test developed in London was tried out at the Commonwealth Games in Christchurch, New Zealand, in 1970.
It's an issue which still concerns him as he ponders the ultimate limits of human ability in the mile run.
He has long believed that 3:30 is possible, but doesn't expect those big zeros to ever come around again.
"The human race," he says, "without genetic experimentation, will not break 3 minutes."
 Load-Date: April 17, 1994

 

End of Document
