

Britain's Hunters are Now the Hunted
The Associated Press
December 26, 1993, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1184 words
Byline: By SUE LEEMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LITTLE THURLOW, England
Body




On a chill November morning, the copse was aflame with autumn leaves and filled with the wail of hounds on the scent of a fox.
Men and women on horseback, some in scarlet jackets and top hats, listened intently as the hounds "spoke," then dashed off after them.
Two hours later, a fox was run to its burrow. Terriers were called to dig it out, then the fox was shot and thrown to the triumphant, baying hounds.
The scene has been part of rural English life for more than 200 years, but now the hunters are also the hunted. "The unspeakable in full pursuit of the uneatable," as Oscar Wilde described hunters, are being chased by the irreconcilable.
Hunts are harassed by saboteurs, who lay false scents and use bogus horns to confuse the hounds. Other opponents attack through politics.
"This is the 20th century. Fox hunting must go the way of bear baiting and cock fighting," said John Bryant, wildlife officer of the League Against Cruel Sports, which is urging Parliament to outlaw fox hunts.
With opinion polls showing 70 percent of those questioned favor a ban, the league is confident of success, perhaps even in 1994. In 1992, a bill to outlaw hunting lost in the House of Commons by just 12 votes.
"The hunters are realizing what it is like to be hunted, and they do not like it," Tony Banks, a sponsor of the 1992 bill, told Parliament in the debate.
Emerging from its customary reticence, the British Field Sports Society has produced a video and booklet, "Hunting. The Facts," designed to counter what it describes as "widespread ignorance."
"I think we in this country have gone mad on the Bambi, fluffy-rabbit thing," said Edmund Vestey, Master of the Thurlow Foxhounds. "Foxes cause tremendous damage and they must be controlled."
Fox hunting is an expensive way to do it. Using annual expenditures on the sport of $ 430 million and 20,000 foxes killed, it works out to $ 21,380 per fox. A pest-control firm will do in a fox for about $ 75.
Vestey also is chairman of the Masters of Foxhounds Association, the governing body of fox hunting, which controls formal hunts and makes the rules.
The Field Sports Society video says hunting is a humane way of disposing of animals that cost farmers millions a year in lost livestock, and also is vital to rural economies. It says hunters benefit from the exercise, companionship and thrill of the chase.
Bryant's group counters that hunting is cruel to the fox, which is not always killed outright, that hunts often damage property and injure livestock, that foxes kill fewer than 2 percent of lambs and negligible numbers of chickens.
Sometimes, the battle gets bloody.
Last April, Thomas Worby, a 15-year-old saboteur, fell under the rear wheels of a huntsman's vehicle at a Cambridgeshire Foxhounds hunt and was killed. In February 1991, Mike Hill, 18, was killed when he jumped from a truck containing hounds as he tried to disrupt a Cheshire Beagles hunt in northern England.
Each side blames the other for hunt violence.
"The hunters are cruel not just to animals, but they use cynical violence to stop anyone who disagrees with them," said Ben Ponton of the Hunt Saboteurs' Association. "The violence is usually started by them."
Vestey, whose own hunt has not been sabotaged, believes most saboteurs "are professional demonstrators out for a fight. Their violent tactics do their argument a great disservice."
At Little Thurlow, on Vestey's 10,000-acre estate 45 miles northeast of London, a typical day's hunting begins at 11 a.m. with the quaffing of a traditional "stirrup cup" of port, and often lasts until dusk.
The trend appears to favor the anti-hunting lobby.
In a Gallup Poll released in August, 69 percent of those responding favored a ban on fox hunting, compared to 55 percent in 1978.
In November, the Oxfordshire and Surrey county councils voted to outlaw fox hunting on their land, bringing the total to 30 out of 47 county councils.
Bryant and his League Against Cruel Sports can count on powerful support from the International Fund for Animal Welfare and the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.
And now and then, the hunters shoot themselves in the foot.
In 1991, two masters of the Quorn Hunt in Leicestershire resigned after the league provided film to television of a fox cub being given alive to hounds after terriers dug it out. Hunting rules say a fox must be killed humanely. The league member had offered to film the hunt and his offer was accepted.
In June, Richard Cheshire and Michael Smith of the Bicester and Whaddon Chase near Oxford were jailed for two months for assaulting Anthony Humphries, a hunt saboteur. The court saw videotape of Cheshire pushing Humphries in front of a vehicle driven by Smith. Humphries was hospitalized with back and hip injuries.
Currently, the league is prosecuting the New Forest Foxhounds in southwest England for cruelty for trapping a fox inside a water-filled drainpipe and sending a terrior to get it out. Cruelty is alleged to both the fox and the terrier.
"Yes, there are elements of abuse, but if you watch professional football (soccer), you see a number of fouls," said Bill Andrewes, gregarious joint Master of the Ludlow Foxhounds and chairman of the Field Sports Society's pro-hunting campaign.
Andrewes acknowledged that "people go hunting because it is fun," but said the ultimate justification, "is that foxes do need to be controlled and hunting and killing them with hounds is at least as humane as any other method."
Nearly all foxes caught by the houds die within seconds from a bite to the neck, he said.
In further defense, Andrewes declared: "To a hill farmer with 1,200 ewes, even 1 percent of his lambs could mean a loss of nearly 1,000 pounds ($ 1,500)."
The society video says hunt clubs help the environment by planting trees as cover for foxes. It asserts that abolishing the sport would put hunt staff, dog handlers, stable hands and many other people out of work - a total of 15,000 jobs.
Bryant of the League Against Cruel Sports contends that foxes would regulate their own numbers if left alone.
"Hunting was hit by both world wars, but the country was not overrun with foxes," he said. "Numbers rise and fall according to the food supply."
"No one employed in hunting needs to lose a job. They could just transfer to drag hunting."
The league advocates drag hunting, in which a scented sack is dragged through the countryside and the hounds follow it.
Nonsense, say hunt enthusiasts. Drag hunting is as exciting "as kissing your sister," Michael Colvin, a member of Parliament and chairman of the Council for Country Sports, said during last year's debate.
Meanwhile, how are the foxes doing?
Charles Nodder of the Game Conservancy, a charity that researches game management, said the population is about 500,000, "a substantial increase" from 30 years ago.
He said hunts kill 20,000 a year and gamekeepers "probably 10 times that" and that up to 40,000 die on the roads.
"If you stopped all culling, the fox population undoubtedly would increase and it would regulate itself," Nodder said, but "livestock farmers would find they were having appalling problems."
 Load-Date: December 26, 1993

 

End of Document
