

Britain Remembers Crucial Battle of the Atlantic
The Associated Press
May 23, 1993, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1269 words
Byline: By GRAHAM HEATHCOTE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LIVERPOOL, England
Body




The war in the Atlantic shipping lanes stretched over five years and eight months, a desperate and often unsung fight between German sailor and Allied seaman that determined the fate of western Europe.
The tide turned against Germany's submarines 50 years ago this month, ensuring that soldiers, ammunition, fuel, food and the other necessities of war streamed across the ocean to feed the Allied offensive in World War II.
Dick Squires, former Royal Navy torpedoman, has vivid memories of the Battle of the Atlantic, a bitter struggle to keep Britain's lifeline open.
"It wasn't the blood and guts I remember, it was the weather, the awful weather, the cold," he said. "In the water, you had three minutes to live." At Christmas 1943, chasing the German battlecruiser Scharnhorst, Squires was unable to move after nine hours' duty at the torpedo firing levers of his destroyer, HMS Matchless.
"I thought I had been wounded, but I couldn't move because my clothing was frozen stiff," he said.
His ship picked up six of the 36 survivors from Scharnhorst after it was sunk by British shellfire with the loss of 1,864 lives.
"I stopped hating the Germans when I saw them in the water without guns," Squires recalled in an interview.
"They were just human beings suffering from shock. When we rescued them some gave the Hitler salute and we said, 'If you don't want to come aboard, there's the water.' None of them jumped back in and the others were grateful."
Squires, with his 10 medals, will march in the veterans parade in Liverpool when Britain officially commemorates the ocean battle with a string of ceremonies from Tuesday through May 30.
A submarine from Germany's current fleet will be among warships and merchant ships from countries on both sides in the war assembling for a royal review Wednesday, the highlight of the anniversary. The destroyer USS Moosbrugger and two American mine warfare vessels will be among them.
Liverpool was Britain's main convoy port, maintaining the tenuous lifeline to the United States and Canada that ensured Allied victory. Millions of tons of shipping were sunk and tens of thousands of lives were lost.
"If the battle had been lost we would have been starved into surrender and Hitler would have won the war in the West," said Fred O'Brien, curator of a museum on the Battle of the Atlantic.
The U-boats had the best of the early going. In 1942, Germany sank 60,000 tons of shipping for every submarine lost. But as Allied naval strength provided better cover for the convoys, Germany lost 41 U-boats in May 1943 alone, or one submarine for only 8,000 tons of shipping.
"The Atlantic campaign must be the longest high-intensity sea battle ever fought," said Adm. Sir Julian Oswald, just retired as First Sea Lord, commander of the Royal Navy.
"We chose this month for the anniversary as it was 50 years ago in May 1943 that mounting losses forced the German submarines to withdraw from the North Atlantic. When they returned three months later, the tide had turned and they never regained their former edge."
But the crews of the "Unterseeboote" never quit.
"The U-boat crews were an elite and their morale never broke," said David Brown, the Royal Navy's chief historian.
As the war was ending, they received a message from their commander, Adm. Karl Doenitz: "You have fought like lions. An oppressive superiority in materiel has driven us into a corner."
The Battle of the Atlantic began when U-30 torpedoed the 13,500-ton liner Athenia off Ireland on Sept. 3, 1939, the day Britain declared war on Germany for invading Poland. The ship, bound for Montreal, sank with the loss of 118 lives, including 28 Americans.
On May 7, 1945, the day before the war ended in Europe, U-1023 sank a 335-ton Norwegian minesweeper off England's southern coast with what was probably the last torpedo of the battle.
Convoys massed up to 60 vessels hazardously close together, steaming at the speed of the slowest vessel, while faster escort warships scurried around them like cowboys riding herd.
The U-boats had easy pickings at first. But the balance gradually shifted as the Allies improved detection methods and depth charges, added long-range patrol planes and small aircraft carriers for air cover and developed new tactics for hunting submarines.
"The Atlantic was terrible," said Lt. Cmdr. Tadeusz Lesisz, who was a gunnery officer on a Polish destroyer. "On one convoy in 1943 we were in a storm for seven days from Iceland to England, with U-boats attacking and us having to go round and round the convoy hardly able to see the ships because of the huge waves.
"I saw ships being sunk but the only time I saw a U-boat was at the end of the war when they surrendered. It was that kind of a battle, we didn't see our enemies."
Capt. Graham Cubbin, then third mate for the Liverpool-based Harrison Line, which lost 27 ships and 422 crewmen in the war, remembers the closely packed ships and the bad weather.
"It was difficult under Royal Navy orders to keep station, 400 yards from another ship. Normally at sea it's three miles," Cubbin said. "Our greatest fear was fog, a primeval fear because it disorientates the senses, and the barrage of sound signals can be misunderstood."
He was sunk in 1940 in the South Atlantic, shipped to Italian Somaliland as a prisoner, freed in 1941 by the British army and sent home to go back to sea.
He has fond memories of U.S. ports to which the merchant ships carried whisky, gin, cloth and other exports to earn dollars for the British war effort. "The States was a land of milk and honey, no blackout, luxury goods like nylon stockings and better than $ 4 to the pound."
British seamen found themselves having tea in New York with film stars like Madeleine Carroll and Walter Pidgeon and dancing with Gloria Vanderbilt at the Waldorf-Astoria.
A British seaman in 1939 was paid the equivalent of $ 36 a month, plus 50 cents a day danger money.
"When a seaman was torpedoed he wasn't paid and his family got nothing until he signed on for his next voyage," said Capt. Duncan Glass, chief marine superintendent of London-based Andrew Weir Shipping, which lost 43 ships in the war.
Each side broke the other's codes, but the German navy suffered more because its leaders refused to believe theirs had been broken so completely and over a long period.
Another key to the battle was the U.S.-built Liberty ship. The cargo vessels came down the ways faster than the Germans could sink them. The record was four days, 15 hours for the prefabricated Robert E. Peary, built by Kaiser Corp. at Richmond, Calif., in November 1942.
"They were splendid ships even if some hit the headlines over breaking up in bad weather or losing propellers," said Cubbin. "They were built to make one crossing of the Atlantic and if they did they served their purpose, but many lasted for 20 years."
Winifred Green was in the Wrens, short for Women's Royal Naval Service, and worked from 1942 to 1945 maintaining minesweepers in the Mersey docks at Birkenhead, opposite Liverpool.
"One night in the seven-night blitz of May 1941, it looked like the whole city was on fire when an ammunition ship, the Malakand, got a bomb down the funnel and blew up," she said. "Bits of the ship were flying all over Liverpool and were found two miles away."
Mrs. Green, cheerfully looking forward to reunions, married a merchant seaman after the war. She wears her Association of Wrens badge and an anchor brooch.
"I got into uniform as soon as I could, at 17 ," she said. "It was only after the war that we realized how serious it had all been. I had been having such a good time that I didn't want the war to end."

 

End of Document
