

BURGER ON THE AMENDMENTS: After the Bill of Rights - 13th Amendment
The Associated Press
November 12, 1991, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1344 words
Body




EDITOR'S NOTE - This is one of a series of Associated Press articles on the Bill of Rights and other constitutional amendments by the retired chief justice of the United States, who is chairman of the Commission on the Bicentennial of the U.S. Constitution.
---
 
 By WARREN E. BURGER
For The Associated Press
The ratification of the first 10 amendments to the Constitution in 1791 satisfied many Americans who believed that, if certain basic individual liberties were to be protected from infringement by the new national government, those liberties should be written down.
The original Bill of Rights, however, was not complete, and it did not answer the concerns of all of the people, including the question of slavery. For that reason, additional amendments have periodically been made to the Constitution down to the present day.
Although the Declaration of Independence advanced the idea "that all Men are created equal," the original Bill of Rights did not outlaw the pernicious institution of slavery. Why did the delegates at Philadelphia in 1787 fail to deal with the abolition of slavery?
It was not an oversight. The Puritan and abolitionist influence was very much present, especially in New England, and many political and intellectual leaders in Washington's day objected to slavery on the grounds that it was immoral, contrary to religious teaching, and violated the principle of equality ably expressed in the Declaration of Independence. But the primary objective of the key leaders - Washington, Madison, Hamilton, Wilson and others - was to create an effective structure of national government to replacethe feeble union of 13 wholly independent states that had been established under the Articles of Confederation.
The Framers were political realists who knew that failure to secure their primary objective - a Constitution - would result in failure to establish a workable political union between the states. They also recognized that if they tried to abolish slavery, delegates of the plantation states, whose economy was built on slavery, would probably walk out of the Constitutional Convention, leaving the states with the feeble Confederation.
The true sentiment of many northern leaders was shown when the Confederation Congress in 1787 - while the delegates were meeting in Philadelphia - passed the Northwest Ordinance, forbidding the extension of slavery in the Northwest Territory from which Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio and Wisconsin later emerged.
The postponement of the slavery issue was a painful choice for the delegates from New England, but they were concerned with the challenge of forging a new nation out of the 13 sovereign and independent states, each of which had its own army - and, in some cases, navy - and each of which was able to control what people and what goods could cross its borders.
Without a strong national government the victors of the Revolutionary War would face many dangers: border disputes and commercial rivalries were likely to lead to warfare, with England, Spain, and France competing to exploit internal conflicts. Although France had been allied with the colonies during the Revolution, she could not be expected to stand by while Spain and England were vying for control of the rich lands of the North American continent.
The Framers' failure to craft a political solution abolishing slavery reflected both the magnitude of the problem and the violent passions that were aroused on both sides of the issue. Those passions finally erupted in the Civil War, the bloodiest conflict in all history up to that time. Without a doubt, the perpetuation of slavery in the antebellum period constitutes one of the bleakest chapters in our nation's history. It also serves as a powerful reminder that our forebears paid a heavy price to secure the liberties that we enjoy today, and that we should not take those liberties for granted.
 
 13th Amendment
Adopted in the wake of the Civil war, the 13th, 14th and 15th Amendments are commonly known as the "Civil War Amendments." The command of the 13th Amendment is simple and straightforward: "Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted, shall exist within the United States, or any place subject to their jurisdiction." In less than 50 words, the 13th Amendment outlawed a morally indefensible practice that had plagued the republic since its founding, and had been a recurrent subject of heated debate between Northern and Southern leaders, finally culminating in a bloody war.
In 1787, the participants in the Constitutional Convention at Philadelphia believed themselves unable to resolve the issue of slavery, so they chose to postpone it. Under Article I, Section 9, of the Constitution, Congress was barred from prohibiting the "the Migration or Importation of Persons" into the United States for 20 years. In addition, Article IV, Section 2, protected slaveholders by requiring free states to return escaped slaves to their masters.
At the time that the Constitution was ratified, there were about 50O,OOO slaves in the United States, and many hoped that slavery - which was already under attack from many quarters - would gradually perish of its own accord. In 1793, however, Eli Whitney invented the cotton gin, which made possible the efficient separation of seeds from cotton lint. With the widespread introduction of the cotton gin, the Southern cotton industry boomed, creating a corresponding increase in demand for slave labor.
By 1861, the first year of the Civil War, the slave population in the United States had grown to approximately 4 million, with the vast majority located in the South. This growth had occurred despite bitter opposition in the North to slavery and legislative efforts to curb its spread.
The growing ranks of abolitionists - led by individuals such as William Lloyd Garrison, Frederick Douglass, and Sojourner Truth - decried the "peculiar institution" on the grounds that it was inconsistent with the ideals expressed in the Declaration of Independence and the moral dictates of the Bible. In Congress, legislative measures such as the Missouri Compromise of 1820, the Compromise of 1850, and the Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854 had attempted to strike a delicate political balance between North and South and stave off a civil war by controlling the expansion of slavery in the territories.
In its decision in Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857), however, the Supreme Court made any further hopes of compromise legally unworkable. In Dred Scott, in an opinion by Chief Justice Roger Brooke Taney, the Court ruled that a slave who had lived with his owner in a free state could not sue for his freedom, because a slave was property, not a "citizen" entitled to sue in federal court.
Going a step further, the Court ruled that, because the Constitution did not grant the federal government unfettered authority to interfere with private property rights, the Missouri Compromise of 1820 - which prohibited slavery in the remaining Louisiana Purchase territory north of the States of Missouri and Arkansas - was unconstitutional. By undoing the Missouri Compromise and casting doubt on the constitutionality of other political compromises on the issue of slavery, the Supreme Court's decision in Dred Scott brought the slavery issue to a head and accelerated the onset of the war that Chief Justice Taney thought he was avoiding.
The 13th Amendment, ratified on Dec. 6, 1865, gave meaning to the Union victory by confirming the principle espoused in Lincoln's wartime Emancipation Proclamation and formally abolishing the institution of slavery throughout the United States. If the 13th Amendment abolished slavery as a matter of law, however, it did little to accomplish racial equality, and it would be nearly another century before the efforts of the civil rights movement abolished the pernicious "separate but equal" doctrine and eliminated legally sanctioned racial discrimination once and for all.
 
 NEXT: 14th Amendment
 
 End Adv for Use Anytime

 

End of Document
