

BURGER ON THE BILL OF RIGHTS: Sixth Amendment
The Associated Press
November 18, 1991, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 947 words
Body




EDITOR'S NOTE - This is one of a series of Associated Press articles on the Bill of Rights and other constitutional amendments by the retired chief justice of the United States, who is chairman of the Commission on the Bicentennial of the U.S. Constitution.
---
 
 By WARREN E. BURGER
For The Associated Press
The Sixth Amendment provides a person who is accused of a crime with a number of basic protections, including "the right to a speedy and public trial," the right to be tried by "an impartial jury of the State and district wherein the crime shall have been committed," the right "to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation," the right "to be confronted with the witnesses against him (and) to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor," and the right "to have the assistance of counsel for his defence."
As is true of the criminal guarantees in the Fifth and Eighth Amendments, many of the guarantees in the Sixth Amendment were drafted in reaction to the tyrannical practices that had been employed in infamous Old World tribunals, such as England's Court of the Star Chamber, and in colonial courts controlled by the British Crown.
The right to "a speedy and public trial" was included to prohibit the government both from imprisoning criminal defendants indefinitely while awaiting trial, and from subjecting criminal defendants to improper judicial procedures behind closed doors.
The right to trial by "an impartial jury of the State and district wherein the crime shall have been committed" grants the defendant the right to have the issue of guilt or innocence determined by fellow citizens drawn from the community rather than by a judge.
Interestingly, although the right to trial by jury in criminal cases was also guaranteed by Article III, section 2 of the original Constitution, the original Constitution did not explicitly refer to trial by an "impartial" jury.
The inclusion of an express guarantee of the right to an "impartial" jury may well have reflected the Framers' awareness that, when the concept of trial by jury was first introduced in England, jurors were not necessarily chosen because they were fair and impartial, but because they were already personally familiar with defendant and the facts of the crime. In addition, jurors in English criminal courts had historically been subject to strict controls, and were not always free to exercise their independent judgment in a case. Early English courts had occasionally used their powers to fine or punish jurors who did not reach a verdict that was to the Crown's liking.
The requirement that the members of the jury be drawn from the "State and district wherein the crime shall have been committed" reflected the Framers' concern that the government would "import" a group of unsympathetic or hostile jurors from a distant city or state to the defendant's trial in order to win a conviction.
At the Virginia Ratifying Convention, William Grayson had objected to the guarantee of the right to jury trial in the original Constitution precisely because it did not guard against this kind of jury-rigging. Grayson argued that when "(t)he jury may come from any part of the state. … (t)he conclusion … is, that (the government) can hang any one they please, by having a jury to suit their purpose."
The right "to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation" requires the government to specify the charges against a defendant so that the defendant has notice of what charges he must defend against. The origins of this guarantee can be found in 17th-century English practice, which did not entitle the accused to review a copy of the indictment against him.
The right to "be confronted with the witnesses against him (and) to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor" guarantees the defendant the right to question his accusers and to call witnesses on his behalf.
By the time that the Bill of Rights was adopted in 1791, the accused's right to confront the witnesses against him had long been recognized at common law, and had been expressly recognized in several state constitutions. The right of a criminal defendant to present witnesses in his defense was of more recent vintage, but was equally well-established, and had been recognized by the Congress in the Federal Crimes Act of 1790.
Finally, by guaranteeing every defendant the right "to have the assistance of counsel for his defence," the Sixth Amendment prohibits the government from stripping the accused of his ability to defend himself with the assistance of an attorney trained in criminal law and procedure.
In the courts of England, defendants charged with serious felony crimes were forbidden from having counsel represent them in court. This rule was partly explainable by the fact that criminal defendants in English courts were generally not required to stand trial against professional government prosecutors. The English practice was widely rejected in the colonies, however, where professional prosecutors were the norm.
In the Framers' time, the Sixth Amendment right to counsel was generally understood as guaranteeing criminal defendants the right to hire their own counsel if they could afford to do so. The Supreme Court has since ruled, however, that the Sixth Amendment right to counsel further requires that, in both federal cases (Johnson v. Zerbst, 1938) and state cases (Gideon v. Wainwright, 1963), the government must provide counsel to represent criminal defendants who cannot afford to hire counsel on their own, and that the right to counsel is guaranteed regardless of how short the defendant's term of imprisonment may be if convicted (Argersinqer v. Hamlin, 1972).

 

End of Document
