

Bush Says Changes in Moscow Sound the Death Knell for Communism
The Associated Press
August 26, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 962 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER CONNELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KENNEBUNKPORT, Maine
Body




President Bush said today sweeping changes in the Soviet Union sound the "death knell for the Communist movement around the world," and that the United States is close to recognizing independence for the Baltic states.
Embracing the dramatic changes under way in Moscow following last week's failed coup, Bush announced $ 315 million in agricultural credits was being made available to the Soviet Union. But Bush said it was not time for any massive U.S. aid because "change has been so traumatic."
Bush said the United States was prepared to deal with whoever emerges as Soviet leader in the wake of the crisis, which has seen the emergence of a power-sharing deal with Mikhail Gorbachev and Russian Federation President Boris Yeltsin.
"It's not a choosing, either-or here," Bush said. "It's not for the United States to say whom we're dealing with."
"I think what you've seen evolving in the last few days is indeed the sharing of power," Bush said. "I think Yeltsin and Gorbachev understand that."
At Bush's side at a news conference outside the president's summer home was Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, who said his country today took steps to establish diplomatic ties with the Baltic states of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia.
Many other nations also are rushing to recognize the three as independent from the Soviet Union, but Bush said the United States had "special responsibilities" as a superpower and was not ready to join them. Yet he added: "I'm confident that this move for freedom and move for independence is inexorable."
Bush repeatedly said the United States supported self-determination for the Baltics and other Soviet republics but said he also worried that further political turmoil could vault the Soviet Union into anarchy.
"I don't want to be a part of making a mistake that would be contributing to some kind of anarchy in the Soviet Union," Bush said when asked if the United States would recognize other Soviet republics seeking independence. "I don't know if this is a breakup or not."
He also said questions about territorial boundaries and the transition to independence needed to be answered. "There are some questions about what you recognize," Bush said.
"We're moving very fast, and I feel very comfortable with what other countries are doing," Bush said. "I'd like to see a few more cards on the table before we take another step."
For example, Bush said agreements between the central government and the republics are necessary for their economic recovery so that Western nations aren't trying to deal with "25 guys going off in different directions."
Bush said much remains unclear a week after the botched coup. But he said of the fallout, which included Gorbachev resigning his leadership of the Communist party:
"It clearly is the death knell for the communist movement around the world. There is only a handful of people that stick out like a sore thumb. I think the one down there in Cuba now must be sweating."
Bush said he and Mulroney discussed the issue of Western economic assistance to the Soviet Union but said he foresaw no major new U.S. offers.
"I have seen nothing to make me change my mind," Bush said.
A meeting is being held this week in London in which deputy finance ministers of Western allies will assess the question of aid to Moscow. But Bush said: "There will be nothing out of the … meeting that will commit us to writing checks."
Bush shrugged off a question about whether he was taking a softer approach to dealing with hard-liners in China's communist government.
"What we're trying to do in China is to see reform move forward," Bush said. "Cutting off discussion with China is not the way to do it."
Bush also called "absurd" criticism that the turmoil in the Soviet Union might have been avoided if the United States and its allies had made a generous economic aid package available to Gorbachev after the Western economic summit in July.
Independence for the three Baltic states was discussed at a session of the Supreme Soviet, but the body's acting speaker said it was an issue for next week's session of the Congress of People's Deputies, the Soviet's parent body.
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania were independent between the world wars, but were absorbed by the Soviet Union under a secret agreement with Nazi Germany on the eve of World War II.
The United States is among the countries that never recognized Soviet authority in the Baltics. But the United States also refrained from establishing diplomatic relations with the three, though each kept envoys in Washington.
The Bush-Mulroney session followed a weekend in which top Bush advisers appeared on television news programs to defend the administration's reluctance to extend diplomatic ties to the Baltics and to discuss U.S. policy in the wake of the failed coup.
National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft said the United States still regards Gorbachev as the "titular" head of the Soviet government. But he and other administration officials spoke frankly of the enlarged and still expanding role of Yeltsin, who led the coup opposition.
Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger said the United States will not recognize the Baltics as independent until the Soviet parliament grants them freedom.
Baltic leaders suggest recognition from the United States would nudge the Soviet government to act faster.
"We will recognize at the appropriate time," Eagleburger said on CBS "This Morning." "It's coming very fast and everybody ought to relax."
Vytautis Landsbergis, the president of Lithuania, predicted in Vilnius that U.S. recognition would come "within a week."
Mulroney's wife, Mila, and four children accompanied him on the visit to Walker's Point, his third in as many summers.
British Prime Minister John Major arrives Wednesday for a three-day stay.

 

End of Document
