

Bush Says Changes in Moscow Sound the Death Knell for Communism
The Associated Press
August 26, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1299 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER CONNELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KENNEBUNKPORT, Maine
Body




President Bush today said sweeping changes in the Soviet Union clearly sound the "death knell for the Communist movement around the world," and that the United States is "moving very, very close" to extending diplomatic recognition to the independence-minded Baltic states of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia.
Embracing the "traumatic" changes underway in Moscow, Bush announced that $ 315 million in agricultural credits was being made available to the Soviet Union. But he said "change has been so traumatic" in the Soviet Union that it was not now possible to extend massive new assistance.
Concerning the Baltic situation, Bush indicated he was not yet prepared to recognize their final independence.
"There are some questions about what you recognize," such as territorial boundaries, Bush told a news conference with Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney.
"Canada moved this morning to begin the process of establishing full diplomatic recognization of all the Baltic states," Mulroney said outside the president's vacation home.
Said Bush: "We're moving very fast, and I feel very comfortable with what other countries are doing. I'd like to see a few more cards on the table before we take another step."
Bush's concern appeared to center around how the republics would relate to the central government and, for any that won independence, how and when the transition to independence would take place.
Bush said the central Soviet government and the republics needed to "hammer out" agreements detailing which of the republics wanted to stay in the Soviet Union and which demand independence. Agreements between the central government and the republics are necessary for their economic recovery, Bush said, so that Western nations aren't trying to deal with "25 guys going off in different directions."
"We have made very clear our conviction that the Baltics will be independent."
Bush said of the situation in Moscow, where President Mikhail Gorbachev had resigned his leadersip of the Communist party:
"It clearly is the death knell for the communist movement around the world. There is only a handful of people that stick out like a sore thumb. I think the one down there in Cuba now must be sweating."
Bush said he and Mulroney discussed the issue of Western economic assistance to the Soviet Union but said he forsaw no major new U.S. offers.
"I have seen nothing to make me change my mind," Bush said.
A meeting is being held this week in London in which deputy finance ministers will assess the question of aid to Moscow.
"There will be nothing out of the 'sherpa' meeting that will commit us to writing checks," Bush said.
Independence for the three Baltic states was discussed at a session of the Supreme Soviet, but the body's acting speaker said it was an issue for next week's session of the Congress of People's Deputies, the Soviet's parent body.
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania were independent between the world wars, but were absorbed by the Soviet Union under a secret agreement with Nazi Germany on the eve of World War II.
The United States is among the countries that never recognized Soviet authority in the Baltics. But the United States also refrained from establishing diplomatic relations with the three, though each kept envoys in Washington.
Mulroney said he understood Bush's reluctance but had decided it was time for Canada to offer diplomatic ties to Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia.
Bush said he agreed with the decisions of Canada and other nations but said the United States was holding back because of its "special responsibilities" as a superpower.
"I don't want to be a part of making a mistake that would be contributing to some kind of anarchy in the Soviet Union," Bush said when asked if the United States would recognize other Soviet republics seeking independence.
Yet he added: "I'm condident that this move for freedom and move for independence is inexorable."
Bush and Mulroney, both in sport jackets, met with reporters outside Bush's Walker's Point home on the Maine coast.
As the three Baltic republics have moved toward democratic government, the United States has demonstrated a measure of increased diplomatic support by maintaining direct contact with the elected representatives in each one.
Once the Bush administration extends diplomatic recognition, one of the first steps would be to send an ambassador to the three and to change the status of the three legations in Washington to full-fledged embassies.
It also would open the way to bilateral assistance to each of the republics. Independence for the Baltic states also would entitle them to membership in international organizations such as the United Nations, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
Earlier, the administration suggested Boris Yeltsin may have the upper hand in a power-sharing deal with Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev.
National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft said the United States still regards Gorbachev as the "titular" head of the Soviet government. But he and other administration officials spoke frankly of the enlarged and still expanding role of Yeltsin, the Russian Republic president who led opposition to last week's failed coup.
"I think that President Yeltsin and President Gorbachev are now cooperating to run the Soviet Union," Secretary of State James A. Baker III said on ABC-TV's "This Week with David Brinkley."
Eagleburger, who is Baker's top deputy, was asked today who was in charge in the Soviet Union and said: "It's a tough one to answer but to the degree that we can figure it out it's Mr. Yeltsin and Mr. Gorbachev." He replied "Yes" when asked if the power flowed in that order.
Eagleburger said Gorbachev "had to run to catch up" to the startling changes in the Soviet Union in the wake of last week's failed coup, and suggested Gorbachev might find himself in a similar position if he dragged his feet on granting the Baltics independence.
"The events may move faster than he has indicated he wants to move," Eagleburger said.
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said Sunday that Yeltsin "represents a set of principles and values that are synonymous with those that we hold for the Soviet Union - democratization, demilitarization."
Baker said, "The political reform effort in the Soviet Union has far outpaced the economic reform effort." He said the United States still wants to see more progress toward a free-market economy before it offers any major economic aid, les it throw "a lot of money down a rat hole."
But the United States appeared open to Britain's suggestion that the Soviet Union be granted full membership in the World Bank and International Monetary Fund, which could loosen Western purse strings on loans.
This past week's stunning events inside the Soviet Union appear to "have speeded up the reform process," said White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater. "The sooner they're ready to participate, the sooner the IMF and World Bank are ready to be vehicles for instruction."
Denmark, Norway and Argentina recognized the Baltics on Sunday, and France expressed an eagerness to formalize ties. Germany invited Baltic officials to Bonn to discuss an exchange of ambassadors, and Britain is dispatching a top Foreign Ministry official for talks with the Baltics.
Vytautis Landsbergis, the president of Lithuania, predicted in Vilnius that U.S. recognition would come "within a week."
Fitzwater said high-ranking administration officials have been meeting regularly in Washington in preparation for a meeting in London on Thursday of seven leading industrialized nations on what might be done to further economic and political reform in the Soviet Union.
Mulroney's wife, Mila, and four children accompanied him on the visit to Walker's Point, his third in as many summers.
British Prime Minister John Major arrives Wednesday for a three-day stay.

 

End of Document
