

But Will They Buy It? Learning the Hard Way in the Old East Bloc
The Associated Press
June 10, 1992, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 819 words
Byline: By MARK FRITZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BERLIN
Body




Are Marlboros loaded with enough nicotine to satisfy the average east German smoker? Will Polish women tolerate conditioner in their shampoo? Can you convince Hungarian snack shops to stock your ice cream even if they don't have refrigerators?
The answers:
a: No (cough) way.
b: Eventually, if you educate them about conditioners with enough TV commercials.
c: Sure, if you pass out free refrigerators.
There are people who have spent plenty of money to find out these things about Eastern Europe, a moving target of a market filled with 200 million often unpredictable consumers.
Since 1990, the world's biggest businesses have ridden into the Wild East on a rough trail hewn by scouts - advertising agents and market researchers paid to define a consumer kept bottled up by generations of Communism.
It hasn't been easy.
"It was like entering a jungle," said Rainer Erfert, chief of the Eastern European operations of Leo Burnett, a Chicago-based ad agency.
Westerners trying to reach Eastern consumers had to define rapidly evolving Eastern lifestyles and behaviors and then try to persuade people to buy things they didn't know they needed.
But the businessmen found Easterners, turned cynics by decades of propaganda, very skeptical of advertising.
"If you take, for example, the very imaginative British advertising, which is very exaggerating, they would not understand it," said Erfert. "They would say, 'Well, you are lying."'
Andy Bilanksi, head of the D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowes agency office in Budapest, said many companies have tried to rely on their image alone, a tactic that works in the West. "But people (in the East) want to know the features. Why is a Mercedes better than an Opel?"
While largely embracing Western products, eastern consumers also have confounded marketers by abruptly reverting to some traditional items.
"After the revolution, people were highly concentrated nearly exclusively on Western products," said Manfred Loehmer, spokesman for the German branch of A.C. Nielsen, the international market research firm that has moved deep into the East.
"But now more and more they find out the value of their old products."
When the Berlin Wall came down, Western cigarette manufacturers launched huge campaigns in eastern Germany. After a strong initial response, nearly 70 percent of the market shifted back.
"The east German cigarettes were cheap and had a flavor they were used to," said Clemens Pues, a University of Muenster marketing professor.
Even Germany's Reemtsma tobacco company ran into trouble. The firm took its east German brand, Cabinet, reduced the tar and nicotine and jazzed up the packaging. Market share plunged from 30 percent to less than 12 percent, said Christoff Walther, vice president for corporate affairs.
"That's where we made the biggest mistake," he said. "It was too Westernized. So Reemtsma made the cigarette stronger, changed the packaging and took out ads saying the company had learned its lesson.
Walther said Reemtsma had done market research before the change, but people "were not used to criticizing products. People said it was good. They said everything was good."
Still, said Walter Zingel, chief of Eastern European operations for the New York-based Bozell ad agency, "When you go in these countries, you realize just how much our system relies on market data."
Zingel has found Easterners often resent condescending ads or commercials that reflect affluent, unattainable lifestyles.
"Some people ran campaigns in effect saying "You poor Hungarians are now able to buy OMO, the world-famous detergent,"' he said. "That approach doesn't work." OMO is made by the Austrian-based Lever Co.
Zingel said Proctor & Gamble, the giant consumer goods company, initially had problems selling Poles on Vidal Sassoon's Wash 'n' Go shampoo and conditioner.
The company had not calculated that only 10 percent of consumers used conditioner, he said. "(The consumer) didn't know what the product was worth."
But the problem was soon fixed.
"The only thing we had to do was explain the technology of combining the two. We did educational copy. The upshot is it's very successful," said Tom Gresk, head of Leo Burnett's Warsaw office, which handled the Proctor & Gamble account.
Getting products into the stores is another formidable obstacle.
Zingel said the big German ice cream maker Schoeller wanted to launch its products in Hungary, but found too many likely retailers lacked refrigeration.
So the company actually distributed free refrigerators to kiosks and gas stations.
Despite these problems, market researchers and advertising agencies are enjoying quick gains in the East. Erfert said Bozell has $ 7 million in billings in Poland alone, "which is pretty good for only 12 months."
And the London-based ad firm Saatchi & Saatchi last year had about $ 22 million in turnover in Hungary, Poland and Czechoslovakia last year, said Simon Goode, corporate development director.

 

End of Document
