

CD-ROM Helps Put Language Into the Hands of the Deaf
The Associated Press
December 16, 1994, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 434 words
Byline: By LARRY BLASKO, Associated Press Writer
Body




Roughly 2 million Americans speak a language that has never been heard. It's American Sign Language.
ASL, familiarly, is practiced by the profoundly deaf, either among themselves or with the hearing who have learned to use their hands to speak.
The problem part is the learning. And the practice. With a grammar and syntax, etiquette and flavor all its own, ASL requires dedicated practice and a good teacher.
HarperCollins Interactive offers both in The American Sign Language Dictionary on CD-ROM by Martin L.A. Sternberg. Available for both Mac and PC, the software explains, teaches and drills ASL. Sternberg is himself deaf and has a doctorate in deafness rehabilitation from New York University.
In addition to the drills and a 2,000-plus-word dictionary, the CD-ROM includes a history of signed communication, beginning in Europe in the 1500s.
Signs are demonstrated both in diagrams and film clips. A control bar allows you to slow the video, which is almost a must for first-timers. Those who have watched a conversation among ASL-proficient adults know that the hands move almost at a blur. Similiarly, in audible speech, native speakers move much more briskly than classroom examples.
Setting up the software from the CD-ROM is easy and relatively quick. The program doesn't put a lot of information onto your hard disk, so a double-speed or better CD-ROM drive will show it at its best.
There's sound with the program for those who have a sound card - and an explanation of why sound is in a program that teaches soundless speech. The reason, the program explains, is to ease the transition for the hearing trying to learn ASL.
Besides ASL, there's finger-spelling, which is a way of signing the English alphabet to spell out words. And because signed speech, like spoken language, varies with country, there are lexicons for Spanish, French, German and Italian.
System requirements for the Mac: 25-megahertz 68030 processor or better, System 7, at least four megabytes of RAM, 13-inch 256-color monitor, CD-ROM drive. For the PC, at least a 20-megahertz 386-based computer, Windows 3.1 or higher, at least four megabytes of RAM, 256-color monitor, CD-ROM and optional sound card.
HarperCollins Interactive products are widely available. Suggested retail for The American Sign Language Dictionary on CD-ROM is $ 69.95 for Mac or PC, $ 79.95 with paperback.
---
HarperCollins: (800) 424-6234.
---
For CompuBug's book, "ABCs of Computing, a Plain-English Guide," send $ 10 to CompuBug, P.O. Box 626, Summit, N.J. 07901. ($ 7 for active-duty members of the U.S. armed forces). Questions and comments are welcome.
 Load-Date: December 16, 1994

 

End of Document
