

Celebrities, Veterans Remember Where They Were on The Day
The Associated Press
June 4, 1994, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1396 words
Byline: By HUGH A. MULLIGAN, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: ABOARD THE QE2
Body




What were you doing on D-Day?
Aboard the great liner bound for Normandy with nearly 1,000 U.S. and Canadian veterans, some old friends from English towns that hosted them and assorted media and show biz celebrities, the question rang out more often than bells chiming the ship's watches.
And with Spitfires, Hurricanes and P-47s lumbering in a nostalgic salute through the gloom of rain clouds over the Channel off Southampton, the answers - sad and funny and sometimes shockingly stark - echoed the unforgettable excitement of that longest remembered day.
Bob Hope, between rehearsals for the big D-Day anniversary show to be performed on deck under the QE2's funnel, recalled that 50 years ago he was broadcasting live the last Pepsodent radio show of the season from California's Van Nuys Air Force Base before an audience of P-38 pilots, who would soon be joining some of the veterans aboard as replacements for buddies shot down in flames.
He and his troupe had just taken their shots to play "Loew's Malaria Circuit," a battlefront tour of South Pacific islands with names like Tarawa, Eniwetok and Guadalcanal.
The script was loaded with jokes about Shicklgrubber, Army food, Air Corps brass and the shortage of girls. An announcer kept interrupting with bulletins about the Normandy invasion and then came Gen. Dwight Eisenhower's historic D-Day message.
The 91-year-old show business legend, whom other comics jest was "not born but knitted by Betsy Ross," recalls ditching the script to "ask God's blessing on all those kids crossing the Channel."
Only a few weeks before, many of them had sat on helmets and jerry cans and ammo boxes on the tarmac when he played U.S. bases in England and Sicily. Frances Langford, the shy songbird who had learned you don't sing "You Go To My Head" at Navy bases because the lyrics in sailor slang invoked outhouse humor, tearfully closed out the show by reverently singing Schubert's "Ave Maria" like the prayer it is.
Dame Vera Lynn, the "sweetheart of the forces," whom blimpish BBC brass once tried to silence because they thought her sentimental songs of loneliness like "Bluebirds Over the White Cliffs of Dover" might lower the morale of fighting men, knew the invasion was on.
She was on the last leg home from entertaining British troops in the Far East and India when her seaplane out of Gibraltar skirted the edge of the great invasion armada stretching across the Channel. She whispered a prayer for "her boys," the RAF crews who still stand at attention when she promises "We'll Meet Again."
Back then the Cockney singer, beloved above all other British entertainers, would have been aghast at the thought that 50 years later the baggy shorts she wore entertaining "the forgotten army" in Burma would be on display in the Imperial War Museum.
Walter Cronkite was a young wire service reporter who, late on the eve of D-Day, had resigned himself to spending another day in a Fleet Street office "writing the main roundup story." Then Capt. Hal Leyshon, an Air Corps press officer, and "an occasional carousing buddy," came knocking at the door of his London digs.
He offered a chance to go along on a "highly dangerous" secret mission with the 8th Air Force. "This has got to be D-Day," Cronkite concluded as off they went in the middle of the night to Molesworth air base. The mission was to go in at low level on a B-17 Flying Fortress and bomb behind the Normandy beaches.
"How could I resist? Why, he even promised if I got back at all I'd be in the office before the official D-Day announcement was made," Cronkite recalled over a cup of coffee.
"The plane's name was Shoo-Shoo Baby, piloted by Capt. Don Sheets. Actually we went in at 12,000 feet and the weather, as we all know, was terrible, but flying over the Channel I got a great look at that incredible armada. I could see the transports loading up the landing craft and my old friends, the battleships Texas and Arkansas, already firing their 14-inch guns." Cronkite had covered a convoy aboard the Arkansas and made the North African landing from the Texas.
"We got plenty of flak going in," Cronkite continued. "The beaches were under heavy cloud cover and the instructions were not to drop any bombs unless an enemy target was confirmed because our paratroopers were already on the ground there somewhere. With the bomb bay doors open and the bombs all armed, we were flying in tight formation in 100 percent cloud cover, which was no damn fun because any collision would have set off that whole squadron. So we came back to Molesworth in ever worsening weather and landed with a full bomb load. By the time I got back to the office from an aborted mission, Ike already had made his D-Day announcement and Harrison Salisbury, my boss, was very unhappy. He thought I had been out boozing all night and had sent somebody looking for me."
Capt. Robin Woodall, master of the QE2, was a 10-year-old schoolboy in the blitz-battered north of London on his way to school when he saw the planes go over with the white invasion stripes painted on their underwings, some pulling gliders. "I was a great plane spotter as were all kids then, but I didn't know it was D-Day," he recalled in his sea cabin just prior to setting off from Southampton.
"Planes were my hobby but I dreamed of going to sea like my grandfather, who had been sailing master of a large yacht called Valdora. My mother was an American from Salem, Massachusetts, and her grandfather was on a tea clipper in the China trade."
Andy Rooney was a correspondent for the U.S. Army newpaper Stars and Stripes aboard a coastal steamer that left Bristol several days before the invasion. "We knew something was going on because of all the ships out there, but didn't know it was D-Day," the veteran CBS correspondent recalled over breakfast in the QE2's lido lounge. On D-Day plus four, Sgt. Rooney climbed down a cargo net into a landing craft and upon disembarking "immediately headed for Cherbourg, because that's where the story was by then." He remembers that his newspaper on June 6 headlined the liberation of Rome.
Harry "Bud" Bristol, from Lompoc, Calif., sailing to Normandy with 9th Air Force buddies on the QE2, was awakened at 4 a.m. on D-Day at his base in Essex and "saw ground crews already painting the white stripes" under the wings of Topsy, his P-47 fighter.
"They told us at the briefing this was the Big Day," Bristol reminisced. "The ceiling was at 2,000 feet. We flew in low and just after daybreak strafed behind Omaha where the landings were already in progress." He flew three missions that day, sometimes going in as low as 10 to 20 feet "and got back with seven holes in the airplane. We lost a buddy who got hit in the right elbow by flak. When he removed his arm from the stick with his other hand, it fell to the cockpit floor. He managed to land safely using only his left hand."
Irving Ostov, from Daytona Beach, Fla., also flew D-Day missions in Leaky Lane, his P-47. "On the first mission we were supposed to protect the Navy ships blasting away at the beaches, but they didn't seem to like that idea and started firing at us. So we got the hell out of there quick."
John Ambrose, from Braintree, Essex, England, came on board the liner at Southampton with a British group called BUTNA: BUddies of The Ninth Airforce. "I was 12 years old, one of those kids who kept asking the Yanks based at Andrews field near home if they had gum, any gum," he related during ther Anglo-American ball hosted by the returning airmen in the ship's Queen's Lounge. "My father worked in a factory and often invited pilots home to tea, but they always showed up with a bottle of PX whiskey."
Ambrose knew something was up on June 6. "There were so many aircraft in the sky you couldn't see the clouds." Ever since Ambrose's hobby has been making plastic models of the war planes that filled his boyhood dreams. He is glad the "old field still exists as a private field for small aircraft."
John Pulford Jackson, a member of the local council in Wormingford, Britain, "on appropriate days" raises and lowers the flags on the memorial to fallen American pilots unveiled two years ago in his village. Jackson, who has lovingly restored an Air Force 2 -ton truck, was only 2 years old on D-Day. This, he insists, "doesn't relieve me of the debt owed to these brave men who came over to help us, and never got home."
 Load-Date: June 4, 1994

 

End of Document
