

Cheney Says Next Phase of the Gulf War Will Be Decisive
The Associated Press
February 10, 1991, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 953 words
Byline: By SUSANNE M. SCHAFER, AP Military Writer
Dateline: SIGONELLA, Sicily
Body




Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said Sunday that allied bombardments had sharply reduced the capability of the Iraqi military, but officials acknowledged that allied commanders have sought more time to prepare for the "decisive" next step in the Gulf War.
En route home to brief President Bush on the prospects for a dangerous ground campaign to oust Iraqi troops from Kuwait, Cheney said the air campaign had reduced the fighting power of some Iraqi divisions by as much as 40 percent.
He said the next phase of the war would likely combine air power with both ground and amphibious combat, but he would not say how soon it might begin.
A senior administration official said "the question of timing" was discussed but not resolved during meetings among Cheney, Chairman Colin Powell of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and top Desert Storm commanders. "The bulk of everything we want" has arrived, the official said, and "the force we've got deployed now is indeed ready."
Following the talks, a senior military official said there was a general feeling among U.S. officers that allied forces could use another three to four weeks to prepare for ground combat.
"The guys just off the boat, they could use some more time," he said, referring to ground units recently arrived from Europe. Such forces have the specialized M-1 battletanks designed to confront Iraq's Soviet T-72 tanks.
The officials spoke only on condition on anonymity. Cheney, for his part, said there was no pressure from any quarter to get started. He said only Iraq's voluntary withdrawal from Kuwait would avoid a land war.
Speaking with reporters aboard their airplane, which stopped in Sicily on the trip back to Washington, Cheney and Powell would not say whether a specific recommendation would be made to the president when they meet him at the White House on Monday. They gave an upbeat assessment of the Gulf War.
"We've got a lot of things to talk about when Cheney and Powell come back," Bush said Sunday as he returned to the White House after a weekend at the presidential retreat at Camp David, Md.
Cheney and Powell arrived back at Andrews Air Force Base near Washington shortly after 10:30 p.m. Sunday. Neither made any remarks to waiting reporters.
Democrats and Republicans alike in Congress are expressing hope the ground campaign can be postponed while the air assault further weakens Saddam's forces, reducing American casualties when ground fighting does occur.
"We're seeing now a continuation of the pulverizing by air which I think ought to continue until we decide that we can hasten the end by some limited ground action," Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole, R-Kan., said Sunday on NBC-TV's "Meet the Press."
A similar view came from Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell, D-Maine, interviewed on same program.
"I think the air war can continue successfully for quite some time," Mitchell said. "I hope very much that … we can degrade their military capability and keep down and eliminate the need for American casualties."
Bush was asked about congressional sentiment to go slow on the ground campaign. "I'll make all those decisions at the right time," he said.
Queried about damage done to the Iraqi ground forces by the nonstop bombing raids, Cheney offered his first quantitative assessment on the results of the bombardment, replying, "I'm sure you could find some divisions that may be down by as much as 40 percent." He called it a "useful estimate."
Some allied commanders have said a goal would be to reduce Iraqi capabilities by 50 percent before taking on the most potent elements of Iraqi force: dug-in combat troops and massive tank and artillery units.
"I can't put a hard number on it, but it clearly is not the same as it was three weeks ago," Cheney said of the Iraqi military, which has been estimated as having 1 million members with 540,000 in and around occupied Kuwait.
Along with the ineffectiveness of Iraq's air force, Cheney cited the destruction of weaponry and supplies, the interruption of Saddam Hussein's ability to communicate with commanders and subordinates, and the degradation of army morale.
During a Riyadh news conference early Sunday morning, Cheney said:
"At some point we would expect to bring other elements of our force to bear on the problem of getting him out of Kuwait. The question is when, and what's the most effective use of those additional forces."
"It might be, for example, that you could make the Air Force even more effective than it's already been if you used your ground forces, your amphibious forces, to force him to move out of the positions he's already in."
"We have to be cautious, not to underestimate his remaining capabilities," Cheney said. "We can't be complacent." He said Saddam retained enough aircraft to mount a wave attack against the allies with chemical or biological weapons, and suggested that multiple pilots could mount suicide missions.
The true measure of Iraq's capabilities will be learned only once its heavily armored and tank-equipped forces emerge from their positions he said.
During their trip, Cheney and Powell stressed that the air war will not stop when the ground campaign begins, describing the phases of the war as "synergistic" and contending the sum of the two phases will be greater than its parts.
Cheney acknowledged that the air-only campaign "may reach the point of diminishing returns" and suggested air power could even intensify once it includes support for ground action.
"When we began the air campaign, we didn't pull any punches," Cheney said. "We went after all of his strategic targets as well as his ground forces. I think when we begin the next stage or the next phase of the campaign, it will indeed be decisive. There's no doubt in my mind."

 

End of Document
