

Christopher Says Bombing Serbia Could Be Considered 'Down The Road'
The Associated Press
April 21, 1994, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 920 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Clinton administration "down the road" may consider bombing Serbia to try to stop the shelling of civilians in Bosnia and to keep the war from spreading through the Balkans, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said Thursday.
"It's not on the table at the present time, but it certainly can be considered in the future," Christopher said as senior senators tugged in opposite directions at the administration's tougher policy on the former Yugoslav republic.
"We just cannot turn our back on this situation," Christopher told Congress as the North Atlantic Council prepared to take up on Friday the administration's proposal to threaten the Serbs with NATO air strikes if they did no remove heavy weapons from the outskirts of Muslim enclaves.
Later, Christopher called the Serb shelling of a hospital and other civilian targets in Gorazde "horrible, horrible," and said "it's been one lie after another" trying to cajole them into negotiations for a settlement of the two-year war.
Sam Nunn, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee and an influential voice on military policy, said the United States and its allies must be willing to escalate military action against the Bosnian Serbs, even if American casualties result.
The West "should escalate all the way to Serbia if need be" to end the Yugoslav conflict, Nunn said.
Responding, Christopher said "it certainly can be considered in the future." But, he said in an interview on PBS-TV's MacNeil/Lehrer NewsHour, "right now we are talking about targets in Bosnia, itself."
He said Nunn's proposal was an escalation "that might be considered down the road."
Earlier, Christopher described to a Senate subcommittee the administration's efforts to persuade NATO allies to approve wider use of air power to protect Gorazde and five other Muslim enclaves.
He could not persuade Sen. Ernest F. Hollings, D-S.C., the populist-style chairman, who took a stance in sharp contrast to Nunn's. Politely but skeptically, Hollings urged Christopher to apply "The Mother's Test" before committing U.S. warplanes to a wider conflict.
That is, Hollings said, the Clinton administration must provide a convincing response a member of Congress could give to a mother should a son or daughter die in combat in Bosnia.
"We are making a civil war an international war," Hollings said, brushing aside Christopher's assertion that "we are getting into Bosnia" to try to keep the war from spreading to Macedonia and Croatia.
"They have in mind a Greater Serbia," Christopher said in an unusually strong indictment of Bosnian Serbs and their patrons in Belgrade.
Congress has been consulted regularly on Bosnia, Christopher said. But Hollings, who heads the Commerce Committee and is a member of the powerful Appropriations and Budget committees as well, was not mollified. "We haven't been asked," he said, "and we haven't asked the people."
From the opposite direction, Nunn, D-Ga., derided NATO's "pinprick attacks" last week against the Serbs and said the Serbs were undeterred because the West had taken a "sort of lowest-common-denominator approach" to Bosnia.
He said the American public must be prepared for the deaths of some U.S. airmen.
"We have to be willing to escalate. Otherwise, the escalation is all on the side of the Bosnian Serbs," Nunn said in an NBC-TV interview. He said later in an interview with The Associated Press that he was not advocating the use of ground forces.
"So the big question is whether the allies are willing to not only take Step 1, as outlined by President Clinton, but escalate all the way to Serbia if need be," Nunn said in his remarks on NBC.
Christopher, hoping for NATO's endorsement at a meeting Friday of the North Atlantic Council in Brussels, Belgium, said France had lined up in support of Clinton's proposal for expanded air power.
German Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel, here to see Christopher, called the president's proposals important and said, "Basically, of course, we support the American position."
Other voices were heard Thursday, as well.
Senate Republican leader Bob Dole of Kansas and Sen. Joseph Lieberman, D-Conn., introduced an amendment to exempt the Bosnian government from an international arms embargo against the feuding forces.
The amendment specified that it would not authorize deployment of U.S. troops "for any purpose, including training, support or delivery of military equipment."
On the House side, Rep. Benjamin Gilman, R-N.Y., introduced an amendment for the unilateral lifting of the arms embargo. "Considering the human and moral disaster confronting us in Bosnia-Herzegovina there is no excuse for further delay," he said.
Sen. John Warner, R-Va., led opposition to the measure, saying it could draw the United States into the conflict and cause a break with America's allies.
In Omaha, Sen. J. James Exon, D-Neb., said Clinton's proposal would draw the United States further into the conflict, but he offered his support. "I said early on.. that selective bombing action is not likely to be successful," Exon, the second ranking Democrat on the Senate Armed Services Committee, said at a news conference.
President Clinton, meanwhile, met with Gen. John M. Shalikashvili, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Anthony Lake, the White House national security adviser.
And Vice President Al Gore, in a PBS interview, said: "We've run out of words of outrage to describe what has been going on in Bosnia. But the consultations have been carried out very quickly and the response was favorable. We're very optimistic."
 Load-Date: April 21, 1994

 

End of Document
