

Chronology of Developments in the Baltic Republics
The Associated Press
January 22, 1991, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1338 words
Body




The republics of Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia were independent for about twenty years between the two world wars. But in 1939 Stalin and Hitler signed the Molotov-Ribbentrop Non-Aggression Treaty, which helped spark World War II. Secret protocols in the pact gave the Baltics to the Soviets in return for those parts of Poland that Germany wanted.
The U.S. never recognized the Soviet annexation of the republics. In 1990, the Baltic republics declared their independence, although Soviet leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev rejected the declarations.
Below is a chronology of events occuring since the start of the month:
Jan. 2, 1991 - Soviet Interior Ministry troops seized the entrance to Latvia's main publishing house in Riga, six days after it announced plans to become an independent company.
Jan. 3 - Soviet Interior Ministry troops surrounded two Communist Party buildings in Vilnius, Lithuania, in an ownership dispute with the republic.
Jan. 7 - The Defense Ministry on Monday ordered thousands of paratroopers into seven secessionist republics to enforce conscription and round up draft dodgers and deserters. Latvia and Lithuania reacted immediately by saying draft-age youth would be encouraged to go into hiding.
Latvia said it was given until Friday to comply with Soviet draft laws or face military action. The third Baltic republic, Estonia, said it had until Sunday.
Jan. 8 - Soviet paratroopers, ordered by Soviet leader Gorbachev to round up draft resisters and deserters, arrived in Vilnius, Lithuania.
Lithuania's Prime Minister Kazimira Prunskiene and her Cabinet resigned amid criticism over price increases and fears of a Soviet crackdown.
Jan. 9 - Soviet troops surrounded the Lithuanian television tower and parliament building in a show of force.
Jan. 10 - Gorbachev warned Lithuanian lawmakers they faced direct rule from the Kremlin if the republic did not comply with national laws. Albertas Shimenas, an economist, was elected to replace Ms. Prunskiene.
Jan. 9 - Estonia believed it had reached a compromise at a meeting with Soviet Defense Minister Dmitri Yazov in which he agreed to postpone troop deployments there if the republic's leaders reinstituted the draft.
Jan. 11 - Soviet troops occupied buildings in Vilnius, Lithuania, including national guard headquarters and main printing plant. Nationalists began vigil at the main television station and mounted guard in front of parliament building to prevent seizure by Soviet troops.
Jan. 12 - Estonia said the Baltic Military Region commander gave notice that 2,000 Soviet paratroopers would be sent to the republic on Sunday. Gorbachev had ordered paratroopers to round up draft dodgers and Red Army deserters.
In Moscow, Boris N. Yeltsin, president of the republic of Russia, strongly protested the use of military force against the Baltics.
Jan. 13 - Soviet troops stormed the Lithuanian the radio-television center. Fourteen people were killed and more than 200 injured. The deaths were the first since the standoff in the Baltics began early last year.
President Vytautas Landsbergis of Lithuania broadcast a televised appeal for citizens to rush to the streets to defend his separatist government.
A self-proclaimed Committee of National Salvation in Lithuania ordered a nighttime curfew, appointed a commandant for Vilnius and announced restrictions on civil liberties.
The committee's membership included leaders of the anti-independence branch of the Communist Party and appeared to be linked to Yedinstvo, a movement to protect the rights of ethnic Russians. About 9 percent of Lithuania's 3.7 million people are ethnic Russian.
U.S. Secretary of State James A. Baker III slammed Moscow's crackdown in the Baltic Republics.
Jan 14 - Soviet President Gorbachev said a local military commander decided to use force in Vilnius, Lithuania, where an assault by Soviet troops the day before claimed 14 lives.
The commander of Soviet military forces in the Baltics, Col. Gen. Fyodor Kuzmin, ordered Latvian Interior Ministry police to hand over their weapons to central authorities. Latvian police have been loyal to the republic's pro-independence government. Communist Party and military officials demanded that the republic's separatist government resign or face a repeat of the events in Lithuania.
The White House said the upcoming U.S.-Soviet summit is "up in the air" in part due to the situation in Lithuania.
Jan. 15 - Soviet Interior Ministry commandos stormed a Latvian police academy and seized weapons from cadets. There were no serious injuries. Thousands at a Communist Party rally cheered for the National Salvation Committee, a pro-Kremlin group, to take power in the republic.
Jan. 16 - Latvian officials said a chauffeur for the republic's Ministry of Transport is shot and killed by Soviet Interior Ministry troops.
Jan. 16 - Soviet President Gorbachev tried to stifle glasnost by proposing that Soviet press be put under legislative control. The Supreme Soviet legislature agreed to a modified version of his proposal.
Jan. 17 - Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland delayed a Warsaw Pact summit. They gave no reason, but Czechoslovakia and Poland have been at odds over the Soviet crackdown in the Baltics.
A Soviet military official promised not to seize the Lithuanian parliament building. Since the Jan. 13 attack on the television center, Lithuanians have built concrete barricades around parliament and dug an anti-tank trench behind it.
The official Tass news agency said the Soviet military and Estonian officials had reached agreement on the contentious issue of conscripting Estonian youths into military service.
Jan 18 - Lithuanian nationalist officials agreed to hold a referendum on independence. But some parliament members and officials claimed that Soviet troops have stopped people at random and rounded up Lithuanian youths for military service.
Jan. 19 - The official Soviet news agency reported that a pro-Moscow group, the Latvian National Salvation Committee, claimed it was dismissing the nationalist government and taking power. But Latvia's president said the report was false.
Latvian nationalists guarded government buildings fearing Soviet tanks will roll into the secessionist Baltic republic as they did the previous week in neighboring Lithuania.
Soviet officials broadcast from the conquered Lithuanian television tower and began live coverage of the Persian Gulf war. The occupied television station was competing against a separatist facility in the second Lithuanian city of Kaunas, and a tiny station set up by nationalists in the parliament building in Vilnius.
Jan. 20 - Soviet black beret commandos assaulted Latvian police headquarters. Five people were killed, and 10 were wounded. Earlier, in Moscow, hundreds of thousands of Soviets rallied to protest the military crackdown and demand President Gorbachev's resignation. In the largest such demonstration in a least a year, about 300,000 people marched to protest the ebbing of President Gorbachev's reform programs; 40,000 more marched in Leningrad.
Jan. 21 - Latvia's parliament voted to create a volunteer self-defense force. Latvian police were ordered to take up arms and defend other local government buildings.
In Tallinn, the Estonian capital, Tass reported that two explosions overnight damaged buildings of the Amalgamated Council of Work Collectives and the Tallinn ship repair yard.
Lithuanian president Vytautas Landsbergis told his republic's parliament that the Baltic republics must be prepared to come to each others' aid.
Soviet Interior Minister Boris Pugo, in overall command of the black berets, said he had not ordered them to attack the Latvian Interior Ministry police headquarters and promised they would be confined to bases.
Jan. 22 - The European Parliament blocked $$1 billion in food aid to the Soviet Union in a sharp reprimand of the Kremlin for its crackdown in the Baltics. A $$500 million technical aid program for the Soviet Union may also be reconsidered, said the parliament's budget committee chairman, Alain Lamassoure of France.

 

End of Document
