

Clinton Got the Nomination, Perot Got the World's Front Pages
The Associated Press
July 17, 1992, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 336 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Bill Clinton got the presidential nomination, but Ross Perot stole much of the attention in Europe's press as the Democratic National Convention ended.
"Perot: The Illusion is Over," said the Rome daily La Repubblica.
"Clinton Takes Off, Perot Crashes," said a headline in Friday's editions of the leftist Paris newspaper Liberation.
"In the end, therefore, the iron logic of the two-party system that inspires the American political system prevailed once again," said a New York-datelined report in the Vatican newspaper, L'Osservatore Romano.
The convention itself was little more than a spectacle for insomniacs in Europe, where it appeared live on television in the wee hours of the morning.
But the week's political developments were prominent on newspaper front pages.
"It would be criminal on our part to follow it indifferently. The United States is still, whether we like it or not, the main player in the universal diplomatic game," commented Nice-Matin of Nice, France.
Most German newspapers gave more attention to Clinton than to Perot on Friday. The mass-circulation tabloid Bild, in typical fashion, focused on "Powerfrau" Hillary Clinton in a back-page splash titled "A strong lady on the way to the White House."
Perot had perplexed and fascinated European commentators as he toyed with the possibility of a White House race.
The Times of London suggested that he "mirrored the contradictions that lie deep in the psyche of many American voters."
"They liked him because they wanted a government that gets things done. Yet ...they have elected a Democrat-controlled Congress and a Republican president, as if to ensure the opposite," The Times said.
La Stampa of Turin, Italy, described Perot as an "egotistical nabob" and an amateur "stumbling over one error after another."
One of the more pithy comments to appear Friday came from Kenneth Baker, former chairman of Britain's Conservative Party.
"If Perot hadn't existed, Norman Rockwell would have had to invent him," The Daily Telegraph quoted Baker as saying.

 

End of Document
