

Clinton Says He Didn't Think Induction Notice Was Relevant  Bill Clinton said Sunday he didn't think it was relevant to disclose that he joined the ROTC program at the University of Arkansas after receiving a draft induction notice in 1969. "I thought the whole focus was the issue about the ROTC," Clinton told reporters. "I tried to expose it as fully as I could. I'm sorry, if you feel that I didn't."
The Associated Press
April 5, 1992, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 455 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Revelations of the induction notice and Clinton's entry into the Army's Reserved Officer's Training Program came Saturday when a letter about the incident surfaced that was sent that year by an attorney to Leslie Campbell, dean at Auburn University.
Both the lawyer from Little Rock, Ark., who said he was a friend of Clinton's in the '60s and the university professor say they oppose Clinton's presidential candidacy.
"I want you to understand something I would gladly have told you this if it had even occurred to me that this was relevant to the story," Clinton said in response to questions from reporters.
Clinton's failure to reveal he had received the induction notice when his draft record and status during the Vietnam War became an issue earlier in his campaign.
"Over they years they have repeatedly said nothing unusual was done in my case. I got no special favors," Clinton said.
Clinton said he regretted any misunderstanding about his draft record and that he would have disclosed the information earlier if he thought it was pertinent.
Clinton acknowledged that joining the ROTC program while a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University helped him avoid the draft in the summer of 1969 but he explained as he had when the issue arose earlier in the campaign that he later gave up the deferment.
"I was gonna be drafted if I didn't do something. I did get in the ROTC and then I later gave up the ROTC deferment," Clinton said.
The letter that prompted the new questions about the way Clinton handled his draft status during the Vietnam was addressed to Dean Leslie Campbell, Arts and Science, Auburn University, dated May 8, 1969, and signed by Cliff Jackson.
The last paragraph of long letter, made available to The Associated Press by Campbell reads in part: "Hopefully, I do not face military service, since I am now classified 1-Y (I think I'm mentally defective!), but other Rhodes and Fulbrights are being regularly drafted out of Oxford. Bill Clinton, friend and Rhodes from Hot Springs, Ark., received his induction notice last week."
In a statement released Saturday night, the Clinton campaign said:
"Gov. Clinton recalls receiving an induction notice while at Oxford, in late April 1969.
"The notice had been sent by surface mail and arrived after the induction date. Gov. Clinton immediately sought guidance from his local draft board about the induction date that had passed. He asked whether he could finish his current term at Oxford.
"As was routine procedure, the request was granted and his induction was postponed. Gov. Clinton completed the spring term and returned to the United States in late June or early July."
The statement went on to say that Clinton then joined the ROTC program at the University of Arkansas.

 

End of Document
