

Clinton Warns of Widening War in the Balkans
The Associated Press
August 4, 1995, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 731 words
Byline: By JOHN DIAMOND, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




As President Clinton warned of a wider war in the Balkans, a U.S. warplane fired on a rebel Serb radar site Friday near the scene of renewed fighting.
The Navy EA-6B Prowler fired on a surface-to-air missile radar unit near the Serb stronghold of Knin, Croatia, according to NATO officials in the region.
The plane, along with another EA-6B, was patrolling the area as part of the NATO mission to support U.N. peacekeepers with air power if needed. The EA-6B is an electronic warfare aircraft designed to detect and jam antiaircraft radars. When their equipment indicated that they had been "painted" by Serb radar, a sign that an antiaircraft missile might be on the way, one of the planes fired a radar-homing HARM missile.
"NATO aircraft Friday, acting in self-defense, launched a missile against a surface-to-air missile radar site near Knin," NATO said in a statement. The pilots on patrol over Bosnia have advance authorization to fire on anti-aircraft units when they believe they are threatened by a SAM attack.
The Serbs did not fire the SAM missile and NATO had no immediate assessment of whether its attack on the radar was successful. The planes returned safely to the carrier USS Theodore Roosevelt in the Adriatic Sea.
Clinton met with his national security adviser, Anthony Lake, only hours after Croatia launched an offensive against rebel Serbs in Knin. Speaking to reporters later, Clinton said: "I'm concerned that it could spread the war in Bosnia and in the Croatia-Serbia area." But the president stopped short of condemning the assault.
Clinton said the Croat government felt "compelled" to launch its offensive against rebel Serb forces because of Serb attacks on the U.N.-designated "safe area" of Bihac. The government offensive halted the attacks on Bihac, which is in northwestern Bosnia, near the Croatian border, he said.
"The Croatian offensive originally was launched in response to the Serb attack on Bihac," Clinton said, "and it has apparently relieved a lot of pressure on Bihac. But because it was so comprehensive, it runs the risk of a wider war."
Earlier Friday, Clinton approved the shipment of guns, ammunition and communications equipment to U.N. forces in Bosnia. The shipment of $ 17 million worth of supplies marks the second installment in a $ 60 million commitment to help a U.N. European rapid-reaction force in Bosnia. The beefed-up U.N. force is designed to protect the flow of relief supplies into the wartorn Balkan country.
Despite the concern within the administration about a wider war, officials also see a possible positive side to the Croat action.
Defense Secretary William Perry said that in addition to relieving pressure on Bihac, the Croatian offensive could improve the chances that the rebel Serbs will return to the negotiating table.
Administration officials closely monitored the situation in the former Yugoslavia into the early hours Friday morning as Croatia launched an all-out strike to regain land taken by rebel Serbs four years ago.
The White House dispatched messages early Friday after the outbreak of hostilities urging the warring parties to negotiate. State Department spokesman David Johnson said the communiques also urged the combatants "to respect the safety and rights of civilians, POWs and especially peacekeepers."
Nonetheless, the Croat force pierced defense lines around the Serbs' self-styled capital of Knin and attacked U.N. peacekeepers who stood in their way.
Clinton told reporters at an Oval Office photo session that the Croatian government had informed the White House that "they would feel compelled" to attack the rebel Serbs in response to the Serb attacks on Bihac.
"We have asked them to exercise real restraint because we are very concerned about a wider war," Clinton said.
White House spokesman Mike McCurry underscored the point that the crisis "was provoked initially by a Krajina Serb attack on the Muslim enclave of Bihac."
A major concern among administration officials is the possible entry of Serbia into the conflict alongside its ethnic brethren fighting the Croats, Perry said. McCurry said that "at the moment, there is no indication of that."
Intensified fighting in Croatia could complicate U.N.-NATO plans to evacuate the peacekeeping force from Bosnia should that become necessary, Perry said. A total U.N. withdrawal could involve the use of as many as 25,000 U.S. ground forces.
 Load-Date: August 4, 1995

 

End of Document
