

Commercializing the Games: With the Money Comes the Price
The Associated Press
February 20, 1992, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 599 words
Byline: By STEPHEN WILSON, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: LA LECHERE, France
Body




Corporate sponsors pay millions of dollars for an Olympic tie-in. Television rights for the Games cause a bidding war. Even the athletes' outfits prominently feature company logos.
The last bastion of Olympic non-commercialism remains the venues, the places where the games are played. Can advertising there - on the world's most visible billboards - be far behind?
"I'd certainly have to say it's a possibility, although not necessarily a probability, in the near future," said Richard Pound, the International Olympic Committee's marketing chief.
Selling ad space at an Olympic stadium could bring in untold millions. But for now, the IOC is sticking to its ban on signs at competition sites.
"I think it makes a statement for us to be able to say we're leaving money on the table and letting the focus of the Games be on the athletes, not on the trade show character," Pound said.
There's no denying the Olympics have become a big-money show, an international advertising bonanza for businesses ranging from candy-bar makers to credit card companies.
Twelve international corporations paid more than $ 170 million for the right to be official sponsors of the 1992 Winter and Summer Games. Total marketing revenues, including television fees, approach $ 2 billion.
The figures are expected to increase substantially for the 1996 Summer Games in Atlanta.
"I don't think commercialization is getting out of hand or taking over the Games," said Pound, an IOC member from Canada. "The injection from the private sector is absolutely essential."
Critics, however, contend the cash boom is eroding the Olympic ideals.
Marielle Goitschel, a former two-time Olympic skiing gold medalist, wrote a scathing column in the French newspaper Le Figaro this week accusing the IOC of hoarding its money in Swiss banks.
Christian Neureuther, spokesman for the German Olympic team and husband of former Olympic ski champion Rosi Mittermaier, launched a similar attack.
"Everything in the Olympics is controlled by money," he was quoted as saying by a Hamburg newspaper.
Twenty years ago, commercialization was considered anathema by the Olympic movement.
Avery Brundage, then the American IOC president, labeled Alpine skiers at the 1972 Winter Games the "trained seals of merchandisers" and banned Austria's Karl Schranz for allegedly taking money from ski manufacturers.
The policy loosened in 1976 under Brundage's successor, Lord Killanin. With Juan Antonio Samaranch as IOC president, commercialization was embraced at the 1984 Summer Games in Los Angeles.
Here at the Albertville Games, pressures of commercialization have given rise to a nasty marketing war.
The IOC publicly accused American Express of using "ambush marketing" to undercut Visa, one of the official sponsors, and the French organizing committee went to court to safeguard the use of the Olympic rings.
"We can't approach this just as if we were a charity," Pound said. "We have to stand behind and protect all of our sponsors."
There has also been controversy over commercial logos worn by athletes.
Last week, the French team protested that the labels worn by the Italians who finished 1-2 in the men's Alpine combined skiing event were too large. Officials agreed the logos exceeded the limit of 50 square centimeters, but Samaranch brushed aside the protest.
"Medals are won on the slopes, not in an office," he said.
While the IOC has shown some flexibility on the clothing front, it has remained adamant against any form of publicity at competition areas.
But the line may soon become blurred as sponsors demand more and more visibility for their money.

 

End of Document
