

Congress Probes: Whitewater Is the Latest in Two Centuries of Tradition
The Associated Press
July 24, 1994, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1043 words
Byline: By LAWRENCE L. KNUTSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The U.S. Army wiped out. The Capitol burned. A senator caned. Generals grilled. A president impeached. Congressmen bribed. The Titanic sunk. Teapot Dome, Joe McCarthy. Watergate. Iran-Contra.
And now Whitewater.
For more than two centuries, the Congress of the United States has investigated the wayward, probed the conduct of government, and pointed fingers of accusation, judgment, blame.
Will this week's congressional examination of Bill and Hillary Clinton's decades-old Arkansas real estate investment meet the standards and drama of landmark congressional investigations of the past?
Or is it a political sideshow, soon forgotten?
History will decide.
But for those 200 years, Congress has made clear that when calamity strikes, when wrongdoing is afoot, congressional detectives are ready to sift through the evidence.
At times, their efforts have produced a bang, at times, a fizzle. The reviews have been decidedly mixed.
"Legislative inquiries have informed, enlightened, entertained, confused, divided, and at times even demoralized the republic," historian Arthur Schlesinger wrote in 1975.
Columnist Walter Lippman in 1922 deplored "that legalized atrocity, the congressional investigation, in which congressmen, starved of their legitimate food for thought, go on a wild and feverish manhunt, and do not stop at cannibalism."
But in 1944, Sen. Harry S. Truman, in his swan song as chairman of the select committee that had been widely praised for its examination of World War II defense contract fraud, told the Senate:
"In my opinion, the power of investigation is one of the most important powers of Congress. The manner in which the power is exercised will largely determine the position and prestige of the Congress in the future."
The first congressional investigation erected the framework for the rest.
It was triggered on Nov. 3, 1791, when 1,400 troops under the command of Maj. Gen. Arthur St. Clair were decimated on the Ohio frontier in a pre-dawn ambush by 1,000 Pawnee and Miami warriors.
American casualties: 657 killed and 271 wounded. For the moment, the U.S. Army was destroyed.
On March 27, 1792, the House of Representatives named a committee to investigate, granting its members the power to call witnesses and demand documents "as may be necessary to assist their inquiries."
The committee found that St. Clair's army was poorly equipped and poorly trained. But the House took no action against St. Clair himself, leaving some historians to believe he was exonerated.
In 1814, the House, burned out of the Capitol by an invading British army, voted to inquire "into the causes of the success of the enemy in his late enterprises."
One congressman said it might have been more useful to inquire into the failure of the United States to defend the Capitol than to examine the success of the British in capturing and burning it.
In 1854, amid the tensions that led to the Civil War, the Senate looked into the brutal caning of one of its members, Sen. Charles Sumner of Massachusetts, by a Southern congressman.
By 1861, bullets and cannon balls had replaced canes and the Union suffered its first defeats of the Civil War.
After the Confederate victory at Balls Bluff, the Senate and House formed the Joint Committee on the Conduct of the War. It is regarded as the most abusive and obstructive investigative effort until the McCarthy era almost a century later.
In 1867, the House, after an investigation, impeached President Andrew Johnson in a dispute over Reconstruction policy. The Senate failed to convict him by a single vote.
Financial corruption in high places supplied much of the grist for congressional investigations after the Civil War. Congress investigated the Credit Mobilier scandal involving the financing of the Union Pacific Railroad and saw the reputations of many of its most senior members stained.
In the early 20th century, Congress investigated arms merchants in the aftermath of World War II, probed the causes for the sinking of the "unsinkable" British passenger ship Titanic, and explored corruption in the granting of government oil leases, the Teapot Dome scandal.
Television gave congressional hearings immediate impact and a national reach.
Viewers could sit in their living rooms and watch crime bosses refuse to testify "on grounds that it might incriminate me."
Television also brought reports of Sen. Joseph R. McCarthy's search for communists in the state department. And television brought the Army-McCarthy hearings in which the Wisconsin Republican found himself accused of seeking special favors for an aide.
The drama in the marble-walled Senate Caucus Room reached its height when McCarthy attempted to link a young associate of Army counsel Joseph Welch to left-wing political groups. Welch, accusing McCarthy of deliberate cruelty, asked the long-remembered question: "Have you no sense of decency, sir?"
Television helped make Oliver North a hero of the right wing during the 1987 investigation of the Iran-Contra affair. In a tangled web of intrigue and covert operations run by the Reagan administration in two distant regions of the world, North emerged as a point man - the lieutenant colonel who arranged to divert revenue from an Iranian arms sales to aid Nicaragua's Contra rebels. At the time, Congress had explicitly banned military assistance to the Contras. North was accused of lying.
"I want you to know that lying does not come easy to me … but I think we all had to weigh in the balance the difference between lies and lives," North said defiantly.
His felony convictions set aside on appeal, North is now trying to become a member of the Senate that once investigated him.
The Senate Watergate hearings in 1973 brought the revelation that President Nixon had installed a taping system that recorded his Oval Office conversations. Some said the disclosure led directly to Nixon's resignation the next year.
The committee's chairman, Sen. Sam Ervin, D-N.C., had an answer for those who said that the Watergate revelations were old hat because many presidents had done similar things.
Ervin growled: "There has been murder and larceny in every generation. But that has not made murder meritorious, nor larceny legal."
Which may be the underlying consideration behind most congressional investigations.
 Load-Date: July 24, 1994

 

End of Document
