

Coup Lookback: Five Days that Shook the Soviet Union
The Associated Press
August 26, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1398 words
Byline: By ALAN COOPERMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Organizers of the coup that briefly toppled Mikhail Gorbachev made at least two critical blunders - they failed to arrest Boris Yeltsin at the outset, and they miscalculated their support in the army.
Here's a reconstruction of what happened:
---
SUNDAY, Aug. 18:
Gorbachev was vacationing with his family in the balmy Crimea. He'd planned to listen to classical music, swim in the Black Sea and read literary journals.
Shortly before 5 p.m., a guard told him some people wanted to see him. He reached for one of the many telephones in his office to find out who was there.
"I picked up one telephone, it didn't work. I lifted the second, the third, the fourth, the fifth - nothing. Then I tried the house phone and realized nothing worked and I was cut off," he later recalled.
He immediately gathered his wife Raisa, 32-year-old daughter Irina and son-in-law Anatoly.
"I knew that a very serious event was going on, that they would either blackmail me, or there would be attempts to arrest me or take me away somewhere," he said.
He told the family that "I would stick to my position to the end and I would not step back, not under any pressure. … The family told me that this should be my decision and they would go through this with me to the end."
For the next 2 days, Gorbachev was a prisoner in his own home. KGB troops surrounded the retreat, ships stood offshore and helicopters flew overhead.
The biggest shock was the delegation that had come to demand his resignation: it included his trusted aide of 10 years, chief of staff Valery Boldin, as well as the head of the KGB guards.
---
MONDAY, Aug. 19:
At 3 a.m., editors for Tass, the state news agency, were awakened and told to report to work. They were given several announcements to transmit, starting at 6 a.m.
Alexander Merkushev, head of Tass's English-language section, recalls "the instructions were put very politely … considering the content" of the documents: Vice President Gennady Yanayev was assuming power because Gorbachev was sick. A state of emergency had been declared in some regions, and an eight-man committee would rule the country.
The junta called itself the GKCP, or State Committee for the Emergency Situation, a set of initials reminiscent of the KGB and its predecessor, the NKVD.
The committee quickly took control of the media and banned all but pro-government newspapers.
Its members had reason for confidence: the public mood was against Gorbachev because of economic distress, and virtually all of his Cabinet backed the coup. Among the GKCP's members were Prime Minister Valentin Pavlov, Defense Minister Dmitri Yazov, KGB chairman Vladimir Kryuchkov and Interior Minister Boris Pugo.
With nearly the entire government on board, the committee was not aggressive about imposing military rule and arresting the possible opposition.
---
In the Crimea, Gorbachev refused to resign. The family and its 32 loyal bodyguards were completely isolated until they rigged up a shortwave radio and began listening to the BBC, Voice of America and Radio Liberty.
When he learned that coup leaders were saying he was ill, the 60-year-old president feared they would poison him to give truth to the claim. The family decided not to accept any food brought by their captors.
---
With Gorbachev under control, the GKCP ordered hundreds of tanks and armored vehicles to rumble into Moscow at sunrise. But the KGB reportedly arrived 40 minutes too late to arrest Russian President Boris Yeltsin at his dacha outside the capital.
Kremlin guards were ordered not to allow Russian Federation officials into the citadel. When Yeltsin tried to get to his Kremlin office, they turned him away. "No one told us to arrest him," a guard later said sheepishly.
Yeltsin sped to the Russian parliament, a 19-story marble building known as Russia's "White House," which became the center of resistance.
Within hours, a crowd gathered to defend the building against seizure. The first cracks in the military appeared as the airborne battalion sent to surround the parliament became its protector.
Yeltsin talked with the battalion commander, Gen. Alexander Lebed, then climbed onto a tank to call for a general strike and annul the GKCP's orders.
Lebed said later that his orders were to "secure" the building and "suppress any acts of provocation," which to his thinking was exactly what he did.
At a secret 6 p.m. Cabinet meeting, hard-liners took heart that only a few hundred protesters had gathered at Manezh Square outside the Kremlin.
"I'm against using tanks. Let people walk around and talk," said Pavlov, the prime minister, who apparently was unprepared to use violence to hold power.
At least 19 ministers attended the meeting. None denounced the coup and only three expressed qualms, according to minutes that later helped persuade Gorbachev to fire them all.
Feeling confident, Yanayev and other GKCP members held a press conference, saying Gorbachev was sick but might someday return to office. It was the last the public saw of them during their brief stay in power.
---
In the Baltics, the coup turned violent. Troops occupied the TV center and other buildings in Riga. One man was shot to death in the Latvian capital. Another died when his car collided with an armored vehicle.
---
Outside the Russian "White House," demonstrators stayed through a chill and rainy night. They built barricades of steel rods and boards. They commandeered trolley buses and deflated the tires, blocking entrances to the parliament.
Morale was high. Tanks were strewn with flowers. Hovering overhead was a gray blimp, draped with Russia's pre-revolutionary white-blue-and-red flag.
Demonstrators built bonfires, passed around tea and cigarettes, and shared apples and ice cream with Lebed's 100 troops.
---
TUESDAY, Aug. 20:
 
 Tension built throughout the day. In Siberia, coal miners struck in answer to Yeltsin's call. In Moscow, more than 100,000 people rallied outside the Russian parliament building. Large demonstrations were reported in Leningrad. But many republics were silent, officials waiting to see how the chips would fall.
Outside the country, there was no hesitation. The European Community suspended $ 1.2 billion in aid. Japan suspended $ 350 million worth.
President Bush said he would never deal with the coup leaders, and he ordered new Ambassador Robert Strauss to fly to Moscow. When Strauss arrived, he refrained from presenting his credentials to the junta, as a sign of protest.
Yeltsin told British Prime Minister John Major by telephone that tanks were rolling even as they spoke. An armored column was spotted about 2 miles from the parliament, and fear grew that the "White House" would be stormed.
Moscow's military commandant imposed a curfew, but thousands of people defied it. They converged on the Russian parliament for a second night. This time, the party atmosphere disappeared.
Women were ordered to leave the building. Gas masks were handed to the 150 deputies, 600 guards, and dozen reporters inside. Guards piled furniture at the top of staircases, laid out firehoses and brandished AK-47 rifles.
Yeltsin said later he had obtained specific plans for storming of the building by the KGB and a list of "the first 12 victims … who were to be killed on the 19th of August at 6 p.m."
In what may have been the turning point in the coup, 20 commanders of the KGB's elite, anti-terrorist Alpha Group refused to carry out the orders, despite threats of court-martial, Yeltsin said.
---
In the Crimea, Gorbachev made a videotape denouncing the coup and proclaiming perfect health. He, Irina and Anatoly cut up the film and prepared four copies to be smuggled out.
Raisa suffered greatly from worry. The ordeal was endured best by Gorbachev's 4-year-old granddaughter Anastasia, who didn't understand.
"She was running around, asking everyone to take her to the beach … and we had to take her," Gorbachev recalled. "But … the guards asked us to stop, because anything could happen, anything at all."
---
WEDNESDAY, Aug. 21
Just after midnight, machine guns rang out in Moscow. Ten armored personnel carriers halted at a barricade in an underpass near the "White House," and the crowd pelted them with debris. The panicked driver of the lead vehicle backed over one man and ran into another.
Someone threw a firebomb at the column, and an officer fired into the crowd. The lead vehicle tried to smash through the barricade of buses. It burst into flames.

 

End of Document
