

Democrats Feel The Heat In The Countdown To Chinese Rule
The Associated Press
June 28, 1994, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 698 words
Byline: By MARCUS ELIASON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HONG KONG
Body




A sharp verbal exchange in Hong Kong's legislature a few days ago starkly revealed the misgivings that pervade the colony as China's day draws nearer.
The government's constitutional affairs chief, Nicholas Ng, wanted the members to believe there was a good chance that China might not, after all, carry out its threat to disband Hong Kong's elected institutions when it takes over on July 1, 1997.
But after failing to get the official to say how he formed this opinion, the members grew impatient. "Wishful thinking," scoffed one. "Gobbledegook," exclaimed another.
Strong words for a legislature that used to be a mere colonial rubber stamp. They reflect the cynicism that has set in among Hong Kong's democrats as this "borrowed place living on borrowed time" begins its three-year countdown to the end of empire.
China's vow to void the 1994 and 1995 elections, Hong Kong's last under British rule, has dampened the hopes of those who imagined the colony could retain Western-style democracy after 1997.
"When China came out categorically saying, 'We'll dismantle everything,' the last shred of illusion disappeared," says pro-democracy legislator Emily Lau.
The Chinese blame Chris Patten, the British governor of Hong Kong. They say things were going fine until Patten arrived in 1992 and set about remodeling Hong Kong's democracy along British lines.
Patten's reforms come before the legislature Wednesday for a final vote. Some legislators are trying to water them down to appease China, while others want to expand them. The outcome won't be known until Thursday, and the odds slightly favor Patten.
But opinion polls suggest that the public, which initially was enthusiastic about the reforms, no longer cares. After all, elections lose their impact if they're to be nullified in less than two years.
Chinese Premier Li Peng said Tuesday the dispute has hurt British-Chinese relations, and he blamed Britain for the rift.
"We hope to see the economic and trade relations between Britain and China develop," Li told a news conference in Beijing. "But it is not possible to free the overall relations from the adverse effects of the rather cool political relations between our two countries."
Patten's reforms would abolish appointments to the Legislative Council, making all 60 seats directly or indirectly elected.
But even a half-baked democracy is more than China bargained for. Having crushed one democracy movement at Tiananmen Square in 1989, it clearly doesn't want another sprouting in Hong Kong.
The democrats worry that the colony is already toeing Beijing's line. They see self-censorship in the media, and sense they are being eclipsed by a powerful business community that wants nothing to disrupt its lucrative trade with China.
"The Chinese are the rising star. They have a lot to give, and many people are eager to get on the bandwagon," Ms. Lau said in an interview.
China says the reforms are unnecessary, since it has already promised to give Hong Kong sweeping autonomy and preserve the market freedoms that have made it a global financial power.
China has much to lose if the handover turns sour. It needs the confidence of the business community if Hong Kong is to remain its gateway to the West, and the loyalty of the 190,000-strong civil service if Hong Kong's high standards of government are to be maintained.
Already, about 60,000 people emigrate annually, and nobody wants a brain drain.
Thus China has coupled its threat to the democratic institutions with a willingness to move forward on knotty economic issues, such as financing a new airport for Hong Kong and building an extra container terminal.
Such moves play well in a territory conditioned by 150 years of colonialism to make money and forego political freedoms. In a society of refugees from Communism, prosperity is a paramount value. It's no coincidence that the move to weaken Patten's reforms was spearheaded by the pro-business Liberal Party.
"We want nothing to jeopardize stability," Howard Young, a Liberal legislator, explained in an interview. "To make drastic changes in 1994 and then have China make more drastic changes in 1997 means we would be going through two political shocks in two years."
 Load-Date: June 28, 1994

 

End of Document
