

Dispatches From The Field
The Associated Press
January 25, 1991, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 974 words
Dateline: WITH THE U.S. MARINES, Eastern Saudi Arabia
Body




The Roman Catholic chaplain at this desert base says that since the war began he has heard a lot more confessions from Marines.
"Since the bombing started, they have begun to understand that this is for real," Lt. j.g. Timothy Koester of Buffalo, N.Y., said Thursday.
"Fear has to be a big thing here," said Koester, a former parish priest. "The young Marines ask me if it's all right to be scared. I tell them I worry more about those who can't acknowledge their fear."
The Catholic National Conference of Bishops, as well as mainstream Protestant denominations, opposed going to war.
"Whether this is a just war or not is a question to be settled on a higher level," Koester aid. "I'm just here to serve the troops."
---
WITH THE BRITISH 1ST ARMORED DIVISION, Saudi Arabia (AP) - British Army psychiatrist Col. John Cougan told officers in the desert army to watch out for battle shock among their troops.
Cougan said soldiers were going to face the full horror of war, with friends killed and injured.
"They are going to have to deal with that," he said. "No one can say how it will affect them but some people will go into battle shock."
A battle shock treatment area will be set up behind the front lines to deal with any serious cases, but Cougan said most could be treated on the battlefield or shortly afterward.
"We must face facts, we are likely to lose some tanks," he said. "I hope it doesn't come to that but you must be aware of problems that could arise."
He said dead tank crew members should be buried in the field with time for a short ceremony to remember a fallen friend.
"Grief is perfectly natural and when it is let out, then that person can carry on working and fighting again," he said.
It is the first time in war that the British army has sent psychiatrists to forward positions with the troops.
---
WITH THE U.S. FORCES, Saudi Arabia (AP) - War can disrupt a lot of things, including the laundry.
Soldiers from the 937th Engineer Group turned in 57 bundles of clothes several days before the war began on Jan. 17, and the clean clothes were scheduled to arrive that day.
"It still hasn't shown up," said Staff Sgt. Liane Overstreet, 34, of Ibar-Overstein, Germany, the group's supply sergeant.
Overstreet said the laundry man, a Saudi civilian, had been very punctual before the allied air offensive began.
For some soldiers, she said, "it involves a couple of weeks of dirty clothes. We're only issued two sets of desert camouflage, so if you had one set in the laundry, the set you're wearing is it."
Most soldiers also have a few sets of the forest-green fatigues commonly worn in the United States and Europe.
---
WITH THE 1ST INFANTRY DIVISION, Saudi Arabia (AP) - Perched atop an armored vehicle, Staff Sgt. Benjamin Kegler has a short answer when asked what worries him the most: "The tanks."
"We're not really afraid of them, but we're not heavy enough to take a tank round, and we're not fast either."
The battalion is used for short-range air defense, and its armored vehicles are armed with Vulcan anti-air Gatling guns.
Overall, Kegler was optimistic about the coming battle.
"We can deal with everything we see out there," said the 30-year-old Blakely, Ga., native. "The biggest thing is the element of surprise, and we can deal with that, too.
"We have better equipment and better training. We also have better morale. I think that gives us the edge. I know it does."
---
WITH THE 1ST INFANTRY DIVISION, Saudi Arabia (AP) - Battalions of combat engineers with the 7th Corps are practicing the dangerous mission of breeching the mine fields and other obstacles that must be overcome to allow tank columns to roll forward.
Engineers have built replicas of the Iraqi defenses using intelligence gathered from satellites and other sources, and are trying to defeat the obstacles.
"It has been a very important learning rehearsal," Capt. Jeffrey Jerome, 31, of Kahokia, Ill., said after watching engineers assault the model barricades. "Every one has been better than the one before."
This unit, the 1st Engineer Battalion, 1st Infantry Division, is the oldest engineering battalion in the army. Its history includes going ashore to clear obstacles on the Normandy beachhead on D-Day, June 6, 1944.
"We have had intelligence on the obstacles," said Maj. Dan Krueger, 37, of Sarasota, Florida, the battalion executive officer. "I think we have a pretty good idea of what the Iraqis have constructed."
He said those defensive positions generally consist of layers of mine fields, concertina and razor wire, fire trenches and anti-tank ditches.
---
WITH THE 82nd AIRBORNE DIVISION (AP) - The 82nd Airborne Division's 2nd Brigade has moved so far north in the desolate Saudi desert that lookouts can catch a glimmer of Iraqi vehicles across the border.
"We're picking up windshield glints to the north," said Col. Ron Rokosz, 45, of Chicago.
"The objective now is to dig in and get everybody here," he said.
A convoy that left around midday Tuesday arrived at brigade headquarters Thursday - minus one ammo truck.
The truck caught fire and exploded Tuesday in a series of blasts that looked like a Roman candle. The night turned a vivid orange, filled with blasts and the whistle of exploding metal.
No one was injured.
There were reports that a driver in a Nissan pickup truck had been shadowing the convoy and sped off just before the fire, but officials said there was no direct proof of terrorism. The fire was still under investigation.
Moving a brigade through the desert may not be like Hannibal crossing the Alps, but it is an enormous logistical task.
At one point, trucks filled the road as far as the eye could see to the front and the rear.
"In my 14 years in the military, I have never seen anything like this. It reminds me of that line from the movie 'Patton': 'Compared to war, all other forms of human endeavor pale by comparison,"' Ennis said.

 

End of Document
