

Dresden Remembers the Night the Sky Rained Firebombs
The Associated Press
February 6, 1995, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 856 words
Byline: By TERRENCE PETTY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DRESDEN, Germany
Body




The night rained incendiary bombs. Dresden was in flames. Even the pavement burned.
Eight-year-old Matthias Griebel watched bodies blasted into the treetops while British and American bombers pounded his city.
"We Dresdeners will never be freed of these images. They are impossible to wash away," says Griebel, now 57, and director of the Dresden City Museum.
The air raids on Feb. 13-14, 1945, have been likened to the atomic bombing of Hiroshima because of the carnage that resulted. The scenes of Dresden's terror were replayed in the novel "Slaughterhouse Five" by Kurt Vonnegut, who witnessed the attack as a prisoner of war.
The concentration of bombs unleashed an unexpectedly mammoth firestorm that destroyed most of Dresden - a baroque city renowned for its architectural splendors. After seven days of fires, it was a wasteland of rubble and smoldering corpses.
Some 11,916 buildings were wrecked over an area of 6 square miles. The flames could be seen 60 miles away.
"In an old city like Dresden, once the fires got going it was very difficult to stop them," said Richard Overy, a history professor at London University's King's College.
The city had been spared earlier bombings because it was not considered an important military target. But the Soviets pressured the Americans and British to bomb such cities in eastern Germany to wreck railway and road centers and hinder the movement of Nazi troops to the front in the east.
The Nazis first said about 70,000 people died but then raised it to 250,000, saying the extras were refugees. The Communists put it at about 320,000. Both figures are considered propaganda.
A new study by Griebel's museum found the death toll probably was between 25,000 and 35,000.
Young Griebel saw horrors he had never imagined. Everything was searing hot. The sky was orange.
Dresden had celebrated pre-Lenten Carnival on Feb. 13 and some corpses were still in costumes. "A dead boy was wearing an Indian bonnet," Griebel recalls.
People have debated the firebombing since it happened. Some on both sides see it as cruel and senseless because it targeted civilians and because the Nazis' surrender, on May 8, was so near. Others argue the raid was pardonable since Germany started the war and carried out terror bombings on British cities.
Ralph Giordano, a German-Jewish essayist who barely escaped being sent to the Auschwitz death camp, believes many Germans who condemn the firebombing are trying to erase their own guilty feelings over the Holocaust and World War II.
"Dresden has been misused by suppressors (of the truth) for five decades. They say 'Auschwitz for Dresden - we're even,' " the Cologne author said.
Giordano wrote a letter to President Roman Herzog pleading that he not say anything that might reinforce this view when the president speaks at ceremonies in Dresden on Feb. 13 marking the 50th anniversary.
Like many Dresdeners, Hans-Joachim Freiershausen carries a grudge against British Air Chief Marshal Arthur Harris, who as head of Britain's Bomber Command ordered the nighttime saturation-bombing of German cities.
Harris preferred incendiary bombs, which the Americans were less inclined to use. Within a month of the Dresden attack, however, U.S. planes began dropping firebombs on Tokyo to create firestorms in the Japanese capital.
"Germans were correctly convicted as war criminals after the war. But Harris was one as well," said Freiershausen, who was a 14-year-old member of the Hitler Youth when Dresden burned.
A statue of Harris was unveiled on May 31, 1992, in London by Britain's Queen Mother Elizabeth despite objections from Dresdeners. When Queen Elizabeth II paid a reconciliation visit to Dresden five months later, protesters jeered and threw eggs.
Canon Paul Oestreicher, an official at Coventry Cathedral in England, has been working to overcome ill will between Dresdeners and the British. He is co-founder of the Dresden Trust, which is raising money for rebuilding the 18th century Church of Our Lady, Dresden's most famous ruin from the bombing.
Oestreicher said he understands the point of view of Dresdeners, but he defends Harris.
"Harris was doing no more than carrying out the policy of forcing Germany into unconditional surrender," he said. "The concept of destroying cities was a German concept, which was practiced very effectively on Coventry."
A formation of 244 British Lancasters dropped incendiaries on Dresden at 10:15 p.m. on Feb. 13, 1945. Twice as many Lancasters struck three hours later. American B-17s dropped high explosives shortly after noon on Feb. 14.
Griebel was at home with his family when the air raid sirens howled. They fled to a park, where they sat out the raids in awe and fear.
Thousands of bodies were later piled on the main marketplace and cremated because the cemetery was overflowing with firebombing victims.
Most of Dresden's architectural treasures were destroyed or severely damaged: the 16th century Dresden Palace and its adjacent Georgian Gate, Semper Opera House and the Royal Stables.
The East German Communists rebuilt Dresden, in mostly Stalinist style utilitarian blocks, but restored many of the old structures.
 Load-Date: February 6, 1995

 

End of Document
