

Dutch Say Permissive Drug Policy Keeps The Lid On The Problem
The Associated Press
December 9, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 703 words
Byline: By ABNER KATZMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: AMSTERDAM, Netherlands
Body




While debate opens up in the United States over legalizing drugs, the trend in Europe is toward increased tolerance for the user - and tougher penalties for the trafficker.
U.S. Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders set off a storm by suggesting America's streets might be safer if drug use were legalized.
In Amsterdam, you don't have to go far to find evidence that appears to support her argument.
In the red light district, for instance, elderly tourists mingle freely with junkies and let their pocketbooks dangle freely. In a city known as one of Europe's major drug bazaars, purse-snatchings are rare and drug-related crimes of violence are almost unheard-of.
"I think the tolerance of both hard and soft drugs has reduced crime in our cities," Amsterdam police spokesman Klaas Wilting said Thursday.
But permissiveness toward drug use may be less significant than other policies - such as strict gun control - in explaining low levels of crime and violence.
And Wilting and other European officials oppose outright legalization.
"If we do that, the government will lose its grip on the (illegal drugs) market, and we can't manage it anymore," said Justice Ministry spokeswoman Jannie Pols.
Police have focused their war on drugs on traffickers associated with organized crime, even as tolerance toward possession and use makes drugs cheap and easy to get.
The Dutch government eliminated penalties for drug possession in 1976, setting a policy that possession of up to a gram of heroin (.035 ounces) or 30 grams (1.05 ounces) of marijuana or hashish was not a punishable offense.
Even though heroin is readily available, the Dutch addiction rate is one of Europe's lowest, with about 15,000 hard drug addicts and 600,000 marijuana and hashish users in this nation of 15 million.
The heroin substitute methadone is readily available at clinics to city residents. A needle exchange program has given the Dutch one of Europe's lowest AIDS rates among intravenous drug users.
The crack cocaine that has contributed to urban violence in the United States is almost nonexistent.
But earlier this year, other European nations reacted angrily to the personal view of Dutch drugs czar Robert Samsom that they should all legalize soft drugs like marijuana and hashish.
Officials worry more about subversion of their economies by drug money and the increasing social costs of addiction than they do about street crime.
The Dutch rejection of legalization in favor of official tolerance reflects government attempts to placate conservatives at home and other European nations that fear an inundation of drugs from the Netherlands.
"We don't want to fill up our jail with drug addicts," said Mario Lap, legal advisor at the Dutch Institute for Alcohol and Drugs.
"They should be in treatment centers and not in jails."
Municipal officials allow so-called coffee shops to sell marijuana and hashish as a way of keeping users from contact with the heroin street trade.
Spain, which has one of Europe's highest heroin addiction rates, decriminalized soft drugs for personal use a decade ago and tolerates heroin and cocaine use.
But Spain has the highest AIDS death rate in Europe, with 75 percent of all AIDS-related deaths stemming from intravenous drug use.
In Britain, both soft and hard drugs are illegal, but the government runs rehabilitation centers where doctors are allowed to prescribe illicit drugs to addicts.
Italy decriminalized drug possession in an April referendum, after years of debate over whether it would cut crime. The government is preparing legislation to free about 17,000 drug addicts sent to prison under a 1990 law that stiffened penalties for drug possession.
Germany and France remain adamant in their opposition to legalization.
"We see no advantage in it because the legalizing of drugs would bring other things with it," said Juergen Stoltenow, spokesman for the Federal Criminal Police Office.
Germany is the most directly affected by the liberal Dutch drugs stance, with thousands of addicts streaming across the Dutch-German border to buy drugs every week.
With drug overdose deaths on the rise in France, the French government is considering ways to increase methadone maintenance programs to wean addicts away from heroin.
 Load-Date: December 9, 1993

 

End of Document
