

End of the Line for the New York-Chicago Broadway Limited
 The Associated Press
September 9, 1995, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 540 words
Byline: By TED DUNCOMBE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PHILADELPHIA
Body




Once it was synonymous with luxury and speed, movie stars and high-powered businessmen. Maid and valet service were no problem, and a million-dollar haircut cost just 50 cents - allowing passengers to pull into the station in style.
Those days are gone. After today, the Broadway Limited will join them. One of the nation's great passenger routes has been killed by Amtrak to save money.
"The train was there day in and day out, year in and year out," said Mike Bezilla, a railroad historian. "It's been there through the world wars, through the Depression, the Sputnik, the atom bomb, you name it - there's been a Broadway."
The service between New York and Chicago by way of Philadelphia and Pittsburgh was inaugurated in 1902 as the Pennsylvania Special. In 1912, it became the Broadway Limited, an allusion not to New York City's theater district but to the Pennsylvania Railroad's wide right-of-way with four and even six sets of tracks crossing the industrial heartland.
After today's last runs, people will still be able to travel the 915-mile route but will have to transfer in Pittsburgh, with waits of nearly two hours.
"The demise of the Broadway … is not merely sad," The Patriot-News of Harrisburg editorialized Tuesday. "It is a mistake of no small significance. This service didn't simply die; it was killed by years of neglect, substandard service and equipment, and a schedule that was geared more to getting the mail through than to the convenience of travelers."
Amtrak says the move will save about $ 17.3 million, or a sizable part of a $ 240 million shortfall the railroad had anticipated in its 1995 budget of $ 1.4 billion.
"It's a sad day at Amtrak when we lose a passenger train, but at the same time we have to keep in mind that the changes we're making will restore the corporation's health," said Deborah Hare, an Amtrak spokeswoman in Chicago.
People lining up Friday at Philadelphia's 30th Street Station ranged from businessmen to European youths on vacation.
Bill Curphey of Zanesville, Ohio, didn't realize until he was boarding that it was the same route he had taken to prep school in New England as a youth.
"I had my own little cubicle," he said. "It was fun, kind of exciting."
Nick Moore and Matt Gilbert, both of England, said the train was the most convenient way to Chicago for them. "You've got a lot more space than on British trains," Moore said. "The stations are amazing."
Except for two periods in 1903-04 and during World War I, and occasional disruptions by flooding, the Broadway ran east and west daily. And before widespread airplane travel, speed was one of its advantages.
In 1912, the trip took about 20 hours, or an average of about 45 mph despite stops. In 1947 it took 15 hours, or about 60 mph, with speeds of up to 90 mph.
In the train's heyday, everything was first class.
Until 1967, all the cars were Pullman sleepers. Barbers would trim a beard for 35 cents or cut hair for 50 cents. There was a library, updated stock and baseball reports, maid and valet service.
Its passengers included Charlie Chaplin, President Eisenhower and the business world's main movers and shakers.
"It really was the Concorde of its day," said Dan Cupper, a railroad author and correspondent for Trains Magazine.
 Load-Date: September 9, 1995

 

End of Document
