

End of Cold War Means the End for Famous Army Corps
The Associated Press
August 16, 1991, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 642 words
Byline: By ROBERT BURNS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




From D-day at Normandy to G-day in the Persian Gulf, the Army's VII Corps compiled a celebrated war record.
On Thursday, it lost the battle of time.
The VII Corps is pulling up stakes in the sector of Germany it defended for more than 40 years, folding its flag and disappearing into the history books.
The Army announced that as part of a plan to reduce by half the size of the U.S. force in Europe by 1995, the VII Corps will disband next year, leaving its sister unit, V Corps, as the central fighting outfit on the continent.
The VII Corps, commanded in the Persian Gulf War by Lt. Gen. Frederick Franks, delivered the knockout blow to the Iraqi Republican Guard forces in a 100-hour ground offensive that included the largest tank battles in the history of warfare.
To be withdrawn with VII Corps by the end of September 1992 are two of the four American combat divisions in Europe: the 3rd Armored Division at Frankfurt, Germany, and the 8th Infantry Division (Mechanized) at Bad Kreuznach, Germany.
The two combat divisions that survived the cutbacks are the 3rd Infantry Division and the 1st Armored Division. Other combat units, including one of the Army's two armored cavalry regiments, also will be withdrawn but no decisions have been announced.
The VII Corps, with more than 71,000 soldiers, 2,200 combat vehicles and 300 helicopters, has defended a 30,000 square mile section of Germany along the former Iron Curtain since the end of World War II. Now that the Cold War is over, the Bush administration sees less need for a large military presence in Europe.
"We need a force that makes sense for the evolving threat" rather than one tailored almost exclusively to handle a Soviet-led invasion of Western Europe, said Col. William Foster, chief of the Army's war plans division at the Pentagon.
Foster said in an interview that whereas the U.S. military previously planned mainly for global war, it now is structuring its armed forces to respond to as many as two major "regional contingencies," such as the Persian Gulf crisis, simultaneously.
The story of VII Corps began in 1918 when it was assembled in France to train doughboys for combat in World War I.
On D-Day, June 6, 1944, the VII Corps led the bloody allied assault on German positions along Normandy's beaches. Under the command of Gen. J. Lawton "Lightning Joe" Collins, the VII Corps rolled east through France and later fought in the decisive stages of the Battle of the Bulge in the Ardennes.
The VII Corps and its war exploits are revered in today's Army.
"The combat operations of VII Corps in World War II is what all future generals of the Army study at the Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, Kan.," said Maj. Pete Keating of the Army public affairs office in the Pentagon.
The Army has known for weeks it would remove one of its two corps from Europe. The decision on choosing which was wrenching, especially because many of the Army's top brass have been a part of one or the other corps.
Gen. Colin Powell, the No. 1 uniformed officer as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, is a former commander of V Corps. Gen. John Galvin, commander of NATO forces in Europe, is a former commander of VII Corps.
In its announcement on withdrawals from Europe, the Army said four of VII Corps' main elements, including VII Corps Artillery and the 2nd Support Command, will be removed by March 15. VII Corps headquarters will disband by April 15.
The Army also said four units in Germany will return to the United States.
The 17th Field Artillery Brigade's headquarters and headquarters battery, as well as its 6th Battalion, will move to Fort Sill, Okla.; the 7th Engineer Brigade's headquarters and headquarters company will go to Fort Lewis, Wash.; and the headquarters and headquarters company of the 4th Aviation Brigade, 3rd Infantry Division will go to Fort Bragg, N.C.

 

End of Document
