

Endeavour's Astronauts: Hold the Kraut, Forget the Lashes
The Associated Press
May 3, 1992, Sunday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 527 words
Byline: By MARCIA DUNN, AP Aerospace Writer
Dateline: CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla.
Body




Hold the kraut and forget the lashes when the new space shuttle Endeavour sets sail this week.
Unlike its namesake, an 18th-century British ship that plied the South Seas loaded with sauerkraut, the shuttle will be stocked with powdered orange juice, dried fruit and freeze-dried vegetables to keep its crew awash in Vitamin C.
"No, we don't have any sauerkraut," admitted the commander of Endeavour's first flight, Daniel Brandenstein. "But we've never had anybody get scurvy on a flight either."
The skipper of the original Endeavour, Royal Navy Lt. James Cook, was a nutritional visionary as well as a navigator and amateur astronomer. He forced his crew to eat sauerkraut to prevent scurvy; the ship carried more than 7,000 pounds of the stuff. He also fed them onions and fresh fruit, when available.
Men died, but none of scurvy.
Those who broke Cook's dietary rules were flogged. Brandenstein, a Navy captain, plans to be a little less strict.
"We don't lash people anymore," he said.
Endeavour lifts off at 7:06 p.m. EDT Thursday on a mission to rescue a stranded communications satellite and boost it to the right orbit. The countdown begins tonight.
The seven-day flight will be a piece of cake compared to Cook's eight-month voyage from England to Tahiti, Brandenstein said. Cook and his men were gone from 1768 to 1771, also exploring New Zealand and Australia.
Cook's mission was to document the passage of Venus between the sun and Earth from Tahiti, chart Tahiti and neighboring islands, and discover whether a large continent existed in the South Pacific.
"Seven days cooped up in the crew module is nothing compared to what those guys went through," Brandenstein said.
The Royal Navy's Endeavour was 98 feet long with a beam of 29 feet. It carried 94 men on its maiden voyage, including scientists and artists who studied South Pacific flora and fauna. There was no bathroom, only the sea.
NASA's Endeavour is 122 feet long with a wingspan of 78 feet. It will carry seven astronauts on its inaugural run, as well as a one-inch sliver from the original Endeavour's sternpost. There is a toilet, awkward though it may be in weightlessness.
Endeavour is the $ 2 billion replacement for Challenger, which was destroyed shortly after liftoff in 1986. It was America's worst space disaster - seven astronauts died in the explosion, including Concord, N.H., teacher Christa McAuliffe, the first private U.S. citizen on a space mission.
Schoolchildren named Challenger's successor in a national competition. The winners - selected in 1989 from 6,154 teams representing 71,652 students - were Senatobia (Miss.) Middle School and the Tallulah Falls (Ga.) School.
Most of the 18 winning students - nine per school - will be on hand for Endeavour's send-off. Also cheering Endeavour on from Kennedy Space Center will be Tallulah Falls' entire student body of 129.
"The Endeavour, it seems to belong to us," said Melody Durrett, 14, an eighth-grader on Senatobia's winning team who composed a song about the shuttle.
While the Challenger accident "was really awful, we're hoping, we feel like we're making up for it," she said. "It makes us feel really proud to be involved."

 

End of Document
