

Explosion in Georgia; Babi Yar Massacre Remembered in the Ukraine
The Associated Press
September 29, 1991, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 795 words
Byline: By THOMAS GINSBERG, Associated Press Writerr
Dateline: TBILISI, U.S.S.R.
Body




An explosion rocked Georgia's broadcasting center Sunday while it was occupied by opponents of President Zviad Gamsakhurdia, and violence in a breakaway region of the republic reportedly left two dead.
The evening blast injured at least one person and blew out most of the windows in the four-story building. Opposition leader Tengiz Segua called it a "provocation" by Gamsakhurdia's forces. Few details were immediately available.
The explosion came after a day of relative calm in the capital of 1.2 million, and as government and opposition leaders were meeting in the Justice Ministry to try to establish an agenda for truce talks.
Elsewhere in the Soviet Union, tens of thousands of people marched in a solemn 50th-anniversary commemoration of the Nazi massacre of Jews at the Babi Yar ravine in the Ukraine.
In the Central Asian republic of Tadzhikistan, the embattled Communist government called a special session of parliament as an estimated 10,000 people demonstrated in the rain outside.
In Moscow, 1,000 people attended a memorial service for three men who were killed by soldiers in a clash near the Russian parliament building during the failed August coup.
Mourners vowed never to forget the three, who have been named Heroes of the Soviet Union, the country's highest honor. But people in the crowd also said they believed the Communist Party was still ruling their country despite being suspended by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev following the Aug. 18-21 coup.
In the wake of the coup, increasing unrest has flared in the republics with the collapse of central authority.
One rebel Georgian National Guardsman was slightly wounded in a clash overnight outside the television center, which was occupied by the opposition last Sunday, the Tass news agency reported.
Gunshots were heard in other parts of Tbilisi on Saturday night and Sunday morning, but there were no other reports of injuries. Gamsakhurdia's forces remained in control of most key points in the city, including the Parliament building.
A few hundred protesters remained at the broadcasting center after the explosion, down from thousands in recent days.
The government-rebel talks were bogged down over an agenda and the question of who would represent the opposition, said Eldar Shengelaya, one of the rebel leaders.
Both sides are non-communists who seek independence from the Soviet Union.
The Georgian leader, elected in May, has been accused by the opposition and officials of some Western countries, including the United States, of disregarding human rights and concentrating power in his hands. He has severely restricted the press, arrested opposition politicians, and clamped a state of emergency on the capital.
In the restive South Ossetia region of Georgia, two people were killed and four wounded in an overnight attack by Georgian militants on the village of Patknet, the Russian Information Agency said Sunday.
Gunfire also broke out in Tskhinvali, capital of the region, which is trying to secede from Georgia. The Ossetian ethnic minority claims it is suffering discrimination at the hands of the Georgian majority.
The Russian republic's news agency said people were wounded, but it did not know how many.
Ukrainians, Israelis and Jewish leaders from around the world began a weeklong commemoration of the Nazi massacre at Babi Yar. More than 30,000 Jews were shot to death at the ravine outside Kiev, the Ukrainian capital, on Sept. 29-30, 1941.
German death squads continued to execute Jews, Communists, Gypsies, homosexuals and others at the ravine for two years. At least 100,000 people, and possibly as twice that number, are believed to have died before the Red army liberated Kiev in 1943.
One of the Israeli participants in the 50th anniversary commemoration voiced concern Sunday that Nazi collaborators may be among the 50,000 Ukrainians who have been officially "rehabilitated," or vindicated, of Stalin-era crimes since April.
Shimon Samuels, European director of the Wiesenthal Center in Jerusalem, said he gave a list of 1,000 suspected collaborators to Ukrainian officials for checking.
In Dushanbe, capital of Tadzhikistan, protesters covered themselves with plastic sheets but did not leave the main square despite drenching rain.
More than 10,000 people have crowded the square for a week supporting scores of hunger strikers demanding the resignation of Communist President Rakhman Nabiyev. He came to power last Monday when the Communist-controlled parliament ousted Kadriddin Aslonov for trying to banish the Communist Party.
Nabiyev held talks with opposition leaders but refused to resign or meet their other demands, including dismissal of the republic's chief prosecutor and head of its television company. A special session of the parliament was scheduled for Monday.

 

End of Document
