

Fine-Tuning the System: the New Limits of Debate
The Associated Press
March 6, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 570 words
Byline: By CANDICE HUGHES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HAVANA, Cuba
Body




The rules of what Cubans can say about what and to whom are changing, but they're still rules.
After years of relative silence, people are starting to grouse about food shortages, long lines, bad buses and bureaucratic bumbling. That's how the government wants it.
They remain quiet, however, on the headier issues of President Fidel Castro's leadership and the one-party socialist state. That, too, is how the government wants it.
The limits on what can and cannot be said are as clear as ever, but Cubans have been speaking out with an unfamiliar vigor within them.
Many talk about how to fine-tune the system in a time of crisis. That would have been unimaginable a decade ago, said Moises Hernandez, one of Cuba's few open dissidents.
Public debate on "perfecting" Cuban socialism isn't spontaneous. Control is tight in Cuba and people have a keen sense of the value of silence.
"There is an imaginary line between complaining and dissent," Hernandez said. "At some moments it moves forward; sometimes it moves back. Each person has to know exactly where to stop, because going over the line can be dangerous."
When the Communist Party solicited public opinion last year as part of its call for a fourth party congress in 1991, people didn't realize at first that the line was being moved.
Its declaration rejected an "unreal quest for unanimity, which is often false, mechanical and formal and can lead to pretense, double standards or hiding of opinions."
Old habits die hard. In July, the weekly magazine Bohemia conducted surveys about Cuban democracy and, it said, many people greeted the pollsters with a "tired and skeptical eye."
Bohemia said others simply refused to talk. The magazine has since disappeared because of the newsprint shortage.
People who dutifully attended the first pre-congress public meetings stuck to the safe slogans of allegiance to Fidel, the party and socialism.
The meetings stopped, the party regrouped and the Politburo issued specific guidelines. One-party socialism was "not open to question," it said, but public debate was invited within that framework.
Meetings resumed and, with the clearer guidelines, people stood up and grumbled. They objected to boring shoes, bad sewers and too much paper work, complained about endless political meetings, crime and ineffective municipal council representatives.
They suggested incentives for outstanding workers, freer travel and ending discrimination against homosexuals and religious believers.
Scenes from the meetings were televised.
Revision of the limits coincides with an economic crisis provoked by upheavals elsewhere in the communist world.
Cubans are trying to cope with austerity forced on them by restricted oil supplies from the Soviet Union and the loss of trade with former Soviet satellites in Eastern Europe.
Some party leaders believe such times require controlled channels for discontent and debate so people will feel a part of the painful decisions required.
"More participation from people in confronting our problems," is one of the goals of the congress, Culture Minister Armando Hart Davalos told visiting journalists.
Some analysts say the party's failure to set a date for the congress could indicate internal differences on the wisdom of public debate.
The opening of official channels for discontent, they note, has been accompanied by a crackdown on unsanctioned human rights groups Castro recently described as "cockroaches."

 

End of Document
