

For the Future President, Politics Was the Only Choice
The Associated Press
February 17, 1995, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 813 words
Byline: By LAWRENCE L. KNUTSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




After losing his re-election bid for Arkansas governor in 1980 Bill Clinton made clear that the currents of his drive for political success ran so strong and deep that for him there was no other choice.
Why politics? a student asked the defeated candidate.
"It's the only track I've ever wanted to run on," Clinton replied.
The story is told in the newly issued "First in His Class, a Biography of Bill Clinton," by David Maraniss, a Washington Post reporter who won the Pulitzer Prize in 1992 for reporting on Clinton's life.
Delving again into Clinton's life, at far greater length, Maraniss follows the youthful politician from the cradle to his decision to run for president.
He was a young man who loved crowds, didn't like to be alone, and found that playing the saxophone made him feel less solitary.
Clinton scored academic success in high school, at Georgetown University, at Oxford University as a Rhodes scholar and at Yale University Law School.
And when defeat came in 1980, posing the possibility that his political career had ended, Clinton was not without resources.
His political network by then was listed on more than 10,000 three-by-five index cards cataloging supporters in the state, across the country, indeed around the world. They were later to become famous as FOBs, Friends of Bill.
The cards were amazingly detailed. On the top right corner was written the Arkansas county where the person lived or the era where the person entered Clinton's life: Georgetown, Oxford, Yale, his Washington service on the staff of Sen. J. William Fulbright, D-Ark., the 1972 McGovern campaign. On the left side were dates beginning from the time Clinton and the subject had first met and every important contact they had had since. In the middle were names, telephone numbers, addresses, sometimes contribution amounts.
They were stored in shoeboxes and wooden library card catalogue files and, Maraniss writes, each "recorded a piece of his history and reflected his relentless campaign drive."
Clinton always had what Maraniss calls "oversized habits," ranging from his impressive string of girl friends to his youthful favorite sandwich - peanut butter and banana.
As governor, he writes, "any aide who spent time with him could tell stories of his inhaling apples in a few massive bites, swallowing them core and all. Hot dogs went down so fast they barely touched his teeth. The mansion cook could not bake chocolate chip cookies fast enough. Plates of enchiladas and nachos disappeared in seconds."
But the author, quoting friends from Clinton's Oxford days, concludes there was one substance Clinton really never did have an appetite for - marijuana.
Clinton was ridiculed in his 1992 presidential campaign for saying he tried the stuff but "never inhaled."
"We spent enormous amounts of time trying to teach him to inhale; He absolutely could not inhale," the author quotes a Clinton friend as saying.
The problem, Maraniss writes, is that Clinton didn't smoke cigarettes, never had, and didn't know how to smoke.
The friends describe Clinton as spending most of the time at parties leaning out the window gasping for air and conclude: "He was technically correct to say he did not inhale."
The future president's drive was evident early.
In July 1963, Clinton lobbied relentlessly with the chaperons on the American Legion Boy's Nation trip for the prize he wanted most and would soon get, the now-famous photograph of the handshake with President John F. Kennedy.
Clinton found a place at the front of the first bus to enter the White House grounds: "With his long strides, Clinton took the lead and placed himself in the front row, just to the right of the outdoor podium." And after the president made brief remarks, the boys surged forward with Clinton winning the race.
He was always eager, and super competitive, even when the stakes seemed small.
As governor he installed a pinball machine in the basement of the governor's mansion in Little Rock only to be dumbfounded when a seven-year-old boy racked up 800,000 points, pulverizing the governor's high score.
"When everyone had left for the night, Clinton stayed up, Billy the pinball wizard, shooting, pounding, leaning, tilting, until two in the morning, determined to reclaim the record," Maraniss writes.
After hearing a Georgetown professor say that great men often slept no more than five hours and refreshed themselves during the day with catnaps, Clinton began sleeping five hours a night and taking catnaps during the day.
But being awake longer than most people didn't make him punctual. A few years later, while working for Fulbright on Capitol Hill, Clinton noticed that Congress operated on the theory that everyone else in the world could wait. Clinton stopped being on time for anything, a habit that would be memorialized by aides in his presidential campaign with the phrase, "He's running a little bit late."
 Load-Date: February 17, 1995

 

End of Document
