

For The Associated Press
The Associated Press
October 25, 1992, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 815 words
Byline: By JIM MATTHEWS
Body




For the first time in over 30 years, "Made in the USA" means something to the international shooting community. An American company has created arguably the most accurate .22 ammunition in the world.
Throughout the development stages, the research staff at Federal Cartridge Company in Anoka, Minn., optimistically called it Gold Medal Match. Then during the Barcelona Olympics, American shooter Launi Meili set two Olympic records and won the gold medal in the women's three-position shooting event, and Bob Foth captured the silver medal after losing the gold by just six-tenths of a point.
Foth had quietly used the same ammunition in June to win the U.S. International Championships and set a national record in the three-position competition.
Since then, the new ammunition has continued to live up to its name.
"Virtually every match we've been in, we've medaled in," said Dave Longren, director of Product Engineering for the Federal.
Even with the finest shooters firing your ammunition, that is a credit to the precision and consistency of the product. The tally so far is three national championships, a world cup medal, and the two Olympic medals.
While Federal won't discuss the costs of the project, Ron Mason, president of the company, freely admits it's been a significant investment that will never pay for itself in direct returns even after the ammunition becomes commercially available in the spring.
"There were two reasons we did this," said Mason. "First, the ammunition business is a tough, competitive environment. Remington and Winchester have been around longer, even though this company was founded in 1922, and we wanted to show the world what we could do. Second, we're Americans. We just think American shooters should be using American-made ammunition.
"This project might seem like an odd investment the way the economy is, but in a small way we're going to end up bringing some jobs back to this country from Europe," said Mason.
Mike Larsen, the manager of shoot promotions for Federal, said an immense amount of pride went into this project.
"The .22 was founded in the U.S., but the ultimate development was taken overseas, like so many things these days. But now we've brought it back here," said Larsen. "We just decided that it was time the U.S. Team was shooting a U.S. shell."
The last time an international .22 rifle shooting medal was won with US-made ammunition was in 1960. Since then, the hand-assembled Russian-made ammunition, the British Eley, and the German RWS ammunition dominated the world events.
The new Federal ammunition has led to a shrinking in group size and the virtual elimination of flier shots - those that unexplainably don't land where expected.
"The engineering accomplishment was something, but that accomplishment was not as significant as convincing the shooters to use the American-made ammo," said Mason.
Meili admitted she was a tough sell.
"Until two weeks before the Olympics, I was still going to shoot Eley," she said. "But this ammunition shot incredible. I couldn't believe it. It takes a lot to have a shooter switch, especially when you've set world records and won major matches with another ammunition.
"There are no fliers with the Federal, and I still consider a shot outside the group - even if it's still a 10 - I consider that a flier. This ammunition shoots nice, round groups and it's probably 1/8th-inch all the way around better than Eley."
Smaller group sizes effectively enlarge the 10-point scoring ring for the competitive shooter, giving them more room to shade a shot to allow for breeze and mirage.
Foth said that one of the worst things to happen to a shooter is for a shot not to land where expected on the target, make an adjustment on the next shot to compensate for the difference, and then to have that bullet land someplace else unexpected. It can rock a shooter's nerves because now he's not sure if he is doing something wrong, or if the ammunition was faulty.
The amazing thing is that we're only talking about fractions of inches at 50 meters. The 10-point scoring ring is less than a half-inch in diameter and the ammunition is so consistent that it will cluster into less than 70 percent of that space barring shooter error. That means that all the shots are practically going through the same hole.
"It's absolutely incredible they were able to put something together in that short a period of time and win two Olympic medals in it's debut," said Foth.
Perhaps even more amazing is that both the shooters and the engineers from Federal feel that another "significant" improvement can be made in the current Gold Medal Match ammunition that will shrink group size even more.
"What makes it more accurate is a combination of 350 to 400 different things, and I'm not kidding you," Longren said.
"At the present time our engineers feel there is still significant improvement that is possible, " said Mason.

 

End of Document
