

Free Press and the Perils of the Market
The Associated Press
July 7, 1992, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 672 words
Byline: By THOMAS GINSBERG, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




In a world where the unthinkable has become ordinary, you can buy The New York Times from a subway news vendor along with Pravda, the former Kremlin bible that now calls itself an opposition paper.
Foreigners have been vying for a share of the market since the press was freed, but the economic chaos that followed the Soviet Union's demise has made both foreign and domestic publishers wary.
"It's foolish now to come out with a new newspaper," said Stepan Kisilov of Moscow News, which publishes an authorized Russian-language summary of The New York Times twice a month.
"At a time when there's no stability in the economic situation and when people are counting the money in their pockets … naturally they'll choose those publications that they know," he said.
One paper Russians know well from the Cold War is The Times. Westerners know the name Pravda, once the powerful voice of the Communist Party and now struggling to servive.
Greater hurdles face new publications, such as the European Community magazine Europa and the weekly newspaper We/Myi published jointly by Izvestia, the former government newspaper, and Hearst Newspapers of the United States.
One problem is that they must compete with dozens of Russian magazines and newspapers. Another is that newsstands are giving less space to publications and more to such high-profit goods as vodka and cigarettes.
Most Soviet-era newspapers still publish, calling themselves the "opposition press," but are having trouble as the government tries to wean them from decades of state subsidies.
Soaring costs of newsprint and a more diverse readership are the greatest perils. The press boom of the glasnost era may be waning, thanks to the very political and economic changes many publications promoted.
"Now, most of the subsidies have dried up or are drying up, and many print media have to stand alone," said Mike Adams of the Moscow office of Young and Rubicam, a U.S. advertising agency. "They have to become real businesses."
Foreign companies never received subsidies and were accustomed to higher production costs, but those costs continue rising as Russia lifts price controls.
"In an environment in which the price of printing rises five or six times in six months, you have to react fast," said Derk Sauer, a Dutch-based publisher whose 3-year-old Moscow Magazine is the city's most visible foreign success story.
He said many foreign publications have failed "because they didn't appreciate the one big law of Russian publishing: The ink is more expensive than what you can sell the magazine for."
Compounding the cost squeeze is a lack of information about readers and their interests. Western publishers and advertisers consider demographic information essential; Russian publishers often know little more than circulation figures.
"Glasnost has been around for six years, but the publishing business … only started to change in the last year," Adams said.
Despite all this, several new publications have plunged into this murky market, including a South African joint-venture business paper, The New Bridge, and the brash We/Myi, by Hearst and Izvestia.
Vladimir Shmiganovsky, the Russian publisher of We/Myi, said Hearst had suspended plans to start the paper two years ago because of political instability, and picked it up again late last year.
Russian and English editions appeared in February here and in the United States. We/Myi claims a circulation of about 200,000 across the former Soviet Union, compared with 70,000 for the Russian-language New York Times bi-weekly.
We/Myi, in full color, aims for entrepeneurs and younger readers. Its stories are written by Russian and American staff members in Moscow and Washington, Shmiganovsky said.
Translation is handled in Moscow and advertising in the United States. The paper is big on flashy American-style layout and headlines.
"Now we have to conquer a market that was much easier two years ago," Shmiganovsky said. "Now, interest in Russia among Americans is declining. It's not nothing, but it's just not like it was."

 

End of Document
