

From The Beaches to Paris, D-Day Vets Find French Still Grateful
The Associated Press
June 11, 1994, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 884 words
Byline: AP Photo NY192, By HUGH MULLIGAN, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: PARIS
Body




Packing up memories of an incredible week, along with sand scooped from Normandy's beaches, departing D-Day veterans remember Paris, and the rest of France, as the most kissable place on earth.
"Je vous remercie pour notre liberte" - I thank you for our freedom.
Everywhere they went, women of all ages, from grandmothers to schoolgirls, greeted them thus and sealed their gratitude with two resounding pecks on each cheek.
Men performed the traditional double embrace. And sometimes even a promenading poodle would be presented to a beribboned vet for a wet-nosed salute to "le Debarquement," as the D-Day landings are termed on posters all over La Belle France.
"I haven't been kissed so often since Paris was liberated," said Harold Stuart of Tulsa, Okla., a D-Day vet with the 9th Air Force, who was on the second plane to land in Paris after the city was liberated Aug. 25, 1944. The first plane hit a mine.
Stuart remembers dancing in the streets until dawn and being kissed by everyone he met.
"Fifty years later, the spirit is almost the same, and I'm not complaining. I'm still very kissable," Stuart enthused.
"So am I," chimed in Marvin Rosvald of Norfolk, Neb., who flew three fighter missions on D-Day and later rode into liberated Paris from his base at Chartres on a truck. He went straight to the Cafe de la Paix, where the Champagne was flowing.
A half-century later, Rosvald again was being embraced as a liberator. He was wearing his D-Day credentials in the Ritz Hotel lobby when Pierre Deluce, a young lawyer, emotionally shook his hand in gratitude for France's deliverance from Hitler.
"The guy wasn't old enough to have fought with the French in Vietnam," said Rosvald, comparing kissing experiences with Stuart in Harry's New York Bar, the venerable Paris watering hole for expatriates like Ernest Hemingway.
Beneath an Air Force banner hanging among the collection of college pennants, proprietor Duncan MacElhone toasted them with drinks on the house, as his father had done for veterans of World War I. He then enrolled them in the "International Barflies," Harry's alumni association.
Hundreds of people were waiting on the pier in Le Havre when the ocean liner QE2 docked with nearly 1,000 vets on the eve of the invasion anniversary. Gabrielle Templar brought her fourth-grade class to greet them.
"The children are not here to see the big boat," she said, but to learn what the United States did for them.
Normandy struck a special medal and presented it with due ceremony to those who fought there.
Sometimes, the excess of gratitude could be dangerous to the liver. In town after town, the returning heroes were feted at town hall with a toast of honor.
Often, the proffered beverage was Calvados, the well-rememberd high-octane Norman applejack that combat correspondent Ernie Pyle described as "a savage liquid made by boiling barbed wire in soapsuds with jeep springs and old tent pegs."
"At 10 o'clock in the morning, two blasts of that stuff can make your head ring like the bells of Sainte-Mere-Eglise," said former Tank Destroyer Capt. Tod Glenville of Vero Beach, Fla., who survived four official functions.
Those who returned to observe D Plus 50 will not soon forget the flags and bunting hanging from window boxes and balconies as their tour buses rolled through tiny villages; people cheering and blowing kisses from sidewalk cafes and farmhouse windows; the gendarmes saluting and waving them through roadblocks.
Small tributes touched them most, like the beggar in the subway who squeezed out "The Stars and Stripes Forever" on his accordion when they came down the stairs in their 9th Air Force jackets.
After wandering down dozens of muddy lanes, a busload of former fighter pilots at found a stone marker at the edge of field letting the world, or at least the cows, know that "The 366th Fighter Group of the 9th Air Force flew from this advanced field."
Perry Lusby, of Sun City, Calif., who was among the first to land a fighter in France after the invasion, was getting his camera set for a picture when a 15-year-old schoolboy, Benoit Duprey, rode up on his bicycle and raised the American and French flags on twin poles marking the east of the vanished runway.
Officials in charge of the D-Day observances apparently profited greatly from the mistakes of the 40th anniversary, when most of the places of the ceremonies were given to politicians and veterans often spent the day hung up in roadblocks.
"We were issued those Catch 22 credentials - good only yesterday and tomorrow," recalled Burton Forster of San Antonio, who came for the 40th anniversary with his 101st Airborne Division buddies. "I almost didn't come this time, but I'm glad I did. It was beautifully organized."
Summing up his D-Day experience, former B-26 crew chief Buzzy Coltraine of Seattle said:
"I didn't cry when I found the names of four of our guys on that plaque to the missing at the American cemetery in Cambridge.
"But I lost control when the lady in the opticians' shop behind the Opera called me a hero for helping free France. She came out from behind the counter and kissed me and said there was no charge for replacing the frames of the bifocals I sat on at breakfast.
"Hell, I'm not a hero. I'm just a survivor, but these people don't know the difference. All I can say is, Vive la France."
 Load-Date: June 11, 1994

 

End of Document
