

From Colt .45s to the Toy Cannon: Astrodome Turns 30
The Associated Press
April 9, 1995, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 872 words
Byline: By MICHAEL A. LUTZ, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: HOUSTON
Body




Even the Astrodome needs to be modernized, it seems.
The place where Elvis rocked and Elvin played celebrates its 30th birthday Sunday, still known in some parts as "The Eighth Wonder of the World."
"The name Astrodome is one of the best brand names in the world. You can go anywhere in the world and they'll know it," Houston Astros owner Drayton McLane said.
"I was in Europe 10 days ago. In Portugal, I mentioned to several people about the Astrodome and they knew exactly what I meant," he said.
From the start, the stadium has had no trouble standing out.
In 1962, the late Judge Roy Hofheinz and Harris County Commissioners fired shots from Colt .45 pistols into the ground in a bizarre groundbreaking ceremony that was fitting for what was to become the futuristic Astrodome.
Since then, very little has been ordinary about the place - the world's first all-weather, multipurpose domed stadium.
McLane, the current Astros owner and Astrodome leaseholder through 2023, doesn't have the Judge's flamboyance, but he has the passion to take what Hofheinz started into the 21st century.
"It's like taking a beautiful home and modernizing it from time to time just like they've done with the White House," McLane said. "It still looks like the White House but it's just been modernized and brought up to date. That's what we need to do on a continual basis for the Astrodome."
Hofheinz, a former Houston mayor, lawyer, promoter, put all of his skills into the building of the Astrodome. He also put himself into the park - he had an apartment inside the stadium.
Some wanted to call the place the Harris County Domed Stadium. That was too drab for Hofheinz, who dubbed it the Astrodome.
Other stadiums had luxury boxes. Hofheinz demanded sky boxes.
"It has tradition," McLane said, gazing up from home plate at the giant rafters. "The first of anything has tradition, if we preserve it."
Hofheinz the showman made the Astrodome the home of such diverse events as bloodless bullfights, midget auto races and the world's largest indoor rodeo.
On Jan. 28, 1968, it was the site of a milestone in NCAA basketball history - the first nationally televised college basketball game, between the University of Houston, with Elvin Hayes, and UCLA, with Lew Alcindor. The Cougars won, 71-69, before a then-record crowd of 52,693.
On Sept. 20, 1973, Billy Jean King and Bobby Riggs staged their "Battle of the Sexes" tennis match in the Astrodome. It drew 30,472 fans, and King won 6-4, 6-3, 6-3.
Billy Graham's sermons and an Elvis Presley concert have echoed through the Astrodome, along with conventions of Jehovah's Witnesses and the roar of motocross events and tractor pulls. The 1992, Republican Convention was held there.
It's been home for the Astros, NFL Houston Oilers and University of Houston football team.
It's hosted baseball All-Star games, one NBA All-Star game, one NCAA Final Four and three world heavyweight championship fights.
Over the years, it's seen the likes of Nolan Ryan and Mike Scott pitching no-hitters, along with Astros stars Jimmy Wynn, the "Toy Cannon," J.R. Richard, Joe Morgan, Cesar Cedeno and now Jeff Bagwell.
Once, a game at the Dome was "rained out" when a severe storm made it impossible for fans to reach the park for a game.
It holds many personal memories for those who have performed there.
Larry Dierker, once an All-Star pitcher for the Astros, has spent all but two of his years in baseball either as an Astros player or broadcaster. Dierker's no-hitter in the Astrodome on July 9, 1976, was a highlight of his career.
His first visit to the Astrodome also remains a big memory.
"It was awesome," Dierker recalled. "It was sort of like going into that new park at Arlington (The Ballpark at Arlington) but even more so because now there are some other really nice new parks. There was nothing like the Astrodome."
One of the sad moments in Astrodome history was the disposal of the huge scoreboard, 474-feet long and four stories tall.
Opponents cringed anytime an Astros player hit a home run. The giant screen erupted in a 40-second explosion that featured a snorting steer, a galloping cowboy on horseback and a fireworks display.
It had to yield to progress in 1987 when officials tore it down to make space for a 10,000-seat expansion.
"That was a sad day for me," Dierker said. "All these multi-use stadiums are pretty much the same. The roof made the Dome stand out but the thing that really stood it apart was that scoreboard."
The Texas-sized scoreboard was replaced by two DiamondVision screens (26 feet by 37 feet), two auxiliary matrix boards and a game-in-progress board.
No snorting steer, no cowboy, no fireworks.
"Nobody's ever come close to matching something like that," said Paul Darst, director of video production and scoreboard operations. "And I don't think anyone every will. There will never be anything like that again."
Officials enjoy throwing out numbers about what they are now billing as The Original.
It cost $ 36.5 million to build, a small sum compared to current costs. More than 133 million people have visited the Astrodome since 1965. It has parking for 24,000 cars.
And someone figured out that 1.7 billion ounces of beverages have been poured in the Astrodome's history.
Now that's a wonder.
 Load-Date: April 9, 1995

 

End of Document
