

From Roosevelt to Jews in the Ghetto: No One Believed Holocaust
The Associated Press
April 17, 1995, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 978 words
Byline: By ANDRZEJ STYLINSKI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WARSAW, Poland
Body




The great Nazi secret - the plan to kill all the Jews of Europe - was carried out before witnesses, using public transportation, official decrees and massive building projects.
The world was watching and listening, but unable to see or hear.
Except for a Dec. 17, 1942, statement in which 11 Allied governments denounced the Nazis' "bestial policy of cold-blooded extermination" and promised to punish the criminals after the war, there was no reaction.
The Western news media, filled with daily battlefront reports, was silent about what the Nazis were doing to the Jews.
Not until the Allies began liberating the concentration camps and death factories in early 1945, not until British, American and Russian soldiers saw walking skeletons and piles of corpses, did the public learn the unbelievable truth - 6 million Jews systematically slaughtered.
As early as December 1941, when the Germans began killing Jews with exhaust fumes at Chelmno, the Jews in the Warsaw Ghetto did not believe reports of what was happening.
"Nobody could imagine that you could take and kill all people from the Ghetto, men and women, adults and children, all able to work," said Marek Edelman, the last surviving commander of the 1943 Warsaw Ghetto uprising. "The Germans needed free labor and the Jews were free labor."
The Polish underground radioed dispatches to its London-based government about the Nazis liquidating the ghetto after July 22, 1942, and sending 7,000 Jews a day to their death, but the expatriates did not believe it.
A month later, Gerhart M. Riegner, a World Jewish Congress representative in Geneva, cabled his leaders in New York and London with details of the Nazi Final Solution he had received from a German industrialist.
The World Jewish Congress leaders kept the information secret, until they could gather more evidence. They could not yet believe it.
By then, about 1 million Jews already had been killed. Auschwitz - to eventually claim 1.5 million lives - was still under development. It took another year before the four crematoria were completed and capable of burning 8,000 bodies a day.
In November 1942, a report reached the British Foreign Office from Jan Karski, a courier from the Polish resistance, who had sneaked into a death camp and twice into the Warsaw Ghetto to witness the mass killing and torture. Then, he slipped through German lines and brought his story to London.
Ignacy Schwarzbart, a representative of the exiled Polish government in London, sent a telegram to the World Jewish Congress in New York, based on Karski's eyewitness reports.
"Jews in Poland almost completely annihilated. Believe the unbelievable," Schwarzbart wrote, as quoted in the 1994 book "Karski: How One Man Tried to Stop the Holocaust" by E. Thomas Wood and Stanislaw M. Jankowski.
Apparently, it was Karski's report, and pressure from the Polish exiles, that led to the Allies' 1942 statement condemning German crimes against the Jews.
But in the months that followed, when Karski tried to tell his stories to Allied leaders, they reacted with incredulity and silence. "Maybe they did not believe, maybe they thought I was exaggerating," he says today.
Karski recalled telling U.S. Supreme Court Justice Felix Frankfurter - one of America's most prominent Jews - about people dying in the streets, the expressionless faces of starving children, the thousands herded into boxcars and sent to death camps.
"When I finished, Mr. Frankfurter said, 'Mr. Karski … I am unable to believe it."
When he met with Anthony Eden, the British foreign secretary "interrupted me," and said a report on the Jews, smuggled by Karski, "has already reached us and the matter will take its proper course," Karski recalled.
During an 80-minute conversation with Franklin Roosevelt, the president asked: "What is happening to the Jewish people in your country?"
Karski said he told Roosevelt:
"More than 1.8 million Jews have been murdered in my country. If there is no Allied intervention, whether through reprisals or other action … the Jewish people of Poland will cease to exist."
"Roosevelt did not show any feelings, did not make any comment," Karski said. "He told me to repeat in Poland that the Allies will win the war and that the criminals will be punished."
The camps were never bombed, although the Auschwitz Museum displays an aerial photograph, taken in April 1944 on a clear day, showing black smoke billowing from a building, and long lines of people going into it - and none coming out.
Five decades later, at the age of 82, Karski still wonders why there was no Allied action. The Jewish leaders in the Warsaw Ghetto who asked him to present their case "did not have much luck" in choosing him, Karski said.
"I was just a courier from one of the many countries and of one of the many undergrounds," he said. "I did not have any leverage."
Other officials told him that the Allies' strategy was to win the war as soon as possible, thereby saving Jews and others, and that the priority was to help Russia defeat the Nazis on the eastern front.
It was not until July 1944, when transports of Hungarian Jews started arriving at Auschwitz, that Jewish leaders demanded the gas chambers be bombed.
"What kind of help will it be for the Jews if we bomb Jews at Auschwitz?" was the argument Karski heard from some British politicians.
"It is not true that one could not bomb Auschwitz gas chambers," said Edelman, the Ghetto leader. "It was a factory of death and to destroy a factory of death meant a lot from the moral point of view."
Today, Karski lives in Chevy Chase, Md.; through 35 years of lecturing on international relations at Georgetown University, he did not see much point in talking about what he did during the war.
"The Lord assigned to me a role to speak and write during the war when - as it seemed to me - it might help," he told a 1981 Holocaust conference.
"It did not help."
 Load-Date: April 17, 1995

 

End of Document
