

Gardening: The Plant Seekers
The Associated Press
February 24, 1992, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1085 words
Byline: By AUDREY WOODS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




The next time you admire a glorious rhododendron, say a small thank you to Sir Joseph Dalton Hooker, who found dozens of species in the Himalayas in 1851 and got the seeds safely back to the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew.
Hooker was one of a fraternity of plant hunters who trekked the wilder reaches of the newly explored world in the name of science and the royal gardens at Kew, on the southwest edge of today's London.
To them we owe the widespread cultivation of geraniums, hydrangeas and even quinine, which saved the lives of millions of malaria victims.
The man who started it all was naturalist Joseph Banks, whose plant collecting feats during the 1768-1771 round-the-world voyage of Capt. James Cook led to his work for King George III as unofficial director of the botanic garden.
"It was on that first voyage," says Kew lecturer Laura Ponsonby, "that Capt. Cook wrote in his diary in Australia, 'Mr. Banks has collected so many plants that I think I shall call this area Botany Bay.' "
The king's mother, Princess Augusta, is credited with starting the botanic garden in 1759 at Kew, the family weekend home.
"Banks was very ambitious for Kew. He wanted it to be the best garden in the world," Miss Ponsonby said. So he sent young men around the globe collecting plants.
He was also very rich, and paid for many of the expeditions himself.
During George III's reign, some 7,000 plants from overseas were introduced to cultivation in England, largely because of Banks and his brave young gardeners.
The first of those collectors, Francis Masson, went on Cook's second voyage, stopping off at the Cape of Good Hope in 1772. Masson spent 12 years there, collecting upwards of 500 species, including 50 pelargoniums (geraniums).
One of the plants he brought back from South Africa, a primitive cycad, has clung lustily to life for more than 200 years and resides in the graceful glass and iron Palm House at Kew.
"It's now got the nickname the oldest pot plant in the world," says Miss Ponsonby.
The plant hunters endured terrible conditions. "Sometimes they were attacked by wild animals," she said. "Sometimes they were attacked by the inhabitants who were not pleased to see them."
On Masson's 1778 expedition to the West Indies, the French took him prisoner on Grenada, and then he lost all his collection in a hurricane.
In 1787, David Nelson, a Kew gardener, innocently joined a breadfruit-collecting expedition to Tahiti and found himself a victim of the mutiny against Capt. William Bligh of the Bounty.
When the crew revolted in April, 1789, the Bounty had departed Tahiti with a thousand young breadfruit trees destined to provide cheap food for the slaves in the West Indies, plus 700 other plants for Kew.
The gardener was one of those cast adrift with Bligh in an open boat. He survived the 11-week ordeal at sea only to die the day after they reached land at what is now Timor.
Two luckier men from Kew joined the determined Bligh in 1791 when he returned for more breadfruit and got it safely to Jamaica, where it thrived.
To the resourceful Archibald Menzies, ship's doctor and botanist, we owe the monkey puzzle tree.
In 1790s, at a dinner with the Spanish viceroy in Chile, unusual nuts were served as an embellishment to dessert.
"He'd never seen these nuts," Miss Ponsonby said, so "he popped them in his pocket, planted them, and by the time he got back there were five little monkey puzzle trees."
King George III and Banks both died in 1820, and the botanic garden declined for 20 years until it was turned over to the state.
Sir William Hooker, the first government-appointed director, took over in 1841. The garden expanded, the public was made welcome and the Herbarium (today holding 6 million dried specimens) was established.
Hooker's son, Joseph - surgeon, botanist, cartographer and draftsman - set off in 1847 for India and the Himalayas. He spent three years in Sikkim, collecting orchids, primulas and 28 species of the most beautiful rhododendrons yet seen.
A brave and determined man who endured much hardship, he apparently had no pretensions to martyrdom:
"If your shins were as bruised as mine tearing through the interminable rhododendron scrub at 10,000 to 13,000 feet you would be as sick of these glories as I am," he said in the annals of his travels.
Joseph Hooker succeeded his father as director and continued the policy of distributing useful plants from their native habitats to regions where they were needed.
An early success was quinine, product of the South American cinchona tree. It was long known as a treatment for malaria, but cultivating had proved extremely difficult.
In 1859, the Hookers backed the efforts of Clements Markham, a clerk in the India Office who wanted to introduce the cinchona to India and Ceylon, where malaria killed more than a million people each year.
Markham, two gardeners and two scientists living in South America collected thousands of seeds in the dangerous interior of Bolivia, Peru and Ecuador.
The plants took hold in India and Ceylon and by 1893 "the cost in Bengal of a dose of quinine, formerly beyond the means of all but the rich, had fallen to a farthing," author Wilfrid Blunt says in his Kew book, "In for a Penny."
Kew played a famous part in establishing Southeast Asia's rubber industry.
"In 1876 they thought rubber trees would be a wonderful economic crop for Malaya and Ceylon," Miss Ponsonby said. The task of collecting the seed fell to an eager young botanist, Henry Wickham.
He knew the 70,000 seeds he gathered in the Amazon jungle would quickly decay.
To avoid the delays of Brazilian paperwork, he told port authorities only that he had some "exceedingly delicate botanical specimens" for the garden of "Her Brittanic Majesty" Queen Victoria, and he was let through to his ship.
Wickham and his seeds arrived at Liverpool port and a waiting train whisked them to Kew, where 2,397 rubber trees germinated. They were shipped to Ceylon, and eventually Malaysia, beginning an enormous industry.
In 1876 Sir Joseph established Kew as a center for scientific research, founding the Jodrell Laboratory. There today's botanists are seeking ways to renew tropical rainforests, to find drought-resistant crops for famine-ridden regions, and studying a chestnut compound that might be useful in the treatment of AIDS.
Kew also propagates endangered species and has a deep-frozen World Seed Bank.
And the plant hunters are still out there, collecting seeds and specimens in Brunei, Malawi, Korea and Nepal, Papua New Guinea, Mexico, Brazil…

 

End of Document
