

George Gave Boris the Support the Russian President Needed
The Associated Press
February 2, 1992, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 688 words
Byline: By DONALD M. ROTHBERG, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




They call each other George and Boris, and the personal warmth of their Camp David meeting gave the world reason to hope it's moving out of the fearsome shadow of superpower confrontation.
For a generation, the hostility between the United States and the Soviet Union rendered the United Nations impotent and spawned proxy wars across the globe.
Even periods when tensions relaxed were no more than a temporary respite. No sooner were arms control agreements signed than each side accused the other of finding loopholes. The rhetoric of even the friendliest of past summits was tinged with suspicion. Each side's missiles remained targeted and on alert.
How different was this meeting between George Bush and Boris Yeltsin.
They were determined to like each other, to put the past behind them.
More than that, they left the impression their pledges of cooperation were more than just words.
Some of the credit for the success of Saturday's Bush-Yeltsin meeting must go to the man who wasn't there - Mikhail Gorbachev.
It was, after all, Gorbachev who took the courageous first step that destroyed the old communist order and led to the inevitable dissolution of the Soviet Union. The trouble was, Gorbachev wasn't suited to lead his own revolution to its logical conclusion.
Ironically, this most Western of Russian leaders was devoured by that revolution and his downfall brought to power a more rough-hewn Russian, a man far less sophisticated than Gorbachev.
For that reason the West, and certainly the Bush administration, undervalued Yeltsin far too long.
Yeltsin proved his drawing power after arriving in Washington late Saturday afternoon for a meeting with congressional leaders. His helicopter landed on the Mall, between the Lincoln Memorial and the Washington Monument, and Yeltsin plunged into a crowd that was shouting, "Boris! Boris!"
He spent several minutes shaking hands, posing for photographs and chatting with tourists and area residents who had gathered for a glimpse of the Russian leader.
Gorbachev once stripped Yeltsin of his position in the leadership because he was pressing the Soviet leader too hard to move faster on the road to change.
At the time, the U.S. administration sided with Gorbachev.
But the extraordinary moves of the last few days, the declarations of determination by Bush and Yeltsin to drastically reduce their nuclear arsenals were a tribute to the Russian president's determination to push ahead.
When he and Bush faced reporters after their three-hour meeting, Yeltsin made it clear the future of Russia and the other republics that once made up the Soviet Union is far from decided.
He likened the Commonwealth of Independent States to "a baby in diapers. You've got to take care of it. You've got to handle it carefully, so you don't drop (it)."
He conceded the republics have their differences, but advised the West not to write it off too quickly.
"Every time we meet … there is each time a step forward," he said.
But the greatest danger is economic.
"I think it's very hard to predict how this will go," conceded Bush, who credited Yeltsin with "great courage."
The moral support helps, but Yeltsin needs more than that.
"If the reform in Russia goes under, that means there will be a cold war … the cold war is going to turn into a hot war. This is, again, going to be an arms race," he said.
Yeltsin predicted that failure of democracy to take root would lead to a return of "the same regime" just thrown out of power - in other words a return to communism.
One official who discussed the meeting on condition he not be identified said Yeltsin seemed eager to brief Bush on what was happening in Russia and to have the U.S. president state that their two countries are no longer adversaries.
Bush didn't disappoint him.
And so, the two leaders parted on the best of terms and making plans to meet again in the spring.
Given the bleak conditions in Russia today, a lot can happen between now and then. But the Camp David meeting showed signs of a thaw unlike any other in the history of U.S.-Soviet relations.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Donald M. Rothberg covers diplomatic affairs for The Associated Press.

 

End of Document
