

Giving Up the Gun: Serb-Surrounded Muslim Enclave Keeps the Peace
The Associated Press
October 5, 1992, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 498 words
Byline: By JULIJANA MOJSILOVIC, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JANJA, Bosnia-Herzegovina
Body




Six months ago, the 2,000 Muslims in this Serb-surrounded village armed themselves and put up barricades. But then they gathered in the center of the village, talked it over - and decided not to fight their Serb neighbors.
"This is the 181st day that no one fired a bullet in Janja," Ibro Huremovic said late last week. "We didn't want to fight our neighbors and they left us alone."
The Muslims, including 150 hunters who had legally registered rifles, turned in their arms, said Huremovic, a Muslim. "You won't see a single armed man here, except some refugees and Serb policemen," he said.
Huremovic credited both Muslims and Serbs with preventing warfare in the village.
"We would not have been able to preserve peace if the majority of our Serb neighbors didn't want the same," he said.
Janja, about 80 miles northeast of the Bosnian capital of Sarajevo, had a prewar population of 10,500 people. Only a hundred were Serbs. The rest were Muslims.
The area has so far escaped "ethnic cleansing" - the driving of people from their homes to create ethnically pure areas. The Serbs are accused of being the main perpetrators.
Only a few hundred Muslims have fled Janja. Their empty houses were given to Serb and Muslim refugees from other parts of Bosnia, Huremovic said.
Huremovic, a trade company director, freely admits that fear played a part in the decision not to take up arms. The presence of one of the most ruthless Serb fighters in Bosnia, Zeljko Raznjatovic, known as Arkan, was a powerful deterrent.
"When he came those who wanted war gave up," said Huremovic, a trade company director.
But he pointed out that the lack of resistance did not lead to action against Muslims in the area.
"Arkan often phones, asking how things are in Janja," he said.
Serb police control the people coming in and out of Janja. But in the village their presence is not notable.
Huremovic said that, with few exceptions - when refugees become violent, for instance - no one harasses the Muslims in Janja.
"Those who remained are a bit afraid but do not want to leave, hoping - when this madness is over - to live as they were used to," he said.
Some Serb fighters even protect Muslims from other Serbs in the region.
Mirko Blagojevic, the commander of Serbian royalists in northeastern Bosnia said his people were trying to protect "loyal Muslims" from being killed or forced to leave the region.
"When somebody attacks us, we are going to fight, but why should we against those who are loyal and want to live with us?" Blagojevic said.
Huremovic said the Muslims in Janja were not prevented from free religious expression, and denied any were seeking to convert. Bijeljina priest Nedeljko Paji said had heard about 25 Muslims who asked a Janja priest to baptize them, but said his Serbian Orthodox Church refused.
"If we accepted, it would have looked as if it was done under a pressure. So, we advised them to wait until the war is over, and then - if they still want it - there will be no problem," the priest said.

 

End of Document
