

Gore: Airdrop Operation To Be Small, But For Some, 'It's The Only Way'
The Associated Press
February 26, 1993, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 867 words
Byline: By ROBERT BURNS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Vice President Al Gore promised today that the U.S. airdrop operation over war-torn Bosnia would be limited in scope, but declared it a life-saving essential for civilians who can't get food and medical supplies any other way.
"It will provide real relief for some people who have been completely cut off from the convoys," Gore said on NBC's "Today" show.
"This is small but in these isolated pockets it's the only way," the vice president added.
At the instruction of Defense Secretary Les Aspin, Joint Chiefs Chairman Gen. Colin Powell today signed the "execute order" giving U.S. European Command the formal go-ahead to begin the operation, Pentagon spokesman Maj. Bryan Whitman said.
Whitman said the order gives U.S. European Command commander Gen. John Shalikashvili the leeway to decide on his own when weather and other factors are right to begin air dropping leaflets informing the Bosnians about the relief operation.
Madeleine Albright, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, said the airdrops will be "supplementary, complementary" to truck deliveries, which she called "the more efficient way to get food into these areas."
"We hope" the airdrops "will really push the … land convoys into more active participation," Albright said on ABC's "Good Morning America."
Defense Department officials say the U.S. airdrop will begin with as many as 80 tons of food and medical supplies hurtling to the ground from a small fleet of C-130 Hercules planes.
The Pentagon said Thursday it will keep secret the exact starting date of the operation, although some officials said it could begin as early as Sunday. The planes will fly at night and at high altitude to lessen any risk of anti-aircraft fire.
President Clinton said it would be a "temporary measure," and members of Congress who were briefed on it Thursday were mostly supportive of the plan.
Sen. J. James Exon, D-Neb., a member of the Senate Armed Services Committee, said after a briefing by Aspin and Powell that it would "send signals to warring parties that the whole world is looking at this."
Aspin, back to work following a four-day hospital stay, told reporters the parachute drops were "short-term emergency efforts" to be undertaken to show that "the denial of food and medicine as part of an offensive ethnic cleansing is absolutely unacceptable."
Powell said that although the operation carried some risk, he was confident it could be done safely and in a way that would get relief to those who needed it.
"I would emphasize that no operation is completely without risk, but this one I think is quite manageable and we think we'll be making a contribution to this humanitarian effort," the Joint Chiefs of Staff chairman said.
In announcing the plan, Clinton said the airdrops will be made "without regard to ethnic or religious affiliation."
He stressed that it was meant as an evenhanded effort to get the fighting factions to stop interfering with overland relief convoys, which are a far more efficient means of aiding the needy there.
"These airdrops are being carried out strictly for humanitarian purposes; no combat aircraft will be used in this operation," he said in a statement.
"Regular overland deliveries are the best means to ensure that the long-term needs of the Bosnian population are met, and the United States calls on the parties to guarantee the safe passage of the humanitarian convoys throughout Bosnia," the president's statement said.
When asked later whether other countries had agreed to join the operation, Clinton said, "We've had several volunteers." He did not elaborate, and the senior defense officials said no other countries had made a firm commitment.
Senate Republican leader Bob Dole endorsed the airdrop Thursday, saying "This is the right step, a small step. … I applaud the president for his effort in this regard."
Senior defense officials who briefed reporters at the Pentagon on condition they not be identified said the airdrop would be preceded by a large-scale leaflet drop over Bosnia.
The officials declined to discuss how long the operation might last. They disclosed that although the plan initially was intended to aid distressed populations in eastern Bosnia, the airdrops might be carried out across all of Bosnia.
The leaflets, printed in the Serbo-Croatian language, will urge the local population not to interfere with the airdrop, stress that it is a humanitarian effort and caution the populace to get out of the way when the huge bundles start dropping from the sky by parachute.
About 600,000 leaflets are to be dumped from U.S. aircraft in the general vicinity of the intended airdrop locations one or two days beforehand, the senior defense officials said.
The Pentagon officials said no fighter aircraft would be used to provide cover for the C-130 transport planes, which are to fly in groups of three to five on each mission. The officials would not say how many missions were planned.
Each plane is to carry 16 bundles of food and medicine. The food will include flour, cooking oil, rice, coffee beans and some of the U.S. military's meals-ready-to-eat, which are pre-packaged meals that don't require any cooking.
The planes will fly out of a U.S. air base in Frankfurt, Germany.

 

End of Document
