

Group Says One Type of Money Coming, But the Devil is in the Details
The Associated Press
January 20, 1995, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 538 words
Byline: By SALLY JACOBSEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BRUSSELS, Belgium
Body




Get ready, Europe: A single currency is on the way.
That was the message in a report released Friday on the practical problems of introducing a new money for the 15 nations of the European Union.
The group's new Treaty on European Union calls for the nations to create no later than Jan. 1, 1999, an economic and monetary merger, with a joint central bank to issue a common money.
But it remains a mystery how the nations will carry out the task of scrapping the German mark, French franc and other currencies for the new one.
"The changeover to the single currency is a challenge of historical dimensions," said Dutch businessman Cees Maas, chairman of a panel of experts who drew up the new EU report.
In the report, the bankers and financial experts recommended the nations switch to the new money, the European currency unit, or Ecu, as quickly as possible.
But they ruled out the "big bang" approach of introducing overnight or over a weekend new Ecu notes and coins and changing savings, checking and other accounts to conform.
"A 'big bang' is impossible … not only impossible, but maybe undesirable as well," said Maas.
Instead, the group recommended that once the European Central Bank is up and running, say, on Jan. 1, 1999, it should take no longer than six months to introduce the Ecu as the union's single currency.
The Ecu, which is variously pronounced eh-KOO or eh-CUE, already is used as an accounting unit and for some payments, although no notes or coins are in circulation yet.
"What we favor is a rapid introduction of the single currency in the smallest possible steps," Maas told a news conference. "If you can't do it in one 'big bang,' the bang should be as big as possible."
The Ecu and the German mark and French franc would initially circulate together - but probably for no more than six months, according to the experts.
"We have to get used to the new currency because changing from one currency to another is a huge operation," Maas said.
The report said the new money should be as strong as the mightiest national currency to gain popular support. The mark now is the EU's strongest currency, and there have been misgivings among Germans about turning in their well-known money for the alien Ecu.
Even though the starting date of monetary union seems far off, the report urged governments and businesses to begin planning immediately.
"The Ecu .. is coming so we have to prepare for it," Maas said. His group will issue a final report in June.
There have been no decisions on what the new money should look like.
To calm public unease about giving up local currencies, there have been suggestions the new bills carry the EU design on one side and symbols of the old money, whether the mark, the franc or Dutch guilder, on the other side.
Under the unity treaty, a monetary union could be formed as early as Jan. 1, 1997, if a majority of nations meet criteria of low inflation and interest rates, stable currencies and healthy public finances.
With or without a majority of nations, the union must begin no later than Jan. 1, 1999.
Nearly all the nations are running enormous budget deficits, which, if not brought down soon, would endanger their chances for joining the monetary union and delay the start until 1999.
 Load-Date: January 20, 1995

 

End of Document
