

Havana's Old Days Shine Through The Troubles, But The Wear is Showing
The Associated Press
July 31, 1991, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 746 words
Byline: By JOSEPH B. FRAZIER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HAVANA
Body




Like a dowager who's seen better times, Havana is down on her luck but not on her pride. Her gilt and glitter are faded but an aristocratic air hovers about her.
Older baroque houses and ornate wedding-cake-style public buildings are encrusted with carved stonework that would shine in any European capital.
The Caribbean gently laps the sea wall on the city's northern edge. Museum-piece DeSotos, Packards and other American cars from the 1940s and 1950s cruise Havana's boulevards and narrow streets overhung with balconies.
But a closer look at the capital of Communist Cuba reveals the wrinkles.
Many once-splendid houses are in bad repair and shared by several families. When they are beyond fixing, grey cement-block buildings take their places.
The cars these days are fewer, and many are gasping their last. That they run at all signals both ingenuity and hard times.
"When a car can't go anymore the owner sells the parts," said a youth who called himself Migo. "Nothing is thrown away. Most of these cars have parts from six or seven others in them."
Some American goods brought in from third countries can be had for dollars by foreigners in state-run "diplomatic stores" but entrance is restricted, and U.S. car parts haven't been sent over since a trade embargo began three decades ago.
More and more, American cars compete with Soviet-built Lada sedans and Chinese bicycles with brand names like Forever and Flying Pigeon imported to help with the critical fuel shortage.
Aging, crowded Hungarian buses also wheeze through the streets. Routes have been reduced, confided two drivers, to save fuel.
The fare is 10 centavos - a dime at the official rate. Paying, says a sign over fare box on Route 23, is a "social obligation."
Some feel obligated. Others do not.
Even Cuba's communist suppliers are providing less.
The Soviet Union, facing its own crisis and distancing itself from Castro's brand of communism, has cut back its oil shipments to Cuba. The availability of parts from Eastern Europe, Cuba's main patron for decades, also is uncertain with the fall of communism.
Many shops are shuttered. The lack of commerce is reflected by the virtual lack of outdoor advertising, save that of the Communist Party.
"Here, nobody gives up!" reads one.
A few stores sell otherwise-rationed goods but at several times the official price. Nearly everyone deals to some extent on the black market.
Many restaurants aim for the tourist's wallet by charging dollars, which most Cubans are not allowed to own. Long lines form at those that take Cuban pesos.
Lines also form for milk. Lines form for buses, meat, soap, cigarettes, for beer, which is especially scarce these days. Supermarkets are virtually bare save occasional bags of a few basic staples. A corner vegetable store offers limes and potatoes.
There is apparently no shortage of Cuban pesos, but rather one of things they will buy. Officially, the currency trades on a par with the dollar - one for one. Some Cubans will approach foreign-looking strangers on the street and offer 10 to one, sometimes more, a risky illegal activity.
Migo offers to change money. "You know, they could pick me up just for talking to you here like this," he said casually during a chat in a poorer section of Old Havana. "The police have said they don't want us talking to tourists."
Many Cubans blame recent shortages on the Aug. 2-18 Pan American Games, which will bring an estimated 10,000 visitors including 4,500 athletes and 1,400 journalists to Havana.
Havana is making what it has available to the visitors, who include hundreds of American journalists and about 700 American athletes. The most important medal Cuba can win, President Fidel Castro said last week, is for hospitality.
Migo is not impressed.
"There is plenty at the diplomatic stores for tourists, people with dollars," he said with a trace of bitterness. "But there is none of that for us."
Migo lives in three small rooms and a makeshift loft with 11 relatives. They have a Russian refrigerator they operate only when something is in it.
"If it breaks, we can't get another," said an aunt, a stout lady fond of cigars and beer.
Migo makes a beer run accompanied by a visitor. No stores have any. He comes up dry on several trips down alleys and corridors to bootleg black marketeers.
"He was supposed to come last night, he said he would," grumbled the aunt.
She knew flusher times, although increasingly, many Cubans never did. More than half were born after the 1959 Cuban revolution.

 

End of Document
