

HEAD: Stamps in the News
The Associated Press
June 7, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 693 words
Body




---
 
 By SYD KRONISH
AP Newsfeatures
The Republic of the Marshall Islands pays philatelic tribute "To the Heroes of Desert Storm" with a new 29-cent stamp. The issue date is July 4, the day on which President Bush has asked Americans to "celebrate the rebirth of patriotism."
Men and women from the Marshalls were among the U.S. troops involved in Operation Desert Storm.
The colorful, horizontal stamp depicts an American bald eagle with an olive branch and five arrows clutched in its talons. In the background are the flags of the United States and the Marshall Islands seen against a burst of sunlight. The denomination "29c" is at the bottom right.
Continuing its epic World War II series, the Marshalls has also issued a block of four stamps portraying the "Sinking of the Bismarck 1941." The stamps were released as two attached pairs on May 27 - the 50th anniversary of the event that marked the end of major efforts by Germany's surface navy in the Battle of the Atlantic.
Collectors interested in these new Marshall Islands issues can obtain additional information from the Stamps and Philatelic Center of the Republic of the Marshall Islands, One Unicover Center, Cheyenne, WY, 82008-0021.
 
 Cole Porter Stamp
One of composer Cole Porter's big song hits was "You're the Top." The U.S. Postal Service acknowledges that refrain by issuing a new 29-cent commemorative honoring the 100th anniversary of Porter's birth. The stamp is the 12th in the Performing Arts Series.
The design features a portrait of Porter with a musical score in the background. At the bottom left is "Cole Porter USA 29." The first-day site is Peru, Ind., Porter's birthplace.
Porter wrote many Broadway musicals, and such now-classic songs as "Night and Day," "Begin the Beguine," "Let's Do It," "I've Got You Under My Skin" and "My Heart Belongs to Daddy."
First-day covers are available in two methods. The deadline is July 8.
The Postal Service encourages customers to buy the stamp, affix it to a self-addressed cover and send it in a larger envelope addressed: Customer-Affixed Envelopes, Cole Porter Stamp, Postmaster, 101 S. Broadway, Peru, IN 46970-9991.
Or send, for each cover desired, a self-addressed envelope and 29 cents payment in check or money order to: Cole Porter Stamp, Postmaster, 101 S. Broadway, Peru, IN 46970-9992.
 
 Jersey Butterflies and Moths
Jersey, one of the Channel Islands in the English Channel, has issued four new stamps that feature butterflies and moths. The species shown on the stamps are European ones whose breeding grounds extend as far north as the Channel Islands but which are rarely seen in Great Britain.
The 15-pence shows the Glanville Fritillary; 20-pence, the Jersey Tiger; 37-pence, the Small Elephant Hawk-Moth; and 57 pence, the Peacock moth.
 
 Pre-Olympic Salute
As expected, various nations will be issuing stamps in a "Pre-Olympic Salute" to the 1992 Games scheduled to be held in Barcelona, Spain.
Uganda has released such a set, consisting of five stamps and two souvenir sheets. The stamp designs were adapted from photos of recent Olympic competition featuring athletes in action.
The 20-shilling depicts the women's 100-meter hurdles in the heptathlon track-and-field competition. The 40-shilling shows an athlete in the long jump. A table tennis match is depicted on the 125-shilling. The 250-shilling has an action scene at a soccer match. And the men's 800-meter track competition is shown on the 500-shilling.
One souvenir sheet features the opening ceremony of a recent Olympiad and the other captures the intensity of competition in the women's 4x100-meter relay race as teammates pass the batons.
 
 U.N. Stamp Expo
The U.N. Postal Administration announced that some rare items from the U.N. Philatelic Museum will be exhibited for the first time at U.N. Stamp Expo '91 to be held later this year at Pennsylvania State College, State College, Pa. The Expo is being sponsored by the UNPA and the American Philatelic Society.
The highlight of the exhibit will be a pair of League of Nations error stamps with the overprint inverted. For further information, write to UNPA, Stamp Expo '91, United Nations, Room DC2-612, New York, NY 10017.

 

End of Document
