

Heavy Fighting in the Croatian Capital
The Associated Press
September 17, 1991, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 925 words
Byline: By TONY SMITH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ZAGREB, Yugoslavia
Body




Shell bursts and the rattle of anti-aircraft fire rocked Zagreb late Tuesday in the first major fighting in the Croatian capital, an outbreak that seemed likely to doom a cease-fire agreement signed hours before.
Federal Air Force jets swooped out of the clear night sky to buzz the city center and were greeted by dense orange flashes of flak. Officials said an air raid warning was in effect for the entire battle-scarred republic of Croatia. An all-clear was given early Wednesday.
Zagreb civil defense officials said five people were wounded in the fighting and that two schools, a textile factory, a private home and an apartment block were damaged.
Air attacks damaged Zagreb's radio and TV transmission tower, north of the city, and damaged the airport and police station in the southern suburb of Lucko, civil defense authorities said.
Jets also attacked the town of Gospic, south of Zagreb near the Adriatic coast, Croatian officials said, and news reports said other towns were also under attack.
It was by far the worst violence to hit Zagreb in the 2 months of fighting that has left more than 450 dead in Croatia, including 34 killed Tuesday. The violence left in doubt the fate of a European Community-brokered cease-fire, signed earlier in the day in a coastal city in the republic of Montenegro.
Zagreb, with 1.2 million inhabitants, is Yugoslavia's second-biggest city, the largest being Belgrade, the federal and Serbian capital.
Whether the latest fighting was intended to sabotage the cease-fire - or as a last bloody blow by one of the parties involved - could not immediately be determined, as it was impossible to determine who started the firing.
Within an hour of the agreement, gunfire broke out between Croatian forces and federal troops at the Dusan Corkovic barracks on Zagreb's east side. As dusk fell, tracers fired from the barracks could be seen over the housing blocks of the Lascina and Boronogaj districts.
Later in the night, Air Force jets flew over the city and intense shelling lasted for about 30 minutes, interspersed with heavy machine-gun and sniper fire audible in the city center from all directions.
Zagreb was nearly completely darkened as a precaution against air raids. Public transportation was halted, and city officials told residents to go to shelter and remain calm.
The Croatian Defense Ministry said MiG-21 Air Force jets attacked Sljene Mountain, north of Zagreb, and said Croatian forces captured a federal barracks in Varadzin, 55 miles northeast of the city.
The Air Force said it lost two planes to ground fire over eastern Croatia.
There have been sporadic attacks by the federal air force on Croatian positions around Zagreb in recent days, but the exchanges Tuesday night represented the heaviest fighting by far.
The cease-fire agreement, mediated by Lord Carrington, the EC representative, was to go into effect at noon Wednesday.
"This country is only days away from a state of irretrievable civil war," Lord Carrington said in announcing the truce.
Croatian President Franjo Tudjman, Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic and federal Defense Minister Veljiko Kadijevic signed the agreement but acknowledged that "deep and dangerous differences" remained.
The cease-fire agreement said: "On one thing we are united - that no viable solution for our people can result from violence and killing, and that we must talk together to determine if we can agree on future relations between our people."
It pledged the parties to assure "that everyone within our control and under our political and military influence should cease fighting immediately." The statement did not address how the truce would be implemented and monitored. No leader appears to be in complete control of the ragtag forces in the field, and the 200 cease-fire monitors sent last week by the EC have avoided areas of conflict.
The deep antagonism among the parties was obvious when, after Carrington read the statement, none of the representatives at the U-shaped table said anything.Then, ignoring reporters' questions, each of the representatives walked off.
Tudjman appeared to be taking the biggest political risk by imposing a cease-fire. He already has lost one-third of the republic to Serb rebels, and has been under intense pressure to fight back with everything available.
Earlier in the day, fighting and dying were reported in the towns of Petrinja, Osijek, Vinkovci, Slavonski Brod and Sinj.
Only 25 miles from the site of the peace accord, Yugoslav navy gunboats blocked Dubrovnik's picturesque harbor and other Adriatic ports. Croatia is dependent on the import of foodstuffs and supplies through the ports.
The fighting in Croatia pits the republic's militia against ethnic Serbs, who represent a minority in the republic and oppose Croatian independence. Federal forces sometimes fight on the side of the Serbs, although they claim to be trying to keep them separate from Croatian fighters.
Croatia claims the neighboring republic of Serbia is using the army, many of whose officers are Serbs, to make a power grab of Croatian territory before what is left of the republic becomes independent.
The Serbian leader, Milosevic, says Croatia must give up Serb-dominated areas if it secedes from Yugoslavia, but denies that Serbia is directing the Serb guerrillas in Croatia.
About 600,000 ethnic Serbs live in Croatia, 12 percent of the population. Hatreds have been fueled by memories of the World War II slaughter of Serbs by a Nazi puppet regime in Croatia, and the retaliatory killing of thousands of Croats at the end of the war.
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto XZAG1, IGA2

 

End of Document
