

Heavy Fighting in the Croatian Capital
The Associated Press
September 17, 1991, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1081 words
Byline: By TONY SMITH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ZAGREB, Yugoslavia
Body




Shell bursts and the rattle of anti-aircraft fire rocked Zagreb late Tuesday in the first major fighting in the Croatian capital, an outbreak that seemed certain to doom a cease-fire agreement signed hours before.
Federal Air Force jets swooped out of the clear night sky to buzz the city center and were greeted by intense anti-aircraft fire. Officials said an air raid warning was in effect for the entire battle-scarred republic.
Jets attacked the town of Gospic, south of Zagreb near the Adriatic coast, Croatian officials said, and news reports said other towns were also under attack.
A large fire was burning on Zagreb's east side, near a chemical plant.
It was by far the worst violence to hit Zagreb in the 2 months of fighting that has killed more than 450 people in Croatia, including 34 on Tuesday.
Zagreb, a city of 1.2 million inhabitants, is Yugoslavia's second-biggest, the largest being Belgrade, the federal and Serbian capital.
Whether the latest fighting was intended to sabotage the latest cease-fire - or as a last bloody blow by one of the parties involved - could not immediately be determined, as it was impossible to determine who started the firing.
Earlier in the evening, an exchange of gunfire broke out between Croatian forces and federal troops at the Dusan Corkovic barracks on Zagreb's east side, and as dusk fell, tracers fired from the barracks could be seen over the housing blocks of the Lascina and Boronogaj districts.
The latest cease-fire agreement was signed Tuesday afernoon by the presidents of rival Croatia and Serbia, the federal defense minister and European Community mediator Lord Carrington. It was to go into effect at noon Wednesday.
"This country is only days away from a state of irretrievable civil war," Lord Carrington had said in announcing the truce.
Croatian President Franjo Tudjman, Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic and federal Defense Minister Veljiko Kadijevic signed the agreement but acknowledged that "deep and dangerous differences" remained.
Tudjman, in an interview with his republic's TV, expressed guarded optimism that it could hold. He said it could "maybe mean that we've avoided an all-out war."
"There were many signatures before, but this is the first time that someone in the name of the army has signed such a document," he said. "We are going to respect the truce, but we are not going to be naive and give up our sovereignty."
There have been sporadic attacks by the federal air force on Croatian positions around Zagreb in recent days, but the exchanges Tuesday night represented the heaviest fighting by far.
Intense shelling lasted for about 30 minutes, interspersed with heavy machine-gun and sniper fire audible in the city center from all directions. There was no word on casualties and it was not immediately clear who was involved in the fighting.
Zagreb was nearly completely darkened as a precaution against air raids. Public transportation, already running without lights, was halted.
City officials told residents to go to shelter and remain calm.
At least three jets were heard over the city, but it could not be determined what they had attacked. Explosions also were heard in the dark but there was no information on their cause.
The Croatian Defense Ministry said MiG-21 Air Force jets also attacked positions on Sljene Mountain, north of Zagreb, and said Croatian forces captured a federal army barracks in Varadzin, 55 miles northeast of the city.
The federal Air Force said it lost two planes to ground fire over eastern Croatia.
The cease-fire agreement said: "On one thing we are united - that no viable solution for our people can result from violence and killing, and that we must talk together to determine if we can agree on future relations between our people."
"We pledge … that everyone within our control and under our political and military influence should cease fighting immediately," the statement said.
The deep divisions among all the sides were obvious when, after Carrington read the cease-fire statement, none of the representatives at the U-shaped table said anything.
Instead, ignoring reporters' questions, each of the representatives walked off.
An hour later, air raid sirens wailed in Zagreb, and Croatia's Defense Ministry reported fighting around the federal army barracks, and claimed the army was firing cannons at the city.
Tudjman appeared to be taking the biggest political risk by imposing a cease-fire on his forces. He already has lost one-third of the republic to Serb rebels, and has been under intense pressure to fight back with everything available.
His defense minister, Luka Bebic, ordered forces to stop firing on the Yugoslav army barracks unless they were shot at. However, as when previous cease-fire agreements were broken, it was difficult to tell who fired first.
Earlier in the day, fighting and dying were reported in the towns of Petrinja, Osijek, Vinkovci, Slavonski Brod and Sinj.
Only 25 miles from the site of the peace accord, Yugoslav navy gunboats blocked Dubrovnik's picturesque harbor. The navy imposed a blockade on other Adriatic ports as well to squeeze Croatia, which is dependent on the import of foodstuffs and supplies through its Adriatic ports.
The fighting in Croatia pits the republic's militia against ethnic Serbs, who represent a minority in the republic and oppose Croatian independence. Federal forces have been fighting on the side of the Serbs, although they claim to be trying to keep them separate from Croatian fighters.
Croatia claims that the neighboring republic of Serbia is using the army, many of whose officers are Serbs, to make a power graf of Croatian territory before what is left of the republic becomes independent.
The Serbian leader, Milosevic, says Croatia must give up Serb-dominated areas if it secedes from Yugoslavia, but denies that Serbia is not directing the Serb guerrillas in Croatia.
The cease-fire statement did not address how the truce would be implemented and monitored, or the organization of any peace talks to follow. No leader appears to be in complete control of the ragtag forces in the field, and the 200 cease-fire monitors sent last week by the EC have avoided areas of conflict.
About 600,000 ethnic Serbs live in Croatia, 12 percent of the population. They refuse to live in an independent Croatia.
Tensions have been further fueled by memories of the World War II slaughter of Serbs by a Nazi puppet regime in Croatia, and the retaliatory killing of thousands of Croats at the end of the war.

 

End of Document
