

Immigrants and the Church: Who's Changing Whom?
 The Associated Press
October 1, 1995, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1238 words
Byline: By RICK HAMPSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




In 1980, Father James Hennesey concluded his magisterial history of American Catholics by observing that the U.S. church finally was emerging from its "long and turbulent immigrant era."
That emergence is taking longer than expected.
In the rectory of Most Precious Blood Church in Queens, the pastor is counting on his fingers. "We have Masses in Italian, Spanish, Croatian, Filipino, Brazilian Portuguese," says Father Raymond Stallings. He pauses a beat before adding "English."
He's also trolling for a priest to say Sunday Mass in Polish. But with 11 Sunday Masses in six languages already being offered, "it's getting tight," he says. Although he's adding some pews, "I don't see how we could fit another ethnic group in."
Most Precious Blood is not exceptional. Not in a diocese where Mass is said in 20 different languages each Sunday; not in a nation whose largest Catholic diocese, Los Angeles, has Mass in 45 languages.
When Pope John Paul II visits the United States this week - he arrives Wednesday, and stays through Sunday - he will see how a church run by and largely for descendants of immigrants from western Europe is being changed by new immigrants from almost everywhere but.
And he may be pleased to note that, in some ways, the newcomers have more in common with earlier generations of American Catholics than with the sometimes unruly group currently in the pews.
In many places - particularly the coasts and the southern border - there are really two Catholic churches: one suburban, white and middle class, the other urban, ethnically diverse and economically precarious.
"Those two churches rarely talk to each other, or even know that each other exists," said Jay P. Dolan, a church historian at the University of Notre Dame.
When the pope celebrates his public Masses, "They'll see each other at Aqueduct or Central Park," Dolan said. "But what about the next day?"
Most Precious Blood belongs to this second church. It is located in a working-class neighborhood of attached houses and storefronts. The bars and the funeral home are still Irish, the restaurants still Italian. Everything else is up for grabs.
About a third of the parishioners aren't native English speakers. The white ethnics are slowly dying off or moving out, leaving behind the great stone church their parents raised during the Depression.
In such a changing sea, the church seems like a rock - to old-timers, and to those blown here from parishes around the world.
The American Catholic Church always welcomed immigrants; many of the churches now adding new language Masses for recent immigrants still have Italian Masses from the previous wave of immigration.
But in the past, the church tried to bend immigrants to its ways - the ways of an overwhelmingly Irish-American hierarchy.
This time, it's unclear who's changing whom.
Take the "quinceneros" - a traditional Latin-American ceremony in which a girl turning 15 gets dressed in white and, accompanied by friends, relatives and sometimes an escort, goes to church to be blessed by a priest.
Some American priests refuse to participate in what they regard as a mere coming-out party devoid of religious significance. But Father Michael McHugh, another priest at Most Precious Blood, said he has no such compunctions.
"If people think enough of the church to come, then you have an opportunity to make a contact," said McHugh, a priest for 15 years. He's wearing jeans and a black, short-sleeved shirt with his Roman collar unbuttoned.
"It's Catholicism," McHugh shrugged. "It's just not Irish Catholicism."
When he walked onto the altar on a recent Sunday to say Mass in Spanish, he found the front pews occupied by some Ecuadorians with a big banner. Unannounced, they had marched down the aisle with their portrait of Our Lady of Cicsne, patroness of their home town, to mark her feast day.
"When you say Mass in a packed house like that, you have a little more juice," McHugh said. Hispanics, he added, generally sing louder, listen harder and socialize longer.
"The point in Mass when we give each other the sign of peace seems to go on forever," he said.
Immigrants tend toward the sort of old-fashioned Catholicism the pope seems to favor - one of benediction and novenas, statues and saints, Marian devotion and the rosary - that was de-emphasized after the Second Vatican Council in the 1960s.
"People are always asking our priests to say Masses on feast days of saints we've never heard of," said the Rev. Ronald Marino, who supervises immigrant affairs for the Brooklyn-Queens diocese.
"We've seen that these things are important to people, whether it's my style or your style," agreed Father McHugh. "With immigrants, you have to adjust."
On the other hand, parish councils, designed to involve post-Vatican II laity, have faded in the diocese. Immigrants move more frequently and are less likely to seek election to such councils.
At St. Matthew's Church in Brooklyn, parishioners felt compelled to elect three parish councils that conducted meetings in three languages - English, Spanish and Creole, the form of French spoken in Haiti.
Vatican II ended in 1965, the same year congressional legislation swung the balance of immigration from Western Europe and to Latin America and Asia. It's still unclear whether the reforms of Washington or those of Rome will have a greater impact on the American church.
Father Marino acknowledges the irony, but said that's how it goes in a global church.
"You hear a lot about how rigid the church is, but immigrants force it to be flexible," Marino said. "In places where there are no immigrants, the church is very predictable."
But the church's immigrant success story may be undermined by a paradox. Although immigrants generally respect priests, seek their advice and value the sacraments they administer, they are not becoming priests themselves.
The problem is acute among Hispanics, who by one estimate will replace the Irish as the church's largest ethnic group by 2010. When the New York Archdiocese ordained three Vietnamese priests, it promptly dispatched them to school in Bolivia to learn Spanish, the language of one in three Catholic New Yorkers.
At Most Precious Blood, Hispanics tend to drop by the rectory unannounced if they need to see a priest. They expect one to be home - although given the worsening priest shortage, such a prospect will be increasingly unlikely.
Combined with a shortage of American priests, the immigrant upsurge is turning the United States - once a prime exporter of missionaries - into mission territory. With only three American priests in residence, Most Precious Blood relies on a Filipino hospital chaplain, a Jesuit from Brazil and a Croatian priest on loan from his homeland.
So far, the parish's ethnics are mostly going their own way. Each group has its own liturgical standard, which stands on the altar during a particular language Mass and languishes in the sacristy the rest of the time. On Christmas Eve, midnight Mass is celebrated separately in English, Spanish and Croatian at different locations on the parish grounds.
But the parish elementary school, which counts growing numbers of Chinese and Koreans, pulls them together. And there are other examples of cross-pollination.
"When the Croatians saw the Italian procession on the Feast of the Holy Cross, they expressed an interest in having their own," said Father Stallings.
"You want a procession?" he asked rhetorically. "I'm open to things."
 Load-Date: October 1, 1995

 

End of Document
