

In London, the Shock of the New Found in Old Shows
The Associated Press
March 11, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 914 words
Byline: By MATT WOLF, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




A conventional love triangle cracks wide open, revealing a play of infinite understanding and sorrow about its characters - and its country.
A familiar thriller offers excitement of another sort, as a once-standard war horse becomes an occasion for wonder.
On yet a third London stage, audiences are stirred by a musical everyone knows by heart in a production that peers straight into its darkly forbidding core.
Both plays - Terence Rattigan's "The Deep Blue Sea" and J.B. Priestley's "An Inspector Calls" - and the musical, Rodgers and Hammerstein's "Carousel," are the stuff of standard English repertory newly presented in productions that carry the force of revelation.
And with the addition of an Oscar Wilde revival, "An Ideal Husband," a century-old play whose depiction of British Cabinet chicanery is all too topical today, the case is clear: London's ostensibly "safest" works are today's most subversive.
The shock of the new, in other words, rests with the old.
"It is very subversive," director Karel Reisz says of "The Deep Blue Sea," Rattigan's 1952 play, which has sold out its eight-week run at the fringe Almeida Theater and transfers March 17 to the Apollo Theater on the West End.
In outline, the play suggests mere soap opera: A judge's wife, Hester Collyer, leaves her decent but dull husband, Sir William, for a younger ex-Royal Air Force pilot, Freddie, who doesn't love her.
While a 1988 staging confirmed its apparent staleness, Reisz and his extraordinary company locate the play's disquieting critique of a nation choking on its emotional reserve.
"Hester, what's happened to you?" Sir William (Nicholas Jones) asks his wife (Penelope Wilton). "Love, that's all," comes her deadpan reply.
And yet Hester's love - indeed, her lust - participates in her despair: "You and I are death to each other," says Freddie (Linus Roache), the emotionally blocked young pilot, whose "no" Hester cannot accept.
The play leaves her pitched, in her words, between "the devil and the deep blue sea" - a woman whose emerging passions encounter only reticence and repression.
"The idea that a good piece of writing becomes old-fashioned is silly, really. It's bad writing that is old-fashioned," says Reisz, a 66-year-old director better known for a film career that includes "Saturday Night and Sunday Morning" (1960), "The French Lieutenant's Woman" (1981) and "Sweet Dreams" (1985).
Still, the passage of time often makes a difference, freeing plays from the theatrical constraints of their own period so they speak freshly.
Priestley described himself as a "wild dramatist only pretending to be a tame one," but the Royal National Theater's current "An Inspector Calls" (1945) is among the few Priestley revivals that truly dares to be wild.
Its opening tableau shows Birling's elegant house floating in a miniaturist limbo behind a charred, rubble-strewn landscape. By the end of the play, the house has collapsed, along with the Birlings' once-secure social order, as the family finds itself implicated in the suicide of a factory girl.
The style is no less radical than the design. While "An Inspector Calls" usually is played for drawing-room melodrama, director Stephen Daldry embraces the metaphysics of a play where nothing is what it seems, least of all Inspector Goole (Kenneth Cranham).
The actors adopt a heightened, almost operatic style attuned to the fevered emotions beating beneath the play's ordered facade. During the inspector's famous speech about collective responsibility - "We don't live alone; we are members of one body" - Daldry brings up the house lights, forcing today's audience to take up Priestley's call to arms.
The production has been a surprise success at the National. Opening in September on a Friday - normally a throwaway night for London premieres - it went on to win Daldry, 31, the Evening Standard Drama Award for best director.
"An Inspector Calls" since has moved from the mid-sized Lyttelton auditorium to the 1,162-seat Olivier, where it continues to sell out.
So, too, does the National's revival of "Carousel" (Lyttelton, through March 27), the 1945 Rodgers and Hammerstein musical that, like "An Inspector Calls," seems far more daring almost 50 years later.
Nicholas Hytner, its director, feels that the true issues of Oscar Hammerstein II's libretto can at last be addressed frankly: "This is totally violent material. It's about the intimate connection of passion and pain.
"That's something no one can tackle because we have all of us been persuaded by the feminist movement that a man beating his wife is in no circumstances beautiful."
Nor, Hytner says, "are they necessarily evil … What one has to do is seek identification as much for the beater as for the beaten."
The result complicates the relationship between factory worker Julie Jordan (Joanna Riding) and carousel barker Billy Bigelow (Michael Hayden), which begins with a fairground pick-up and ends with a heavenly plea for absolution and understanding.
"This story is about two deeply wounded individuals," says the 36-year-old director. "At the center of the greatest numbers - 'If I Loved You,' 'What's the Use of Wonderin' ' - is something phenomenally disturbing; there's so much pain concealed."
Hytner's comments honor a process of reinvestigation common to all these productions, as any received ideas are scraped away to permit the abiding wisdom of the works their due.
"This is a show about sex," Hytner said. "That was veiled in 1945; we can take the lid off it now."

 

End of Document
