

In Northern Ireland's 'Bandit Country,' the IRA Calls the Shots
The Associated Press
October 11, 1992, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 605 words
Byline: By SHAWN POGATCHNIK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MEIGH, Northern Ireland
Body




Motorists passing through this village were stopped at gunpoint one recent night - but not by police. The armed men were IRA guerrillas, demonstrating who calls the shots after dark in the corner of Northern Ireland called "bandit country."
Such roadblocks are a regular Irish Republican Army tactic in southern County Armagh, a rural, mostly Roman Catholic area on the border with the Irish Republic. The aim is to intimidate residents and mock Britain's authority.
During a 30-minute exercise at Meigh, a dozen men in combat jackets and ski masks paraded through the village of 100 people, stopped cars at the crossroad and demanded identification from drivers.
They handed out a leaflet instructing residents to inform the "republican movement" of any "antisocial" behavior such as theft, drug trafficking and rape. The warning described two local men as drug dealers who would be killed unless they left Northern Ireland within 24 hours.
Residents said the two went into hiding after the roadblock. Police would not comment or say whether the men were suspects.
A dairy farmer stopped at the roadblock said later he would have spat on the leaflet - but he was too afraid.
Like other residents interviewed in Meigh, the farmer did not want his name revealed. He said many residents had a good idea of who the IRA men in the area were, but that none would tell the British authorities.
Fear is pervasive in south Armagh. In July, the bodies of three local men suspected by the IRA of being police informers were dumped on roadsides near Meigh.
Army bomb-disposal units spent a day checking for booby traps before recovering the corpses, illustrating how warily security forces operate on such hostile ground.
"We deserve normal policing, but we get no policing," said Michael O'Neill, a local council member from the Social Democratic and Labor Party, which opposes the IRA and gets most of the Catholic votes in Northern Ireland.
"If there's a burglary … you could wait up to 24 hours or two days for the police," said O'Neill, who sees a "vacuum of authority" being filled by the IRA.
British security sources acknowledge that fear of ambushes makes army commanders reluctant to challenge the IRA displays.
British soldiers now travel in helicopters, not armored cars, to avoid roadside bombs. Members of the Royal Ulster Constabulary, the British province's police force, rarely patrol on foot, and never without a military escort.
"You see who controls the ground in this area," said Jim McAllister, a council member from Sinn Fein, the legal political party that supports the IRA.
"The local community has no faith in the RUC," said McAllister, who said he often is asked to mediate disputes involving crime. "Why would people deal with an alien force when they can sort out problems among themselves?"
At Meigh, the IRA checkpoint operated within two miles of a British army base being built to replace one bombed in May.
More than 30 soldiers have been killed by the IRA in south Armagh's rural hub of Crossmaglen since the conflict began in 1969.
On hilltops outside the town, soldiers in army watchtowers equipped with high-tech scopes and listening gear keep an eye on traffic and farmhands moving about the rolling bogland.
Even so, in recent weeks IRA operatives have assembled car bombs and transported them unmolested to explode outside the police forensics lab in Belfast and the Armagh courthouse, causing more than $ 35 million in damage.
Paddy Short, who runs a pub in Crossmaglen, reflected on the relationship among the Catholic community, IRA and British soldiers in south Armagh.
"There's no law," he said, "but there's order."

 

End of Document
