

In the Caucasus Mountains, a War That Could Tear Russia Apart
The Associated Press
January 31, 1993, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1109 words
Byline: AP Photo planned, By ALAN COOPERMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KARTSA, Russia
Body




The Ingush Muslims are savages, says Marat Khaiti. If we do not cleanse our land of them, our grandchildren will spit in our faces.
The man spewing this hatespeak is a 30-year-old warehouse clerk in North Ossetia, a mostly Christian region in Russia's jagged, snow-laden Caucasus Mountains.
For six days in November, he battled his Muslim neighbors with hunting rifles and gasoline bombs as they tried to burn each other out of their homes. But he also admits his family secretly sheltered an Ingush woman and child, probably saving their lives.
It is a contradiction that reflects the political, ethical and emotional confusion in the Caucasus, where a dozen ethnic groups have lived side by side - and occasionally fought each other - for centuries.
The fighting has occurred mainly in times of upheaval, when Moscow's grip has loosened. In 1918, after the Bolshevik Revolution. In 1942, when the Nazis were advancing.
And now, with the fall of communism.
More than 330 people died when the Ingush and Ossetians fought in November, the first ethnic violence inside Russia since the Soviet Union's collapse.
Tens of thousands of refugees fled villages like Kartsa, now a silent cluster of brick cottages with black scorch marks curling above the windows.
To halt the fighting, President Boris Yeltsin declared a state of emergency Nov. 2 and sent in 5,000 soldiers.
A curfew, censorship and martial law remain in effect in this part of the northern Caucasus, 1,500 miles south of Moscow.
Only the rumbling of Russian armor through mountain hamlets kept a bitter truce as peace talks finally opened Jan. 23 in Kislovodsk, a resort famed for its healing mineral springs. No substantial progress was made, but both sides agreed to meet again in February.
Yeltsin will need all the magic of the local waters, and then some, to end the ancient feud between the 100,000 Ingush and 400,000 Ossetians. Historians say they have been fighting for territory since the 13th century, when Mongol invaders drove the Ossetians' ancestors into the Ingush-held mountains.
The price of peace today may be billions of rubles of replacement housing, an investment the government can hardly afford. But the cost of failure in the talks could be far higher.
From the Black Sea to Siberia, Russia is a checkerboard of 21 republics and 11 "autonomous" regions dominated by various minority groups. As inflation and crime worsen, they are battling over a shrinking economic pie. Ossetians and Ingush could lead the way to civil war or breakup.
"It's time to declare loudly: The fate of all Russia is being decided" in the Caucasus, said Gen. Alexander Kotenkov, head of the region's temporary military government.
The mountain range stretches 500 miles between the Black and Caspian seas, forming Russia's southern border with Georgia and Azerbaijan.
Those two former Soviet republics also face conflicts in the mountains: Azerbaijan is fighting Armenia for control of Nagorno-Karabakh, while Georgia combats separatists in Abkhazia and South Ossetia. The South Ossetians want to unite with their brethren in Russia.
The internecine battles confuse not only outsiders, but sometimes also the combatants.
Khaiti could not explain why he harbored Ingush neighbors in his home during the November bloodletting, and he did not want his fellow militants to know.
"It was only a woman and a little girl," he said apologetically.
Yet he was adamant that the two ethnic groups can no longer live together - all Ingush should leave North Ossetia, or be pushed out.
"We hate them and they hate us," he said.
The violence erupted Oct. 31 after a week of mounting Ingush street protests that began when a 12-year-old Ingush girl was accidentally run over by an Ossetian armored personnel carrier.
But the modern conflict goes back nearly 50 years, to Soviet dictator Josef Stalin's decision to deport the entire Ingush nation for collaborating with the Nazis during World War II.
In February 1944, an estimated 60,000 Ingush were packed into railroad cattle cars and sent to desolate Kazakhstan. As many as one-third died during the four-day journey or soon after arriving in winter, without food or shelter, in a hostile land.
Meanwhile, Ossetians moved into their former homes.
In 1957, the Ingush were legally "rehabilitated" and began returning to the Caucasus. They claim the 1,400-square-mile Prigorodny district, including part of the North Ossetian capital, Vladikavkaz, as their land. But more than 50,000 Ossetians now live there, and they have no intention of giving it up.
"You cannot undo the injustice of 1944 with another injustice today," said Akhsarbek Galazov, chairman of the North Ossetian parliament. "If we begin revising borders, where will it ever end?"
During the Oct. 31-Nov. 5 fighting, both sides used a simple, devastating tactic to assert their claim to the land.
When they seized a village, they identified houses owned by the enemy, turned on gas stoves, and waited a few minutes. Then they tossed in hand grenades or bottles of gasoline stuffed with burning rags.
The result: rows of houses with the roofs blown off. Inside, nothing is left but charred timbers and smithereens of crockery. Outside, pretty picket fences and decorative window sills are disconcertingly intact.
In some villages that changed hands more than once, the only undamaged homes belong to neutrals. Mikhail Katsuba, 68, saved his house in Kartsa by chalking "Russian" on it in foot-high letters.
The more numerous Ossetians generally got the upper hand in the fighting. Some Ingush claim Russian troops helped the Ossetians because they are fellow Orthodox Christians. Russian officers deny it.
Since the truce, hundreds of hostages have been exchanged, but many families are still searching for relatives. Rumors of atrocities are common, but could not be confirmed.
An estimated 5,000 Ossetians fled the fighting for other parts of the republic, and many are now homeless. The Ingush situation is even worse: authorities say 62,000 refugees registered in Nazran, the capital of Ingushetia 16 miles north of Vladikavkaz.
Zhabi, a bearded Ingush fighter, was burned out of his home and now lives with 16 relatives in a one-room apartment in Nazran that reeks of urine, dirty laundry and fried potatoes.
The first time he shot an Ossetian in the face, Zhabi said, he was sick to his stomach for two hours. But after that, "killing got much easier and I did a lot of it."
He declined to give his full name for fear of arrest. He said he expected to fight again, but he offered a visitor a bullet from his pistol as a souvenir.
"I had eight left, now I've got only seven," he said. "You have saved the life of one Ossetian."

 

End of Document
