

In the '60s, It Was Free Speech; In the '90s, It's the Homeless
The Associated Press
August 3, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 709 words
Byline: By CHRISTINA D. MUNGAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BERKELEY, Calif.
Body




In 1969, student leader Dan Siegel stood on the steps of the University of California's Sproul Plaza and spoke three words that launched 5,000 demonstrators: "Take the park."
Last week's demonstrations at what has become People's Park were no less volatile, but the issues have changed from free speech and the Vietnam War to volleyball and the plight of the homeless.
Siegel displays the ambivalence of many protesters from a generation ago toward the violence in the current protest. He was not there this time.
"I had other things to do," said Siegel, now an attorney for Oakland Unified School District.
"I am not so much upset about the building of volleyball courts at People's Park as to think that people should commit acts of violence to prevent them from being put in. The whole thing seems out of proportion."
In 1969, after free speech and anti-war protesters spontaneously took pickaxes and plants to a university lot, the demonstrators battled ten days with police and ultimately National Guardsmen sent by then-Gov. Ronald Reagan.
A young bystander died and hundreds of demonstrators were hit by buckshot before the university backed off and let the half-block off Telegraph Avenue evolve into what has recently become a cross between London's Speaker's Corner and an open-air homeless shelter.
The latest clashes erupted over a city contract to lease the center of the park from the university for $ 1 and install lighting, toilets, and volleyball and basketball courts.
Merchants and city officials said the filthy park repelled visitors and attracted crime, but street people said the construction was only a way of evicting them from the place they called home.
"The need here is not for more volleyball, but for more food and clothing to get back into mainstream society," said Kenneth Beard, who is homeless.
After the first bulldozer moved in, about 600 protesters on Wednesday night stormed city streets, smashing dozens of windows in stores and in the student union building at UC Berkeley.
A flying bottle broke a police officer's jaw and a protester fired three handgun rounds Thursday night. Adrian Clark, a visitor from England, was slashed in the face at a Thursday night protest during which some young people built a bonfire with clothing donated to the homeless.
Friday night's protest ended with police firing dummy bullets at about 100 protesters who marched around the park and a nearby shopping area, refusing to heed police warnings to disperse
Authorities said at least 77 people have been arrested since Wednesday.
The violence has turned off many city residents.
"Berkeley Police Under Attack," ran the headline in the Berkeley Voice, the city's only newspaper.
UC Berkeley sociology professor Todd Gitlin said vandalism and violence are why he hasn't checked out the latest demonstrations, even though he wrote manifestos for People's Park back in '69.
"I'm not up for riots," he said. He said the protesters in 1969 were backed by 25,000 city residents because they ran "a principled, idealist movement that took a position of green space against development - an early shoot of the environmental movement."
But he also said one reason this week's demonstrators garnered little community support was because the homeless "are perceived as a special interest group at odds with the community, the kind of people people are afraid of."
Siegel said he thinks people are exaggerating the glories of the past. Telegraph Avenue was as "scruffy" in 1969 as it is today, he said.
The demonstrators in 1969 included many more peaceful protesters but no fewer stone-throwers than Wednesday's crowds, and those stone-throwers were homeless people "like the people who were so upset Wednesday night," he said. "I don't think there was a big difference."
Once a token of people's right to control their lives in the face of authority, People's Park has now become a narrower but equally valid symbol for society's failure to provide for the homeless and helpless, Siegel said.
But Kent Randolph, whose record store carries a locally famous mural commemorating the seizure of the park in 1969, said volleyball courts were fine with him.
"That park has been a very depressing place for a long time, and as a symbol, to me, it's lost all meaning," he said.
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto FX1

 

End of Document
