

In the Name of the Mother: Scars from Wrongful Conviction
The Associated Press
March 21, 1994, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 678 words
Byline: By JESSICA BALDWIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Anne Maguire says she has forgiven the police who beat her, the judge who sentenced her and the system that wrongly jailed her and her family as IRA bomb-makers.
But she harbors no love for her nephew, Gerard Conlon, who implicated her. Conlon's own ordeal is the basis of "In the Name of the Father," a movie nominated for the Academy Award.
The film shows Mrs. Maguire serving breakfast to Conlon and his buddy Paul Hill, now married to a daughter of the late Sen. Robert Kennedy.
Mrs. Maguire says she met Hill only briefly, at an Irish folk dance.
"He was not in my house," she told a reporter in her London apartment. "I wasn't showing anybody how to make bombs in my kitchen, and for Gerard Conlon to let that scene be shown in the film! Twenty years onward, he's still calling me a liar."
Conlon acknowledged implicating his aunt, but says he did it under duress during police questioning. He has since said that she was not involved.
Jim Sheridan, the movie's director, has been criticized for taking liberties with the facts. In London last month, Sheridan said he did not set out to make a documentary but to tell the story "of one person suffering and becoming an independent spirit."
Conlon, Hill, Paddy Armstrong and Carole Richardson were convicted of planting IRA bombs in pubs in Guildford that killed five people.
Mrs. Maguire saw the movie with Ms. Richardson. They became close friends during years in prison together.
Police raided the Maguire family's tidy northwest London home on Dec. 3, 1974, after Conlon and Hill implicated her. Mrs. Maguire says she was deprived of sleep and food, violently interrogated and beaten, but always maintained her innocence.
She, her husband Patrick, her brother Sean Smyth, her sons Vincent and Patrick, family friend Patrick O'Neill and Patrick Maguire's brother-in-law Guiseppe Conlon were convicted in 1976 of making IRA bombs. The crucial evidence was a scientific test for nitroglycerine traces that has since been discredited.
Guiseppe Conlon, Gerard's father, died in prison in 1980.
It was one of four major IRA cases in the mid-1970s that sent 18 people to prison, 11 of them for life. After long public campaigns, all of the convictions have been reversed by the Court of Appeal.
"I know there were 18 innocent people at the time," said Mrs. Maguire, who served nine years of a 14-year sentence. "But our family seemed to be the only one that was stripped of everything. Our kids were left orphans. They lost both mum and dad."
The unhealed wounds and unanswered questions are summed up in the title of her recently published book, "Why Me?"
When the judge sentenced her to 14 years, Mrs. Maguire thought about her children and fainted.
"Who is going to look after my kids? You were there 24 hours a day, you washed, you cooked, you loved them, you held them and you listened to them and I just thought 'No, I might as well be dead,' because that was mental torture," Mrs. Maguire said, tears welling behind her thick glasses.
A young-looking 59 with a slightly crooked smile and soft, black curly hair, Mrs. Maguire speaks unhurriedly with a slight accent from her native Belfast.
She has made a cozy home with her eldest son Vince, 36, who was sent to prison for three years when he was 17. Her husband, who served eight years, lives across the street, an arrangement she does not discuss.
The initial government compensation payment covered the deposit for her garden apartment. While lawyers argue about the final amount, Mrs. Maguire pays the mortgage by escorting children on a school bus.
Laundry bags dropped off by her sons John, 35, and Patrick, 33, wait at the washing machine in the kitchen. Every Sunday, Mrs. Maguire fixes dinner for the entire family.
If she had her way, all her children and grandchildren would live with her.
"It's your own children coming up again, and you're trying to catch that little bit of togetherness to try and make up for the lost years of your own children," she said.
---
"Why Me," HarperCollins, 4.99 pounds ($ 7), will be published in Canada in June. A U.S. edition is planned.
 Load-Date: March 21, 1994

 

End of Document
