

In the Groove: Audio Reviews
The Associated Press
November 23, 1992, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1073 words
Body




Henry Purcell: The Complete Anthems and Services, Volumes 1 and 2 (Hyperion) - The King's Consort, the Choir of New College, Oxford, conducted by Robert King.
 
 After recording all of Henry Purcell's welcome songs and odes, Robert King has embarked on a five-year project of recording Purcell's complete church music.
The series points toward 1995, the 300th anniversary of the death of perhaps the greatest musical son of England - and perhaps the luckiest.
In the comprehensive notes accompanying the discs, King comments that if the composer had been only a few years earlier he might not have had a musical education.
Born at the end of Oliver Cromwell's period of dour Puritan rule, Purcell learned music as a chorister in the Chapel Royal, which enjoyed the enthusiastic support of King Charles II.
Charles not only poured money into the choir, but kept an orchestra of Royal Violins to serenade him at table and in the chapel. These ample resources later shaped Purcell's music.
And in time, the lack of those resources in English churches discouraged performances of Purcell's works. At best, they were sung with organ accompaniment, not the shimmering strings.
The music - brilliantly performed in these recordings - captures the exuberance of the Restoration, and the pent-up creativity released by the demise of the Puritans.
Purcell's skills as a theatrical composer are evident as he spins short texts into small dramas. There is a stroke of daring, perhaps genius, in the dirge-like instrumental beginning of "I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord." Within two minutes, the tempo kicks up to dance time. The choir joins in, slightly subdued by some striking dissonances. Five minutes in, restraint is cast aside to affirm "I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, with my whole heart ..."
Each anthem has its particular pleasures, and the performances are uniformly excellent. Admirers of Purcell can give thanks, with a whole heart, and eagerly wait for more.
- By Robert Barr, Associated Press Writer.
---
"Good As I Been to You" (Columbia) - Bob Dylan
 
 After regaling us with such compositions as "Wiggle Wiggle" on his last album, the world's greatest living songwriter takes an album off. Bob Dylan's new album is a collection of folk songs performed with an acoustic guitar, a harmonica and a voice that's aged like fine gravel.
The ever-inscrutable Dylan doesn't provide us with authors of the compositions, leaving his resourceful fans to trace the origins through a national computer network.
"Good As I Been to You" defies such deep analysis. Nominally, it's a throwback to his first album 30 years ago, but in reality this heir to Woody Guthrie carries on a folk tradition that dates back much further.
From the sublime to the silly, Dylan tells stories. They rush past like one of his unpredictable concerts - a seductive ballad, a rock stomper, the Civil War ode "Hard Times" and a stately Irish tale composed by Paul Brady. And lest anyone takes this too seriously, he ends with "Froggie Went a Courtin'."
Dylan's voice wears every one of his 51 years now, but he still knows how to wrap it around a song. It's obvious now when he's putting everything into his work or coasting - dig out his last album for an example of the latter - but he's engaged here.
Leave it to Dylan to show that "Unplugged" is not a fad. It's a tradition.
- By David Bauder, Associated Press Writer.
---
"Fat City" (Columbia) - Shawn Colvin
 
 After a tantalizing debut in 1989 with "Steady On," which won a Grammy for best new folk performance, Shawn Colvin made her fans wait three years for a follow-up.
It's been worth it.
"Fat City" fulfills the promise of her first album, and goes beyond. It is the work of a mature songwriter who's lived enough to have perspective, but not so much that she is jaded or cynical.
And while the overall sensibility is folk, Colvin is not of the banana bread and whole grains school of songwriting.
Colvin has sung harmony vocals on many artists' albums, and a lot of the people she has played with make guest appearances on "Fat City."
Former touring partner Richard Thompson, Bela Fleck, the Subdudes, David Lindley, Chris Whitley, Booker T. Jones and other luminaries lend their considerable talents to "Fat City" without overwhelming Colvin's voice and vision.
The languid opener, "Polaroids," sets a late-afternoon mood, but other cuts considerably quicken the tempo, including the bouncy "Tennessee" and Object of My Affection," in which Colvin finds real love, "not some toy with batteries."
Other standouts include the album's one cover, the Warren Zevon-Jackson Browne collaboration "Tenderness on the Block," and the gorgeous "Orion in the Sky."
- By Eric Fidler, Associated Press Writer.
---
"The Chase" (Liberty) - Garth Brooks
 
 Garth Brooks doesn't come across as a country singer anymore than Bill Clinton comes across like the governor of a small state.
Look into either's eyes and you'll see an almost maniacal ambition, the same look exaggerated by pro wrestlers to comic book proportions. Big as it is right now, country music is still smaller than Garth Brooks, and on "The Chase" he moves to keep his vast audience for a long haul.
The reach to keep such a broad base tells, just as it does on Michael Jackson. Brooks even has his own "We Are the World" on "The Chase," a gospel number called "We Shall Be Free."
The emphasis is on big ballads that are musically bland, but saved somewhat by lyrics that show Brooks to be the antithesis of the standard country stud good ol' boy, like on "Somewhere Other Than the Night": "He's come to realize he's neglected certain things; and there are times she feels alone even by his side; it was the first time she ever saw him cry."
This Garth fellow is a regular, sensitive guy. But whatever the outlook of the material, Garth always sings it with power and even subtlety.
Just don't think he's a country music singer. He could have been, but Brooks chose the MOR legacy of Barry Manilow, Kenny Rogers and Neil Diamond. And he's already eclipsed the first two.
Best cut: "Mr. Right," a breezy Western swing number about a very accommodating cowboy. He's ready to spend a lifetime being Mr. Right, or just a night being Mr. Right Now.
Worst cut: "Dixie Chicken," saved by Brooks' vocal and session players from being a Pat Boone-like ripoff of Little Feat. But it's still a pointless and inferior version of the Lowell George classic.
- By Jim Patterson, Associated Press Writer.

 

End of Document
