

In With the New, Out With the Old in Former East Germany
The Associated Press
January 1, 1991, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 546 words
Byline: By MARK FRITZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BERLIN
Body




Eastern Germany's oldest sugar factory ended its 152nd year of operation by shutting down on the last day of 1990, a sobering reminder that the former nation is entering a pivotal new year.
The next 12 months will represent perhaps the most important chapter of the region's transition from socialism to free market democracy, experts say.
It is a year that carries not only the promise of renewal, but the potential for economic chaos and social disorder.
Experts say joblessness will peak and perhaps affect half of the 8 million workers. Comfortable old subsidies that kept rents, energy and transportation low began falling away on Tuesday.
In this year, the ordinary business of living will change.
Perplexing new tax laws will take effect, schools are being restructured, health care will cost more. Even the act of insuring a car will be different.
Economists predict 1991 will be the year when Western investment rolls in, propelling what used to be East Germany down the long road to parity with what used to be West Germany.
The trip, however, will be filled with such demoralizing sights as the abrupt collapse of the Klein Wanzlebener sugar factory. It was an enterprise that predated Bismarck, outlasted Hitler, grew dependent on Communism but could not adjust to capitalism.
The eastern German news agency ADN said Monday that the plant, in the city of Wanzleben outside Magdeburg, closed Monday because it was obsolete and considered unprofitable.
The plant was taken over in 1990 by a western German concern that plans to build a new sugar factory in Wanzleben by 1994, the agency said.
The fate of the old plant and the plans for a new one represent what German officials hope will be a pattern.
The president of the government Labor Institute, Heinrich Franke, said in a radio interview Sunday that up to 45 percent of the workers in eastern Germany will lose their jobs, but that coming investments will generate new ones.
Some officials say the gap between decline and recovery will be huge, however.
Franz Steinkuehler, leader of Germany's largest labor union, IG Metall, predicted an exodus of jobless easterners looking for work in wealthy western Germany.
Besides worrying about jobs, eastern Germans face a whole new realm of tax laws, social welfare regulations and other changes that went into effect on Tuesday.
They also must start paying for medication and some other health costs. However, a treaty between the two German nations stipulates that western pharmaceutical companies must set prices 55 percent lower in the east.
Last week, industry leaders threatened to boycott the eastern market rather than sell goods cheaply. Critics said a boycott could deny ailing eastern Germans important medications.
"There will be deaths," Bruno Herold, chief of the Druggists Association in eastern Germany's Saxony state, said in an interview with the Dresden newspaper, Morgenpost am Sonntag.
Stipulating that medicines be sold cheaply is part of an overall effort to blunt the shock of the free market. Although eastern energy costs were being allowed to double today, they will still be much lower than in the west.
Eastern Germans will also face the taxes of their western counterparts, and their rents will rise, though increases will be keyed to the occupants' wages.

 

End of Document
