

International News Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
February 12, 1993, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 969 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Frostbitten, exhausted and emaciated, polar explorers Sir Ranulph Fiennes and Dr. Michael Stroud were airlifted off the ice today, Fiennes' wife said.
Lady Virginia Fiennes told British Broadcasting Corp. television that her husband and Stroud were picked up by a Twin Otter plane, putting a halt to their record-breaking expedition across Antarctica.
No details about the men's condition were immediately available.
Organizers said the men, who set out Nov. 9, are suffering from severe frostbite in their extremities and Fiennes has developed a deep and painful infection in his foot. Their food supplies, which they dragged along on sleds, were running out.
Last Friday, the pair broke an 84-year-old record for the longest unsupported polar march after covering 1,257 miles in 89 days.
On Sunday they completed the first crossing of the Antarctic on foot, when they traversed the Beardmore glacier near the Ross Ice Shelf.
The pair made the trek without the aid of dogs or vehicles.
---
BEIJING (AP) - A leading official at the Communist Party's ideological school urged intellectuals today to study China's most capitalist-oriented city, and not get wrapped up in theoretical debate.
The call by Xing Bensi, vice president of the Central Party School, to learn from the freewheeling Shenzhen special economic zone in southern China appeared on the front page of Guangming Daily, the national newspaper for intellectuals.
Since senior leader Deng Xiaoping visited Shenzhen a year ago to urge bolder economic development, all Chinese officials have voiced strong support for his market-style reforms.
What makes today's commentary stand out is how bluntly an official of the main party school pooh-poohed theoretical debate.
Echoing Deng, Xing urged theoreticians who wanted to help the nation "not to participate in or provoke meaningless, abstract debate. This is something we should learn from Shenzhen."
---
LONDON (AP) - Despite pledges by the government of Sri Lanka to safeguard human rights, the torture and disappearance of scores of prisoners continues, Amnesty International said today.
An Amnesty International delegation visited the troubled Indian Ocean island of 17 million people in 1991 and made 32 recommendations for human rights safeguards. The government accepted 30 of the 32 and at its invitation Amnesty International returned to Sri Lanka last October for a two-month visit.
The new report said many of the recommendations the government said it had accepted had not been implemented.
It said the team found fewer violations than in the previous year, but the figure remained high.
The report also detailed what it called gross abuses of human rights by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam.
Over 17,500 people have been killed since 1983 when rebels from the minority Tamil community started a violent campaign for an independent homeland in the north and east.
Tamils, 18 percent of Sri Lanka's people, say they are discriminated against by the majority Sinhalese.
---
CANBERRA, Australia (AP) - British historian David Irving, who has questioned whether 6 million Jews were killed by Nazis in World War II, is not welcome in Australia, the Immigration Department said today.
An Immigration Department spokesman, who asked not to be identified, said Irving was refused a visitor's visa on the orders of Immigration Minister Gerry Hand. No further details were available.
Irving's Australian publisher said the controversial author had planned to tour Australia in March and April. Veritas Publishing Company manager Murray Pope criticized the ban as an attack on freedom of speech.
He said an Immigration Department letter said the visa application was refused because Irving would be "likely to become involved in activities disruptive to, or violence threatening harm to, the Australian community."
The ban was applauded by Australian Jewish groups.
---
BEIJING (AP) - China's working women are hit hardest by the new wave of economic reforms, an official report said today.
Sixty percent of the workers dismissed from 1,175 enterprises surveyed by the Women's Department of the All-China Federation of Trade Unions were women, the Worker's Daily (Gongren Ribao) reported.
The enterprises polled in the recent survey employed 900,000 women workers, of which 21,000 were dismissed. The report did not say when the survey was conducted or what time period it covered.
It said that in 42 enterprises in the coastal city of Hangzhou, women accounted for 73 percent of the workers laid off.
China's Communist leaders have always championed the cause of raising the status of women, and focused on bringing them into the work force. Ninety percent of working-age women in China are employed outside the home, one of the highest percentages in the world.
But traditional concepts of female inferiority remain deeply ingrained, and many bosses have used economic reforms that stress efficiency, profits and cutting of bloated staffs as a pretext to fire women.
---
AMSTERDAM, Netherlands (AP) - American photographer James Nachtwey won the World Press Photo prize today for his picture of an emaciated Somali woman carrying a dead child to a grave.
It was selected from 19,428 entries competing for the honor, one of the most prestigious in photojournalism.
The photo, titled "Somalia," was shot near Bardera last November for the Paris-based Magnum Photos agency and published in the French newspaper Liberation.
The $ 8,100 annual award will be presented at a ceremony here April 27.
The winners of the two other top awards in the competition were also Americans.
Magnum photographer Eugene Richards won the Leica Oskar Barnack Award for best picture story with his series "The Wetlands of Northern Nigeria."
Freelance photographer Jan Sonnenmair won the Budapest Award for best expression of human emotion with "A Legacy of AIDS."

 

End of Document
