

Investigators Follow the Money in the Kerrigan Attack
The Associated Press
January 18, 1994, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 695 words
Byline: By STEVE WILSTEIN, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: PORTLAND, Ore.
Body




Investigators are looking into whether money given Tonya Harding by U.S. figure skating's governing body and other backers was used to pay for the attack on Nancy Kerrigan.
Harding planned to face her first questioning by the district attorney today. She says she is innocent.
NBC reported that authorities have bank records that could tie Harding's former husband, Jeff Gillooly, to the three men in custody in the alleged plot. NBC said the records may confirm bodyguard Shawn Eckardt's claim that Gillooly paid for the attack that nearly knocked Harding's rival out of the Olympics.
NBC and The Oregonian newspaper said investigators suspect Gillooly used money donated by Harding's supporters to finance her skating to pay for the hit.
The money, the reports said, may have come from the U.S. Figure Skating Association and other benefactors, including George Steinbrenner, the New York Yankees owner and a U.S. Olympic Committee vice president.
Asked today in her driveway whether Gillooly would be arrested, Harding said, "No, he's not."
Ron Hoevet, Gillooly's lawyer, said Gillooly paid Eckardt $ 3,500 a few hours after the attack on Kerrigan because Harding was "very freaked out" by the incident. Gillooly was still in Portland at the time, then flew to Detroit to join Harding.
Hoevet said $ 3,000 of the payment - for bodyguard services in Portland on Harding's return, and for an upcoming appearance in Fairfax, Va., that Harding later canceled - came out of her skating association funds. The other $ 500 was in cash.
"It was a legitimate payment," Hoevet said. "This was the only time Gillooly or Harding paid Eckardt for bodyguard services."
Harding and Gillooly, who divorced last year but have reconciled, maintain their innocence in the Kerrigan attack.
Assistant District Attorney Norm Frink was not yet in his office this morning to comment on the reports of bank records.
In Detroit, Wayne County Prosecutor John O'Hair told the Detroit Free Press he did not have "one scrap or shred of evidence that Tonya Harding was in any way involved."
He also said no decision has been made on when any warrants might be prepared.
Both Kerrigan and Harding are expected to compete at the Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway, next month, although officials have suggested Harding should withdraw.
Harding has earned about $ 200,000 since 1991, including $ 150,000 from ice skating tours, The New York Times said today. The U.S. Olympic Committee confirmed that Harding received grants totaling $ 13,679 since 1989, and the Times said she received additional sums through private donors, including $ 20,000 from Steinbrenner.
Eckardt, 26, Shane Minoaka Stant, 22, and Derrick Brian Smith, 29, are free on bail on charges of conspiracy to commit assault.
Stant is accused of being the man who slammed a bar into Kerrigan's right knee on Jan. 6 in Detroit. Smith, his uncle, allegedly drove the getaway car. Eckardt claims Gillooly had him set it up.
Stant appeared before a judge in Phoenix today and agreed not to fight extradition to Oregon. He was expected to return to Portland later in the day.
Through a lawyer, Gillooly denied involvement in the alleged plot and said Eckardt was not really Harding's bodyguard. But that was contradicted by a letter that surfaced Monday, purportedly written by Gillooly and bearing his letterhead.
It said:
"My wife, Tonya Harding Gillooly, is a world-class figure skater and therefore subject to unusual risk. We have engaged the protection services of Shawn Eckardt on numerous occasions both nationally and abroad. He is a capable and effective presence. Shawn is concientious (sic) of his responsibilities and has never disappointed us."
Copies of the letter, attached to Eckardt's resume, were given to reporters by Keith Lowe, a security guard in Portland. Lowe said he wanted people to know more about Eckardt.
"He almost ruined my career," Lowe said. "He threatened me. He wanted to be a security coordinator."
Hoevet denied that his client knew of the attack.
"Shawn had created a James Bond life for himself," Hoevet said. "Unfortunately, he gave himself some of that life when he attacked Nancy Kerrigan. His act is as bizarre as his resume."
 Load-Date: January 18, 1994

 

End of Document
