

It's Difficult To Reconcile The Beauty And The Hatred
The Associated Press
June 19, 1994, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 843 words
Byline: By JEFFREY ULBRICH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BYUMBA, Rwanda
Body




The most difficult thing to reconcile in this war-ravaged country is the stark contrast between its physical beauty and the depth of the hatred that is tearing it apart.
Driving through the Rwandan countryside is a sheer visual joy. Serpentine roads slither through lush green mountains. Terraced fields are carved out of the slopes, providing a rich agriculture that accounts for nearly half of Rwanda's gross domestic product.
Then, in northern and eastern Rwanda, one notices there are no people - or at least very few. The plots of bananas, sweet potatoes, beans, rice, corn and sorghum are empty, save for the odd brave soul tending a single field in an otherwise vacant landscape.
Hundreds of thousands of people have died since the Rwandan civil war erupted anew April 6. Most of the victims have been civilians, largely minority Tutsis killed by Hutus who make up the government-trained, virtually uncontrolled militias.
The rebel Rwandan Patriotic Front, mostly Tutsis with a few anti-government Hutus, has seized two-thirds of the country and is driving government troops and their supporters into Rwanda's southwestern corner, bordering on Burundi and Zaire.
The retreating Rwandan army has left a human wasteland behind: piles upon piles of bodies of men, women and children, many of them chopped to pieces and mutilated by long machetes.
"What kind of person can hack a six-month-old child in two?" asked a Nigerian major, member of the 450-man U.N. force in Rwanda. "What depth of hatred can make a man do that?"
The question, often asked, goes largely unanswered.
"It's really difficult to trust anybody now," said Cyriaque Ngoboka, a refugee living in a camp in Kigali, the capital. "There has been so much killing, so much wickedness."
"They kill, but they don't know why," said Capt. Thierno Fall, a Senegalese military observer with the U.N. force, trying to come to grips with the savagery all around him. "To kill is nothing here. It's a punitive act, like whipping somebody."
There is, of course, the historic explanation. Many Rwandans cite centuries of ethnic animosity.
The Hutu, essentially sedentary farmers, lived in what is now Rwanda for hundreds of years, which was originally inhabited by pygmies called the Twa. Around the 15th century, the Tutsis, a Nilotic tribe of cattle herders, entered the scene.
The Tutsis, making up less than 14 percent of the population, long ruled over the more numerous Hutus. But that changes with rebellion against and independence from Belgium in 1959-60.
Hundreds of thousands of Tutsis fled to neighboring countries to escape the massacres as the Hutus took control. Many of today's Rwandan Patriotic Front soldiers are children of those who fled.
"The source of the hatred comes from on high," affirmed Aloys Nabamwita, a refugee in Kigali, echoing a sentiment frequently heard. "For the little people, it doesn't matter. It comes from people who want power."
Many of the vicious militiamen have been indoctrinated with pure hatred for Tutsis. The militiaman is told that the Tutsi baby now nestled in its mother's arms will come back and kill him 16 years from now, so he is in fact eliminating a future enemy soldier.
Even so, the kind of slaughter seen in Rwanda seems beyond the reach of indoctrination, or even centuries of history. That neighbor can hack neighbor to death in a small village; that militiamen can herd people they have known all their lives into a church and slaughter everybody inside seems an aberration of human nature.
The massacres are also a tactic. One senior U.N. officer noted that government forces rarely withdraw in disorder. Their mode of operation is to prepare a retreat, massacre all of the Tutsis within the area to be evacuated, then conduct an orderly withdrawal, leaving only horror for the rebels to find.
As the government is pushed into an increaingly desperate position, the killing of civilians is stepping up again. The massacres seem to be multiplying.
That one can kill in a fit of passion is imaginable. That one can be ruthless with his sworn enemy can be imagined too. But to exterminate men, women and children systematically, people from the same village or the same neighborhood - not only kill, but hack and mutilate in the most grotesque manner conceivable - would seem to require a basic loss of humanity.
The Holocaust of World War II was carried out with a certain detachment. In Rwanda, the killing is personal, eye-to-eye - the blood runs, the screams rake the ears.
"The militia are a power unto themselves," said the Rev. Henri Blanchard, whose church in Kigali was the scene of a recent massacre of about 170 people. "It wouldn't surprise me if one day they start killing themselves. No one controls them."
And all around the beauty. As the four-wheel-drive vehicle bounces and careens down the single-lane red dirt road, passing through one idyllic green village after another, a head pops out from around a wall and a curious set of eyes cautiously observes the passersby briefly, no doubt wondering if it means death returning for a final turn.
 Load-Date: June 19, 1994

 

End of Document
