

Italian Ban Shoots The Marlboro Man From The Saddle
The Associated Press
December 18, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 419 words
Byline: By TERRY LEONARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ROME
Body




Italy has rounded up a posse of 17,000 customs agents, and they are gunning for the Marlboro Man.
In this spaghetti western, the trademark cowboy doesn't stand a chance.
Bidding to halt what it says is a flourishing black market, Italy has banned sales of Marlboro, Merit and Muratti Ambassador cigarettes for 30 days, sending some smokers into a frenzy and infuriating the manufacturer.
"We think that this is a protectionist act that sort of punishes the wrong person," said George Knox, a vice president for Philip Morris, the American maker of the brands.
Cigarettes are a state monopoly in Italy, and the ban seeks to end alleged complicity by tobacco companies in a black market that Italy says cheated it out of $ 335 million in taxes this year.
The Finance Ministry ordered the ban on Saturday, contending Philip Morris had not taken steps to keep its cigarettes off the black market.
About a month ago customs officials in Ravenna seized a contraband cargo of 9 tons of the brands in question. Italian law allows such a ban with violations over about 5 tons.
Philip Morris has challenged the ban in Italy's administrative court, and Knox said he expects the appeal to reach the constitutional court.
"The way, it seems to us, to get at the contrabandistas, if that is what they are called in Italy, is not to punish the manufacturers when we have nothing to do with that act," Knox said in a telephone interview from New York.
The ban runs through Jan. 12. Ironically, it has made the black market the only vendor of the brands that have been taken off the shelves at licensed stores and duty free shops. Vatican City and the tiny republic of San Marino, which is surrounded by Italy, have joined the prohibition.
The government has ordered 17,000 customs officers, tax police and other officials to enforce the prohibition.
In another odd twist, it does not cover Marlboro 100s, Merit 100s or Marlboro Lights, because they were not among the contraband cigarettes seized in Ravenna.
"It's ridiculous. I can sell the Marlboro 100s but if I sell just one pack of normal Marlboros to one of my regular customers I can be fined a million lire ($ 840) and lose my license," said Tiziana Cotoluffi, who runs a tobbaco shop in the center of Rome. "But they can just go down the street to the black marketeer without any problem."
That black marketeer is an elderly woman who for years has openly sold cigarettes from a makeshift, sidewalk stand.
On Wednesday, she told customers she had no more Marlboros, but would on Thursday.

 

End of Document
