

Italy: Walking a Tightrope Between the Vatican and the West
The Associated Press
September 6, 1994, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 300 words
Byline: By DANIEL J. WAKIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




After weeks of loud anti-abortion rhetoric, Italy's delegation to the U.N. Population Conference has quietly taken a more ambiguous stance that could put it at odds with the Vatican.
Italy is walking a tightrope between its pro-choice Western allies and the Holy See, which has campaigned to stop the conference from endorsing abortion.
Rome did not release its official position on the conference, which opened Monday, until its delegates gave a copy to Italian reporters flying on the plane with them to Cairo.
The conservative government of Premier Silvio Berlusconi rejects abortion as a "method of regulating births."
But it calls for respecting "principles of self-determination in the field of reproduction" and does not rule out language in the conference's draft document that abortion should be available.
Italy also supports the "full diffusion of knowledge and means of controlling conception," which puts it at odds with the Vatican.
Overwhelmingly Roman Catholic Italy legalized abortion in 1978, and Pope John Paul II lost a major battle when a church-backed referendum to overturn that law failed.
Just a month ago, delegate Altero Matteoli raised the level of debate by calling abortion a "type of homicide." Abortion also was an issue in talks between Foreign Minister Antonio Martino and the Vatican in July.
The Italian delegation has not said whether it would would support language in the draft document allowing abortion.
But delegation leader Antonio Guidi said Monday: "There have never been misunderstandings" on the issue. "No one has said it's a way of controlling births."
He said government officials were discussing increased contribution to funds for population programs abroad. It doesn't need them at home: Italy's birth rate of 1.3 children per woman is one of the world's lowest.
 Load-Date: September 6, 1994

 

End of Document
