

Japan Says The Way To Save The Whales Is To 'Cull' Them
The Associated Press
February 21, 1994, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 347 words
Byline: By PETER JAMES SPIELMANN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NORFOLK ISLAND, South Pacific
Body




Majestic blue whales can be saved from extinction by killing off some of the more populous minke whales, which share their Antarctic home, Japan argued today.
The suggestion - that you can save the whales by killing them - horrified conservationists and most delegates at an International Whaling Commission conference on Norfolk Island.
The conference is discussing a proposed 50-year ban on commercial whaling in the Antarctic, which is backed by the United States, France, Britain, Germany and others. Approval requires a three-quarters majority of the 39 voting members, so Japan can block it with the support of nine nations.
The commission will vote on the ban in May.
Japan believes that 2,000 to 4,000 minke whales could be killed each year, leaving more food for the endangered blue whales, said Masayuki Komatsu, deputy director of Japan's Far Seas Fisheries Division.
The whaling commission believes only about 500 blue whales - the world's largest creatures - remain in the southern hemisphere, and just 4,000 remain worldwide. The minke population is estimated at 760,000.
"You need to seriously consider culling (minkes), for the sake of the others' recovery," Komatsu said in an interview with The Associated Press.
Conservation officials say allowing commercial hunting of minke whales would open the door to pirate whaling to supply gourmet restaurants in Japan, where a 3.5-ounce piece of whale meat sells for about 6,500 yen ($ 64).
"The time for the slaughter of these precious mammals is finished," said Australia's environment minister, Ro 0 down in the southern ocean, where most of the world's whales that remain live and feed, then it will be completely uncontrollable," said Sydney Holt, a scientific adviser to the whaling commission and the International Fund for Animal Welfare.
The meat from one minke whale is worth $ 70,000, "so of course it's worth cheating," Holt said.
Conservationists also are worried that whalers will kill more minke whales than allowed, and also will kill endangered blue whales, fin whales, right whales, humpback whales and sei whales.
 Load-Date: February 21, 1994

 

End of Document
