

Kremlin Coup Attempt Rocks the Cradle of the Revolution
The Associated Press
August 24, 1991, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 489 words
Byline: By DUSAN STOJANOVIC, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LENINGRAD, U.S.S.R.
Body




Ivan Visilovsky has lived under the Soviet Communist system from its beginning until what now might be its end. And he is puzzled.
"What has happened to this bright idea? I don't know," said the 79-year-old Communist who works as a doorman in the Lenin Museum.
"I still believe in socialism, but many mistakes have been made since the great Lenin," said Visilovsky, sitting in the downtown marble castle.
The Soviet Union's second-largest city is the cradle of the Bolshevik Revolution. Earlier this year, however, residents voted to give the city back its pre-revolutionary name of St. Petersburg - a move that still awaits final legislative action.
Across town Friday at the Smolny Institute - Lenin's headquarters during the Bolshevik Revolution - party archives and documents were sealed to assure that papers relating to the three-day coup attempt by hard-liners were not removed.
The city is rich with historic sites, including the Lenin Museum, which exhibits documents and belongings of the leader of the 1917 Revolution. Ten Rolls-Royces purchased by Lenin in 1921 are part of the exhibit.
Not far from the museum on Thursday, however, thousands of young people chanting "Down with Communists!" put on a rock concert in front of the Winter Palace. The concert was called "Rock Against Tanks."
"How can rock music defeat tanks? It is impossible," Visilovsky said, laughing.
The balding, bespectacled veteran spoke of the coup's failure with disappointment, saying its leaders made a mistake by proclaiming emergency measures and sending tanks into the streets.
If they hadn't, he and others would have believed Gorbachev was ill, he said.
Visilovsky joined the Communist Party during World War II. He remained in the army but studied law in Moscow after the war and was decorated for his political activities, he said.
He also spoke disparagingly of Russian Federation President Boris N. Yeltsin, saying his belief in capitalism could be deadly for socialist society.
"It could bring unemployment and hunger," he said.
Visilovsky admitted that the idea of communism is rapidly losing ground in Leningrad, as illustrated by the dwindling number of people who visit the museum.
"The number of visitors has drastically decreased in recent years, and the trend is continuing," said Nina Murochina, the museum's deputy director.
She complained that "hooligans" have vandalized exhibits in the museum, and said a replica of Lenin's dacha in a Leningrad suburb has been burned down three times. This week a rock was thrown through a side window of the museum.
Because of reduced interest, the museum may be moved to a less prominent site in the city.
"The Lenin Museum will never cease to exist, because Lenin is the founder of the Soviet Union and because he is a part of our history," Murochina said.
But she added that "the concept of the museum must be changed. We'll have to stop idealizing Lenin and start looking at some mistakes he obviously made."

 

End of Document
