

Lengthy German Drama: The Communists, The Bible and the Governor
The Associated Press
December 8, 1993, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 527 words
Byline: By KEVIN COSTELLOE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BERLIN
Body




The popular governor of Brandenburg state in eastern Germany admits the Communist secret police once gave him an antique Bible but in his defense he says that at least the book wasn't stolen from a church.
Nearly everywhere else in Germany, the economy and Chancellor Helmut Kohl's re-election chances dominate public life.
Except in Potsdam, just outside Berlin, where Gov. Manfred Stolpe has been mired in a two-year investigation into his connections with the East German secret police, the dreaded Stasi. The inquiry has come to symbolize the Stasi specter still haunting reunited Germany.
"I never got any money from the Stasi, and I never pocketed anything for myself," Stolpe said this week, after a parliamentary committee took another look into his past during the Communist regime.
The Social Democratic governor said the Stasi gave him the nearly 400-year-old Bible along with an antique atlas in 1987, and that he immediately turned them over to the Evangelical Church, which he represented as a lawyer.
"The Bible wasn't stolen from any church," he said. The book of scriptures cost the Stasi 3,000 East German marks - about $ 580 at the official rate - though it probably would have fetched far more in the west.
While the Stolpe case represents an extreme, Germany is still living through a modern morality play, in which a link to the Stasi is usually a mark of shame.
German news media created an uproar last month with disclosures that the mother of swimming idol Franziska van Almsick had routinely passed on information to the Stasi. German sports officials immediately urged all eastern German athletes who spied for the Stasi to 'fess up.
Even the six-year prison term handed on Monday to Markus Wolf, the Stasi foreign espionage boss, has infuriated many Germans, because he'll likely be free on bond pending years of court appeals.
Kohl's suggestion to toss out the tons of Stasi files has picked up support, especially among those afraid of the volatile mixture of fact and fiction they contain.
Four years after the East German Communist Party and its front-line Stasi troops fell from power, signs are emerging that things may be changing.
On the eve of last weekend's municipal elections, Potsdam mayoral candidate Rolf Kutzmutz admitted he had been a Stasi informant but still picked up enough votes to make him the clear favorite in a run-off on Dec. 19.
Across town, Stolpe was defending his contacts with the Stasi, which he insists were aimed at protecting the oft-threatened churches in Communist East Germany.
Stolpe denies charges he received a meritorious service award from the Communists.
As western Germans are slowly coming to understand, the Stasi's reach was so all-encompassing that anyone of prominence had contacts with the secret police.
The gifts, though, pose a problem. Germany's ARD TV called the Bible the "corpus delicti." In America the phrase might be "smoking gun."
Stolpe's chief accuser, former Stasi control officer Klaus Rossberg, told the investigating commission on Monday that the presents were meant "to tie Stolpe to us" and included pricey Meissen porcelain.
"Mr. Stolpe never refused a gift," Rossberg told the panel.
 Load-Date: December 8, 1993

 

End of Document
