

Liberals Lead The Election Going Into The Stretch
The Associated Press
October 22, 1993, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 589 words
Byline: By JEFFREY ULBRICH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TORONTO
Body




Liberal leader Jean Chretien swung into the final three days of the campaign for Monday's general election relatively certain he will be Canada's next prime minister.
Chretien's only worry, it seemed, was whether he would head a majority government or a less stable minority government.
Two polls published Friday showed Chretien solidly in front and Prime Minister Kim Campbell's Progressive Conservatives fading to third. But the Reform Party, a western-based conservative movement, and the separatist Bloc Quebecois, maintain large regional blocks of support.
Canadians are voting to fill 295 seats in the House of Commons. The party with the most seats picks the prime minister, even if the party wins fewer than the 148 seats needed for a majority.
The Liberal leader is so confident, he has started acting like a prime minister, discussing tax questions with some of the provincial premiers.
"I guess next week I will have another job," Chretien, 59, a longtime politician from Quebec, said at a campaign stop. "It's the last time I'm applying for a new job, so you decide if I should get it or not."
Ms. Campbell, who became Canada's first female prime minister in June when Conservatives chose her to replace Brian Mulroney, put on a brave face, but all but admitted her fight is for second place. And even that may be tough with Reform and Bloc Quebecois sucking up large numbers of Conservative votes.
A Gallup poll of 1,011 Canadians showed the Liberals with 44 percent, the Reform with 19 percent, the Conservatives with 16 percent, the Bloc Quebecois with 12 percent, and the socialist New Democratic Party with 7 percent. The poll is accurate within 3.1 percentage points.
A survey of 3,329 Canadians by the Angus Reid organization gave the Liberals 43 percent, Reform and the Conservatives both 17 percent, the Bloc Quebecois 14 percent and the NDP 7 percent. That poll is accurate within two percentage points.
Perhaps an even larger question was which party would place second, the Conservatives or two upstart protest parties that didn't exist six years ago.
The Bloc Quebecois is running only in Quebec, campaigning on a platform of independence for the French-speaking province. It could sweep enough of the province's 75 seats to put it in second place. That would make it the first party dedicated to dismantling the Canadian federation to go to Ottawa as the official opposition.
The Reform , running everywhere except Quebec, is particularly strong in British Columbia and Alberta and has made inroads in populous Ontario.
The campaign is being fought largely on economic issues and unemployment, now at 11.2 percent in Canada.
Ms. Campbell proposes to eliminate the $ 26.6 billion budget deficit. Chretien has offered a $ 4.5 billion job creation plan. Reform advocates an even more tightfisted fiscal policy than the Conservatives. Few outside Quebec take the Bloc's position seriously on anything but independence. The NDP, once Canada's third political force, advocates scrapping the free trade agreement with the United States and saving Canada's social programs.
Ms. Campbell has fallen precipitously from the most popular politician in the country this summer to an also-ran. She has had a disastrous 10 days, with her own party rebuking her for appearing to criticize her predecessor, Mulroney, and chastising her for a series of television ads that appeared to ridicule Chretien's physical defect.
The right side of the Liberal leader's face is partially paralyzed, forcing him to speak from the left side of his mouth.
 Load-Date: October 22, 1993

 

End of Document
