

Life In Bosnia's Capital: Tending the Injured, Burying the Dead
The Associated Press
June 9, 1992, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 825 words
Byline: By SLOBODAN LEKIC, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SARAJEVO, Bosnia-Herzegovina
Body




"You will have to speak up!" the exhausted surgeon shouted to a visitor at Sarajevo's main hospital. A day earlier, a mortar shell had exploded just outside his operating room, leaving him temporarily deaf.
After two months of combat, the empty thoroughfares of the besieged Bosnian capital are dominated by smoking hulks of buildings. Cars, buses and trolleys are frozen in their tracks, pocked by thousands of shrapnel fragments.
The stench of burning and cordite is thick in the air. A mortar round hits with maddening, quarter-hour regularity, pulverizing the debris.
"You have to be very careful not to expose yourself to sniper fire," said Azra Husic, a 41-year-old schoolteacher. She was making her way home, hugging walls, crouching low and dashing across open spaces.
Sarajevo, site of the 1984 Winter Olympic Games, is ringed by mountains. Now most of that high ground is held by Serbs who rain artillery and mortar fire on the city of 600,000 people.
Monday's Muslim attack to break the Serb stranglehold seemed at least partially successful. The blue-and-white banner of Bosnia-Herzegovina fluttered lazily on Vidikovac, a scenic bluff south of the city. Zuc, a hilly suburb northeast of the city center and a nest of Serbian snipers, also fell.
Serbs fighting majority Muslims and Croats across the republic of 4.3 million people oppose Bosnia's Feb. 29 independence declarations because they want close ties with Serbia. They already hold two-thirds of Bosnia and seek to rip away a substantial chunk of Sarajevo for their new Serb republic.
The latest fighting, which peaked in intensity on Monday, lessened on Tuesday, but shops and and offices stayed closed, and a general alert was in force. The few cars testing the streets dodged shell holes, overturned garbage containers and streetcar wires coiling across the pavement.
Small groups of people gathered in the doorways of buildings, peering anxiously outside. Some tried to sweep up mounds of broken glass and fragmented bricks from sidewalks and streets in front of their houses.
In the market square, there were no takers vendor for Faruk Gerin's wares - a few onions and five rolls of toilet paper. An artillery blast rang out, sending the few potential customers scurrying for shelter.
"I figured many people would take advantage of this morning lull to buy something, but I may have been wrong," Gerin said. Then he, too, took cover.
Wisps of gray smoke floated lazily from the burned-out hulk of a 20-floor office tower near the Marshal Tito barracks. The former army base itself was a charred ruin, targeted by Serb gunners angry that withdrawing Yugoslav soldiers had left behind their heavy weapons to the Muslims.
Across the street, gaping black holes filled with twisted reinforcement wire mark the spots where cannon shells had slammed into an apartment block and a railway station.
In Sarajevo's main Kosevo hospital, doctors and nurses worked on the latest casualty - a Bosnian soldier with a gaping leg wound. Surgeon Faris Gavrankapetanovic, the doctor who was temporarily deafened by a mortar blast, had been working without a break for more than 50 hours.
He said he, along with seven other doctors and four anesthesiologists, had treated 332 casualties, most of them government soldiers, since Monday morning.
During Monday's fighting, five shells smashed into the hospital grounds, one only yards from the ward where the doctors were working.
The doctors said most of the wounds they treated were caused by rifle and machine-gun fire, indicating relatively close combat. Bursts of small-arms fire could be heard, indicating fighting within the city limits.
The fighting frequently knocked out the hospital's electrical power, and half of the staff could not come to work because of the bombardment.
Patients had to be moved from upper floor rooms to the basement each time the big guns started up.
Since the fighting began, the city has been under near-complete Serb blockade. Hospital workers said the food and medical supplies were running low. But most of the patients were not complaining.
"I am just thankful I am alive," said Dzemal Solakovic, a fighter hit in the shoulder by Serb sniper bullet during Monday's combat. "Who cares whether the floors of the hospital are as clean as they should be?"
Not all were lucky as Solakovic.
A dozen bloodied bodies were bundled on stretchers and laid out on the ground outside the morgue. The corpses were to be loaded into a van that would take them to a makeshift burial ground in a downtown park.
Thirteen were buried in a traditional Muslim ceremony Tuesday afternoon. The body of a blond young man lay with a slowly coagulating trickle of blood still flowing from his temple.
Another corpse had the name Nijaz scrawled on the left leg. A soldier crouching nearby pointed to the body and explained what had happened - a Serbian shell had exploded.
"We could find no injury mark on him, but he died instantly," he said. "He was my buddy."

 

End of Document
