

Looking Back on 'The Longest Day,' As It Unfolded
The Associated Press
April 18, 1994, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 2457 words
Byline: By The Associated Press Excerpts from stories by The Associated Press about the D-day invasion:
Dateline: SUPREME HEADQUARTERS, ALLIED EXPEDITIONARY FORCE,
Body




American, British and Canadian troops landed in northern France this morning, launching the greatest overseas military operation in history with word from their supreme commander, General Dwight D. Eisenhower, that "we will accept nothing except full victory" over the German masters of the Continent.
Text of the communique:
"Under the command of General Eisenhower Allied naval forces, supported by strong air forces, began landing Allied armies this morning on the northern coast of France."
The Germans said the landings extended between Le Havre and Cherbourg along the south side of the Bay of the Seine and along the northern Normandy coast.
Parachute troops descended in Normandy, Berlin said.
Berlin announced the landings in a series of flashes that began about 6:30 a.m. (2:30 a.m. Eastern War Time).
The Allied communique was read over a trans-Atlantic hookup direct from General Eisenhower's headquarters at 3:32 EWT, designated "Communique No. 1."
A second announcement by S.H.A.E.F. said that "it is announced that General Sir Bernard L. Montgomery is in command of the army group carrying out the assault. This army group includes British, Canadian and United States forces."
The Allied bulletin did not say exactly where the invasion was taking place, but Berlin earlier gave these details:
Allied naval forces, including heavy warships, are shelling Le Havre. "It is a terrific bombardment," Berlin said.
Other Allied units were streaming ashore into Normandy from landing barges.
General Eisenhower, in his first order of the day, as monitored by NBC in New York, read as follows:
"You are about to embark on a great crusade.
"The eyes of the world are upon you and the hopes and prayers of all liberty loving peoples go with you.
"You go with superior arms, security from the air, and incontestable right on your side.
"The enemy will fight hard and well. He will fight savagely in this year of 1944. You have air superiority, fine weapons.
Then followed a promise of victory and the order, read to all the troops by their commanding officers as they embarked, concluded as follows:
"We will be victorious. Good luck, and may the blessings of God go with you."
---
An Eyewitness View of History
 
 By ROGER GREENE
Associated Press War Correspondent
ON A BEACHHEAD IN FRANCE, June 6, 1944 (AP) - Hitler's Atlantic wall cracked in the first hour under tempestuous Allied assault.
As I write, deeply dug into a beachhead of Northwestern France, German prisoners, mostly wounded, are streaming back. But the Boche still is putting up a terrific fight.
Shells are exploding all over the beach and out at sea as wave after wave of Allied ships, as far as I can see, move into shore.
My escorting officer, Sir Charles Birkin, was slightly wounded three times in the first 15 minutes ashore and three men were killed within five feet of me.
Our heavy stuff is now rolling ashore and we not only have a solid grip on the beachhead but are thrusting deep inland.
The beach is jammed with troops and bulldozers for many miles, and now it has been quiet for 15 minutes, which apparently means the German big guns are knocked out.
Our casualties on this sector have been comparatively light.
I landed at 8:45 a.m. wading ashore waist deep in water under fire to find quite a few wounded and some killed on the beach - and Nazi prisoners, very stiff and sour-looking already coming back.
Before embarking we were told there would be 10,000 Allied planes attacking today and there is every sign our air mastery is complete. So far not a single German plane has been seen.
The night-long channel crossing also was quiet until the last mile.
German prisoners said Hitler visited this beach two days ago and they admitted that they were taken by surprise.
Only a few hundred Nazis manned the beach defenses on this sector. They laid down a terrific machine-gun fire, but were quickly overwhelmed.
As far as I have seen there is no sign of Hitler's vaunted Atlantic Wall with its massive concrete fortifications. German artillery deeper inland is very formidable, but the beach defences are piddling, rifle-slits and strands of barbed wire.
---
Crumbling Old Orchard Wall Called 'Thickest Barrier'
 
 By ROGER GREENE
Associated Press War Correspondent
WITH THE ALLIES IN FRANCE, JUNE 6, 1944 (AP) - As far as we could see after advancing five miles inland, Hitler's vaunted "Atlantic Wall" is a myth. The thickest barrier I have seen is a crumbling old brick wall, two feet thick, along an apple orchard where I am sitting deep in the grass writing this story.
The crackle of rifle fire some 500 yards away is intense, and every few minutes we throw ourselves flat and try to squeeze our whole bodies under our battle helmets as German shells burst in the orchard nearby.
Aside from scattered pillboxes, barbed wire and silt trenches, the German static defenses so far have been practically nil, and in this sector at least we have seen nothing of the great concrete fortifications 12 feet thick which the Germans had boasted they had erected along this coast.
Their mobile artillery appears their most formidable defense, and while their planes are fairly much in evidence they are only specks in the sky compared with the great clouds of Allied bombers and fighters which sweep over our heads in endless waves.
German death's head signs warning of "Minen" (mines) are frequent along the roads, but there is no evidence of the "millions" of mines which the Germans said they planted.
We walk along with extreme care, however, along the center of the road, or along truck tracks where the way has been cleared.
This has been a tremendous day. I crossed the channel in a small, heavily rolling LCI (landing craft infantry) with 100 men. It was a rough crossing, but without attack by German U-boats, E-boats or planes.
Not until we were about a half a mile from shore did the German shells begin dropping around us. Then they came thick and fast. They were bursting like mushrooms in the water all around us, black and ugly, as we slithered down the gangplank under packs that weighed more than 60 pounds and started a 50-yard wade ashore in water up to our waists.
I fell on the slippery gangplank as it swayed, and went under the water, dousing my wrist watch, but the fall may have saved my life. When I scrambled to my feet seconds later I saw a receding spout of water left by a shellburst less than ten yards away.
Although I believe I was the first correspondent ashore, I had to wait more than five hours before I could send my first story back by boat.
The press field radio which was scheduled to arrive early on D-day still hasn't shown up.
The first Frenchman I met after landing said the Allied naval and air assault preceding the landings shook the whole countryside like an earthquake.
"Alas," he said, "we had wine saved to greet the Allies, but now it is gone. Pouf - bombs and wine do not mix. Veree sad."
This little flotilla of 50-odd 50-ton ships, weary and knocked about after 40 hours of fighting in the big waters of the channel, is heading temporarily to port this morning and aboard this boat the men are cheered by one thing - that we have seen an Allied beachhead go in and stay in.
When we left the French coast last night at 9 p.m. that beachheadwas slowly building up, American troops were landing in long columns without interruption and Allied warships, after hours of shelling German defenses, still were at it unceasingly.
In our area the enemy up to that time had offered no resistance of any consequence on the sea or aloft, but was pouring in heavy fire from his batteries behind the beach ridges which our troops were storming.
He was being hampered by overwhelming Allied sea and air concentrations - including battleships and cruisers - and there was every indication that this initial beachhead was going to be a success.
Our success in the landing operations was achieved yesterday in spite of high and rough seas which made it difficult to lead and dispatch smaller craft from the transports. Some of these smaller craft had to go out only partly loaded.
Watching from this cutter just off the beach itself we saw a number of mine explosions in the early phase of the attack, but the area was soon cleared of these explosives by powerful fleet action.
Just to the right of our main landing strip Nazis soon took over refuge in a little French village that looked like a postcard painting of any pastoral scene and was dominated by a rural church.
Hot enemy fire was coming from the village until one of our battleships lying several hundred yards off turned a broadside and, with five successive rounds, sent steel marching up the slope until that enemy refuge lay in ruins.
Aside from this the fleet's part of the operations was almost one of reaching far in behind the fighting line to smash German batteries. We could see dust and smashed rock particles rising like a sandstorm. Whole areas were ground fine. Of all the Allied craft we saw in action over a period of many hours not one was observed to have been hit.
Here was the pattern of assault as it was prepared, launched and developed as seen by those of us aboard the Coast Guard cutter commanded by Ensign Edwin E. Smith of New York City, a part of the flotilla commodored by Lt. Cmdr. Alexander Stewart of Mamaroneck, N.Y., a former advertising man.
We had been "sealed" aboard the cutter until Monday, June 5, and got our first indication that we were going across as Allied planes of all types flew slowly over our little splinter fleet to show us their new, distinctive markings.
Our flotilla sailed that day unnoticed. Dock workers were not even looking as we went out in a long beautiful line. The first thing we saw was an arc of transports around the horizon of the sea and then row upon row of transports slipping forward gray and silent and indefinitely menacing the haze.
Then we joined the landing craft themselves, each crowded with soldiers sitting still, like brown little dots under the open sky. Just a few minutes later our own planes began to wheel overhead in great strength.
Soon small fires were burning on the sterns of some of the transports - men were burning confidential papers.
At 9:08 - this is still Monday night - we heard the first sounds of firing. It was far off to our starboard where earlier we had seen motor torpedo boats dashing across the channel.
At 3:20 a.m. Tuesday we got between the vast line of Allied battleships and cruisers just as moonlight broke momentarily through the overcast.
At 3:40 a.m. hundreds and hundreds of flares went up above or along the enemy coast. We didn't know whether we had thrown them into the skies or whether the Nazis had set them off in the expectation of an immediate attack.
Then in the faint light just after dawn we saw our troops going quietly off the transports onto assault landing craft. Shortly great fires began to spread along the beach - we thought from Allied bombing action.
By 5:45 our shelling from the sea was well under way and landing craft were heading out in thick droves from the transports. The fleet's guns were making a dull roar exactly like distant thunderclaps and the exploding shells looked like falling stars along the shores.
At 6:08 firing was coming from the enemy shore. We saw smoke rise from a transport, but she ploughed on, a destroyer by her side.
At 7:00 close alongside a transport we heard an officer calmly calling out over the ship's loudspeaker telling the landing craft when to come up for men and where. "Come up to the port side in five minutes," we heard him say.
At 11:15 we turned from our central position in the area of action and headed fast for the assault area where our troops were going in and somebody in the crew observed with a slight laugh, "Always, all my life, I want to come to France. Ain't this a hell of a day for it, though?"
We saw big sections of the beach covered by smoke, some white and some dusty rust color, as we drove fast toward it. As we went in we passed through a lane of Allied cruisers and battleships. From more than one of these big fellows the French tri-color was blowing out stiff in the breeze - French ships coming home to France.
By 12:15 we were within a few hundred yards of the beach and the air was full of rushing, booming sound from the shells our big warships were laying beyond our beach assault forces.
Just ahead of us on the beach tracer fire was showing red against patches of green on the hillside. Our troops in a single file and slightly stooped under their burdens were plodding along with a terrible patience and strange unreal lack of any visible excitement. Now and again enemy shells fell among the little group: it dissolved, slightly shrunk; formed again and went on.
---
Battle Debris Jams French Beach
 
 By LEW HAWKINS
Associated Press Writer
ON A NORMANDY BEACH, JUNE 8, 1944 (AP) - This is a picture of a Normandy beach:
The water is a welter of wreckage.
There are derelicts from shore to many hundreds of yards off. If you land at high tide, there's considerable congestion, accentuated by the fact that only a narrow strip of beach from twenty to fifty feet wide lies between high water mark and the grass marking the beach's end.
Along this sharply rising aisle of stones is stacked all of the vast store of invasion paraphernalia which managed to escape enemy fire during the landings.
Footroom is decreased further by the extensive foxholes which must be dug in the sandy grassy strip on the beach on the side of a little rise which saved thousands of lives.
Yesterday there were long litters bearing those who did not escape the fire but busy soldiers stepped carefully around the bodies while the wounded awaited treatment.
Bad weather probably was the chief cause of Allied losses in breaking into the beaches. It is probable that, if the weather had permitted more exact intelligence data on strong points recently installed along this stretch, the preliminary bombardment by both planes and naval guns could have been made more effective. But certainly without the intelligence we did have and its application by the Navy and Air Force, losses to enemy fire power would have been multiplied.
Much of the Germans' Atlantic Wall defenses which I have seen were evidently eleventh-hour preparations made months after the Nazis started boasting about their impregnability. …
Leaving the beach this morning took one into a shallow valley, then up a steep hill to reach a plateau of gently rolling land.
Atop the bluff one gets a dramatic reminder of one of the last war's famous poems when one sees wild poppies glowing bright red across peaceful looking meadows. This isn't Flanders but one is much too close to those silent fellows down on the beach stones to let such a technicality invalidate a few seconds of prayerful wonder.
 Load-Date: April 18, 1994

 

End of Document
