

Making Money In the Land of the Ruble
The Associated Press
February 20, 1992, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 535 words
Byline: By CLINTON O'BRIEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Bob and Virginia Clough have taken a novel approach to coping with the bewildering regulations and essentially worthless currency that bedevil foreign businessmen in Russia.
They don't even try to make a profit, at least not in hard currency.
The goal in their computer software joint venture is to take dollar losses for the time being and plow rubles back into their business in hopes of establishing an edge on far-wealthier competitors.
"Our company has never shipped hard currency West," said Bob Clough, the 31-year-old business development director for the venture, which is 80 percent owned by the small U.S.-based software maker Nantucket Corp.
"We can use the rubles here much more effectively in further investment in our operations," said Clough, whose venture is competing against giants such as Lotus and Microsoft.
For all the fascination that Russians have for Western goods and technology, the country's backwards and hermetic business regulations have prevented many entrepreneurs from exploiting the huge, new market.
At the heart of the matter is the ruble.
It is not freely convertible to other currencies, so it is basically worthless in other countries and it is exchangeable for foreign currency in Russia only at artificial, government-set rates.
To make matters worse, there are two such rates. The "commercial" rate used for international business transactions pegs the ruble's worth at $ 1.80, while the "tourist" rate says the ruble is worth about 1 cent.
And there are questions of how much the ruble is worth even within Russia. The long-standing practice of printing money indiscriminately has undermined its value and spurred inflation in a classic wage-price spiral.
Prime Minister Yegor Gaidar said Wednesday that the government has begun intervening to reduce the money supply, hoping to curb inflation. That would be a necessary preliminary to making the ruble freely convertible.
The Cloughs, longtime Russophiles, are savvy about ways of skirting the ruble economy.
Sometimes the Cloughs barter for things they need, using hard-to-get items such as Ukraine-made sofas or even bigger items.
In one case, they traded several Russian "Zhiguli" automobiles to pay for the printing of thousands of 6-volume, 1,200-page software manuals.
Russia recently asked the West for a stabilization fund of about $ 6 billion - a reserve which the Russian Central Bank could draw from if needed to prevent wild swings in the ruble's exchange rate once it is traded freely.
The International Monetary Fund could make a decision on providing such a fund by April. But Russia must set a timetable for limited convertibility before it can be accepted into the IMF and become eligible for its large loans.
Even if the ruble becomes convertible, other barriers remain to doing business in Russia.
Bob Strauss, the U.S. ambassador to Russia, said Wednesday that confusing tax laws, poor communications and bungling government ministers frustrate many Americans who want to enter the Russian market.
"I think when they get over here, they come expecting an almost impossible situation in which to do business," Strauss told The Associated Press. "They find it is even worse than they expected - it is really tough."

 

End of Document
