

Marriage on the Rocks in France, Magazine Riding the Trend
The Associated Press
March 22, 1994, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 556 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER BURNS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




Starry-eyed honeymooners from around the world may flock here for romance, but France is losing its own taste for marriage. Now unhappy spouses have a new magazine to show them how to untie the knot with sang-froid.
"Sexuality: Are You Ready For Adventure?," "Alimony: Act Against Deadbeats," and "A Free Partnership - Marriage or Not?" are some of the articles inside the slick covers of Divorce, along with pictures of attractive models.
"Divorce isn't a bad thing," said the magazine's director, Jean-Michel Pascali. "It's the failure of love translated into a solution."
New statistics show one in three married couples in France is opting for divorce, up from one in 10 in the 1980s. The new rate matches U.S. figures, which are among the world's highest.
And the French increasingly prefer to shack up than shuffle to the altar in the first place, much to the chagrin of the religious right.
The number of weddings last year fell to 254,000, 40 percent less than 20 years ago. Unmarried couples account for one-third of births.
Pascali's monthly, with a 10-member staff that includes a lawyer and a psychologist, is not all downbeat. It give tips on how to save failing marriages as well as handling legal battles, helping children through their parents' divorce and looking for another mate.
"People don't divorce to be alone," he said. "You divorce to separate yourself from difficulty and to get together with someone else. And you don't want to fall into the same mistakes."
Divorce, which ran its first issue in November, is the brainchild of a group of journalists that includes a woman who went through a painful split herself.
"She bought a women's magazine that had a story on it and found it lacking," Pascali said.
But the new magazine doesn't sit well with religious traditionalists.
Abbe Paul Olagnier, head of the Priestly Fraternity of Saint Pie X, blamed the rising divorce rate on two centuries of secularism and laicism.
"The rupture and instability between couples is a new slavery. There remains only sadness," Olagnier said. "Catholic doctrine is necessary for social peace."
Divorce magazine's first few issues have sold 60,000 copies each, enough to keep the publication economically viable, Pascali said. About 65 percent of the buyers are women.
The director says people prefer the magazine to buying a book because they can relate to it better.
"A magazine is open, you can write to it," said Pascali, 40, whose parents are divorced. "It shows people they're not alone."
The magazine receives 3,000 letters a month, many answered in subsequent issues.
With 40-odd pages for $ 3, Divorce has virtually no advertising. Family-oriented advertisers like automaker Renault "wouldn't run them for people who are divorced," Pascali said. "And we don't want any phone sex ads."
Magazines in best financial health these days don't depend on ad revenue, which fell 14 percent last year alone after double-digit increases in the 1980s, said Pascale Marie, head of the national magazine publishers' association.
But she added: "The press cemetery is filled with magazines that were great for two or three issues. I bet you that happens to this one."
Divorce isn't looking for subscriptions, any more than ads.
"We hope our readers don't have to subscribe," Pascali said. "We hope after eight or nine months that they will have worked it out."
 Load-Date: March 22, 1994

 

End of Document
