

Money Handlers Follow the Moods in the United States and Russia
The Associated Press
July 8, 1995, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 876 words
Byline: By EVAN RAMSTAD, AP Business Writer
Body




Central banks in Washington and Moscow made some long-awaited moves this past week. And the Dallas skyscraper where oilman Boone Pickens works has become a stormy place.
 
 Fed Cuts Rate to Stave Off Decline, Then Learns Things are Cool
Did they act too soon? Or after everyone else?
The Federal Reserve cut its key bank lending rate by one-quarter point Thursday, the first reduction in three years, hoping to hold off an economic decline portrayed by many observers as dramatic.
But then Friday, the Labor Department reported the nation's unemployment rate actually got better last month. Had they known, the Fed's policymakers might not have cut the rate.
Wall Street and Washington were glad they did. Stocks jumped, with the Dow Jones industrials average finishing the week at a record high just above 4,700. Bond prices also rose.
Several big banks cut their prime lending rates in response to the Fed's move. But the cost of many types of borrowing had already gone down in recent weeks, causing economists to debate whether the Fed was leading the way or following the pack.
The unemployment report, while generally stronger, showed jobs continued to be lost in the key manufacturing sector.
And so now investors' attention shifts to the possible outcomes from the Fed's next meeting on interest rates in late August.
The guessing has already started.
 
 A Regular Ruble
Russia's political leadership, starting to worry about elections in December, moved to ease voters' minds about inflation. The government set the first official trading band for the ruble since it was allowed to float on the market three years ago.
The goal is to add predictability to turbulent financial markets.
But Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin acknowledged, "Financial stability inevitably will have a restraining effect on the political passions of the election campaign."
The new government trading band allows the Russian central bank to intervene in currency markets to keep the ruble in a 15 percent range - between 4,300 and 4,900 to the dollar - until Oct. 1.
But some experts doubt the central bank can do the job without depleting its estimated $ 10 billion in hard currency reserves.
The Russian currency has regained 11 percent of its value since hitting a low of 5,130 in early May during a long slide after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
 
 Target Boone
Boone Pickens, who became famous in the 1980s for making hostile takeover bids, has spent the 1990s trying to finesse the most out of Mesa Inc., the big natural gas producer he leads. From his Dallas office adorned with Western art, Pickens has tried to squeeze a profit from the ultra-low priced gas market through futures hedging and promotion of natural gas consumption.
But two major shareholders think Pickens' time is up and are trying to oust him from Mesa, which is saddled with a $ 1.2 billion debt. Pickens wants another 18 months to straighten things out. So he turned to a "poison pill" defense, something he sharply criticized when he attempted takeovers of Unocal Corp. and Phillips Inc.
"I made a mistake on the gas market and when you make mistakes you pay a price, so that's where I am," he said.
 
 Winners, Losers and Somewhere in Between
Winners: Chrysler Corp. sold more cars and trucks in June than in any other month in its history, lifting the auto industry's U.S. sales to a level about even with last year's … Packard Bell Electronics Inc. got a $ 170 million investment from NEC Corp. to help sustain its growth.
Losers: Former Chrysler Chairman Lee Iacocca was blocked by company director from using his options to buy Chrysler stock. The board cited his involvement in Kirk Kerkorian's attempt to take more control of the automaker … Holders of Orange County municipal bonds may take a hit - the rich but troubled California county is headed toward default on $ 800 million of the securities … Smith Corona Corp., one of the last American typewriter makers, filed for bankruptcy protection.
Somewhere in Between: Symantec Corp. will buy Delrina Corp. in a $ 415 million stock swap. The two companies make great PC software but their positions are threatened by features in Microsoft Corp.'s new Windows 95.
 
 Ticker
A retired Florida appellate judge, Daniel S. Pearson, was named to investigate the finances of Commerce Secretary Ron Brown … The government is getting ready to sell U.S. Enrichment Corp., a state-run corporation in charge of handling uranium taken from Russian missiles … The Clinton administration took the first steps toward a trade battle with Japan over film and photographic paper … The president of Apple Computer Inc.'s Japanese subsidiary, Frank Seiji Sanda, resigned after a year on the job … The first half of the year set a record for merger activity on Wall Street, with more than 30 deals worth more than $ 1 billion accounting for nearly half the business … Benetton may fight a German ban on advertising featuring AIDS and other provocative themes.
 
 Coming Up
Monday: Federal Reserve issues consumer credit figures for May.
Thursday: Labor Department releases weekly jobless claims, June producer price index.
Friday: Labor Department releases June consumer price index; Commerce Department releases June retail sales; Federal Reserve releases June industrial production.
 Load-Date: July 8, 1995

 

End of Document
