

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
June 26, 1992, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 1240 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: MILAN, Italy
Body




Italian pop singer Loredana Berte has filed an alimony suit against her estranged husband, former tennis star Bjorn Borg, lawyer Enzo Marazzi said.
Marazzi said Thursday that the singer is seeking $ 30,000 a month, including compensation for damages allegedly caused by Borg to her career and for violation of the marital obligations.
Marazzi also said that Swedish judges are incompetent to decide on the divorce of the couple as the marriage was celebrated in Milan three years ago and is up to a Milan court to rule the case.
According to the Italian lawyer and to published reports Borg, who usually lives in Monte Carlo, filed a divorce suit with a Swedish court earlier this month.
The five-time Wimbledon champion and the popular Italian singer married in September 1989.
---
HOUSTON (AP) - Houston quarterback Warren Moon is interested in becoming a part-owner of an NFL club when his playing days are over.
"I don't have the patience to coach," Moon said in an interview with the Houston Chronicle. "That takes too much time away from my family. And I've taken too much time away from them as it is."
Moon was the Oilers' player representative before the union dissolved itself almost two years ago. He said the experience would help him as an owner.
"I've learned enough about the insides and outsides of this game, being involved from the union standpoint, and also from being very involved with the league, to know how to run a franchise," he said.
Moon, who will be 36 in November, is in a contract dispute with the Oilers management and is considering a possible holdout when the team reports to training camp in San Antonio next month.
---
HACKENSACK, N.J. (AP) - Living for the weekend takes on a new meaning this weekend at L.T.'s Restaurant and Sports Bar.
On Thursday, state Superior Court Judge Peter Boggia gave the landlords permission to evict the beleaguered bar from its East Rutherford, N.J., premises.
The bar, which is partly owned by New York Giants linebacker Lawrence Taylor has fallen behind $ 74,000 in rent to the building owner, 17 Plank Inc.
Greg Haworth, attorney for the landlord, said 17 Plank would not apply for a warrant for eviction until Monday at the earliest.
The bar has debts of more than $ 200,000. Meanwhile, stockholders swap accusations of mismanagement and misappropriation of funds.
The two groups of warring owners are to appear in a hearing July 9 before Superior Court Judge Kevin M. O'Halloran.
---
CANTON, Ohio (AP) - The 1992 inductees into the Pro Football Hall of Fame have chosen presenters for the Aug. 1 ceremony.
The presenters will make remarks leading to each presentation at the steps of the football shrine.
John Riggins selected NFL commissioner Paul Tagliabue. He was a season-ticket holder as a fan of the Washington Redskins when Riggins, a bruising fullback, helped the team to Super Bowl honors. They met for the first time at the 1992 Pro Bowl.
Lem Barney, the Detroit Lions cornerback from 1967 to 1977, selected Jim David, a former Lions defensive player and defensive coach.
Al Davis, head of the Los Angeles Riders organization, chose John Madden, a television analyst and former Raiders coach.
John Mackey, former Baltimore Colts tight end, chose U.S. Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Jack Kemp, a successful quarterback in the American Football League.
---
ATLANTA (AP) - Mike Storen, one of basketball's colorful czars, will step down as commissioner of the Global Basketball Association when his contract expires next Tuesday.
The GBA, based in Atlanta, is expected to name Storen's replacement when the league's board of governors meets in Atlanta next Tuesday.
The league office said Storen plans to pursue other opportunities through his sports marketing and consulting firm, Celebrity Services Inc.
"I'm very proud of the creation and success of the GBA in its inaugural playing season, and I look forward to watching the league grow and build upon its very solid base," Storen said.
He helped found the league three years ago and has served as its only commissioner. Eleven teams began play last fall, using a white ball.
Storen also served as commissioner of the American Basketball Association, which used a red, white and blue ball, and of the Continental Basketball Association.
---
MAHWAH, N.J. (AP) - Guillermo Vilas, who holds four career grand slam titles, will play an exhibition match against five-time Wimbledon champion Bjorn Borg on July 20 at the Pathmark Tennis Classic.
Borg and Vilas last played 12 years ago at the Nation's Cup in Germany, where Vilas took the match 6-3, 1-6, 6-1. Borg, 36, won 10 of their 13 meetings.
Vilas, 39, was ranked No. 2 in both 1975 and 1977. He took the French and U.S. opens in 1977 and won the Australian Open in 1978 and 1979.
The match will benefit Arthur Ashe's Safe Passage Foundation, a non-profit organization to help inner-city children.
---
PORTLAND, Ore. (AP) - The Portland Trail Blazers have donated $ 8,500 to a neighborhood association for construction of an outdoor basketball court in a low-income area.
The Brentwood-Darlington Neighborhood Association has been trying to build the court since 1986.
NBA commissioner David Stern, who spearheaded a similar program for an outdoor basketball court in New York's Central Park last summer, was on hand Thursday for the Portland court's ground-breaking ceremony.
"The Trail Blazers and NBA recognize the need for programs that give youth a positive recreational outlet," said Marshall Glickman, Trail Blazers senior vice president of marketing.
"Hopefully, Harney Park will help enhance the quality of life for the residents of Brentwood-Darlington and provide an alternative to drugs, gangs and other criminal activity for area youth."
---
CLEVELAND (AP) - Retired Cleveland pitcher Mel Harder threw out a ceremonial "first pitch" at the site of the Gateway baseball stadium that will become the Cleveland Indians' home in 1994.
Harder, whose uniform number of 18 was retired by the team in 1990, tossed the ball Thursday from a mound arranged at the downtown site. Sandy Alomar of the Indians was on hand to catch the first pitch.
Harder played for the Indians for 20 years, longer than anyone in franchise history. His career record was 223-186 with a 3.80 earned run average. He holds team records for innings pitched, shutouts, wins, strikeouts and games pitched.
Indians pitcher Charles Nagy also threw a ceremonial "first pitch" as part of a news conference to announce concession plans at the sports complex, which also will include an arena for the NBA's Cleveland Cavaliers.
---
OTTAWA (AP) - Former NFL star Dexter Manleu made his debut for the CFL's Ottawa Rough Riders in a 43-36 exhibition victory over the British Columbia Lions.
Manley, banned for life from the NFL for drug abuse, was penalized for being offside on his opening down. British Columbia's Steve Rodehutskors lined up opposite Manley and had the better of the exchange for much of the evening.
Ottawa's Terrence Jones threw a 56-yard touchdown pass to Treamelle Taylor with 1:21 remaining in Thursday night's game.
---
SASKATOON, Saskatchewan (AP) - Toronto Maple Leafs goaltender Grant Fuhr shot a 1-over-par 72 in the first round of the Canadian PGA Tour's Willows Classic on Thursday.
Fuhr, who failed to qualify for a tour card last month, entered the tournament on a sponsor's exemption. He was nine strokes behind leader Dave Pashko, who opened with an 8-under 63 on the 6,839-yard Willows course.

 

End of Document
