

NATO May be One of the Victims of the Bosnian War
The Associated Press
November 24, 1994, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 648 words
Byline: By DONALD M. ROTHBERG, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




NATO is among the severely wounded in the savage war in Bosnia. After years of preparing for Armageddon, NATO's first involvement in a shooting war is straining the alliance.
Air strikes have done nothing to slow a Serbian offensive in northern Bosnia and are looking more like a show of weakness than of strength.
"The whole experience in Bosnia has been just dreadful," said Eliot Cohen, a professor of military history who headed the Pentagon study of the air war in the Persian Gulf. "The organization really looks like a laughing stock and the Serbs are clearly not afraid of it."
Throughout the Cold War, the 16-nation alliance was a formidable military bulwark against the threat of a Soviet attack on Europe. But that threat never materialized and the Soviet Union dissolved without a shot being fired against the West.
NATO's mission changed. It became the potential enforcer of U.N. resolutions. NATO took on the role of enforcing the U.N.-imposed no-fly zone in Bosnia and later threatened the Bosnian Serbs with air strikes if they didn't lift their siege of Sarajevo and halt attacks on U.N. peace keeping troops.
But acting as a U.N. enforcer also involved accepting U.N.-imposed limits and now the United Nations gets much of the blame for NATO's inability to use its vast military potential effectively in Bosnia.
In addition, deciding what NATO could or could not do, depended on getting the approval of all 16 members of the alliance. Britain, which has troops in Bosnia as part of the U.N. peacekeeping force, has opposed a military escalation that would endanger those forces.
The differences between the United States and its allies are no secret. Speaking only on grounds of anonymity, a senior administration official involved in the issue, said, "Without more pressure on the Serbs than we have mustered to date there isn't a chance in hell we're going to get a political settlement."
Incoming Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole, R-Kan., is heading for NATO headquarters in Brussels on Monday and said he would "tell them I don't see any reason for their existence if they have to take orders from the United Nations."
As president of the Atlantic Council, David C. Acheson is a strong supporter of NATO, but he describes himself as "terribly frustrated" by what he calls the convoluted chain of command.
"My personal view is that NATO might be better off to pull out" of Bosnia and say it will return only if given a freer hand to use its military power.
"I ask myself, what are we waiting for?" said Acheson. "What will it take to generate a NATO retaliation against planes or troops? I honestly don't know."
Frustration over NATO's role intensified after the raid on the Udbina air base in a Serb held area of Croatia. The United Nations authorized the raid by NATO war planes, but insisted that every effort be made to limit casualties.
The result was a bombing run that left holes in the runways but avoided damage to the planes parked nearby.
Cohen said damaging the runways had no military value.
"If they have well-trained crews, they can fix that in a day," he said. Calling it a "signal of weakness," Cohen said that "it's an insane way to use military force and it's dangerous because ultimately it really is the kind of thing that's going to get people killed."
Clinton administration officials are known to have been disturbed when they learned that the raid on Udbina resulted in nothing more than disrupting the runways.
The goal of the U.S. effort to gain a stronger response in Bosnia is to keep the conflict to that former Yugoslav republic. Now, policy makers fear that if Bihac falls the conflict will spread because Croatia might decide to try to dislodge Serbs from territory they hold in that country out of fear that the Bosnian Serbs join forces with their Croatian brethren.
 
 ---
 
 EDITORS NOTE: Donald M. Rothberg covers foreign affairs for The Associated Press.
 Load-Date: November 24, 1994

 

End of Document
