

New National Library Separates The Studious From the Curious
The Associated Press
October 21, 1992, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 458 words
Byline: By MARILYN AUGUST, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




France's new national library, slated to open in 1996 with 11 million volumes, will accommodate the general public and scholars on separate floors, but all will be able to browse through a vast expanse of shelves.
"The new library of France will be open to all, to the studious as well as the curious," Culture Minister Jack Lang told reporters Wednesday as he unveiled a model of the controversial $ 1.4 billion facility.
"Besides scholars and researchers, the library will be wide open to teachers anxious to improve their courses, students, journalists or simply curious individuals looking for the most up-to-date information on a given subject," he said.
In a country where open-stack libraries are rare, the good news is that visitors will have free access to nearly 1 million volumes arranged on shelves in comfortable, carpeted reading roms.
Researchers and scholars will be accommodated in ground-level reading rooms lined with 550,000 volumes that can be picked from the shelves.
One floor up, overlooking a garden as big as the Palais Royal, the general public also will have easy access to some 400,000 volumes arranged in similar fashion.
The library's reserve stacks, including priceless manuscripts, historical documents and rare books, will be made available to accredited scholars upon request.
Thanks to modern technology, researchers will no longer have to wait up to two hours to get their books, as they do in the old national library. A system currently in use at the new Finance Ministry headquarters can deliver books in 20 minutes.
The library will reserve 1,550 spots for the general public and 1,850 for researchers - three times the number currently allotted at the cramped and antiquated Bibliotheque Nationale in central Paris.
Lang said President Francois Mitterrand's last major architectural grand project will be completed in 1995 and open to the public in early 1996.
The new library has been under fire since its inception.
Library experts assailed the design as costly and impractical - it called for four 250-foot towers that made the building resemble an upside down table.
French architect Dominque Perrault went back to the drawing boards. He lopped off two stories - there are now 22 - and eliminated plans for conference rooms and a 700-seat auditorium.
He also rearranged the stacks, putting as many volumes as possible in the base of the building.
Lang said the new library's computerized card catalogue would link it to all university and municipal libraries in France.
"The national library will function as a last resort," said Eric Gros, head of communications. "The collective catalogue will allow the teacher in the provinces to locate the document he's looking for. It may turn out to be in the library next door."

 

End of Document
