

Old People Wait for the End - of the War, or Their Lives
The Associated Press
February 20, 1995, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 665 words
Byline: By SAMIR KRILIC, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SARAJEVO, Bosnia-Herzegovina
Body




Crammed onto one floor of a former school, dozens of elderly Bosnians silently await the end of the war, or their lives, whichever comes first.
The makeshift old people's home was set up in August 1993 in a shell-shattered school building several hundred yards from the front line. It shelters 64 sick and old people with no one to turn to.
One doctor, five nurses, four orderlies and a social worker try to cope with the needs both of their live-in charges and 150 other elderly people, many living on their own.
Conditions are miserable. Many of the elderly are too sick or feeble to make it to the toilet, so they relieve themselves on the floor or in bed. Natural gas for heat is scarce, so rooms are often icy. For most, frugal meals of beans, lentils and rice are the only break in a day of staring at the walls.
The Red Cross contributes some canned food once a month. U.N. peacekeepers from France provide occasional favors - food, medicine, gasoline for the home's single car, and once old clothes donated by family members. Local charities have been able to help out with aid only three times since the home started.
"What they get is not nearly enough," said Nina Winquist, a Red Cross representative.
Dobrila Mulina, a 70-year-old retired history professor, spends her days in the smelly, narrow corridor.
Sitting in her wheelchair at a table packed with books, Mulina, affectionately known to her companions as "Seka" (Sister), reads daily in an effort to escape the harsh reality of her life.
"I live in my isolated little world of literature," she said, absently stroking her gray hair. "The apathy and the boredom of others around me makes me miserable and desperate."
Her resilience is all the more remarkable given her suffering - chronic diabetes forced doctors to recently amputate her right leg because increasingly poor circulation led to the threat of gangrene.
A daily shot of insulin each morning helps her relax and begin her day's reading.
She prefers the dark corridor to the room she shares with nine other women, most of them so sick they rarely leave their beds. Despite a broken window, stale air is heavy in the overcrowded room.
Without a single television or a radio for entertainment the day ends with the onset of dusk.
"I take a sleeping pill so as not to think about the past, the present, and the grim future," Mulina said. She clings to hope that once the war is over, her daughter and grandchildren, who live in Liverpool, England, will come to take her away from the misery.
If she lives that long. Old age or sickness have killed 41 people at the home during the 18 months she has been there.
"Death is at home here," she said. "We are never sure what will come first - our end or the end of the war."
Others too are gloomy, the misery of daily existence compounded by the suffering they were exposed to before landing here.
Aisa Smajlovic, 81, takes solace in religion. Her only son was killed at the beginning of the war in her hometown of Visegrad, 75 miles east of Sarajevo. She fled Bosnian Serbs soon afterward, leaving her house, cattle and life behind. She moved in after finding temporary shelter in a refugee camp.
Bent nearly double by age, she manages to walk five times a day downstairs for water for her ritual wash-up before prayers. Low water pressure means taps and toilet bowls on the second floor are dry.
Abid Jahic, 69, fled with his family from Rogatica, 35 miles east of Sarajevo, when Serbs captured it at the begining of the war in April 1992.
The Jahics left for Zepa, an eastern enclave held by the Muslim-dominated government. Jahic was seriously wounded by a shell and was evacuated by the United Nations to Zenica for medical treatment, while his wife and two daughters stayed behind.
Unable to return to the besieged enclave, Jahic came to Sarajevo where he was left to fend for himself.
"If the officials here in the home hadn't allowed me to stay I would have died," Jahic said. "All I want is to see my family one more time before I die."
 Load-Date: February 20, 1995

 

End of Document
