

On The Road To Tuzla: American Combat Troops Clear The Way
 The Associated Press
December 26, 1995, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 595 words
Byline: By JEFFREY ULBRICH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: VIDOVICE, Bosnia-Herzegovina
Body




In a cold, driving rain, U.S. troops and armored vehicles crossed a river from Croatia into Bosnia on Tuesday, beginning a southward push to secure a route for thousands of their comrades.
Most of the 20,000 American soldiers taking part in the NATO peace-enforcing mission will eventually have to cross the Sava River to get to U.S. headquarters around the Bosnian city of Tuzla.
To make the route safe, about 100 soldiers and 16 Bradley fighting vehicles and jeeps floated on a barge over the rising, muddy river - the first U.S. combat unit to cross the Sava.
Because most of the Sava's bridges have been destroyed in the war, an engineering unit struggled Tuesday to build a pontoon bridge. A platoon of six fighting vehicles drove on another 1 miles south and set up a U.S. checkpoint separating Serb and Bosnian Croat forces.
"Now that the checkpoint is in, we will begin to bring more forces across," said Capt. Thomas Dorame, commander of A Troop of the 1st Squadron of the 1st Armored Cavalry Regiment.
Dorame's troops continued south to rendezvous with Americans coming north from U.S. headquarters at Tuzla airbase.
U.S. forces traveling overland to Tuzla will have to pass through Posavina corridor, the only link between Serb holdings in western and eastern Bosnia and the site of ferocious fighting during the 3 -year war.
The northbound troops, 20 vehicles and 75 soldiers, secured a bombed-out building to be used for meetings among local Bosnian, Croat, Serb and NATO military leaders.
"This is the first step in establishing our presence in the corridor," Dorame said, referring to Tuesday's mission.
The troops met no resistance as they passed Croat and Serb checkpoints.
Lt. Col. Greg Stone of Seattle, Wash., said he met with Serb and Croat brigade commanders to explain the mission for securing the route to Tuzla. He quoted the Serb commander as saying: "The war is over, let's not let anybody else get hurt."
Bystanders - many under umbrellas - cheered and applauded as the Americans came down the road from the north. "We're coming across to help these folks and make peace work," said Stone.
A bearded Serb guard at a checkpoint looked less enthusiastic but was no less glad of the war's end.
"I don't care who is here, the Americans or somebody else," he said, a rifle slung over his back. "I'm just happy it's over."
So far about a thousand U.S. soldiers are in the Balkans. Most of the others will be deployed from Germany to Croatia, where they will cross the Sava River into Bosnia.
Of the armored fighting vehicles brought across on the barge, six will guard the U.S. checkpoint until relieved by another American or NATO unit. The other two Bradleys remained at the river's edge to provide security for engineers working on the bridge.
Engineers worked on the river's muddy southern bank to sink an anchor to hold one side of the pontoon bridge. A bulldozer worked the soil, and soldiers, chilled by the steady downpour, unloaded gear.
"You can see our biggest problem is the rising water," said Capt. Gene Snyman of Morris, Kan., overseeing the project. "We're having a tricky time trying to find where to put the cable in."
Still, NATO officials said a rising river would not delay construction of the bridge, expected to be working by Dec. 30.
Across the river in Croatia, a 70-vehicle U.S. Navy land convoy arrived Tuesday with materials for building the first of several tent cities for housing American troops in Tuzla.
"We got mud. We got rain. We got cold. We got rivers rising," said Lt. Cmdr. Bill Spann. "And we're still going to get the job done."
 Load-Date: December 26, 1995

 

End of Document
