

On the Other Side of the Wardrobe
The Associated Press
July 28, 1995, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 414 words
Byline: By SARAH NORDGREN, Associated Press Writer
Body




C.S. Lewis' imaginative fight between good and evil, "The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe," has been reissued by HarperTrophy (paperback, $ 7.95). The story, abridged and illustrated by Robin Lawrie, this time comes to readers in a near-comic book form.
Lucy, Edmund, Susan and Peter discover a magical world on the other side of a wardrobe in a great country house, where they have been sent to escape the air raids of World War II in London. The enchanted land of Narnia is a land of talking animals, dwarfs and fauns; a land held in the cold grip of the White Witch, where it is always winter - and never Christmas.
By abridging Lewis and packing each page full of illustrations and dialogue, some of the imaginative power of this story is lost. But as an introduction to the many fine works Lewis is responsible for, it works fine.
"A Book of Narnians: The Lion, the Witch and the Others" will be available from HarperCollins ($ 16.95) in September, compiled by James Riordan and illustrated by Pauline Baynes. The book is a collection of some of the wonderful creatures from the world of Narnia. Full-color paintings by Baynes depict many of the best-known animals. The accompanying text sets them in the context of their role in the story of Narnia.
Lewis wrote numerous books in his lifetime; however, the seven books of "The Chronicles of Narnia" were his only works for children.
 
 Three Orphan Kittens
Margaret Wise Brown wrote more than 100 children's books before dying at the age of 42 in 1952. "Goodnight Moon" and "The Runaway Bunny" are classic, beautifully written, read-me-to-sleep stories for young children.
If "Three Orphan Kittens" (Disney Press, $ 13.95) is a slightly lesser work than "Goodnight Moon," it still outranks most young children's literature in its charm.
The kittens are born on a farm where there is not enough room for three more pets. But when the young farm boy places them on a truck to take them to town, they bounce off the back in a burlap sack and find themselves in a snowdrift.
The three make their way inside a nearby house, where they make plenty of mischief until they fall asleep in a little girl's closet and live happily ever after.
Jesse Clay illustrates this version of "Three Orphan Kittens." His paintings do justice to Brown's fine tale.
"Three Orphan Kittens" is the fourth Disney Press book written by Brown, based on the classic Silly Symphony films. Other titles: "The Grasshopper and the Ants," "The Old Mill" and "The Ugly Duckling."
 Load-Date: July 28, 1995

 

End of Document
