

On the Billy the Kid Trail
The Associated Press
August 21, 1992, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 555 words
Dateline: FORT SUMNER, N.M.
Body




The Billy the Kid Museum is located here in the community where the 21-year-old outlaw was shot to death in 1881 by Lincoln County Sheriff Pat Garrett.
The Kid often used William H. Bonney as his formal name then. But there's evidence that he was born Henry McCarty - although he also sometimes used the alias Henry Antrim. It's all blurred in the mists of myth that leave only the nickname Billy the Kid indelibly imprinted in folklore.
"We have a rifle that belonged to Billy the Kid, and I've got the documentation on it," says owner Don Sweet, whose father founded the museum in 1953. "I've got the door that Billy backed through the night he was killed, and two curtains that came out of the room.
"I've got a rock that he carved his name on that came from north of town here and the chaps and spurs he wore to the dances, silver inlay, silver on iron, very nice decorative spurs. Billy went to the dances, and he could sing real well and was a very good dancer."
The museum's collection includes antique cars and wagons. There are also memorabilia from nearby Old Fort Sumner, the old military fort, among them brass kettles the soldiers cooked in, and items relating to Gen. Edwin Vose Sumner, the Civil War general for whom the fort was named in this eastern New Mexico town.
"We have General Sumner's army blanket, cash box and spurs," said Sweet. "And we have the letter from his daughter giving these items to my father."
Sweet is witness to the wide appeal of the outlaw legend. "Last year I counted up and we had visitors from every state and 40 foreign countries," he said. "The most were from Germany, after Canada, of course, among the foreign visitors."
The museum is open 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m, daily through September, then closed on Sundays. Admission is $ 2 for adults, $ 1 children 12 and up, younger than 12 free. The telephone number is 505-355-2380.
---
Old Fort Sumner Museum is beside the old military cemetery in the historic area of the old fort, about 7 miles south-east of present-day Fort Sumner. The cemetery contains Billy the Kid's gravesite.
"We have the Kid's favorite gun, a Colt Lightning, in our collection, along with other local historic items," said museum curator Joe Bowlin.
"The gravesite is a constant attraction even when the museum is closed - people come in off the highway and go into the cemetery and if it's dark they'll go searching around for it with their flashlights."
The museum, 3 miles off Highway 60-84, is open 8 a.m. to 6 p.m. daily year round. Admission is $ 2 for adults, $ 1 for children over 12. The telephone number is 505-355-2942.
Bowlin is also president of The Billy the Kid Outlaw Gang, which he describes as a society, based in nearby Taiban, dedicated to preserving and documenting the history of the outlaw and his times. He said the society, which he founded in 1987, now has a world-wide membersip of around 3,000. The telephone number is 505-355-9935.
Part of Old Fort Sumner has been restored and has been designated a New Mexico State Monument, Bowlin said.
 
A newly published book, "The Lincoln County War," by Frederick Nolan, depicts in detail the events surrounding the war, one of the most brutal episodes in American frontier history. It includes photos and letters of the protagonists.
The book is published by the University of Oklahoma Press, 607 pages, $ 49.95.

 

End of Document
