

One of the Scariest Jobs in the Army: Looking for Land Mines
 The Associated Press
December 20, 1995, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 484 words
Byline: By JEFFREY ULBRICH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TUZLA, Bosnia-Herzegovina
Body




U.S. Army Spc. Ray Shealy, supine in the slushy snow, probed gently with a short wooden stick, brushing away obstructions with a bare hand red and raw from the cold.
He's doing one of the scariest jobs in the Army - looking for land mines. And he loves it.
"Blowing stuff up and jumping out of airplanes: It's a great line of work," Shealy beamed Wednesday, wiping the muck from the front of his soaked camouflage fatigues during a break in his mine probing.
Bosnia is laced with mines. Millions of them. Estimates range from 3 million to 6 million, but no one knows for sure. What they do know is that they pose one of the greatest dangers to American troops in the NATO-led Bosnia peace force.
Shealy, from Columbia, S.C., is trying to detect a pattern to the locations of mines laid just outside the Tuzla air base. There is none.
"The Bosnians practice no known mine-laying patterns," said Sgt. Salvadore Stewart of Los Angeles as he watched Shealy slowly slither up a ditch. "It's like taking a handful of jacks and throwing them on the ground. There might be mines inches apart and no others for 30 feet."
Mines have always been big casualty producers in wartime, said Sgt. Robert Wyatt, who's been in this line of work for five years.
Wyatt, Shealy and Stewart are members of a combat engineer platoon attached to the 3rd Battalion 325th Infantry, the airborne unit providing security at the Tuzla base, headquarters for what will eventually be 20,000 American troops.
This team will be searching for mines the whole length of the air base perimeter where U.S. soldiers eventually will run regular patrols.
In open areas, the engineers use metal detectors. But close to the rolls of concertina wire or the fence, they probe by hand - a slow, dangerous process.
"I can do this a long time," said Shealy, taking a break from probing and crawling. "But when you get tired, you've got to call somebody else in so as not to make mistakes."
The ground is covered with snow, so the mine hunters can't see their quarry. They have to use their hands. For some, gloved hands are not sensitive enough. That's why Shealy's fingers are red and numb, deadened by dipping in icy water and slush.
Most of these guys didn't expect to become mine specialists when they became engineers.
"What attracted most of us was demolition," said Stewart. "I didn't know I was going to be working with mines."
Added Wyatt: "You've got to love it. A lot of people who do this line of work do get out, though, especially if they have had a couple of close calls."
For the moment, the engineers are only marking the mines.
"We don't have any plans to blow them until we get better control of the area," said Stewart.
American forces, part of the NATO peace contingent in Bosnia, took over the Tuzla base on Wednesday. U.N. soldiers began moving out, but those from NATO members Norway and Denmark will remain and become part of the NATO operation.
 Load-Date: December 20, 1995

 

End of Document
