

ONE LONG REWRITE JOB: The Legend of Robin Hood
The Associated Press
June 9, 1991, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1210 words
Byline: By HILLEL ITALIE, Associated Press Writer
Body




Long before the rise of Hollywood, Robin Hood was a box-office draw.
Travelers passing through Nottingham (in the English Midlands about two hours north of London) in the early 19th century could stop at "Robin Hood's Well" for a drink of water or sit in "Robin Hood's Chair" and don the cap worn by the great outlaw himself.
In nearby Sherwood, there was another well, two caves, a meadow, sundry hills, a Robin Hood stable and a Robin Hood farm. You could also visit Little John's grave, Friar Tuck's well and the church where Robin and Marian were joined in matrimony.
Robin Hood was a classic folk legend, a composite of fact and fiction, a weaving of true stories and popular ballads. Some say he lived in the 1100s, some say the 1300s and others say not at all.
His story has been evolving for hundreds of years. He's been called Robbin Hood, Robyn Hode, Robert Hode, Robert the Hood, Robyn Hod, Simon Hod and Robert de Kyme. He robbed from the rich, but didn't always give to the poor. He was a yeoman, a knight, a landowner turned rebel.
In Hollywood terms, this was one long rewrite job and the process has continued on film for the past seven decades, from Douglas Fairbanks to Errol Flynn to Kevin Costner, who stars in the latest version, "Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves."
"It's so similar to the King Arthur legend, delving into the gut of people who read and romanticize and idealize," said John Jolley, a professor of history at Bryant College in Smithfield, R.I.
"People really want to believe these types of things come true. It's the retribution of one person against the other, a deep resentment of aristocracy with all the corruption and abuse."
"Well, I think a lot of them existed" laughed Richard Barnes, a specialist in medieval literature at Pomona College in Claremont, Calif.
"In Spanish-speaking literature, for instance, you have a lot of stories that are similar to Robin Hood and the Sheriff of Nottingham. You have someone who offends the powers-that-be and makes monkeys out of officials."
The legend began around 1230 with an entry in the County "Pipe Rolls" of Yorkshire: "Robertus Hood, Fugitivus," the man in question allegedly fleeing to Sherwood Forest to avoid paying taxes.
If authorities never caught up with him, storytellers certainly had their way. With England torn by harsh class oppression, accounts of rebellion were common over the next two centuries, and references to Robin Hood kept appearing in ballads and verse.
At first, he was simply a thief who picked on bishops and archbishops and ordered Little John to let knights and squires pass unharmed. But by the 1800s, he was the human rights champion we know today - looking after the poor, standing up to tyrants and winning the heart of Maid Marian.
"I think there were a number of people who confronted the nobility at various times," Jolley said. "They probably won many battles and the stories continued. I'm sure that's what the returning father told his children. I think Robin Hood is a composite."
Many movie fans remember his story from the 1938 classic "The Adventures of Robin Hood," which starred Flynn and Olivia de Havilland as Robin and Marian, Claude Rains as the treacherous Prince John and Basil Rathbone as the evil Sir Guy of Gisborne.
The movie takes place in 1191, at a time when King Richard I has left England to fight in the Crusades against the Muslims. His brother, Prince John, seizes power and begins a period of brutal Norman oppression against the Saxons, torturing them and making them pay high taxes.
Robin Hood, or Sir Robin of Locksley, is a wealthy Saxon who takes to Sherwood Forest to help his people fight the Normans.
He's the best archer in the land and is ably supported by his "Merry Men," notably the burly Little John, the good-natured Friar Tuck and the graceful Will Scarlett. They have the rule of Sherwood Forest and fear no man, especially a Norman. Rich intruders are robbed, but the poor are fed and taken care of, among them King Richard, who returns in disguise.
Prince John and his assistants, Sir Guy of Gisborne and the Sheriff of Nottingham, decide Robin must be killed and capture him after staging a marksman contest in town. He is to be hanged the following day.
Helping him escape is the beautiful Maid Marian, a ward of King Richard who spurns Sir Guy for the dashing young outlaw. After Robin kills Sir Guy in a spectacular sword fight, Richard is returned to his throne, Prince John is banished and Robin and Marian are to be married.
Most of the Robin Hood movies have stuck to the theme of a flamboyant, happy-go-lucky outlaw, a notable expection coming in 1976 with "Robin and Marian," starring Sean Connery as an aging, weary Robin and Audrey Hepburn as a somber Marian.
Other movies include "Rogues of Sherwood Forest," "Men of Sherwood Forest," "Robin Hood of the Pecos" and "Robin Hood of Texas," starring Gene Autry. Fairbanks made a silent version in 1922, Frank Sinatra parodied the legend with "Robin and the 7 Hoods" and there was even an Italian movie, "Robin Hood and the Pirates."
A 1980s BBC series starred first Michael Praed and later Jason Connery as the outlaw Robin Hood. The segments were lush and mystical with overlays of black magic, intrigue and philosophical debates. The "Merry Men" were more grim than merry, more pensive travelers through an occult world than light-hearted and sprited adventurers, and Marian fought just as fiercely as the men. Their spiritual father in this acclaimed series was Herne the Hunter, a horned god of the forest.
An earlier TV series, also from Britain, was "The Adventures of Robin Hood," which ran from 1955-58. It starred Richard Greene as a freshly scrubbed lad who was pure of heart.
Criticism about Robin Hood has gone on for centuries. During the 1450s, a historian lamented the rise of "the famous murderer, Robert Hood, as well as Little John, together with their accomplices from among the dispossessed, whom the foolish populace are so inordinately fond of celebrating both in tragedy and comedy."
And J.C. Holt, author of "Robin Hood," a scholarly account first published in 1982 and reissued seven years later, worries the story has been transformed beyond all recognition from the early ballads.
"The thing I object to very strongly is the notion that modern versions, whether Errol Flynn or whatever are reflections of what the original legend was like," said Holt, a professor emeritus at Cambridge University in England.
"A film director in the 1990s can write something entirely imaginary and excuse it on the grounds that he's just adding to the legend."
But Holt stops short of rejecting Robin Hood as mindless fantasy, of ignoring the power of legends and how they reflect and even stir the popular imagination.
The issue isn't what kind of life the actual man led or if he even lived at all. Robin Hood matters because of how people respond to him. If some have used his story as a way of making money, others view him as a positive inspiration, a tangible expression of their own desires.
"It's that idea of stealing from the rich and giving to the poor, the whole idea you're helping the downtrodden," Jolley said. "People who never had the chance and were born on the wrong side of the tracks, it's like a dream that's out there somewhere."

 

End of Document
