

Out of the Headlines, Into the History Classroom
The Associated Press
September 29, 1991, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 807 words
Byline: By TAMARA HENRY, AP Education Writer
Dateline: COLLEGE PARK, Md.
Body




They're teaching head-spinning, this-just-in-from-Moscow history in Soviet studies classes on college campuses these days.
In one, at the University of Maryland, students thought they were finally up to date when their guest lecturer, from the U.S. Information Agency, mentioned that Russian President Boris Yeltsin had taken ill with a heart problem.
Whoops! Once again, today's headlines threatened to revise today's lessons.
The incident in Professor John Robinson's course on Soviet Ethnic Contemporary Issues illustrates the difficulty of teaching history while the Soviet Union is casting off communism, spinning off republics and reinventing itself.
"Oh, it's dreadful," Jack Perry, retired ambassador to Bulgaria, says with mock despair. He is director of the Dean Rusk Programs in International Studies at Davidson College in North Carolina.
"All of my friends on this campus, as well as elsewhere, really have a crisis now in trying to teach Soviet studies, especially political science," said Perry.
"There are just no books, frankly," he said, adding that the copying machine has become an essential teaching aid.
Perry recently reviewed a new edition of a textbook on United States-Soviet relations for a publisher.
"It was really a very well-written book and I hate to think how much work has gone into it," he said. "But I had to tell the publisher … it's got to start absolutely over again. Not a single word is not out of date."
Demand for college courses dealing with the Soviet Union has grown by 10 percent since 1987, to more than 10,000 classes nationwide. At Maryland, for example, 308 students were enrolled in Russian studies courses last year. In 1985, Russian studies wasn't even offered.
"Ever since the Gorbachev era and perestroika began, there has been a steadily rising curve in the number of courses offered both in Soviet studies and in eastern European studies," said Dorothy Atkinson, executive director of the American Association for the Advancement of Slavic Studies, housed at Stanford University.
"With the most recent developments now, I'm sure we are going to see a continuation of this trend," she said.
Maryland senior Joseph Matthews of Annapolis, Md., is an economics major who's studying the Soviet Union because he sees a future for business there. "There's a lot more potential for development activity," he said.
And Brian Harlin, another senior, plans to go into politics and sees the course as a way to better understand the Soviets. "I figure I need to know more about the Soviet Union because that is the country we have a lot of dealings with," he said.
At American University in Washington D.C., 300 students attended a recent convocation that included an assessment of world events by Louis Goodman, dean of the School of International Service. Such a forum would "normally draw two-thirds as many," he said.
Syracuse University, meanwhile, has a waiting list for its courses in Soviet affairs and Russian studies. Spokesman John Harvith said the number of graduate majors in Russian studies has increased over the past 10 years from four or five to about 25.
Konstantin E. Aksyonov, a visiting professor at Syracuse who teaches "Geography of the U.S.S.R." and "Comparative Government: U.S.S.R.," said students were eager to hear about the coup during the opening sessions this year. Aksyonov left Leningrad Aug. 24, three days after the coup failed.
"The changes in the Soviet Union have created enormous challenges for those who teach," acknowledged Margaret Karns, director of the Center for International Studies at the University of Dayton in Ohio.
"It's impossible to publish a book today or write an article that isn't dated by the time it comes out," Karns said.
Elena Dmitrieva, a 20-year-old Moscow State University student who's visiting the University of Maryland's College Park campus for the fall semester says none of the assigned textbooks is entirely accurate.
"Things are changing very rapidly," she said.
To deal with the changes, Robinson, the University of Maryland professor, assigned students to monitor key newspapers for the class.
"My view is that we have to fundamentally restructure the way we teach the course just like the Soviet Union has fundamentally restructured its political system," added Peter Zwick, who teaches at California State University in San Marcos.
A year ago, Zwick conducted a one-day seminar at the American Political Science Association in Washington on how to teach Soviet politics.
"It was clear to me that the system had fundamentally changed and our teaching of the subject had not changed correspondingly," Zwick said. "A lot of that is due to inertia. People like me who have been doing this for 20 years don't want to start all over again and relearn our subject. So we kind of plug in the things that we have and try to make them fit the situation."

 

End of Document
