

Palestinians: Between the Israeli Rock and the Arab Hard Place
The Associated Press
September 29, 1993, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 779 words
Byline: By NICOLAS B. TATRO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BEIT JALLA, Occupied West Bank
Body




The Palestinian owners of the OBG Textile Factory like to show off their latest product: a T-shirt with a portrait of Yasser Arafat.
However, about 80 percent of their $ 300,000 a month in sales is not to Arabs but to Israel: shorts for kibbutz farmers, underwear and socks for department stores, dresses and track suits for boutiques.
Economic ties between Israel and the occupied lands are well established and may be strengthened by the PLO-Israel accord. But relations are complex and both Israelis and Palestinians worry about the economic impact of peace.
They can agree on the need to erase the poverty and the 40 percent unemployment that is a source of Palestinian violence and terrorism.
"A good peace depends on good commerce. Both Arabs and Jews have an interest in a prosperous economy," said Jiris Al-Arja, deputy mayor and main owner of OBG - Oriental Beit Jalla Garments - one of the town's five textile factories.
Yet Israel fears competition from OBG's textiles as well as from citrus and other agricultural goods grown by low-wage Palestinian workers.
Jordan worries that Palestinians who make up 75 percent of the business community in the kingdom will shift their wealth to the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Palestinians fear being caught in the middle.
Dan Propper, head of the Israeli Manufacturers' Association, noted Israel's 11 percent unemployment rate and said the country would have to protect some industries such as textiles, at least initially.
But he envisions Tel Aviv as a vibrant economic hub.
"I believe the autonomy could serve as a bridge for export into Arab countries. Israeli technology can be used to produce products in the autonomous areas for consumption in the Arab world," he said.
Propper said plastic dishes, toys, furniture, paper products, gold jewelry and other goods could be jointly made for sale in neighboring Arab states.
Samir Huleileh, who administers European Community aid for the occupied lands, said there is a perception in the Arab world "that we Palestinians will be a trojan horse for Israel because we know the Hebrew language and the people and have a relationship already."
Elias al-Arja, the manager of OBG, said he is not anxious for free trade with the Arab world, where wages are lower and Syrian-made T-shirts sell wholesale for $ 1 - half his price.
Others believe that allowing Israel too big a role could impede plans to entice rich Palestinians abroad, who are seen as having an investment potential of $ 100 million.
One of the plums of peace will be economic aid, about $ 500-$ 600 million a year from non-Arab countries alone, according to Palestinian estimates. Much will be spent building 20,000 to 30,000 housing units a year as well as roads, sewer lines, telephone exchanges and power grids.
Israel's construction industry is primed to do the work, but Huleilah said that could alienate Palestinian contractors from Jordan to Bahrain who are also eager for work.
But not all Palestinian investors are skittish about cooperation with Israel.
Kamel Metri, 63, who returned to Beit Jala after 40 years in Lima, Peru, said Israel is the target market for the $ 7 million thread factory he plans to open.
"To have peace and live together with the Jewish people is a great hope," he said. "I think there will be strong cooperation. It will be difficult for Israel to live near a hungry neighbor."
Samir Abdullah, a Palestinian economist at Bir Zeit University in the West Bank, said Israeli-Palestinian cooperation is a "must" in some areas but had to be built on a new sense of equality.
"We have had a lot of relations in the past quarter-century, but they were formed on the basis of Israel's interests," he said. "Now, it will depend on mutual agreement."
Palestinians will continue to rely on Israel for jobs, for example. About 100,000 Palestinians are expected to work in Israel once the plan is implemented - up from about 70,000 today.
But Abdullah said Israelis will now be asked to provide job security and not deduct taxes from paychecks without giving benefits such as health care.
Perhaps the most promising area for Israeli-Arab cooperation is tourism. Israeli officials point to the possibility of combined tour packages with Israel, the West Bank, Jordan and Egypt.
Ptachia Bar-Shavit, an economist for Israel's Bank Hapoalim, predicted tourism could double to 4 million visitors in the next three to four years. He said the potential for exports to Arab countries was an additional $ 1 billion per year.
The biggest benefit, both he and Propper indicated, would be the fading away of the Arabs' secondary boycott of Israel, which Bar-Shavit estimated had cost Israel about $ 40 billion in the past 40 years.
 Load-Date: September 29, 1993

 

End of Document
