

PART III: Deep Black; In Age of Arms Trafficking, 'Always Something 'Round the Corner'
The Associated Press
April 3, 1994, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1408 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: COLOGNE, Germany
Body




The Englishman flipped through his passport, an inky blur of visas and overnight stops: Germany, Switzerland, Bulgaria, Turkey, Thailand, Romania, Indonesia, Vietnam.
It bespoke a hectic life. And the ring on his hand, encrusted with fat diamonds, bespoke a certain prosperity. Brokering the weapons of war is tiring, it seems, but rewarding.
Does he know the German? "Yes. He was the guy who tried to get me involved in a deal with the Yugoslavs." For what? "The usual. Kalashnikovs. RPG anti-tank weapons."
And? "It was a strange EUC."
The end-user certificate is a foreign government's way of vouching for an arms importer. This one identified a Turkish company as the buyer. The Englishman knew the managing director, faxed him and was told he had not ordered the weapons.
The Englishman, who says he does only clean deals, backed out. No regrets. "There's always something else comes 'round the corner," he cheerfully assured a reporter.
Down at Zollkriminalamt headquarters here - the Customs Police - the German is well-known, too.
A cautious chief investigator wouldn't discuss him except to make clear that "this name is familiar to us." But another source confirmed that authorities are investigating whether the "familiar name," in violation of a U.N. arms embargo, is busily dealing with Croatia.
In this decade of ethnic war, embargo and military surplus, things could grow busier still for the German, the Englishman and other traders in small arms, a globe-trotting corps that sometimes plays by the rules, sometimes doesn't.
But things could grow trickier, too. In meetings this spring, the United Nations will take up the international problem of arms trafficking for the first time, looking for ways to better monitor the movement of weapons.
Those movements, it will find, are at times untraceable - twisting black lines on black backgrounds.
An Associated Press inquiry into the illicit arms market, drawing on the knowledge of dealers, enforcement officials and others who often spoke only on condition of anonymity, found that it encompasses both "deep black" and shades of gray, both dead-of-night smuggling of undocumented weapons, and open shipment of arms licensed under false pretenses.
It found, too, that the 1990s market is not controlled by some cabal of "deep black" operators.
The traders can be simply once-only opportunists, moonlighting military men, representatives of arms manufacturers desperate for cash. The customers of the '90s include Latin American crime cartels, African insurgents, ethnic militias in the former Soviet Union. The shipments can range from a simple 1,000 assault rifles to batteries of rockets and artillery. The methods are endlessly creative. But a standard deal might go like this:
A broker from Country A buys surplus arms from a cash-short government, Country B. Perhaps working with another middleman, he has them shipped from Country B on a fraudulent end-user certificate that says the arms are bound for Country C. Instead, they are shipped to Country D, a destination forbidden by U.N. embargo or the B government's policy. The shipment might take a roundabout routing through Singapore or some other freewheeling port.
The false "EUC," going for $ 50,000 or more, can be critical, allowing the trafficker to ship in the first place.
A classic example from the 1980s: A fraudulent certificate saying the end user was Bangladesh, presumably bought from a corrupt Bangladeshi official, enabled a clever trader to ship a West German manufacturer's rifles not to Asia, but next door to communist East Germany.
More recently, investigators found last August that a Panamanian diplomat in Spain issued a false end-user certificate for 25,000 submachine guns and other weapons from the Czech Republic. The Czechs eventually blocked the shipment, apparently bound not for Panama's army, disbanded a few years ago, but for Bosnia in ex-Yugoslavia.
Licensing agencies sometimes spot fraudulent documents, uncovering traffickers' schemes. But often they do not.
The U.S. State Department, which licenses munitions exports, was chided by its own inspector-general for a "haphazard" system of checking foreign end users. An investigation by The Independent, a London newspaper, found similar lapses in Britain's licensing agency, the Department of Trade.
Out on the front lines - the borders of embargoed ex-Yugoslavia, for example - the defenses against trafficking crumble further.
"Everyone can see on the ground in Yugoslavia that arms are there that weren't there before," said Richardt Vork of the Sanctions Assistance Mission, a 224-member European-U.S. customs team monitoring those borders.
The warring sides clearly are smuggling war materiel through the unpoliced "green borders" of the back country.
"Now the Bosnian Muslims have 120 mm mortars," Vork said. "We don't know how they're getting them."
The United Nations and NATO do have successes to point to, such as the interceptions of arms and ammunition packed aboard an Iranian jetliner stopped in 1992 in Zagreb, Croatia, and a ship stopped in the Adriatic Sea in 1993. Both were believed to be Iranian shipments to Bosnian Muslims.
But even interdictions can expose weaknesses.
The AP learned that when Italian customs found a truckload of 1,500 pistols destined for embargoed Croatia, it simply turned it back. No investigation was opened. Now, almost two years later, after a press report on the incident, a case has been filed in Munich against a German company allegedly involved.
The U.N. embargo's biggest embarrassment may be flying in the skies over Croatia - a tiny air force of MiG-21 fighters, apparently smuggled in piecemeal from somewhere in eastern Europe and reassembled.
The U.N. Security Council committee overseeing the sanctions has sought information on the Croatian jets. But a U.N. diplomatic source said it received an unsatisfactory response from Croatia, and no other government has helped.
The United Nations, with few resources for enforcing embargoes, can only rely on governments' good will.
"The people who decide that the U.N. will establish embargoes don't seem to realize that the U.N. has no mechanism for monitoring embargoes," said a frustrated U.N. official in New York who deals daily with sanctions.
Governments are taking anti-trafficking steps on their own. In the United States, for example, a half-dozen CIA specialists now keep tabs on low-profile weapons deals, a CIA source said.
But some say it's time for the international community as a whole to take greater control of the trade. They look forward to the U.N. Disarmament Commission meetings on arms trafficking that begin April 18 in New York.
"We want to create common legislation among all countries to enhance internal controls in each country, in order to identify the traders and the ways in which these illicit arms are sold," said Colombian U.N. diplomat Patti Londono, whose government is a leader of the anti-trafficking campaign.
Some propose that governments report deals involving small arms to the new U.N. Conventional Arms Register, which now solicits reports only on larger weapons. Some suggest forming U.N. investigative teams to track down embargo violators. The global police network Interpol already has begun assembling an arms-trafficking database.
Committed arms controllers support such moves.
'This can't be a free market. You must control the trade in death," said German Greens politician Juergen Trittin, who leads his party's campaign against German arms exports.
But opposition to greater controls will be formidable.
By one expert's reckoning, the legal sale of arms is the world's No. 2 industry - a $ 250 billion business in 1990, compared with $ 430 billion for petroleum. The legitimate industry, perhaps led by the world's top arms seller, the United States, is expected to resist international bureaucratic meddling.
No matter how the U.N. debate turns out, the Englishman is too busy to worry. He was fresh from Vietnam when he sat down to discuss his business.
"In Vietnam, I did a deal for old U.S. weapons left behind from the war," he said. " M-16 rifles, .45 pistols, you name it, from the war."
A deal for whom? "I can't tell you." He smiled good-naturedly. "They wouldn't want me to."
The ebb and flow goes on, just beneath the surface. In this case it cast up some old M-16s on some distant shore, for some unknown cause.
"Ah," the Englishman mused, "if only we could put a sensor on a gun, to see where it travels to."
 Load-Date: April 3, 1994

 

End of Document
