

People Who Made the Year That Made History
The Associated Press
December 19, 1991, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1558 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




The news stories of 1991 were the stories of people - in desert front lines, in the streets of Moscow, in Louisiana voting booths, in research laboratories.
And the people who made headlines in 1991 came in new categories: Soviet entrepreneurs, Yugoslav militiamen, U.S. ozone-hunters, American women filling the ranks of an army at war. Before 1991, who had heard of "U.N. weapons inspectors"?
Here's a look at the year now ending through the stories of 10 individuals, some known, some unknown, who helped make the news:
 
 BOB GALLUCCI
For five days in September, stranded in a Baghdad parking lot, Gallucci and his colleagues seemed at the center of the world.
The cadre of U.N. Special Commission inspectors - with Gallucci as deputy chief - spent much of 1991 dismantling Iraq's secret nuclear and other terror-weapon programs.
"We knew the mission was potentially extremely important," the 45-year-old New Yorker said recently. "We expected we might possibly have trouble gaining entry to some of the buildings - but it never occurred to us that we'd have trouble leaving."
After the inspectors seized nuclear documents in Baghdad, Iraqi soldiers surrounded their bus and detained them in a parking lot. Later, the Iraqis backed down, under international pressure.
So far, U.N. inspectors in Iraq have found uranium enrichment and other nuclear weapons facilities, a biological weapons program and huge stocks of chemical weapons.
 
 HOLLIE VALLANCE
A soldier clutched her tiny infant to her heart as she stoically prepared to ship out from Georgia to the Persian Gulf.
The poignant photo came to symbolize the role of women in the Gulf War, one of the big stories of the lightning conflict.
"It was like a dream, like it never happened. It went by so fast," the soldier, Army medic Hollie Vallance, recalls.
Baby Cheyenne, now 1 , dislikes her mom's uniform. "She knows when I have my uniform on that I'm gone for the day, and she has fits," said the 23-year-old Vallance, who plans to re-enlist next year.
Of 540,000 Americans who served in the gulf, 35,000 were servicewomen. Eleven died, five in hostile action. In a big step forward after the war, Congress lifted the ban on combat duty for female pilots. But the Pentagon has put the move on hold for at least a year.
 
 HANAN ASHRAWI
An American-educated professor of English, Hanan Ashrawi emerged as the articulate voice of Palestinian delegates at the Madrid peace talks. Ashrawi, 45, was eloquent or sharp-tongued, as required, in explaining the Palestinians' suffering under Israel's rule and their dreams of statehood.
Asked whether she considered herself a leader, she said: "They didn't pick me to lead them. All I'm doing is to try and explain the problems."
In Madrid, the Palestinians for the first time gave the world the impression of willingness to compromise. They said they would discuss Israel's offer of limited autonomy but still insisted on two main goals - an end to Israel's occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip and, later, a state of their own with east Jerusalem as its capital. Ashrawi and chief delegate Haidar Abdel Shafi, an elderly physician, were a sharp contrast to the usual picture of Palestinians as gun-toting guerrillas.
 
 MARKO PRGOMET
He went to the battlefield right from school, and learned to fire his weapon before he turned 18. "We play kids' games," jokes Prgomet, one of the young Croatian fighters confronting Serbian insurgents and the Serb-dominated federal forces in Yugoslavia.
But Yugoslavia's nightmarish war is deadly serious, Europe's worst fighting since World War II. Thousands have died, and some 600,000 people have fled their homes.
War erupted after the Yugoslav republics of Croatia and Slovenia declared independence June 25. The federal army withdrew quickly from Slovenia. But the Serbs and Croats, united by language but divided by religion and history, fought on.
Each side proudly wears its insignia into battle. Prgomet sports the red-and-white Croat checkered symbol, and wears his Roman Catholic faith in a cross with the Virgin Mary. Serbian warriors don black caps with Serbian white eagles, and the cross of their Orthodox Church.
 
 GERMAN STERLIGOV
He's just 24 and never finished college. But he's a millionaire businessman and typifies a growing number of Soviets who have seized Mikhail S. Gorbachev's reforms to start their own companies.
Sterligov made his fortune in 1991 by starting one of the country's first commodities exchanges, and since has branched out into television sponsorship. He put his net worth last summer at more than 10 million rubles - $ 17 million at the official exchange rate.
The future may belong to people like Sterligov who have managed to make fortunes without belonging to the Communist Party elite - the elite whose power was smashed after the failed August coup.
Sterligov and his generation of entrepeneurs are critical to helping the country build a vibrant market economy in place of the old centrally run system.
 
 GHAITH PHARAON
For this bold Saudi investor, 1991 marked the end of an era.
The Federal Reserve Board and the U.S. Justice Department accused him of being a U.S. front man for the global schemes of the scandal-ridden Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, Pharaon, 51, jet-setted around the world in his private plane, snapping up hotels, investing in blue-chip corporations and building a business empire, including $ 226 million in U.S. assets.
After the BCCI scandal unfolded in July, Pharaon dropped from the public spotlight.
Gone are the lavish balls at his Georgia mansion, attended by such powerful politicians as Andrew Young and Jimmy Carter. Gone, too, are some of his U.S. holdings, sold off as regulators closed in on BCCI, Pharaon's main bank.
 
 WARREN BUFFETT
He would like people to think he's just a bumpkin from Nebraska, a folksy, disheveled man who also happens to be one helluva stock-picker.
Don't be fooled. The Oracle of Omaha in 1991 was the Warrior of Wall Street.
Buffett, a 61-year-old billionaire investor, donned his white hat and emptied a barrel-full of silver bullets as he remade Salomon Brothers Inc. after the worst scandal in the firm's 81 years.
Buffett, a big Salomon shareholder, was characteristically down-to-earth when smooth-talking Congress and the press about cleaning up Wall Street.
Then he got tough. He overhauled Salomon's management and sacked its public relations and law firms. He slashed $ 110 million in bonus money. He decried Wall Street pay as irrational.
When necessary, Buffett cranked up the charm. He also was ruthless - his word. In the year's biggest scandal, he may have saved one of Wall Street's legendary firms from collapse.
 
 JIM ANDERSON
Flying out of Maine, a descendent of the U-2 spy plane is scouting northern skies for a new enemy - the chemical processes threatening the protective ozone layer above the atmosphere.
Harvard professor Anderson, 47, is project scientist for a five-month study to determine whether a hole is forming in the ozone over the Northern Hemisphere. The ozone shields the Earth against ultraviolet rays linked to skin cancer and cataracts.
Anderson's team found alarming evidence of an ozone hole over the Antarctic five years ago. That finding led to an international agreement to curb the use of ozone-depleting chlorofluorocarbons.
Recent satellite data showed broader ozone loss, extending above much of Europe and the United States, giving the current project its urgency.
"We're losing ozone to the extent that not being able to go out in the sunlight in the spring or early summer becomes a real possibility in the next decade," Anderson said.
 
 MARY-CLAIRE KING
In 1991, this geneticist and epidemiologist at the University of California, Berkeley, became one of the nation's most visible scientists.
In quick succession, King announced the discovery of the first genetic cause of deafness, found a way to identify people especially susceptible to the ravages of the AIDS virus, and identified a gene that predisposes people to breast cancer.
Each discovery alone would have made 1991 a good year for King, 45, but the three together marked her as a rapidly rising scientific star.
Her work typified the new excitement in the field of genetics, as researchers in 1991 moved much closer to translating fundamental scientific advances into real improvements for patients.
 
 DAVID DUKE
In 1991, he lost an election in one state but gained a following in many. In 1992, he'll have a national stage for his racially tinged message of resentment and frustration.
Duke, an ex-Ku Klux Klan leader and onetime Nazi sympathizer, ran as a Republican in Louisiana's gubernatorial election and was trounced by Democrat Edwin Edwards. But the state representative's political appeal - anti-welfare, anti-tax, anti-affirmative action - was strong enough to draw campaign contributions from across the country.
Duke, 41, seeks to uncouple himself from a racist past. "I was too intolerant," he says of earlier days. But on Dec. 4 he made both his ambition and his sentiments clear.
He announced that day a run for the GOP presidential nomination, asserted that President Bush had "sold out" the party on civil rights, and denounced immigration policies that he said were undermining a society that is "Christian … and of European descent."
 
 End Adv for Release in Year-End Editions
 Graphic



 
LaserPhotos

 

End of Document
