

Perot 'On the Wrong Side of the Angels' on NAFTA, Iacocca Declares
The Associated Press
September 23, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 488 words
Byline: By TOM RAUM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Ross Perot "is on the wrong side of the angels" in his campaign against a free trade pact with Mexico, retired Chrysler chairman Lee Iacocca said Thursday in an opening salvo on behalf of the Clinton administration.
After meeting with President Clinton, Iacocca told reporters at the White House he would help Clinton in his effort to win passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
He said he expected to make several television commercials plugging the agreement and to give speeches.
The administration hopes that high-profile appearances by Iacocca can help counter Perot's outspoken efforts against the pact, which would remove nearly all trade barriers among the United States, Mexico and Canada over the next 15 years.
Iacocca said he didn't sign on to go toe-to-toe with the Texas billionaire. But he made it clear that Perot would be a favorite target.
"I think he should get some facts put together," the former auto industry executive said.
Perot claims that the free trade agreement would result in the loss of more than 5 million jobs - many of them in the auto industry - as companies move plants to Mexico to hire low-wage labor.
"That's completely wrong," Iacocca said.
"I think this is a message we've got to get out. People have been playing on the fears of Americans," he said.
"He's a good fellow, he's worth a couple billion dollars. I like him. But he's on the wrong side of the angels here," Iacocca said of Perot.
In Dallas, Perot spokeswoman Sharon Holman said Perot would stand by his statements on NAFTA. Otherwise, she had no immediate reaction to Iacocca's joining the White House campaign for the trade agreement.
Iacocca is a familiar figure from the many TV spots he did for Chrysler.
"Lee Iacocca is a folk hero to many Americans," said White House counselor David Gergen. "He has enormous credibility as someone who's a winner, created jobs, who is very firmly for American workers. And I think the more Americans hear him, when they know where he stands, it will make a difference."
The administration hopes Congress will act on the agreement, initiated by the Bush administration, by year's end. Although supported by business groups and many Republicans, the agreement has shallow support among Democrats and is strongly opposed by labor unions.
Iacocca said he had been a longtime supporter of removing trade barriers with Mexico. He said Mexico's economy is booming, and the free-trade pact would mean more Mexicans would by more U.S. products, resulting in more U.S. jobs, not fewer.
"We should have an alliance in our own hemisphere" like the Europeans have with the European Community, a trading bloc of 12 nations, he said.
Iaccoca said he was vacationing at his villa in Italy last month when Clinton called "and said come see me."
'I want to give the president a hand here," Iacocca said.
Would he debate Perot?
"I'm not debating anyone. Do you think I'm running for office? Are you guys nuts?"
 Load-Date: September 23, 1993

 

End of Document
