

Petra Kelly Symbolized the Rise and Fall of the Greens
The Associated Press
October 20, 1992, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 583 words
Byline: By NESHA STARCEVIC, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: FRANKFURT, Germany
Body




Fiercely intelligent, intense and driven, Petra Kelly in some ways symbolized the rise and fall of the Greens party she helped found.
Kelly represented a new generation of German politicians who rose from the student movement to shake the establishment with their new ideas. Frail-looking but iron-willed, she changed the landscape of German politics when she became one of the co-founders of the Greens party in 1979.
But eventually she found herself shoved to the sidelines as the party's strength faded.
Kelly, 44, was found dead late Monday in her Bonn home. Authorities said Tuesday she had been shot in the head by longtime companion Gert Bastian, 69, who then shot himself.
Before helping found the Greens, Kelly had quit the Social Democratic party in disgust over its acceptance of U.S. missile deployment in what was then West Germany.
"Only when you put pressure on the wound and scream, will things change," she said in a parliamentary address in 1986.
That statement epitomized Kelly's confrontational style, which gained her followers and enemies alike.
To many, she seemed aloof. "The fragile little blonde who always appears a little cold" was how the magazine Stern once described her.
But others hailed her idealism and commitment.
"She was one of the most courageous people. She was driven by examplary courage to fight against the arms race in both the West and the East," said Otto Schily, a former Green party member who later joined the Social Democrats.
Born in Bavaria in 1947, Kelly moved to the United States at 13 with her mother and stepfather, a retired American colonel. As an international affairs student at American University in Washington D.C., she worked in Robert F. Kennedy's presidential campaign.
One event that strongly influenced her was the death of her 10-year-old half-sister Grace Patricia in 1970 of cancer. That spurred her to became involved in cancer research and the effects of radiation.
By the early 1980s, Kelly became a familiar figure at the huge rallies against the deployment of nuclear Pershing 2 missiles in Germany. The Greens, meanwhile, were growing from a left-fringe ecology-minded group espousing anti-NATO views into a major political force.
In 1983, the Greens - Kelly among them - won 24 seats in the German parliament, entering the Bundestag with flowers and banners.
The party continued to gain strength, inspiring similar movements elsewhere in Europe. By 1987, the Greens held seats in six of West Germany's 11 state legislatures.
Kelly, a familiar figure with her short-cropped hair, was known for her rejection of the trappings of politics, wearing T-shirts to meetings with heads of state and giving half her parliamentary salary to the party.
Ironically, the Greens were in some ways a victim of their own success. The party brought the environment and disarmament into mainstream politics, and weakened as those issues were taken up by more moderate parties.
Kelly herself became a casualty of Greens political rules and the deepening rift in the party. She unsuccessfully resisted a change in the party leadership and failed to get on the party ticket in the 1990 federal election.
In that balloting, Greens from western Germany were knocked out of the parliament. Since then, Kelly and Bastian had lived in virtual political seclusion.
Kelly was a fighter of lonely battles. In later years, she traveled to Australia to help the Greens there and spoke on behalf of the aborigines, and to northern India to defend the rights of the Tibetans.

 

End of Document
