

Poland's Lech Walesa: "We Want to Be the America of the East"
The Associated Press
March 22, 1991, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 665 words
Byline: By MICHAEL PUTZEL, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Lech Walesa of Poland told U.S. business leaders Friday his nation wants to be "the America of the East" and said it represents a commercial opportunity comparable to the American West in the 19th century.
Wrapping up a three-day state visit to Washington before setting out on a cross-country search for private investors, Walesa issued an open invitation to business people in an address to the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
"We welcome all foreign partners," said the first democratically elected president of the former communist country. "Do come."
Abandoning the caution of some in Eastern Europe who fear Western colonization, Walesa said in Poland, "Every second company should be American."
Economists say foreign investors have been cautious because Poland was slower than some of its neighbors, particularly Hungary, to lower the bureaucratic barriers that hinder the flow of Western capital.
But Walesa said Friday those obstacles have been removed and Poland now welcomes wholly owned subsidiaries, joint ventures and all forms of development. He announced Thursday that beginning April 15, Poland will drop its requirement that U.S. citizens obtain visas before visiting Poland.
"We want to be the America of the East," he told the chamber. And he promised, "The returns will be much greater than the outlays."
In that speech and one that followed at the National Press Club, Walesa said he is searching for some Christopher Columbuses willing "to go the other way."
Pressing his theme that Poland, while struggling with economic reform after 40 years of communist rule, is now a land of opportunity, the former shipyard electrician said, "The situation in Poland today could be compared to the great American move to the West in the last century."
David Kemme, a U.S. economist tracking the Polish reform effort, agreed that recent changes in legislation and banking practices have made it easier for foreign investors to operate in Poland and take their profits out.
Kemme recently called Poland "a wide open economy with the most liberal private investment laws in Europe - and not just Eastern Europe, either."
In a question-and-answer session after his speech to the press club, Walesa was asked to assess his relations with the Soviet Union, Poland's neighbor to the East.
The Soviet Union's problems, he said, are "50 times worse than Poland's" and Moscow is watching closely to see "whether the Polish reforms stand a chance."
Poland, he said, could be compared to "one of those little Ford cars of yours, and the Soviet Union would be a huge truck with a container and pulling two trailers."
"It's difficult to turn corners" with that rig, Walesa said, "and we have to be very careful in this Ford of ours."
Acknowledging Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's daunting task in trying to reform the Soviet Union, Walesa said, "We would not like to hinder things in any way. We wish Gorbachev well."
But he hinted at his sympathy for the Baltic republics in their struggle to gain independence from the Kremlin.
"If we are successful," he said, "they will be, too."
Earlier in the day Walesa held an hour-long meeting with Secretary of Commerce Robert Mosbacher and more than a dozen leaders of major American corporations while senior members of his government discussed Poland's economic reforms with members of the Polish-U.S. Economic Council at the Chamber of Commerce.
Mosbacher and Walesa sat down in the secretary's office for a private discussion with U.S. business leaders, including former Commerce Secretary Peter G. Peterson, who now heads The Blackstone Group; Robert Stempel of General Motors, and John Hinds of American Telephone & Telegraph.
The Polish president left the capital Friday afternoon for Los Angeles, where he was to present former President Ronald Reagan with a Polish badge of honor. He has meetings scheduled there and in Chicago and New York next week with members of the Polish-American community and other business leaders and potential investors.
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto WX9

 

End of Document
