

Politics: The More Things Change, The More They Seem The Same
The Associated Press
September 9, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 833 words
Byline: By DIDRIKKE SCHANCHE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NAIROBI, Kenya
Body




Eight months after general elections ushered in a new era of multiple parties, a sour mood has settled over Kenyan politics and governance is little changed.
Despite international censure, President Daniel arap Moi's administration reigns with old tactics: dismantling opposition presses and seizing publications; spreading tales of international plots to destabilize the nation; lambasting Western critics as neocolonialists; and failing to counter the corruption gripping Kenya's economy.
Meanwhile, the opposition has failed to live up to the heady promises made during two years of protests against Moi's 15-year rule. Instead, it has been paralyzed by internal rivalries and power struggles.
Kenya's problems highlight the difficulties many African countries face in completing the shift from autocracy to democracy that began after Eastern Europe's one-party states collapsed in 1989.
Since then, 33 of sub-Saharan Africa's 43 autocracies accepted political pluralism. But most did so in name only.
Disputed elections masquerading as democracy returned military rulers to power in Burkina Faso, Gabon, Ghana, Togo and Mauritania.
Angola's elections rekindled civil war; Zaire's dictator refused to relinquish power and hold meaningful elections; and Nigeria's military leader annulled the results of recent elections.
In Kenya, political changes had only superficial effects.
After defeating a field of seven opposition candidates to win another five-year term as president, Moi shut down two publishers who printed opposition magazines and seized tens of thousands of copies of magazines critical of his government.
Last month, Moi's government claimed that a plot was afoot by the U.S. State Department and the opposition to destabilize the country. As evidence, it cited letters that appeared to be forgeries.
The U.S. Embassy dismissed the allegation as "a clumsy effort to discredit the opposition and the American government."
Corruption has continued unabated, despite international pressure for greater openness and accountability in this impoverished nation. In one instance, as much as $ 150 million was taken from the country in a scheme said to involve the central bank and senior government officials.
The government has done little to halt ethnic fighting in western Kenya, repeatedly blaming the violence on opposition parties. Moi claims multiparty democracy inflames tribal hatreds.
Three independent monitoring groups and one parliamentary commission, however, have implicated government and ruling party officials in promoting the violence.
"It is a terrible indictment of Kenyan leaders that they are ready to instigate violence and death to prove that democracy does not work," Lord David Ennals, an honorary member of the British Refugee Council, wrote in a report issued Sept. 1 after he visited the area of the fighting.
As many as 1,000 people have been killed and more than 10,000 uprooted in the violence, according to Ennals and the other monitoring groups.
U.S. human rights activist Kerry Kennedy Cuomo, who visited late last month, cited recent improvements in Kenya's public life, including an opposition presence in parliament, a freer press and greater freedom of expression on the street.
But she expressed dismay at the arrest of an opposition parliamentarian who was charged with incitement for urging businessmen in an area of ethnic unrest to close their shops to protest the violence.
"For him to be detained indicates that there are some serious abuses of the right to free expression and a hesitancy on the part of the government to accept democratic change," Mrs. Cuomo, of the Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Center for Human Rights in Washington, said in a telephone interview.
Western donors forced a reluctant Moi to hold multiparty elections last December by withholding $ 350 million in aid to protest growing autocracy, the deterioration of civil rights and corruption bleeding Kenya's economy.
The international community held out the promise that the payments would be returned if Moi toed the line.
"It is hoped the Kenyan government will understand that if the present state of affairs persists there is an obvious risk that support … cannot be maintained," longtime donor Denmark said last month when it cut its already reduced aid by another $ 7 million.
Denmark cited ethnic clashes, widespread government corruption, persecution of the press and foot-dragging on economic reforms.
Kwendo Opanga, a Kenyan columnist, said he feels Moi's government never had any intention of fully embracing political pluralism and that Moi's attitude is shared by other African rulers.
"Our leaders still believe that we will go back to a one-party state," he said. "I think they are trying very hard to discredit multi-party democracy and that applies to most leaders on this continent. They are not given to sharing power."
The government maintains Kenya is firmly launched into the multi-party era, with no intention of returning to the one-party rule that existed from 1969 to 1992.

 

End of Document
