

Premier Lags In The Opinion Polls But Narrows The Gap
The Associated Press
October 1, 1993, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 379 words
Byline: By PHILIP DOPOULOS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ATHENS, Greece
Body




Premier Constantine Mitsotakis is fighting for his political survival in upcoming general elections, but an opinion poll released Friday showed he was catching up to his main challenger.
The main issues in the Oct. 10 election for the 300-seat Parliament are the deficit-ridden economy and Greece's policy regarding the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia, which has the same name as a Greek province.
A loss by Mitsotakis, 75, or former Premier Andreas Papandreou, 74, who had open-heart surgery in 1988, could end either man's political career.
Mitsotakis' conservative government fell Sept. 9 as a result of a protest against what some hard-liners felt was his soft stance on Macedonia. Greece has refused to recognize the new republic, claiming that its use of the name Macedonia implied territorial ambitions.
Negotiations are presently underway at the United Nations between Greece and Macedonia to find a solution.
But the defection of two parliamentary deputies from Mitsotakis' party forced the elections seven months before his four-year term was to expire.
Friday's survey showed the lead held by Papandreou's Panhellenic Socialist Movement had narrowed to 7 percent, from 10 percent last week.
The poll, conducted in metropolitan Athens, included no margin of error. There were 814 respondents.
It indicated that Mitsotakis' New Democracy party was apparently attracting more undecided voters. Other recent polls have shown that as much as 28 percent of the electorate is undecided.
The deputies who defected backed former Foreign Minister Andonis Samaras, who was dismissed by Mitsotakis last year for his position that there would be no recognition of Macedonia as long as the new state uses that name.
Samaras, 42, founded his own party, Political Spring. Polltakers say he has an outside chance of playing a kingmaker's role if either major group fails to win an overall majority.
The economy is also in the doldrums, with inflation nearly 15 percent and a bloated public sector running deep in the red.
Mitsotakis has pushed to sell off state-owned businesses. During his 1981-89 tenure, Papandreou nationalized many foundering industries, and says he wants to restore free medical care and other benefits.
The campaign, which has been dull, officially ends on Friday.
 Load-Date: October 1, 1993

 

End of Document
