

REVIEW: How Azef the Spy Worked Both Sides of the Street
The Associated Press
September 23, 1994, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 288 words
Byline: By MARIO SZICHMAN, Associated Press Writer
Body




If Yevno Azef had not existed, Dostoevsky would have invented him.
Not before nor since has a double agent worked both sides of the street with such skill, zeal and ferocity.
In his mesmerizing biography, "Comrade Valentine" (Harcourt Brace, $ 24.95), Richard E. Rubenstein says that at the height of Azef's career, in the early part of this century, he was both a police informant and leader of the most powerful terrorist group in Russia, the Fighting Organization of the Socialist Revolutionary.
As a police informant, he sent perhaps hundreds of revolutionaries to prison or to death. As a terrorist leader, he was responsible for killing dozens of officials, among them the Grand Duke Sergei, uncle of the last czar; and Vyacheslav von Plehve, internal affairs minister who was considered responsible for the Kishinev pogrom, in which 45 Jews died, more than 600 were injured, and more than 1,300 homes and shops were looted or destroyed. (Rubenstein notes that von Plehve's assassination "must rank among the most popular political killings of the century.")
Every time Azef felt threatened, either by the police or by suspicious comrades, he raised the ante. Finally, when suspicions mounted about his duplicity, he sent more comrades to their deaths and ordered the assassination of Russia's last czar. His failure to complete the task of killing Nicholas II sealed his fate. One of his comrades obtained information about his work for the police, and he was sentenced to death.
A headline in the Feb. 7, 1909, edition of The New York Times proclaimed, "Police and Reds Both Hunt Azef: Only Question Seems to Be at Whose Hands He Will Die."
The answer was less dramatic: Azef died in bed in 1918 without getting his comeuppance.
 Load-Date: September 23, 1994

 

End of Document
