

Saluting the Queen, Elevating the Admiral
The Associated Press
June 5, 1994, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 542 words
Byline: By TERENCE HUNT, AP White House Correspondent
Dateline: ABOARD THE USS GEORGE WASHINGTON
Body




From the flight deck of this massive aircraft carrier, U.S. sailors gave a traditional British salute to President Clinton and Queen Elizabeth II.
The queen gave the president a lift on her royal yacht, Britannia, to the George Washington, as it prepared to set sail across the English Channel from Portsmouth to Normandy for D-Day anniversary celebrations Monday.
It's customary on British ships for sailors to lift their hats and give a cheer when the queen's yacht passes, so the American Navy decided to follow suit.
Sailors went through repeated practice drills, following directions from a British manual. 'The British are born planners. Nobody does ceremony like these guys," said a Navy spokesman, Capt. Chuck Connor.
As the Britannia pulled close, U.S. sailors snapped to attention. And when the Britannia passed, sailors on the George Washington were ordered, "Hats up." Up they went. Leading the cheer, an officer shouted, "Hip, hip, hip." The sailors responded "Hooray." Each cheer - there were three - was accompanied by a circular wave of hands.
Later, on the George Washington, Clinton said the Britannia guests "were all ecstatic" to see the carrier.
---
An estimated 4,000 sailboats, speedboats and other pleasure craft raced to keep up with the Britannia as she cruised toward the George Washington. They bobbed in sparkling green sea in the wake left by the queen's 412-foot ship.
On board the queen's yacht, Clinton reflected on the sailing of the huge Allied armada to Normandy a half century ago.
"I was trying to imagine what it must have been like 50 years ago to have 7,000 boats. I felt enormous pride," Clinton said. "We're here with these sporting vessels because of what we did 50 years ago. Our system and our values prevailed."
Hillary Rodham Clinton was overheard at one point to say she was cold. The president put his arm around her for warmth.
Clinton shared some of his conversations with the queen.
"The queen talked about what it was like 50 years ago," Clinton said. "She talked about how important it was not only rallying to the cause of war but continuing to do ordinary things. The queen told me that on D-Day, 'I was at the dentist."'
As for his own thoughts, Clinton said, "You know what encapsulates this all for me? Eisenhower's words in which he said that D-Day was the fury of an aroused democracy. Those words say it all," the president said.
---
On board the George Washington, Clinton and the first lady watched over the re-enlistments of 61 sailors. The president was in a dark suit; Mrs. Clinton wore a dark pants suit with big gold and black buttons on the jacket - very military looking.
Clinton called on Adm. Mike Boorda to perform the reenlistment ceremony. The president recently promoted Boorda to chief of naval operations.
Stepping up to Clinton's lectern, the 5-foot-6 Boorda found himself straining to see over the microphone.
Clinton stepped in to help, pulling out a stool hidden in the base of the lectern.
"This is one of the services performed by the president," Clinton said with a laugh. "This is the second time I have elevated Admiral Boorda in the last few months."
Clinton's joke got a loud laugh from thousands of sailors.
And Boorda's reaction? "This is really terrible," he said in mock horror.
 Load-Date: June 5, 1994

 

End of Document
