

Sarajevans Now Living the Longest Siege of the Century
The Associated Press
September 22, 1994, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 535 words
Byline: By SAMIR KRILIC, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SARAJEVO, Bosnia-Herzegovina
Body




Busy just trying to survive, Sarajevans failed to notice that their city moved into the record books this week, surpassing Leningrad as the longest urban siege this century.
"It's all trivial," said Enes Huleric, a 28-year-old Bosnian soldier who spent the record-setting day Wednesday sitting in a frontline trench. "Live to tell, that's the point."
Though suffering nowhere near the casualties and horror of the 900-day German siege of Leningrad, in which at least 800,000 Soviets died, Sarajevo bears all the scars of 2 years of urban warfare. More than 10,000 of its residents have been killed.
The shine of the former Olympic city is gone.
Hardly a building is without broken windows or pockmarks from shells, and night brings the total blackness of a city without electricity.
After a six-month respite in which Sarajevans enjoyed what others take for granted - light, heat, running water, food - the Bosnian capital is slipping back to the old days of deprivation. Besieging Serbs have once again cut the supply line and turned off the power and gas.
The only remaining benefit of the February cease-fire that brought Sarajevo a semblance of normalcy is that mortar and tank shells do not rain down indiscriminately. But Sunday's flareup in fighting - the worst in seven months - was a reminder of how fragile the peace is.
What most separates Sarajevo from Leningrad is that Russia's second-largest city did not have a humanitarian airlift to help it through World War II. As susceptible as it is to shutdowns, the Sarajevo airlift has sustained the Bosnian capital's approximately 300,000 residents.
But Sarajevans cannot leave their once-cosmopolitan city, and the siege mentality is strong.
"When the war began, we thought it was the end of the world, to live in these conditions," Huleric said. "Now, unfortunately, we've gotten used to it, and what is worse, this has become a normal way to live."
All of the few houses still standing in Hrasno, on Sarajevo's western front where Huleric is posted, have plastic sheeting over the windows.
After their shift on the front, Huleric and his fellow soldiers head back to their homes to gather firewood, fetch water for their families and then pass the night by candlelight awaiting what the new day will bring.
"Every night I say my prayers, hoping that tomorrow peace will come," said Adem Cekaric, a 42-year-old soldier. "Peace, for me, means life like I remember it."
Across town, war refugees gathered in front of their camp, worrying about how they will survive the coming winter.
"We made a big mistake thinking that the world is going to help us," said one of them, Adem Sadzak. "That is why after 900 days of siege, we still have to wonder, 'Will we ever go home?"'
Trio, a group of innovative young designers in Sarajevo who've used the symbols of international pop culture and art to portray the city's suffering, also makes calendars that show which day of the siege it is rather than the days of the week.
Many Sarajevans plan their future accordingly.
"These 900 days of the siege have made us learn a lot about life and death, and how you have to do things you never thought of," mused Zarko Karamusic, 27. "I live my life like today is my last day on Earth."
 Load-Date: September 22, 1994

 

End of Document
