

Save The Sex Until The All-Clear Signal, Says Sex Therapist
The Associated Press
February 6, 1991, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 391 words
Byline: By ARTHUR MAX, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Here's Dr. Ruth's advice for couples sweating through a poison gas alert: touch, hug, talk - but don't try making love with your gas mask on.
Sex therapist Ruth Westheimer says she didn't come to give advice to Israelis about sex, but to show support for Israel.
"Despite being a little apprehensive, I thought my 4-foot-7 frame has to stand up and be counted," she said in an interview.
"I'm not saying I'm not scared. I wasn't happy to be alone in a hotel room last night," said the 62-year-old psychologist. "I haven't moved without my gas mask for one split second. And I have a junior mask."
Mrs. Westheimer's links to Israel are not new. She came to Palestine as a refugee from Germany in 1945 and fought for the Jewish underground, the Haganah, before Israel declared independence in 1948.
She was wounded by shrapnel in the leg during the battle for Jerusalem in the first Arab-Israeli war.
She went to the United States in 1956 after several years in France, and launched her career as a sex-therapist-of-the-air 10 years ago.
The Israel she is revisiting is under seige by Iraqi missiles. None of the warheads have carried chemical weapons, but the Iraqi threat to do just that is taken seriously; many Israelis have spent recent nights in rooms sealed with plastic sheers and masking tape.
Often, the rooms are crowded with the whole family, in-laws, grandparents and pets, adding family strains to the personal terrors of war.
"If a relationship has been good, then it's going to remain good. If a relationship is bad, it's not going to get suddenly resolved. And if its bad, it's very difficult to be confined every evening at home," said Mrs. Westheimer.
"The only thing I would say is, be patient. … Even if husband and wife are more on each other's nerves, don't make a decision about getting a divorce right now. Let some time pass. An atmosphere of tension is not a good time to make decisions. I would say right now, open the fridge, eat."
The war could even help some couples overcome petty differences. "Maybe it will heighten the relationship and the sex life," she said.
Mrs. Westheimer, whose parents were killed in the gas chambers in Auschwitz, said seeing Israelis carrying gas masks is chilling. "It brings back memories… It must be terrible for people here who survived the Holocaust. To have to go through that again is very sad."
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto TLV4 of Feb. 5

 

End of Document
