

Securing The Aid Is Only Half The Battle
The Associated Press
July 17, 1991, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 660 words
Byline: By THOMAS GINSBERG, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




The tough task of winning Western financial help in London is a mere prologue for Mikhail S. Gorbachev. Keeping it from disappearing in the black hole of a corruption-prone Soviet bureaucracy will be an epic battle.
"It's more important to whom the aid is given, rather than for what," says Gennady Lisichkin, director of the Institute of Economic-Political Research at the Soviet Academy of Sciences.
"Any aid should go to small business," not to the government, where bureaucrats can interfere and the funds could be tied up and misdirected as a result of political feuding, Lisichkin said in an interview Tuesday.
Gorbachev is seeking Western help to upgrade Soviet industry and agriculture, convert military industry to civilian uses and make the ruble a convertible currency.
He has set no figure for the level of aid he wants.
But the Soviet leader has noted problems in repaying the $ 65 billion Soviet foreign debt. And he has proposed an international fund to promote the ruble's stability when it is eventually floated on international markets.
Soviets differ on whether international aid should be accepted at all.
Some say it will only slow democratization and prolong the rule of discredited Communists who still control the country's economic and administrative infrastructure.
Even supporters of credits and investment disagree on who should get aid, how to keep it out of pet projects and bureaucrats' pockets and what will ensure it reaches the people who need it.
"… It should be a thousand points of small assistance targeted to specific areas of a newly created market economy rather than one big bulk assistance designed to support the original pillars of the crumbling edifice," President Vaclav Havel of Czechoslovakia wrote in Sunday's New York Times.
He called for assistance to individual Soviet republics, and for basing investment and aid decisions on the economic merits of individual projects "rather than on the arbitrary will of central planners."
Nodary Simonia, deputy director of the Institute for World Economics and International Relations, noted how easy it is for foreign aid to be diverted from. Last winter, local officials in Moscow reportedly diverted at least one shipment of German humanitarian aid, intended for citizens facing food shortages, and sold it on the black market.
Western leaders should "insist" on creation of an agency to oversee any aid or investment, she said.
A radical reform plan co-written up by Soviet economist Grigory Yavlinsky at Harvard University contains a provision for creation of new agencies at the republic level to oversee the distribution of foreign aid.
They would include representatives from the Group of Seven leading industrial nations and the International Monetary Fund.
Gorbachev has mixed elements of Yavlinsky's plan with more conservative suggestions from Prime Minister Valentin Pavlov, apparently dropping the provision calling for independent supervisory offices.
"The Pavlov … program would take all the aid through central organs," said Sergei Zverov, an aide to Yavlinsky.
Political scientist Igor Klyamkin suggests aid be given to republic governments. "The center … won't move anywhere without pressure from within," Klyamkin told the liberal daily Komsomolskaya Pravda.
But Simonia said in a telephone interview that giving aid to republics "would just be substituting republican bureaucracy for Kremlin bureaucracy, and republics are even less professional."
Gorbachev has made it clear that he wants the republics to coordinate economic activity through the Kremlin.
Nine of the 15 republics support his effort to hold the country together in return for receiving greater control over resources on their territory.
Marshall Goldman, a Harvard University political scientist in London for the summit, sides with skeptics on aid.
"In my opinion, even if it's given to the right people, there's no wholesale market and it could just disappear anyway," he said in a telephone interview.

 

End of Document
