

Siberian Family Links Up with Nebraska Kin  A photograph and the breakup of the Soviet Union have made it possible for a Siberian family to contact their long-lost cousins who emigrated to Nebraska in 1904. The family plans a reunion this month when Phil Weber, a farmer and county commissioner, travels to Siberia to meet his cousins and visit his mother's birthplace. "I've always liked to travel, but I never thought I would be going to Siberia," Weber said. "I always wanted to see the birthplace of my mother."
The Associated Press
April 5, 1992, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 285 words
Dateline: DORCHESTER, Neb.
Body




Weber will fly to Moscow and then visit a town on the Volga River where his mother was born in 1902, before traveling 3,500 miles to Siberia.
The family was reunited by another Nebraska man, Marvin Ziegler, who went to Russia last fall to visit relatives.
He was approached by 72-year-old Friederich Rohrig of Kuragino, Siberia, a retired collective farm worker, who asked for help finding Nebraska relatives.
Rohrig showed him a family picture taken sometime in the 1930s in Friend, a farming town about 40 southwest of Lincoln.
Ziegler returned home with the photo, looked in the phone book, and called a Rohrig in Friend, who identified one of the people in the picture as Weber's mother - the late Marie Rohrig Weber. She was the first cousin of Friederich Rohrig.
The photograph was the only link that remained between the families after 1935, when communication between them was halted at the order of the Russian government, Weber said.
In 1941, the Rohrig family and other German-Russians along the Volga on the west edge of the former Soviet Union, were forced by dictator Josef Stalin to move to Siberia, away from Hitler's advancing armies. The family in Nebraska had no way to find their relatives.
"In my situation, there was a one-in-a-million shot in finding them," said Weber, who lives in Dorcester, about 10 miles from Friend.
Since October, the Rohrigs and Webers have exchanged letters, with the Rohrigs writing of hardships and their desire to emigrate to Germany.
"Every day a lot of people leave for there, but only the ones that have close friends or relatives can go there," Maria Rohrig, one of the cousin's wrote. "They have to be invited. We have great hope that if God wants it we will go soon."

 

End of Document
