

Six Months in the Mountains, a Few Chats With the Serbs
The Associated Press
January 7, 1994, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 495 words
Byline: By FRANK BAJAK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BERLIN
Body




Hikes in the rugged Macedonian mountains. The occasional chat at the border with Serbian sniper teams. One patrol's mistaken foray into Serbia. No hostility or casualties.
That about sums up the six months of peacekeeping duty of the first U.S. combat unit to go to former Yugoslavia, soldiers of the Berlin Brigade task force said after a welcome-home ceremony Thursday.
"Them mountains were real eye-catching," said Spc. Michael Posch, 25, of Bartlesville, Okla. "I enjoyed it very much."
The 315 American blue berets who patrolled Macedonia's rugged northeastern border with Serbia began returning to Berlin Dec. 27. The last 75 flew in Thursday.
Another U.S. Army unit, from the 6th Infantry based in Vilseck, Germany, has replaced them in Macedonia. Their mission is to prevent war from spreading to the only republic that split peacefully from Yugoslavia, which now consists only of Serbia and tiny Montenegro.
The lightly armed Americans, part of a 1,000-strong U.N. force led by a Finnish general, manned three border observation posts and a forward logistical base.
Their heaviest weapons, some anti-tank guns, were kept out of sight.
The mission has been peaceful, and the returned soldiers said nearly all Macedonians were friendly, save a few older ones they encountered who made gestures suggesting the Americans should leave.
Sightings were frequent of Serbian soldiers, mostly snipers seen on a ridge the Americans came to call "Sniper Hill."
It was a little difficult, said Posch, for soldiers trained for combat to get used to intentionally making themselves visible.
"In a peacekeeping mission you are meant to be seen," he said. "But everyone was thinking, 'We're a target."'
Pfc. Troy Donohoo, 20, of Hillsboro, Ohio, said Serbian soldiers would frequently stroll by along the border just 100 yards from his squad's observation post.
"They kept coming up to us," he said. "They would come right to the border and start talking to us."
In early October, one Serbian soldier came for a nighttime visit, posing as a Macedonian "and started checking out our camp," Donohoo said.
He said the Americans later moved that observation post back across a gully.
The task force's commander, Lt. Col. Walter Holton, said his soldiers found the Serbs "non-aggressive" but curious.
"They were very interested in meeting Americans," he said.
The climate was comfortable even during winter until night fell, when temperatures would drop to freezing, soldiers said. And there was lots of fog, which almost got one patrol in a lot of trouble.
"They walked into Serbia," Posch said. "They were probably two miles into Serbia and didn't know it. They finally figured out where they were at and figured they better get back while the getting was good."
The Macedonia mission was the last for the 6th Battalion of the 502nd Infantry, whose Charlie Company was the heart of the task force.
"I'm closing it down in July," Holton said. The last American soldier is due to leave Berlin by September.
 Load-Date: January 7, 1994

 

End of Document
