

Sleeping on the Cheap on the Road
The Associated Press
June 2, 1995, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: For AP Special Features
Length: 539 words
Byline: By JENNIFER MERIN
Body




One way to cut costs for traveling abroad this summer is to bypass hotels in favor of university or college residences and youth hostels.
Many campus residences emptied by students during summer vacations, usually early July through mid-September, take in travelers. Some require guests to be at least 16 years old, others will accept families with younger children.
Youth hostels generally attract young singles, but most will accept people of all ages.
Amenities vary. If you're unsure, carry your own linens. Telephones are generally available, you may leave your luggage if you're staying more than one night - and there's no tipping.
Throughout Europe, fees for college rooms generally range from about $ 40 to $ 50 per night, single occupancy. Doubles start at about $ 30 per person, per night. That's about half the price of a decent, inexpensive hotel.
Residences may also have affordable dining rooms, offering satisfying meals for under $ 10.
But don't count on fine cuisine any more than soundproof rooms and private baths. Hallways tend to echo with the noise of youthful exuberance, and bathrooms are generally communal. Some residences have only one shower room per floor.
Another drawback is that campuses are often in residential areas away from museums, shops and nightlife. Public transportation is usually good, but nighttime service may be limited. On the other hand, schools with summer sessions may have evening programs of interest.
Youth hostels are another cheap housing alternative. With several single beds arow in dorm rooms, one for men and one for women, they afford less privacy than campus residences but are less expensive. Prices per night, per person, range from about $ 6 in some Italian hostels to $ 30 in London.
In addition to a bed, the nightly fee covers use of a communal kitchen, where guests prepare their own food. Chipping in with others to shop in local markets and cook a big meal for all is fun and a wonderful way to meet travelers.
Hostelling International, a non-profit organization, runs an International Booking Network through which you may reserve space in any of the 5,000 participating youth hostels in 70 countries. There's a $ 5 fee per booking plus annual membership dues - $ 25 for adults, $ 35 for families with young children, $ 10 for youths aged 16 to 18 years. To assure a bed, book at least two weeks in advance, even if you're backpacking.
International Hostelling offices in London, Amsterdam, Rome, Paris, Vienna and most major cities worldwide will book reservations in Europe, or you may make all of your reservations before leaving home.
University residences and youth hostels are also open to travelers throughout the United States.
---
For a list of university housing in countries you plan to visit, contact the national tourism offices of those countries. Or browse through guidebooks from Moon, Lonely Planet or other publishers focusing on budget, adventure or student-style travel. In the U.S., contact the state's tourism department or the university.
For reservations or guidebook ($ 13.95) of hostels in Europe, North America, Asia and South America, contact American Youth Hostels, 733 15th St. N.W., Suite 840, Washington, D.C. 20013-7613. Telephone (800) 444-6111.
 Load-Date: June 2, 1995

 

End of Document
