

Soft-Sell Is The Name Of The Religion Game In Wartime
The Associated Press
January 29, 1991, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 486 words
Byline: By JEFFREY ULBRICH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: AN AIR BASE IN THE GULF
Body




For Father Gordon Beattie, a Benedictine monk from Scotland who tends to the spiritual needs of British airmen here, the soft-sell approach seems to work best in wartime.
"The point of my being here is to be here - not to shove a cross and a Bible at them," he says. "Obviously, I am a minister of God, but for those who seek it. I am against coercion."
This British base has three chaplains: Beattie, the Roman Catholic who says the Royal Air Force is "a late vocation" for him; a Church of England representative; and a Church of Scotland and Free Churches chaplain.
It might seem as if the morality of war and the business of killing fellow human beings would be a major topic of conversation between the RAF personnel and their religious advisers, but that doesn't seem to be the case.
"I don't know how many pilots we have here," Beattie says, "but I would think the majority of them made their minds up without coming to us."
The religious aspect of making war is dealt with in the pilots' training.
Beattie's career path is unusual for a Benedictine, whose priests usually live in a monastic community. He joined the RAF in 1980 after 13 years as a civilian priest.
He has spent much of his priestly life outside a Roman Catholic environment altogether, devoting years to teaching in a state school, working in Africa and then serving as a prison chaplain. The military is at least a partial return to community life.
"I consider it missionary territory," he says of his work with the forces in peacetime. "I worked in Nigeria, and it's less missionary there than in the military."
But in wartime, priestly work must be more subtle.
"It's a 'Catch-22' situation," says Father Gordon, as he is known. "Should I sit in the office all day and wait for customers? Or should I pound the beat, go from section to section?"
Beattie, whose green camouflage uniform carries the rank of squadron leader, opted for pounding a beat, not shoving the cross at them, as he says, but just being present.
The small Christian chapel here frequently is used by soldiers who just want a moment alone. Finding a priest there might even frighten them off.
Most of the offices and unit headquarters are set up in portable cabins spread out around the base.
"Basically, you have to find out where all of the crew room Portacabins are," he says. "I sit down, have a meal with them, on or off the base. You also need iron kidneys, with all the coffee I've drunk."
From time to time, Beattie says, an airman will grab his sleeve as he is leaving one of the cabins and ask to have a chat.
Beattie cringes with embarrassment to say it, but he admits his role here often is that of substitute spouse.
"People who come to you here are talking about matters they wouldn't talk to you about in the UK," he says. "They are seeking release or support. Certainly, some want a prayer and a blessing. But I think they come to me with things they would say to a wife."

 

End of Document
