

Some Critics Call 'In the Name of the Father' Miscarriage Of Justice
The Associated Press
February 11, 1994, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 598 words
Byline: By JESSICA BALDWIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




In the United States, the movie "In the Name of the Father" got seven Oscar nominations. In Britain, it's been criticized for being as much an injustice as the case it portrays.
"It seems to have touched a raw nerve," said director Jim Sheridan, in London to defend his movie ahead of today's opening.
For Americans who flocked to the movie, "In the Name of the Father" is great drama. Hollywood agreed and nominated the film for seven Academy Awards, including best picture and best director.
But in Britain, where millions followed the real-life case of the Guildford Four on which the movie is based, it is seen as almost as much an error of judgment as the initial imprisonment of four innocent people.
The filmmakers' claims of "dramatic license" as an excuse to change events doesn't wash with British critics, who note the film is unabashedly promoted as "the story of the Guildford Four."
The Guildford Four are Gerry Conlon, Paddy Armstrong, Paul Hill and Carole Richardson. They were four feckless teen-agers arrested in 1974 following an IRA pub bombing in Guildford, south of London. Five people were killed and 64 were injured.
They made confessions - after police mistreatment and beatings - and were sentenced to life in prison. Conlon's father and six other family members were implicated in the confessions and sentenced to long prison terms which they served for operating a bomb-making factory.
Guiseppe Conlon, from his prison deathbed, asked his son to clear his name. The film, a dramatization of Gerry Conlon's autobiography "Proved Innocent," is the culmination of that campaign.
The Guildford Four were freed on Oct. 19, 1989, when the appeal court ruled that their convictions were questionable because the police had lied.
Conlon completely supports the film. But some other victims of the injustice, including some of Conlon's relatives who appear fleetingly in the movie, think it's an insult to the truth. That view is backed by reviewers and some members of Parliament.
They cite numerous fictional deviations:
-The father-and-son relationship between Oscar nominees Daniel Day-Lewis and Pete Postlethwaite could not have developed in a shared prison cell because Gerry and Guiseppe Conlon were not held together.
-Emma Thompson's legal counterpart in real life, solicitor Gareth Peirce, never argued their case in court.
-Thompson is shown in a dramatic scene uncovering a key police document, marked "Not to be shown to defense," which gives Conlon an alibi for the night of the bombing. In reality, a government official told the court that new evidence showed a number of police documents had been altered and that police had "seriously misled the court."
-The burning alive of a prison guard by an Irish Republican Army member is completely fictitious.
"The whole attempt to make any kind of political statement is fatally compromised by the blatant falsehoods which it contains," wrote Alasdair Palmer in The Spectator magazine.
The Daily Telegraph's Susannah Herbert echoed the sentiment, saying "Sheridan has made a film about injustice which is itself unjust, a film which dishonors to a degree the real story on which it is based."
Last week at a screening in the House of Commons, Sheridan defended his project to lawmakers from the governing Conservative Party who fear a backlash in favor of the IRA in the United States and liberals who exposed the injustice and bristle at the inaccuracies.
"It wasn't made to get them out of prison," Sheridan said. "I would have made a documentary then. It's the story of one person suffering and becoming an independent spirit."
 Load-Date: February 11, 1994

 

End of Document
