

Son Fights to Save His Father - and Prove He is Not 'Ivan the Terrible'
The Associated Press
June 21, 1992, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1617 words
Byline: AP Photos, By SHARON COHEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SEVEN HILLS, Ohio
Body




For six years, he has searched the earth for a monster, a Nazi death camp guard known as "Ivan the Terrible." The stakes are enormous: his father's life.
He has traveled from Canada to the Crimea, lobbied Congress and the KGB, tracked down Nazi camp guards and even sifted through garbage to try to prove his father, John Demjanjuk, is not Ivan. He believes another man was the sadistic guard who ran the gas chamber at the Treblinka death camp.
"We could only see one thing and that was proving him innocent, regardless of what we were up against," John Demjanjuk Jr. said of the campaign he has waged with his brother-in-law Ed Nishnic. "We have never doubted our ability to do that."
With dogged investigative work, some lucky breaks and the fall of the Soviet Union, the two have raised doubts about Demjanjuk's conviction as a Nazi war criminal. They believe newly obtained evidence from KGB files shows a man named Ivan Marchenko - who disappeared at war's end - was the Treblinka executioner.
Demjanjuk, 72, a retired Cleveland autoworker, was extradited to Israel in 1986 and convicted two years later after five Treblinka survivors identified him as "Ivan the Terrible." He was sentenced to death.
Demjanjuk has insisted he is a victim of mistaken identity. But the Israeli prosecution now argues even if he wasn't Ivan, there's evidence he was a Nazi guard elsewhere and this makes him guilty of genocide. They've also proposed another theory: There may have been two Ivans at the camp.
"We find 'Ivan the Terrible.' They don't dispute that," a furious Nishnic said. "But without missing a beat, they say, 'OK, you're another Nazi.' This has got to stop. … They're making a mockery of justice."
Demjanjuk's fate now rests with judges on two continents. The Israeli Supreme Court recently heard the prosecution concede for the first time the defense had perhaps introduced a "tiny doubt" about the conviction.
The appeal is based on statements from 37 Treblinka guards and forced laborers who, when interrogated by the Soviets decades ago, said Marchenko was "Ivan the Terrible." Most of their descriptions don't match Demjanjuk.
The statements became available when the Soviet Union collapsed last year, but the defense contends the Justice Department had leads back in 1978 suggesting that others identified Marchenko as Ivan. The department recently said it had misplaced some evidence and an investigation is being conducted.
The case also is being re-examined in the United States. In Cincinnati, a federal appeals court recently reopened Demjanjuk's extradition, saying it may have been wrongly issued "because it was based on erroneous information." A hearing is set for Aug. 11.
"It's difficult to believe that things are finally coming together after all the years," said the 27-year-old Demjanjuk, who, like Nishnic, works full time on the case. "All of our efforts are starting to come to fruition."
The two have logged tens of thousands of miles, hopscotching from Italy to Poland to Germany to Ukraine to Israel, poring over records in languages they couldn't read, pounding on doors of people they'd never met, hiring attorneys, translators, drivers and investigators.
They believed there was an "Ivan the Terrible," it wasn't Demjanjuk and they had to find him.
Their pleas for help received a boost when James Traficant, a Democratic congressman from Ohio, appointed the 37-year-old Nishnic his Nazi war crimes investigator - giving him entree to records across Europe.
They've financed their campaign with more than $ 1 million raised from the Ukrainian community, though Nishnic, who is married to Demjanjuk's daughter, Irene, says they're now about $ 160,000 in debt.
But the financial strain, they say, is just part of the burden.
"It's something that's difficult to describe having grown up since age 11 with the cloud of Treblinka hanging over this family's head," said Demjanjuk Jr., the only one of three children who talks publicly about the case. "I had to go to school, I had to live with the fact that my father was accused of murdering 850,000 people."
The Demjanjuks were living inconspicuously in a brick house in this Cleveland suburb in 1976, when officials in Israel first suggested that the head of the household - faithful Ford employee and churchgoer - was a mass murderer. His son was 11 years old.
In 1981, Demjanjuk was stripped of his citizenship. A Justice Department inquiry had found he lied about his wartime activities when he entered the United States. Five years later, he was extradited.
It was at this point that his son put his life on hold. After two years of study in finance, he quit Cleveland State University to help his father.
"Knowing that my father was innocent and there wasn't anybody else out there that was going to work to find the truth in this case, we had no choice but to take it on ourselves," he said.
Meanwhile, in Israel, the Demjanjuk case was hailed as the country's biggest Nazi war crimes trial since SS officer Adolf Eichmann was convicted, then hanged in 1962.
It was held in a convention center, broadcast live and children were bused in as an educational tool to hear dramatic testimony about the Holocaust, "Ivan the Terrible," and Treblinka, a place once described by its commandant as "Dante come to life."
Demjanjuk says he spent most of World War II in German prisoner-of-war camps after being captured in May 1942 while serving in the Soviet army.
But the prosecution charged Demjanjuk was at Treblinka and also was a Nazi guard at the Sobibor death camp in Poland and Flossenberg concentration camp in Germany. They presented a Nazi photo ID of him - the defense said it was a forgery - which cited a posting at Sobibor.
The prosecution also has noted Demjanjuk gave the name Marchenko as his mother's maiden name in a 1948 visa application, but the defense says he chose it at random because he couldn't remember her name.
Demjanjuk's son, who attended the 14-month trial, rejects any suggestions his father was a war criminal.
"They might as well say he's the man on the moon," he said. "I haven't seen any evidence … to convince me that my father had anything to do with the murder of Jews or any other people during the Holocaust."
The issue of evidence and what the Justice Department's Nazi-hunting unit, the Office of Special Investigations, knew - and when - are at the heart of controversy in this case.
The defense contends the OSI stonewalled its efforts to obtain reports, failed to pursue leads, withheld important documents and even tossed evidence out when it suggested Demjanjuk was not "Ivan the Terrible."
"There's such a level of emotion about this case, I think a lot of people haven't really acted with the traditional good sense," said John Broadley, a Washington attorney who represented the defense in a Freedom of Information case. "You would really hate to believe this is the standard operating procedure of the Justice Department."
"I think Israel was led down the garden path by the Justice Department," added Broadley, who formerly worked for the federal agency. "I cannot imagine how they would ship a guy off as 'Ivan the Terrible' … and not send exculpatory evidence that they knew they had."
In one of the stranger twists, both the younger Demjanjuk and Nishnic obtained some of their information by sifting through documents that had been tossed in the garbage by the OSI. They were tipped off by a sympathizer who collected a garage-full of papers thrown out by the agency.
The two men said they found interviews with Treblinka survivors, information that Marchenko was known as Ivan and a report that showed the testimony of the SS man in the Demjanjuk case contradicted what he told Justice Department investigators in an earlier meeting.
"There was a feeling of sheer outrage that the system … could be abused to that extent by members of the United States Justice Department," said the son.
As to other charges of government impropriety, Justice Department spokesman Dean St. Dennis says his agency is conducting a probe into allegations and criticisms that information was withheld, but declined to elaborate.
This month the agency announced it had uncovered evidence of 1978 interrogation reports in which two Treblinka guards identify a Marchenko as the operator of the gas chamber there. The Justice Department said it was gathered for the prosecution of another camp guard and kept in that file.
That disclosure comes six months after Nishnic traced Marchenko's family to the Ukraine and met his two daughters, who were infants when their father left for war. Their mother had died only 40 days before Nishnic's visit.
Both women they knew nothing of their father, and when Nishnic explained why he was there, he said they cried and one addressed her mother: "'Mama, I'm so happy you're not here to hear what I'm hearing."
"My mother loved him to the day she died," the daughter said.
Later, one of the daughters provided Nishnic with Marchenko's wedding photo - which showed some physical similarities to Demjanjuk.
With the case now before two courts, both Demjanjuk's son and Nishnic are hopeful there will be a ruling soon in their favor.
"It feels different this time," the son said. "I'm more assured at the end of the day that justice will be done and my father will be vindicated."
But he acknowledges that any success has been costly. He speaks wistfully of his friends who have become successful engineers and accountants while his life was given over to his father's cause.
"As far as our lives are concerned, they stopped in 1977," when the federal complaint was filed, he says. "Normal life as we knew it stopped and I don't think it ever can be regained even if they were to release my father."

 

End of Document
