

Stamps In the News: United Nations Stamps Hail 'Year of the Family'
The Associated Press
January 14, 1994, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 467 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH, For AP Special Features
Body




The United Nations Postal Adminstration will issue a set of six commemorative stamps in March with the theme of "1994 - International Year of the Family."
Each of the six designs has a common background symbolic of the International Year of the Family emblem, which portrays a heart sheltered by a roof, linked to another heart denoting "life and love in a home where one finds warmth, caring, security, togetherness, tolerance and acceptance."
Superimposed on this common background are silhouettes of family images. The General Assembly of the United Nations proclaimed 1994 as the International Year of the Family and the theme "Family resources and responsibilities in a changing world."
Also issued simultaneously with the new set of stamps will be a souvenir card depicting the new adhesives plus a statement by Secretary Genral Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
---
If you are interested in the new IYF stamps, you may write to the UNPA, PO Box 5900, Grand Central Station, New York City, 10163-9992. Or you may phone toll-free 1-800-234-UNPA.
---
Guyana Issues WWII Stamps
Guyana, located on the northeast coast of South America, has issued a set of 11 stamps and a souvenir sheet depicting significant milestones of World War II. Guyana is the former crown colony of British Guiana.
Featured on the stamps are the following: British and U.S. forces linking up in France two days after D-Day in 1944; a U.S. howitzer team at Monte Casino in Italy; the Japanese battleship Yamamoto being attacked by American aircraft in the Battle of the East China Sea; a meeting in Moscow, where secretaries Hull, Eden and Molotov held a conference; U.S. forces crossing the Rhine over the Remagen Bridge; B-29s raid Japan; Gen. George Patton leading U.S. forces to victory in Sicily; Allies destroying the German ship Tirpitz; the end of fighting in Italy in 1943; a U.S. Sherman tank fighting in France; Lt. Audie Murphy, hailed as the most decorated serviceman in the United States.
The souvenir sheet shows Russian and American force meeting at the Elbe River on April 25, 1943.
At the end of 1993, Guyana also issued a sheetlet of 10 stamps highlighting major "War in the Air" victories during 1943. The 50th anniversary stamps illustrate wartime air forces of the Allies in action.
---
To obtain the Guyana stamps, write to Inter-Governmental Philatelic Corp., 460 West 34th St., New York City, 10001.
---
Care of Stamps
Stamps, to be displayed at their best, should be housed properly. A good album not only achieves this, but gives protection from dirt, loss and damage.
Loose leaf albums are recommended for all collectors beyond the novice level. Not only do loose leaf albums allow for expansion of your collection but the pages can be removed for mounting stamps as well as for display. Supplemental pages can be added as needed.
 Load-Date: January 14, 1994

 

End of Document
