

Stamps In The News: War Scenes Pique Interest in the Stamp Set
The Associated Press
December 13, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 588 words
Body




By SYD KRONISH
For AP Special Features
This year marks the 50th anniversary of the U.S. entry into World War II.
To commemorate the occasion, the U.S. Postal Service recently released a 10-stamp set recalling our involvement in the war, to be followed by a series annually until 1995 focusing on the war from the battlefield to the factory.
Philatelically joining the U.S. war memorial is the Commonwealth of Dominica, a former British colony in the Windward Islands of the Caribbean.
Dominica has issued four new stamps and a souvenir sheet to recall the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, in the early morning of Sunday, Dec. 7, 1941. President Franklin D. Roosevelt described it to Congress the next day as "a date which will live in infamy."
The 10 cents depicts the first wave of Japanese planes leaving the carrier Akagi at 6 a.m. as they fly toward their target - the U.S. Naval Base at Pearl Harbor.
The 45 cents shows the second wave of Japanese aircraft taking off from their carriers at 7 a.m. en route to Pearl Harbor.
The $ 1 illustrates the U.S. destroyers Breeze, Medusa and Curtiss working together to sink a midget Japanese submarine at 8:30 a.m. in the harbor.
The $ 5 portrays the completion of the Japanese attack at 9:45 a.m.
The $ 6 souvenir sheet features the beginning of the attack at 7:55 a.m. as the first wave of aircraft make their bombing run.
Each of the stamps has the time noted in the lower left corner.
Continuing in the World War II commemoration of events and tributes to allied leaders, Uganda (situated in East Africa) has joined a number of nations in honoring Charles de Gaulle, French military general during the global conflict and later president of France. There are four stamps and a souvenir sheet in the set.
The 20 shillings depicts a portrait of de Gaulle, who led the Free French forces against the Germans in World War II.
The 70 shillings illustrates de Gaulle taking part in the liberation of Paris from the Germans in 1944.
The 90 shillings shows de Gaulle escorting King George VI of Great Britain during an inspection of Free French troops in England in 1940.
The 1000 shillings portrays de Gaulle assuming the office of president of the Fifth Republic of France in 1959.
The 1200 shillings souvenir sheet features another view of de Gaulle entering Paris with his troops in 1944.
The stamp set highlights de Gaulle's prominent role as leader of the Free French forces, particularly when most of France was governed by a collaborationist government called the Vichy regime. He fled to London in 1940 and pressured the Allied powers for a role in the struggle against the Nazis and the ultimate liberation of his homeland.
---
More Tribute to de Gaulle
Also honoring Charles de Gaulle is Antigua and Barbuda, located in the Leeward Islands of the Caribbean. These new adhesives feature de Gaulle's career as a military leader and later as president of France.
The 15 cents shows de Gaulle greeting President Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1945. The 45 cents depicts de Gaulle with German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer in 1962. The $ 1 illustrates de Gaulle crossing the Rhine River into Germany near the end of World War II in 1945.
The $ 5 portrays de Gaulle returning via helicopter after a state visit to Germany in 1948.
The $ 6 souvenir sheet depicts the main participants of the Casablanca Conference in June 1943. Seen on the stamp are Gen. Henri Honore Giraud, Roosevelt, de Gaulle and Prime Minister Winston Churchill.
The Pearl Harbor and de Gaulle stamps are available at your local dealer.

 

End of Document
