

Stamps in the News: Mickey Mouse Goes For the Gold
The Associated Press
June 19, 1992, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 659 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




The 1992 Summer Olympic Games soon will begin in Barcelona but Mickey and Minnie Mouse already have displayed their athletic prowess in a new set of stamps released by Antigua and Barbuda.
There are seven stamps and two souvenir sheets in the set issued by this former British colony in the West Indies. The 10 cents depicts Mickey presenting a gold medal to a mermaid who triumphed in the swimming competition.
Other Disney characters get in on the act. The 15 cents shows Donald Duck's nephews (Dewey and Huey) watching their brother (Louie) attempting to get into a kayak. The 30 cents illustrates Donald Duck falling off a pier as Uncle McScrooge sets out in his yacht for the competitions.
The 50 cents portrays Donald falling off his pony in his mistaken idea of water polo. The $ 1 features a bee about to sting the helpless Big Pee whose hands are occupied in weight lifting. The $ 2 depicts Donald Duck and Goofy in a fencing match. The $ 4 has Mickey in a volleyball game against Donald. The $ 5 shows Goofy making a long vault.
The first of the two souvenir sheets saluting the Summer Olympics features Goofy using springs to make a spectacular slam dunk shot in basketball against Donald Duck. Referee Mickey calls a foul. The second sheet illustrates Daisy Duck and Minnie Mouse in such gymnastic events as rhythmic gymnastics, the uneven parallel bars and the balance beam.
The designs for the stamps were prepared by the Disney Studios in the U.S. The stamps are available at your local stamp dealer.
---
Sports Variety Collection Available
New collectors who would like to start a topical sports collection will be interested in the offering of 50 different U.S. baseball, sports and Olympic stamps by the U.S. Stamp Collectors Society.
The collection contains the first U.S. baseball stamps issued in 1939, plus other athletic adhesives issued during the past 50 years. It also includes the first U.S. Olympics stamp, issued in 1932. Each collection is $ 9.95.
You may order or inquire from the USSCS, PO Box 917, Van Nuys, Calif., 91408. The phone number is 818-997-6496.
---
New Topical Section in 1993 Scott Catalog
Volume I of the new 1993 Scott Standard Postage Stamp Catalog which includes U.S., United Nations, Canada, Great Britain and British Commonwealth issues, is now off the presses.
Collectors will note for the first time a new topical section that includes birds and trains on stamps. Another good piece of news is that the stamp market is showing definite signs of improvement.
"The stamp market has shown steady positive growth in 1992," says Stuart Morrissey, vice president and publisher of Scott.
The new catalog continues the recent practice of showing retail values to give collectors an idea of what they can expect to pay for a particular stamp in the grade range Fine-Very Fine.
Substantial monetary gains have been listed for various errors. For example, the horizontal pair imperforate vertically on the 20-cent Golden Gate of 1923 (Scott 567a) has increased to $ 1,500 unused from $ 750. The vertical pair imperforate of the 1960 four-cent Masaryk (Scott 1147a) moves up to $ 3,250 unused from $ 2,250.
The cover price of the 1993 volume (and all subsequent volumes) is $ 32. It is available at your local stamp dealer, bookstore, or directly from Scott Publishing, PO Box 828, Sidney, OH 45365.
---
From Butterflies to Mushrooms
Topical collectors - those who specialize in subjects rather than specific countries - have much fun in their hobby. Some of their subjects are unusual, to say the least.
It is not uncommon to have collectors save stamps on dolls, religion, ships, music, transportation, explorers, world leaders, butterflies and bridges.
But some rather unique subjects listed in the June edition of "Topical Time," the official publication of the American Topical Association, include: medieval women, heraldry, fictionl detectives, owls, pirates and cacti.
There is even a yarn about acquiring stamps featuring mushrooms.

 

End of Document
