

Star Watch: Happy on the Outside; Dark on the Inside
The Associated Press
February 8, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 719 words
Byline: By HILLEL ITALIE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Gary Oldman can make you believe he doesn't have a care in the world. When he laughs, his eyes narrow and his mouth forms a gleeful, crescent-shaped grin as if he just stumbled upon a free case of beer.
So where's the gun-toting, fire-breathing Jackie Flannery of "State of Grace," or the aptly named punk martyr Sid Vicious of "Sid and Nancy"? What about the ill-fated playwright of "Prick Up Your Ears," and the tormented war veteran of "Chattahoochie"?
They're all there, the actor insists with a wink. They're stirring inside, waiting their turn, hoping for the right part to come along so they can be set free.
"My characters are all very dark, aren't they?" Oldman noted during a recent interview.
"I also feel dark in many ways. I think you take them to you. You don't go where they are, you meet them halfway. One of the most pleasurable people to watch is Montgomery Clift. It's almost like he wears his soul. Sometimes it's almost too painful to watch. It really works. It's not shrouded in attitude."
In his new film, "Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead," Oldman blissfully plays the fool, starring as the hapless Rosencrantz in the wacky tale of two minor characters from Shakespeare's "Hamlet." Tim Roth co-stars as Guildenstern and Richard Dreyfuss is featured as The Player, who leads a traveling band of actors.
Oldman's research for "Rosencrantz and Guildenstern" came almost entirely from the script, but when he takes on a role he usually starts with a photograph.
For "State of Grace," a mob movie co-starring Sean Penn and Ed Harris, the actor studied a photograph of an Irish gangster who had the face of "a choir boy," a charming man whose actions contrasted with his appearance.
Oldman also used a picture for inspiration in "Chattahoochee," a film based on a true story. He played Emmett Foley, a Korean War veteran who comes unhinged in a quiet Florida neighborhood and spends years in a mental institution so awful his case helped inspire nationwide reforms.
"I had this one picture where he was 19 and there was something rather kind of fey about him and awkward," Oldman explained. "He was in this uniform that looked a bit too big for him and he was smiling into the camera.
"If you covered up the eyes the mouth was smiling. But if you covered up the mouth the eyes were terrified. It reminded me of someone I knew where all the tension was in his eyes."
Oldman, 32, grew up in the impoverished London section of New Cross. He didn't go to see movies. He didn't go to plays. He didn't have many friends. Most of the time, Oldman was by himself, pretending, acting.
"I had an army, toy soldiers," he recalled. "I had a sort of army that I liked to play with and I also liked to make costumes. I liked to get an old curtain and get it around my back and pretend I was Batman for a day. I had an overexcited sense of imagination so it wasn't a surprise to me that I became an actor.
"What actors do is an extension of what we all do as kids. Someone once said, 'Oh actors, all you do is pounce around in frocks and pretend you're kings and queens."'
He dropped out of school at age 15 to work in a sports shop and seemed ready for a lifetime of drifting when he saw the film "If . ..", a chilling drama about a revolt at a British boarding school. Oldman enrolled in drama school, appeared in regional productions and television and eventually worked in London's Royal Court Theater.
"People ask you that old question, 'How do you remember all those lines?' I used to dismiss it. I would just roll my eyes. But I gave it a second thought and I realized the answer is you forget everything else. A great deal of it has to do with concentration."
In 1986, he made his first feature film, "Sid and Nancy," and went on to star in "Prick Up Your Ears," playing Joe Orton, the tormented English playwright of the 1960s who was murdered by his homosexual lover. Oldman also appeared in "We Think the World of You," which co-starred Alan Bates, and "Track 29."
"I don't lose myself in my characters," he insisted. "But for 'State of Grace,' for instance, I spent five months playing a pretty scuzzy person. If you spend a whole day in a neighborhood surrounded by crack dealers, you can't help but pick some of it up; it has to affect you. It's like if you have a bad day at work, you'll go home in a bad mood."

 

End of Document
