

Stretching Out in the Balkans - A Day's Drive From The War
The Associated Press
April 22, 1994, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 737 words
Byline: By FRANK BAJAK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LOJANE, Macedonia
Body




At their hilltop observation post, the American infantrymen dice chili peppers in a containerized kitchen, chop wood and stoke their dinner fire. Around them, the Balkans churn.
Across a scrub brush ravine in Serbia, a smuggler walks a loaded-down mule over a ridge, delivering cans of scarce gasoline to a nation under U.N. embargo.
"It's not uncommon to see a train of 20 mules fully loaded," says Sgt. Michael Carr, a 24-year-old Bostonian and post commander.
At the Macedonian border checkpoint below, eight mules are tied to trees. "They were all arrested," says Carr, dead serious. Their owner must pay a fine to get them back - but will likely still make a good profit.
Gasoline costs more than 15 times as much in Serbia.
Carr's post is one of six on the Serbian border that Army Rangers took over this week from Swedes, who are leaving peaceful, easygoing Macedonia for redeployment 200 miles away in war-frayed Tuzla, Bosnia-Herzegovina.
The U.S. Army now patrols nearly two-thirds of Macedonia's border with Serbia, accounting for roughly half the 1,000-member U.N. contingent in the only republic to break loose of Yugoslavia without a war.
The three observation posts manned by Americans since July are in the barren, sparsely populated east near Bulgaria. Serb army sightings were occasional. In the new sector, bunches of Serb soldiers are spotted almost daily.
The Serbs would wave to the Swedes and sometimes chat with them. With the Americans, they're keeping their distance.
No sign of hostility or increased military activity has emerged, although the Americans went on a higher alert last week after U.S. fighter jets bombed Bosnian Serb positions. Soldiers will need to worry about vipers, asps and adders, though. It's getting hot and they have come out of hibernation.
Apart from the nightlife in Skopje, the capital 20 miles away, smuggling is the main attraction in this landlocked crossroads republic.
"This is a smuggler's economy," says Bob Norman, acting U.S. chief of mission in Skopje, "All the main industries have been closed down and yet new shops are opening every day."
Besides the Serbia equation, Greece slapped a trade embargo on Macedonia in February.
Greece's complaint is mostly over what Macedonia should call itself - anything but Macedonia, the name as well of a Greek province, it insists.
Disputes like that are the confusing tinder of Balkan wars, two of which started over Macedonia early this century.
Capt. Steven Bapp, 31, of Rosholt, S.D., closely studied his pocket references on the flight from Germany Monday, including when it is all right to open fire. He commands newcomer Delta Company of 1st Battalion, 6th Infantry.
The U.S. military likes clear-cut missions, but knows its only peacekeepers on the ground in former Yugoslavia have anything but that.
"We have different officers come in and tell us different things and it can be confusing," says Sgt. James Cantrell, 22, of Knobnoster, Mo. He was on his way back to Germany to train replacements.
Peacekeeping is still new ground.
Back at the border, Pfc. Joseph Elder, M-16 rifle slung over his shoulder, stands on sandbags, a dug-in armored personnel carrier with U.N. markings at his heels. Over his shoulder are the dull red roofs of Lojane, a little town strewn with garbage and bisected by a trash-lined stream.
His eyes are fixed through binoculars on a dirt road that stretches across the Tabanovce River valley toward the Belgrade-Athens highway, where empty trucks are lined up waiting to cross into Macedonia.
After loading up, most will return 0 etimes they're a little wary of us because we report everything they do: make sure they're not taking money from people or beating them up," says Carr.
But the American blue berets are not enforcers. Their mission is to observe, report and be friendly.
More than a half-dozen soldiers did just the opposite in January, getting into a drunken fist fight with Macedonians in Skopje. They were shipped back to Germany, disciplined and demoted.
There was only a ripple in the local press. By contrast, last month's visit of the top U.S. soldier, Gen. John Shalikashvili, got favorable, saturation coverage.
"Macedonians are mostly very happy to have the Americans here. They feel safer," says Gora Mihajlovski, a columnist with the daily newspaper Vecer. "Some are a little worried, though, about how long they will stay."
That, American commanders will tell you, is an open question.
 Load-Date: April 22, 1994

 

End of Document
