

Summit Opens; Massive Soviet Aid 'Not in the Cards'
The Associated Press
July 15, 1991, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1066 words
Byline: By MARTIN CRUTSINGER, AP Economics Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




President Bush and America's rich allies opened their 17th annual economic summit Monday and plunged immediately into debate over Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev's appeal for help to rescue his failing economy. A top U.S. official declared that massive aid was "not in the cards."
In the absence of a financial bailout, the leaders were considering a political communique expressing strong support for economic reforms in the Soviet Union and "new thinking" in its foreign policy, a diplomatic source said.
The communique, to be released Tuesday, says the West is willing to help the Soviets move to a more open, democratic society and free-market economy. Yet, any pledges of tangible assistance will be put off until the summit's final statement on Wednesday, the source said.
On another topic, the political communique makes a veiled overture for the removal of Iraqi President Saddam Hussein, saying the people of his country "deserve the opportunity to choose their leadership openly and democratically."
It also emphasizes the Western leaders' stance that sanctions must be maintained against Iraq until it complies with all U.N. resolutions, including the identification and dismantling of Baghdad's nuclear program, and it singles out Iraq in a proposal for a central registry for arms sales.
Bush said late Monday night that there was "strong support" among the allies for military action if Iraq does not comply with the U.N. resolutions.
He said the French and the "British clearly are in that supportive mode and I think most countries recognizing the terrible danger of this man going forward with a nuclear program would be of the same mind."
Bush spoke to reporters at the ambassador's residence following a dinner meeting - at the historic Tower of London - where the heads of state discussed political hot spots around the world as they ended the first day of the economic summit.
The leaders of the world's seven biggest industrial democracies - the United States, Japan, Germany, Britain, France, Italy and Canada - were all smiles in bright sunshine for the traditional "class photo" that always opens the summits.
Then they dug into three hours of discussion of their differences on such sober topics as Soviet economic troubles, impediments to free trade and other problems confronting the global economy.
U.S. Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady, in a briefing on the first meeting of the summit partners, sought to lower expectations of an expensive Western aid package for Moscow.
"If you are talking about the kind of grand bargain mentioned before, that's not in the cards," Brady said. He was referring to a suggestion of aid approaching $ 25 billion or more a year.
The U.S. official said one item on which the United States and its economic allies likely could agree was bestowing on the Soviet Union an associate membership in the International Monetary Fund - giving it access to technical advice but not direct loans from that body.
With much of the attention focused on the Soviet Union, Brady said there had been some talk at the first session that "preoccupation with problems in the Soviet Union should not lessen" any movement to help emerging democracies of Eastern Europe.
But French President Francois Mitterrand told his summit partners that Gorbachev "would be the major item" at the meeting, a French spokesman said.
On other topics, Bush expressed optimism about concluding a nuclear arms treaty with Moscow and praised the acceptance by Syria of a U.S. proposal for a Middle East peace conference, calling it a "good response." He said he was sending Secretary of State James A. Baker III to the Mideast for new talks.
On the arms control talks, Bush said Baker had told him there was only one issue left to be resolved. "It's encouraging - one point remaining but an important one," Bush said. Quick resolution would mean a Bush-Gorbachev summit later this month in Moscow to sign the treaty.
While Germany, backed by France and Italy, is pushing strongly for a major economic package for the Soviets, the United States and the other summit countries favor a much more cautious approach.
Gorbachev was scheduled to arrive in London Tuesday and was to make a personal appeal for assistance the following day at the conclusion of the summit.
Soviet officials, briefing reporters Monday, said Gorbachev would like to have, among other things, pledges from the West in the amount of $ 10 billion to $ 12 billion to set up a fund that would be used to assist the Soviet Union in stabilizing its currency, the ruble, which now is virtually worthless outside of the country.
Vitaly Ignatenko, Gorbachev's spokesman, said that without significant help from the West "the risks would be increased - for everybody" but he said the Soviets were not looking for all the official limousines clogging London's streets to be "filled to the brim with money. This is just the beginning of the process."
Brady said, "At some point in time the Soviets obviously will need a stabilization fund. But I think, without trying to prejudice what will be decided in the next two days' meetings, the reform program inside the Soviet Union is going to have to take place and take more form."
British Foreign Minister Douglas Hurd said none of the countries wanted to see Gorbachev go away empty-handed but on the other hand, "there's no one here who wants to send him away with a big fat check."
German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, worried about the impact that Soviet economic chaos would have on German unification efforts, has been the most outspoken in supporting aid although Mitterrand also told reporters that Gorbachev "must be given enough aid to succeed - and straightaway."
But Bush said "this is not blank check time" and Japanese Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu has expressed even more opposition, arguing that Japan would not be prepared to provide large sums of assistance until the Soviets return four northern islands taken toward the end of World War II.
On a non-Soviet topic, the U.S. administration signaled that Bush, just as he did at last year's summit in Houston, was lobbying the other leaders in an effort to break the logjam on the stalled world trade talks, known as the Uruguay Round.
Those discussions were supposed to conclude last December but broke off in acrimony when the United States and European countries could not reach agreement on a U.S. demand to slash farm subsidies.

 

End of Document
