

Test your reading comprehension by reading the story below and answering the questions that follow.
 The Associated Press
October 2, 1995, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 590 words
Dateline: GENEVA
Body



Hole In Ozone Over Antarctica Is Growing, U.N. Says
 The hole in the earth's ozone layer is growing faster than ever, allowing harmful ultraviolet radiation to reach the Earth.
Ozone is a gas in the Earth's stratosphere that blocks ultraviolet rays from reaching the Earth. Ultraviolet rays are believed to increase the incidence of skin cancer and cataracts.
The hole, first observed over Antarctica in the 1980s, has reappeared each September and October since then. This year, the hole is twice the size it was at this time last year, according to the United Nations World Meteorological Organization.
The hole appears during the end winter in Antarctica. With the onset of winter, temperatures plunge in the stratosphere and hasten ozone depletion.
The depletion of the ozone layer is caused mainly by the use of industrial chemicals on Earth. Even though factories are using less ozone-destroying chemicals such as chlorine and bromine, the hole continues to grow. That's because these chemicals have a life of 60 to 100 years and continue to linger in the atmosphere.
The expansion of the hole has surprised but not alarmed experts, who predict the ozone layer will get even worse before it recovers.
"From the end of July through August and early September ozone levels in this polar region have depleted by an average of 1 percent a day … more rapidly than ever before," said Rumen Bojkov, special adviser on ozone to the agency.
"Every 1 percent drop in ozone means roughly 1.3 percent to 1.5 percent more ultraviolet radiation reaching the surface," said Bojkov.
He said each 1 percent increase in ultraviolet radiation is thought to increase chances of skin cancer and eye cataracts by 2 percent.
The ozone layer also has deteriorated over Europe and North America, but to a lesser extent than in Antarctica. The agency says ozone levels over Europe and North America have diminished 10 percent to 15 percent since 1957. At the same time, ultraviolet radiation has increased 13 percent to 15 percent.
In 1987, countries agreed to reduce worldwide use of ozone-destroying chemicals. Without this agreement, Europe and North America would have over 35 percent more ultraviolet radiation by now, he said.
The organization expects the ozone decline to become more severe the next 10 years, reducing levels over Europe and North America by at least another 5 percent.
After that, the depletion is expected to slow down before starting to recover around the year 2040.
 
Using the newspaper story, find the vocabulary words listed below, and circle them in the article. Use the context of the story to help you figure out the meaning of each vocabulary word. Then, write the number of each word next to its correct meaning. Use a dictionary to check your answers.
 
 1)stratosphere 3)onset 5)depletion 7)expansion 9)plunge
2)incidence 4)alarmed 6)observed 8)predict 10)hasten
 
 --- a. noticed
--- b. a lessening in size
--- c. tell about in advance
--- d. fall suddenly
--- e. start; beginning
--- f. made larger
--- g. rate of occurrence
--- h. hurry; accelerate
--- i. frightened
--- j. a layer of air surrounding the earth about seven miles up
 
 ----------
Answer Key: a)6 b)5 c)8 d)9 e)3 f)7 g)2 h)10 i)4 j)1
 
 PART TWO
LET'S CLEAR THE AIR:
The automobile can be a source of air pollution. Here are three ways to cut down on its use: biking, car pooling and using public transportation.
Pick one of these topics and write an article that could be printed in your school newspaper. Your goal is to convince readers to clean up the air. Take a few deep breaths and begin.
 Load-Date: October 2, 1995

 

End of Document
