

Text Of The Resolution Recognizing Baltic Independence
The Associated Press
September 6, 1991, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1126 words
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Following are the texts of the Soviet State Council's resolutions Friday recognizing the independence of the Baltic republics, as reported by Tass and translated by The Associated Press.
---
RESOLUTION OF THE U.S.S.R. STATE COUNCIL ON THE RECOGNITION OF THE SOVEREIGNTY OF THE ESTONIAN REPUBLIC.
Taking into account the concrete historical and political situation preceding the entry of the Estonian Republic into the U.S.S.R., the U.S.S.R. State Council resolves:
1. To recognize the independence of the Estonian Republic.
2. On the basis of the resolution of the V (Extraordinary) Congress of the U.S.S.R. People's Deputies, to hold negotiations with the Estonian Republic to resolve the entire complex of issues relating to the provision of the rights of the citizens and the interests of the U.S.S.R. and the states which make it up, (and) affecting economic, political, military, border, humanitarian and other issues.
To form a state delegation of the U.S.S.R. for negotiations with the Estonian republic (and) to give it the necessary authority.
Taking into account the special interest of the R.S.F.S.R. (Russian Federation) which borders on the Estonian republic, to include its representatives into the above-mentioned state delegation of the U.S.S.R.
3. In resolving issues relating to the recognition of the independence of the Estonian Republic, to take into account the need to fulfill the obligations of the U.S.S.R. to the international community, and to observe the universally recognized norms of the international law, human rights and freedoms, and the rights and freedoms of ethnic minorities, which are confirmed in international treaties and other acts in which the U.S.S.R. is a party.
4. On the basis of the Declaration of Human Rights and Freedoms adopted by the V (Extraordinary) Congress of the U.S.S.R. People's Deputies, to recognize that the citizens of the U.S.S.R. who have expressed a wish to stay in the Estonian republic or move to the U.S.S.R. are entitled to the legal protection of the U.S.S.R. and the republic whose citizenship they will assume.
5. The U.S.S.R. Foreign Ministry shall announce support of the appeal of the Estonian Republic for its entry into the United Nations, it shall also express itself in favor of its joining of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
U.S.S.R. State Council
Moscow, Kremlin
Sept. 6, 1991
---
RESOLUTION OF THE U.S.S.R. STATE COUNCIL ON THE RECOGNITION OF THE SOVEREIGNTY OF THE LATVIAN REPUBLIC.
Taking into account the concrete historical and political situation preceding the entry of the Latvian Republic into the U.S.S.R., the U.S.S.R. State Council resolves:
1. To recognize the independence of the Latvian Republic.
2. On the basis of the resolution of the V (Extraordinary) Congress of the U.S.S.R. People's Deputies, to hold negotiations with the Latvian Republic to resolve the entire complex of issues relating to the provision of the rights of the citizens and the interests of the U.S.S.R. and the states which make it up, (and) affecting economic, political, military, border, humanitarian and other issues.
To form a state delegation of the U.S.S.R. for negotiations with the Latvian republic (and) to give it the necessary authority.
Taking into account the special interest of the R.S.F.S.R. and the B.S.S.R. (Byelorussia) which border on the Latvian republic, to include their representatives into the above-mentioned state delegation of the U.S.S.R..
3. In resolving issues relating to the recognition of the independence of the Latvian Republic, to take into account the need to fulfill the obligations of the U.S.S.R. to the international community, and to observe the universally recognized norms of the international law, human rights and freedoms, and the rights and freedoms of ethnic minorities, which are confirmed in international treaties and other acts in which the U.S.S.R. is a party.
4. On the basis of the Declaration of Human Rights and Freedoms adopted by the V (Extraordinary) Congress of the U.S.S.R. People's Deputies, to recognize that the citizens of the U.S.S.R. who have expressed a wish to stay in the Latvian republic or move to the U.S.S.R. are entitled to the legal protection of the U.S.S.R. and the republic whose citizenship they will assume.
5. The U.S.S.R. Foreign Ministry shall announce support of the appeal of the Latvian Republic for its entry into the United Nations, it shall also express itself in favor of its joining of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
U.S.S.R. State Council
Moscow, Kremlin
Sept. 6, 1991
---
RESOLUTION OF THE U.S.S.R. STATE COUNCIL ON THE RECOGNITION OF THE SOVEREIGNTY OF THE LITHUANIAN REPUBLIC.
Taking into account the concrete historical and political situation preceding the entry of the Lithuanian Republic into the U.S.S.R., the U.S.S.R. State Council resolves:
1. To recognize the independence of the Lithuanian Republic.
2. On the basis of the resolution of the V (Extraordinary) Congress of the U.S.S.R. People's Deputies, to hold negotiations with the Lithuanian Republic to resolve the entire complex of issues relating to the provision of the rights of the citizens and the interests of the U.S.S.R. and the states which make it up, (and) affecting economic, political, military, border, humanitarian and other issues.
To form a state delegation of the U.S.S.R. for negotiations with the Lithuanian republic (and) to give it the necessary authority.
Taking into account the special interest of the R.S.F.S.R. and the B.S.S.R. which border on the Lithuanian republic, to include their representatives into the above-mentioned state delegation of the U.S.S.R.
3. In resolving issues relating to the recognition of the independence of the Lithuanian Republic, to take into account the need to fulfill the obligations of the U.S.S.R. to the international community, and to observe the universally recognized norms of the international law, human rights and freedoms, and the rights and freedoms of ethnic minorities, which are confirmed in international treaties and other acts in which the U.S.S.R. is a party.
4. On the basis of the Declaration of Human Rights and Freedoms adopted by the V (Extraordinary) Congress of the U.S.S.R. People's Deputies, to recognize that the citizens of the U.S.S.R. who have expressed a wish to stay in the Lithuanian republic or move to the U.S.S.R. are entitled to the legal protection of the U.S.S.R. and the republic whose citizenship they will assume.
5. The U.S.S.R. Foreign Ministry shall announce support of the appeal of the Lithuanian Republic for its entry into the United Nations, it shall also express itself in favor of its joining of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
U.S.S.R. State Council
Moscow, Kremlin
Sept. 6, 1991

 

End of Document
