

The Pope Takes Manhattan, The Vendors Make Hay
 The Associated Press
October 7, 1995, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 513 words
Byline: By LARRY McSHANE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Saturday in the park with John Paul was a time of reflection - and Vince Arnoldo was reflecting that if it rained, it might cost him $ 500.
Arnoldo, a free-lance vendor with a fistful of Vatican flags in his right hand and a board packed with papal buttons in his left, was just one of many folks trying to make a buck while the pope preached to at least 130,000 people in the park.
Illegal vendors along Central Park West were selling everything from shirts to nuts. They peddled unauthorized $ 15 papal sweatshirts, $ 10 gold-plate "commemorative" crosses, $ 8 "custom-made" John Paul II T-shirts, $ 1 homemade crosses with the pope's picture.
At the Universal Church between 75th and 76th streets, a banner across the glass double doors advertised rental space to the papal crowd: "Weddings, receptions, parties, benefits, concerts, conferences, trade shows."
Hawkers sold newspapers along the park's western edge. People handed out fliers pitching new jobs and "free" Pope videos ("allow $ 9.92 to cover the cost of manufacturing, shipping and handling"). One man sold boxes of mixed nuts from a wooden crate, preying on Catholics with the munchies.
"Delicious," he promised.
Arnoldo, whose items were selling for $ 1 a pop, wasn't as upbeat. The threat of rain on this gray fall day was posing a menace to his anticipated profit - about $ 500 for a morning's work. The rain never came, but his attitude didn't change.
"I've seen better days," said Arnoldo, a cabbie who drove 270 miles from his hometown Syracuse to sell pope memorabilia. "I think maybe this city, there's not much believers."
Mike Santarpia, 48, an ex-city cop selling papal T-shirts of his own design, figured things had to get better.
"I was down by the United Nations on Thursday, and I didn't sell one shirt," he admitted. His main gripe on Saturday morning: "My girlfriend forgot to bring umbrellas to sell."
One illegal vendor's pitch for his $ 15 papal sweatshirts was simple: "They're 20 bucks a block away!"
He was right; the official merchandise did not come cheap.
The double-CD of the pope praying, in English or Spanish, went for $ 25. Papal T-shirts were $ 20, and so were papal baseball caps. The black and white "1996 With the Holy Father" calendar brought $ 15. A Vatican puzzle postcard sold for $ 5.
Police and park rangers did little to shut down the vendors, who really feared just one thing: confiscation.
One vendor sat on a park bench holding just two shirts at a time. He kept a bag filled with the rest of his fall collection beneath an adjoining bench.
"If the police catch you, they take away the whole thing," he explained. No profit is one thing; losing the clothes is a loss for the day.
But what does a man profit if he gains the world and loses his soul? That was the question posed by a born-again Christian who was passing out leaflets at Columbus Circle questioning the pope's religious role.
Not that anybody headed to the Mass was paying attention.
"I haven't had much response," preacher Ray Kane admitted, watching waves of people ignore him. "Today, these people have a one-track mind."
 Load-Date: October 7, 1995

 

End of Document
