

The 'Lost Boys' of Brazil Live and Die on the Streets
The Associated Press
September 5, 1993, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 614 words
Byline: By PETER MUELLO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




They are the Lost Boys, with names like Little Skunk, Big Mouth, Cat-Eater, Red.
They play, beg, eat, bathe, sleep and steal on the streets of big cities across Brazil. Often, they die there.
Their real names belong to another world, one of homes and families and childhoods they never had or would rather forget.
The future does not exist for them. They are a nuisance, a waste, a tragedy.
"My life is like the wind - there's nothing to hold it down," said Rusty, a street kid in the northeastern city of Recife. Not long afterward, he was shot to death by police.
Many of the children, like Rusty, blow through life unnoticed until they meet a sudden, violent end.
For eight boys in Rio, the end came July 23, before dawn.
Two cars pulled up to a downtown sidewalk, where a group of kids slept huddled on a scrap of old carpet in the shadow of Candelaria Cathedral. Five men got out and started shooting.
Six raggedy children died on the spot. Two more died later in a hospital.
"The street raised him and the street killed him," said Ana Maria Pereira, the mother of a 13-year-old victim.
Nobody came for Little Skunk. His body lay in the morgue for days, and finally was buried in a pauper's grave.
Survivors told the story: A day earlier, they had a run-in with police making rounds. Someone threw a rock that shattered the windshield of the police van. The cops said they would be back, and warned the boys not to sleep on the street.
Four policemen were arrested as suspects.
The massacre shocked Brazil and the world, but was not really surprising. Congress has said at least four street children are killed every day in Brazil.
Human rights groups say many of the killers are off-duty policemen hired by shopkeepers to "clean up" a high-crime district.
"It was big because it was downtown and there were eight at once," said Gecivaldo Barbosa Alves, a "street educator" with the Sao Martinho Foundation for street children. "But it's a fire of straw. Thirty days from now, no one will remember."
Street kids are the dark side of the "Brazilian miracle" of the 1960s and 1970s. Rapid economic growth brought a flood of peasants to the cities, where they settled in miserable shantytowns called "favelas."
No one knows how many children are on the streets. Some say there are nearly 4,000 in greater Rio alone.
Many come from the worst favelas: the Tide, New Holland and Shoemaker slums perched on rotting piles over the fetid waters of Guanabara Bay. Others are the children of rural families, often from the vast northeastern drought zone, that gambled everything on making it in the city and lost.
Nearly all tell stories of hunger, violence, beatings, drunken or absent fathers.
"Taking to the street is an act of courage," Alves said. "If they stayed where they were, they'd die."
In the street, the kids band together for companionship and protection. They beg, steal, scrounge, collect and sell bottles or old paper.
What money they get goes for food or for shoemaker's glue. Inhaling the fumes causes hallucinations and helps them ignore hunger, thirst and cold.
"They create a family in the street," Alves said. "They hang around together, sleep together, get arrested together."
At night, they crawl into holes and abandoned houses, or curl up on pieces of rug or cardboard on subway air vents or newsstands.
Sleeping on the sidewalk is risky because of the police. Boys and girls routinely tell of being picked up, beaten and forced to have sex with policemen or each other.
For kids who want to leave the street, there are private shelters and halfway houses. But most never make it that far.
"Getting rid of street kids is a long-term project," Alves said. "Until then, a lot more will die."

 

End of Document
