

The Nobel-ist of Them All: University of Chicago Celebrates 100th
The Associated Press
September 29, 1991, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1767 words
Byline: By SHARON COHEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CHICAGO
Body




Sprouting above the locust trees that line Dorchester Avenue is a sleek high-rise that lends new meaning to the phrase "street smart." Its nickname: Nobel Tower. Its neighbor: the University of Chicago.
Four university professors who live in the tower are Nobel Prize winners. And the red-brick building next door? It's home to two more Nobelists from the school.
This quiet corner may be the one place in the world where six Nobel laureates can shout to each other from their windows, and that speaks volumes about the prestige and pedigree of the university, which begins celebrating its 100th anniversary this week.
In a city built on brawn, the University of Chicago was founded on brains. It is a breeding ground for presidential cabinet and Supreme Court members, great writers, great scientists, even a great comic mind or two.
In a city sometimes known for bare-knuckle brawlers, it is a silk-gloved sophisticate, a place where Aristotle is breakfast fodder, where scholars devote five decades to a dictionary, where even the guy who butts heads on the 50-yard line on Saturday plays cello in a chamber orchestra on Sunday.
And in a city that embraces lovable losers, it is an indisputable, certifiable winner: 61 Nobelists have been university faculty, students or researchers. Eight now are on staff.
The University of Chicago, it would seem, is as out of place in Chicago as a Republican in City Hall. But some say they're quite compatible, thank you.
"This is the city for us," said Edward Rosenheim, professor emeritus of English. "There's a tough-mindedness in this town that's shared at the university. This is a great city that gets things done, and is characterized by energy of all kinds … and it has transferred a great deal of moxie to this university."
"Part of it is the mystique of 'the city of big shoulders.' That metaphor has always seen as making Chicago anti-intellectual, but it isn't that way," said Gerhard Casper, provost and former law school dean.
"Chicago, both the city and the university, have been innovators," said Nobel economist Milton Friedman, who taught at the school for 30 years.
Despite that bond, the university has a lower profile in its own backyard than it does abroad, where it's renown in pipe-smoking citadels of academe.
"It's better known in Oxford, England, Heidelberg or Tokyo than it is in Glenview," Rosenheim said, referring to the Chicago suburb.
The reasons for that are both mundane: In the muscle-bulging world of college football, it's more of a 90-pound weakling. Its team, abolished for 30 years after halcyon beginnings, is not exactly ready for prime time. (Last year's record: 1-9.)
And arcane: As a research university, its work can be downright esoteric. Scholars, for instance, have worked since the 1950s on the Chicago Assyrian Dictionary, a glossary of the Akkadian or Assyro-Babylonian language, based on texts that are the first in man's recorded history.
"Great universities historically have been very isolated little communities," Rosenheim said. "If you'd say, 'Hey, there's a place where they're very much interested in quantum physics,' how many people would understand?"
But at least one experiment there changed the world.
On Dec. 2, 1942, Enrico Fermi and colleagues, protected by raccoon-coat wearing guards, gathered in an indoor squash court under the grandstands of then-Stagg Field and split the atom.
The history-makers celebrated the first controlled sustained nuclear chain reaction with a silent toast of Chianti, then autographed the bottle as they ushered in the modern nuclear age.
While Fermi won the Nobel, other alumni have nabbed the Oscar, the Tony, the Pulitzer, the Guggenheim and other prestigious honors.
The university's alumni include writers Saul Bellow, Kurt Vonnegut Jr., Philip Roth and Susan Sontag; journalist Seymour Hersh; radio host Studs Terkel; Supreme Court Justice John Paul Stevens; banker David Rockefeller; astronomer Carl Sagan; director Mike Nichols; Second City co-founder Bernard Sahlins; and actor Ed Asner.
Others have achieved fame - 'Untouchable' crime-buster Eliot Ness - or infamy - Nathan Leopold and Richard Loeb, the geniuses who killed a 14-year-old boy in one of the Roaring '20s' most sensational crimes.
Both its law school - Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia taught there - and business school - former Secretary of State George Shultz once was dean - are considered among the nation's best.
Law school alumni include former attorneys general Ramsey Clark and president emeritus Edward Levi, who started as a kindergartener in the university lab school and also was a professor and law school dean.
And its economics department is so celebrated it's known worldwide as the "Chicago School," famous for its conservative free-market philosophy. In 13 of the 22 years the economics Nobel has been awarded, someone connected with the university has won.
"It's very, very heady. I always stood there with an open mouth and absorbed as much as I could," Sahlins said. "It's really a place where intellectual discourse was considered as exhilarating as a Chicago Bears game."
History professor Robert Richards jokes that when he had breakfast in a local cafe: "I was forced to talk about Aristotle over my cornflakes."
Such intellectual intensity creates a certain smugness.
It was the faculty here, after all, who in 1959 rejected Levi's proposal to award the visiting Queen of England an honorary degree because she didn't meet scholarship standards.
"I was very proud of them," Levi recalled, "They were adhering to their principles."
Students, too, can display a sense of superiority, bolstered by the belief that if you can make it here, you can make it anywhere.
"Any U of C student worth their salt feels a bit of intellectual elitism," said former student ombudsman John Scalzi, who graduated this spring.
The university "attracts students who are anxious for a rigorous intellectual experience … and who are rather independent minds," said President Hanna Holborn Gray. "To take on this kind of curriculum is to take on not just a lot of hard work, but to believe … the end result ought to be to know how to think."
Legend has it that no undergrad, from start to finish, has earned a perfect 4.0 average.
Enrollment is nearly 11,000, but only a third are undergrads, whose annual tuition is $ 16,275. About 95 percent plan to continue their schooling. Of incoming freshmen, 70 percent were in the top 10 percent of their classes.
Though students may be the brightest in high school, "When you come here, everybody's that smart and the professors are walking around getting tickets to Sweden," Scalzi said.
Those trips to pick up the Nobel and all the brainy students help foster some silly stereotypes.
"A lot of people have the image of the university that it's hyper-sophisticated nerds who can't tie their shoes," Richards said.
There is, however, a wunderkind image traceable to the university's first president, William Rainey Harper, a Baptist who had his doctorate at age 18.
Fellow Baptist John D. Rockefeller founded the university, ultimately donating $ 35 million, prompting some to joke its hymn should be "Praise John From Whom Oil Blessings Flow."
Perhaps the university's biggest innovator was another whiz kid, Robert Maynard Hutchins, who became president at age 30. He was bold: He developed a core curriculum, making all undergraduate courses mandatory.
And he was witty: He once said, "When I feel the desire to exercise, I lie down 'til it goes away." And controversial: He dropped football, saying it was doing no one any good except "the teams that beat us."
It wasn't the university's only controversy.
In the 1950s, rising crime and the ghetto spread into the university's South Side community, Hyde Park. Speculation was that the school would merge with another or move.
The university, using the power of eminent domain, working with the city and aided by government dollars, purchased and demolished parts of the racially changing neighborhood. Supporters say it stimulated revival and reversed decline.
But political strategist Don Rose, then a local newspaper publisher, argues that a culturally diverse neighborhood was destroyed. "They did their best to create an upper-middle class, predominantly white suburb in the city," he said.
Today, integrated Hyde Park is home to many faculty members, who often socialize together.
On campus, they're frequently in contact, too: Physicists take each other's classes, economists talk with law professors, and so on.
"People talk across departmental lines," Richards said. "It's a gritty place where ideas smash up against each other, produce a lot of heat and smoke and burned hands. … If you don't have the stomach for it, you'll have terminal dyspepsia."
Though it's not all serious - "Nobel Laureate X-ing" signs dot the campus - there are pressures working among super-achievers.
"It is both a stimulus and a reminder of what it is possible to achieve and what you have not achieved yourself," Richards said. "It's a driving force and sometimes it drives people out of the university."
Faculty member George Stigler, 1982 Nobel economist, offers another perspective.
"We are in a competitive atmosphere, not against each other, but against the world," he said.
Case in point: Astrophysicist Subrahmanyan Chandresekhar, who drove 150 miles weekly from a Wisconsin observatory to teach two students.
Colleagues asked why he was wasting his time. He replied the men were very serious students. They were. Both won Nobels.
So did Chandresekhar - 26 years later.
The university also is home to the first Heisman Trophy winner, Jay Berwanger (1935), and Amos Alonzo Stagg, winner of six Big Ten titles and inventor of uniform numbers, the huddle and the letterman's club.
But since football's return in 1969 in another division, the record is a humiliating 48-121-2.
There are no athletic scholarships here, just scholars: One player, a pre-med student, has a 3.6 chemistry average.
"My vocabulary has tripled in the three years I've been here," said Coach Greg Quick. "When we produce a playbook, it has to be gramatically correct, or some guy will raise his hand and say, 'Should that be a colon instead of a semicolon?' "
Even the Scholarly Yell is erudite:
"Themistocles, Thucydides, the Peloponnesian Wars, X-squared, Y-squared, H-2-S-O-4, Who for, What for, Who in the hell are cheering for? Go Maroons."
Quick hopes to give fans more to cheer about, but learning will always be the university's real mission.
"They make you learn to be able to teach yourself," said Carl Sagan. "Once you have that skill, you can go on with that forever."
 Graphic



 
With LaserPhotos

 

End of Document
