

The 1996 Olympic Games: Preparing the Flame For Atlanta
The Associated Press
July 18, 1993, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 798 words
Byline: By MARC RICE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ATLANTA
Body




With three years to go before the opening of the Atlanta Olympics, this city is beginning to see the tangible evidence:
The Games are on the way.
Preparation for construction of the main Olympic stadium has begun. Negotiations for U.S. television rights are about to get under way. Even the mascot Whatizit has been redesigned.
"We're about to get into the fun part," said Billy Payne, president of the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games.
That would be a welcome change from the past few months, during which organizers of the Atlanta Games have grappled with political skirmishes and financial disappointments.
As Atlanta hits the midway point - three years after the 1990 awarding of the Olympics and three years before the July 20, 1996, beginning of the Games - organizers are bracing for a whirlwind of activity.
The most visible sign of progress was the ground-breaking this month for the $ 209 million Olympic stadium, which was nearly derailed in March when neighborhood residents and county commissioners balked at the project.
Construction of several other venues are to begin in the next 1 years.
"Bricks and mortar now begin to take the place of doubts and cynicism and negativism about whether or not we'll be ready," Payne said.
But other obstacles await, particularly the job of convincing TV executives that rights for the Atlanta Games are worth a record $ 500 million, and dealing with what some say are unrealistic expectations over how the Olympics will benefit Atlanta in the long run.
Talks on a TV deal begin later this month, with Atlanta Olympics officials seeking about 20 percent more than the $ 401 million NBC paid to televise the 1992 Barcelona Games. TV rights represent the single biggest piece of revenue for the Games.
ACOG officials believe they have a valuable commodity because the 1996 Games mark the centennial of the modern Olympics, and the location means that the choice events can be shown live in prime time.
Yet the Atlanta Games may still be a hard sell.
The Barcelona Games, while recognized as one of the best Olympics, were a money-loser for TV.
"No question, the media package is a problem," said Georgia State University economist Donald Ratajczak.
"There is the legitimate issue of whether a single network can afford the kind of money they (ACOG officials) have budgeted," Ratajczak said. "They talk about including cable, but in the last Olympics cable didn't do so well."
ACOG also is only halfway to its goal of signing 10 corporate sponsors at $ 40 million each, something Payne had hoped would be completed months ago.
"As everyone knows, the sponsorships, because of the very difficult economy, did not come in as quickly as we wanted it to," Payne said.
"I should never ever have said we hoped it would happen by a certain date, because it is coming in at a pace that matches our needs," he said.
The slow pace may be a bigger problem than that acknowledged publicly by Atlanta officials, Ratajczak said. Had the sponsors come on board earlier, ACOG would have tens of millions more dollars in the bank earning interest, he said.
"The likelihood they will get (the sponsors) is good, but clearly the timing is way late," he said. "That was the original projection - they would have interest income. The interest is not going to be an income, and that hurts."
Just as sticky as the financial matters is the tightrope Payne and his crew must walk the next three years to keep enthusiasm high while leveling the hopes that the Olympics will spur major improvements in Atlanta's quality of life.
"I don't think we tried hard enough to play down too many statements by too many leaders that the Olympics were going to radically change this city," said George Berry, chairman of an Olympic oversight authority.
"It's becoming more and more obvious that the money is not going to be there for off-venue capital improvements," Berry said. "The reality is, the Olympics are going to be a great event … but what you see is what you get."
The Rev. Tim McDonald, who heads a coalition of activist groups in Atlanta, said the community has a right to ask that the Olympics do more for the city.
"When you've got a $ 1.5 billion budget that's going to generate $ 5 billion, I don't think expectations are too high," McDonald said. "If the Olympics do what it has the potential to do, then it will be a good thing for the city."
Among other things, McDonald has been pushing for assurances that small, local businesses are included in Olympic deals and that residents of neighborhoods affected by Games construction be trained for long-term jobs.
McDonald's group also has been pushing for union labor on Olympic construction projects. Labor groups and one of the companies working on the stadium have reached agreement on wages and benefits for construction workers.

 

End of Document
