

The Artists: Top Auction Houses Romance the Eastern Market
The Associated Press
January 13, 1991, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 629 words
Byline: Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BERLIN
Body




The world's top auction houses have set up shop in Berlin, seeking to acquire and sell treasures kept hidden during the Communist rule in eastern Europe.
Sotheby's, the world's largest art auction house, has chosen a former Prussian palace in eastern Berlin as the site of its new office. The previous tenant was the German-Soviet Friendship Society.
Rival Christie's has selected a posh ground-floor setting just off the Kurfuerstendamm, western Berlin's most fashionable shopping boulevard, as its new address in the capital.
Both aim to explore the unknown art world of the former Communist east that was largely closed off to capitalist dealers during the Cold War.
"Sotheby's had long thought about going to Berlin. With the opening of the Wall, it became necessary to open," said H. Josef Koenig, director of the Berlin office.
Koenig says he gets offers every day from eastern Germans seeking appraisals of silver, paintings or antiques they had hidden for years.
The objects include old Meissen porcelain, pieces of Biedermeier furniture, silver, jewelry and paintings. Sometimes works of real value appear and can make their owners rich.
Shortly before unity Oct. 3, an East German from Dresden showed up at the Frankfurt branch of Sotheby's with a painting he had inherited.
The retired worker had hidden the painting after the Red Army fought its way into Germany in 1945 and kept it secret from East German authorities who had forbidden private ownership of art.
Experts identified the painting as a portrait by the 20th century German expressionist Emil Nolde. Out of sight for half-a-century, the work had been given up for lost by art connoisseurs. The painting was valued at 1.35 million marks ($$900,000).
"Nobody knows what is over there," said Koenig.
To find out, Christie's hired Peter Betthausen, former director of the National Gallery in what was East Berlin and a specialist in German art of the 19th and 20th centuries, to head its office.
Christie's is also staffing its Berlin office with experts to assess the value of objects offered, focusing on silver and jewelry.
Sotheby's eastern expansion does not stop in Berlin. An office already exists in Budapest, Hungary, and another is planned for Prague, Czechoslovakia, in 1991.
The arrival of the two major auction houses could signal the start of a revival of Berlin's prewar role as Germany's major art center.
Berlin began its steep decline as an art mecca in 1933 when Adolf Hitler took power. The Nazis banned many artists, and in 1939 publicly burned more than 1,000 works of art that they deemed "offensive."
Socialist Realism was the tune of the day when the Communists came to power in eastern Germany after World War II. Artists who did not conform could not exhibit.
The unstable postwar political situation also affected West Berlin. The city found it hard to attract valuable works for museums while the city was divided.
But now that the city is open again, both auction houses have spared no expense for the occasion.
Sotheby's sponsored a public exhibition that drew large crowds in October to Schloss Charlottenburg to see modern paintings by such artists as Kandinsky, Matisse and Modigliani.
Christie's flew in Lord Carrington, a former NATO secretary general who is chairman of Christie's International, for the official Dec. 10 opening of its offices.
However, it may take a while for Berlin to become the site of the kind of spectacular auctions held regularly in London. While many foreigners visit the city to look at what is left of the Berlin Wall, most do not come regularly.
"Germans love traveling to London," said Angela Hucke, Christie's press officer for Germany. Auctions are also most likely to fetch higher prices in London, which has a more international buying audeience than Berlin.

 

End of Document
