

The Pipes Call, the Crowds Come to Scots Tattoo
The Associated Press
September 3, 1993, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 422 words
Byline: By GRAHAM HEATHCOTE, Associated Press writer
Dateline: EDINBURGH, Scotland
Body




While some search out the best plays, operas, concerts, art exhibitions and poetry readings at the Edinburgh Festival, the big crowds are watching the army.
The Edinburgh Military Tattoo packs them in at 900-year-old Edinburgh Castle with a swaggering nighttime show of bagpipes, drums and brass, joined by visiting bands and marching teams.
This year there were cannon shots, flaming torches, fireworks, a lone piper on the battlements, violinists, a choir, masses of Scottish dancers and the Blues and Royals cavalry up from London.
More than 8 million people have seen the tattoo since it was first held in 1950. Its total audience over three weeks is usually about 200,000.
About 50 million more people see the military spectacle on television worldwide. And, unlike the arts events at the Edinburgh Festival, which ends today, the tattoo has never needed a cent of public subsidy.
Scotinform, a market research group, reckons the annual Edinburgh Festival and the concurrent "fringe fetival" of avant-garde events generates $ 66 million for Edinburgh from tourists and an additional $ 42 million for the rest of Scotland.
"The researchers say the tattoo accounts for 45 percent of the Edinburgh sum and 90 percent of the other figure and it has never cost the city a penny," says Brian Leishman, the tattoo's business manager.
Leishman, 57, is a retired army major in his 18th year of putting on the tattoo. He had to find $ 3.45 million to stage the 24 performances this year.
Commercial sponsorship enabled him to hold seat prices below cost at $ 11.25 to $ 22.50 each. A surplus from ticket sales is given to the army benevolent fund and to the festival.
Half the tattoo audience is from England, 20 percent from Scotland and the remaining 30 percent split among Americans, Canadians, Australians, New Zealanders and others, Leishman said.
The castle, looming above the city on a rock 400 feet above sea level, is headquarters for the Scottish division and of a Scottish Lowlands brigade.
The army says "tattoo" derives from the "doe den tap toe," an old Flemish cry warning innkeepers to turn off the beer taps and for soldiers to return to their quarters.
Asked why the tattoo is such a draw, Leishman said: "It epitomizes all that's good in the service: music, tradition, pomp and circumstance, and pipes and drums are very stirring. Britain has no conscription now so few people these days have any experience of what soldiering is about."
"And we have the castle," he added. "The organizers of any similar event tend to build a castle."

 

End of Document
