

The Artists: The Cathedral and the Phone Booth: One Man's Masterpieces
The Associated Press
March 12, 1993, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 835 words
Byline: By GRAHAM HEATHCOTE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LIVERPOOL, England
Body




Inside the Anglican cathedral in Liverpool, one of the largest churches in the world, is a red telephone booth.
Both were designed by Sir Giles Gilbert Scott, and both are acknowledged masterpieces.
"They make a lovely example of the range of his works and the times in which he lived," says Chris Palmer, spokesman for the Royal Institute of British Architects.
"Liverpool Cathedral can be seen as one of the last, great Victorian Gothic buildings in Britain, while the near-perfect phone box is one of the finest examples of our early 20th-century classicism."
Scott was 22 when he won the design competition for the cathedral, which was inspired by the great Gothic churches built from the 12th to the 16th centuries.
He was 43 when he designed the phone box, taking his inspiration from the family mausoleum of Sir John Soane, the architect of the Bank of England who died in 1837.
Dean Derrick Walters persuaded British Telecom to give one of the red phone booths to the cathedral when the communications network was discarding them for a cheaper, easier-to-maintain and vandal-proof design in tough glass and aluminium.
"The dean thought it would be nice to have an example of Scott's smallest design on permanent display in his largest design. British Telecom gave us the phone box in the late 1980s and visitors are always photographing it," said Peter Kennerley, the cathedral education officer.
One feature of Scott's booth that exasperated the network was that it had 54 small panes of glass on three sides.
Neil Kerr, a Liverpool poet, remarked to a visitor: "I have wondered whether the cathedral is the largest phone box in the world or the phone box is the smallest cathedral."
The Cathedral Church of Christ is the largest Anglican cathedral in Britain. It was built of red sandstone on a hill between 1904 and 1978.
The cathedral was Scott's lifework. He was knighted for it in 1924; when he died in 1960 in his 80th year, he was buried at the front of the cathedral, outside the west door.
A half-million stone blocks and 12 million bricks went into the cathedral, and its bells are the world's heaviest and highest. The gigantic organ has 9,704 pipes, from 32 feet long to three-quarters of an inch.
King Edward VII laid the cathedral foundation stone in 1904, and Queen Elizabeth II attended the 1978 thanksgiving service for the completion.
In between, Edward's son, King George V, was at the 1924 consecration, and the queen's father, King George VI, visited in 1940 during World War II, encouraging the builders by saying: "Carry on, if only in a small way. Refuse to be beaten."
Kerr, 39, described the cathedral as "an awesome place" and said: "The ordinary man of Liverpool wouldn't bring his family here. I've lived in Liverpool all my life, but I never came here until I was in my late 20s and I felt I needed to after my mother had a stroke.
"Catholics wouldn't visit it in past years because of religious differences, but that isn't true any more."
The city is a byword for neighborliness these days as Anglican bishop David Sheppard and Catholic archbishop Derek Worlock work closely together. Liverpudlians jokingly call them, "Fish and chips."
At Whitsun, there is a procession along Hope Street between Scott's Gothic cathedral and Sir Frederic Gibberd's modernist, circular Catholic cathedral, built between 1962 and 1967. It is topped with a conical roof capped with a colored glass tower and crown of pinnacles.
Kerr said the grandeur of Scott's cathedral appeals to him and he often visits it, sometimes finding himself the only layman at Holy Communion first thing in the morning.
In a poem called "The Cathedral," Kerr wrote:
"It stands a MONOLITH against the sun.
Its grandeur speaking in voluminous
tones yet silent.
It is mystical and austere, a sandstone
pantheon with Gothic arches in the sky."
"The refectory is the best place in Liverpool for lunch and tea," he confided over lunch.
Pointing out of a refectory window to the houses in Percy Street, he said, "That's the house where John Lennon and Stu Sutcliffe - the Beatle who died - shared a bedsit."
The Beatles were all born in Liverpool and as boys they played beside the cathedral in the disused quarry, which was made into a graveyard. Paul McCartney unsuccessfully auditioned for the cathedral choir when he was 11.
The "Liverpool Oratorio," composed by McCartney and American Carl Davis for the 150th anniversary of the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra, had its premiere in the cathedral in 1991.
Sir John Betjeman, the late poet laureate and enthusiast for churches and railways, loved the cathedral as he loved St. Pancras train station in London, designed by Scott's grandfather, Sir George Gilbert Scott.
Betjeman wrote of the cathedral: "This is one of the great buildings of the world. … The impression of vastness, strength and height no words can describe. … Suddenly one sees that that the greatest art of architecture, that lifts one up and turns one into a king, yet compels reverence, is the art of enclosing space."

 

End of Document
