

The Latest From the War on AIDS: No Cure, No Treatment, No Vaccine
The Associated Press
August 12, 1994, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 761 words
Byline: By DANIEL Q. HANEY, AP Science Writer
Dateline: YOKOHAMA, Japan
Body




The gist of 3,500 reports this week from the war on AIDS is simple enough: There is no cure for AIDS, no effective treatment, no vaccine.
Nor will there be anytime soon.
"Anyone with HIV won't find much solace at this meeting," said Dr. Mervyn Silverman, president of the American Foundation for AIDS Research.
The tone of the 10th International Conference on AIDS, which concluded Thursday, was restrained from the start. Organizers warned the 12,000 participants not to expect anything big. They were right.
After four days of nonstop discussion, the goal of controlling HIV, the AIDS virus, seems as distant as ever.
"Breakthrough findings don't time themselves to coincide with international meetings," said Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the U.S. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.
But in the field of AIDS, breakthroughs are rare in the months between international meetings, too. The only one that surfaced since last year's big meeting in Berlin was the discovery that AIDS-infected women can avoid passing the virus to their babies during birth if they take the drug AZT.
Even this is a limited victory. Because the medicine is so expensive, it will not help those living in poor countries, where the disease is most common. And it may be worthless to even those who can afford it if AZT-resistant strains of the virus grow dominant.
If any theme emerged from the conference, it was the need to go back to basics. Rather than a scatter-shot scramble for new drugs, many scientists seemed to agree that they need new ideas. And they will get them by exploring the innermost workings of the virus and the body's complex and ultimately futile response to it.
The new head of the U.S. Office of AIDS Research said this will be the focus of the federal government's annual $ 1.3 billion AIDS budget.
"The engine that will drive the entire AIDS research enterprise forward is basic research," Dr. William E. Paul told the meeting.
But scientists have been gathering this kind of information since the epidemic began. Two of the most talked about subjects at the conference - long-term survivors and gene therapy - build on the encyclopedic store of basic knowledge already assembled about HIV virology and immunology.
While almost everyone who catches HIV eventually gets sick and dies, about 5 percent are still perfectly healthy 12 years to 15 years after their infection. Researchers believe that if they figure out how these people's immune systems tame HIV, maybe they could turn it into a treatment for those less fortunate.
"This is obviously a hot topic," said Dr. David Ho, head of the Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center in New York City.
His preliminary study, presented at the meeting, offers hints of unique immune system responses in people who carry HIV without harm.
Other researchers said their decade of basic research into HIV's origins, structure and life cycle is about to result in human experiments in gene therapy, the most exotic AIDS treatment yet. The idea is to insert HIV-killing genes into people's blood cells so they will be able to protect themselves from the virus.
No one knows whether this will produce a practical AIDS therapy. Time and again, the virus has proven to be more clever than the scientists. Its principal tactic is to evolve mutant genes that make it impervious to new drugs.
During treatment, HIV quickly becomes resistant to AZT and all the other drugs developed so far. No clearly effective new ones were introduced at the meeting. Doctors still hope that mixing the drugs together will improve their potency.
"We will combine them in as many different ways as we can imagine," said Dr. Paul Volberding of the University of California at San Francisco.
However, researchers showed little of the bravura that reigned early in the epidemic, when many were convinced victory over AIDS was inevitable.
"It has outsmarted us so far, and most of us would predict it will continue to," said Dr. Mark Wainberg of McGill University in Montreal.
For now, many believe that keeping people from catching AIDS, largely through condom use, is the only practical way to control the epidemic, which continues to spread with alarming speed.
According to the World Health Organization, about 17 million people have been infected with HIV - three million in the last year alone. Africa is hardest hit, but the virus is starting to spread in Asia, the world's most populous continent.
Clearly AIDS will be a deadly foe for a long time. The International AIDS Society is planning more meetings like this one through the end of the century.
 Load-Date: August 12, 1994

 

End of Document
