

The Economic Message of the War Is 'America's Back'
The Associated Press
February 28, 1991, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 598 words
Byline: By RICK GLADSTONE, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




America's quick Gulf War triumph could have profound psychological benefits for the economy, renewing respect for U.S. technology and infusing consumers with a patriotic fervor that may be felt from auto showrooms to machine shops.
"It appears to me we've come out of this as a country that's the clear global economic and military superpower," David Bostian of the New York investment firm Jesup, Josephthal & Co. said Thursday.
Among other things, the gulf victory could result in heightened demand for U.S. products and services, a strong desire by foreigners to invest large amounts of money in this country and a dramatic re-emergence of the American consumer, who curtailed spending even before the crisis began in August.
"There may be a kind of new, can-do feeling - you don't have to buy a Honda to get a good car," said Northwestern University finance professor Eugene Lerner, head of Disciplined Investment Advisers, a firm in Evanston, Ill. "We're talking about the country's animal spirits here."
John Wilson, chief economist for the Bank of America in San Francisco, said "the story on the impact of the war will be whether consumer confidence will bounce back. I think it will."
Nobody is predicting that peace will erase the nation's acute economic ills, including high levels of debt, a slump in manufacturing, a crisis in banking, increased unemployment and a depressed real estate market. Indeed, some say peace might dangerously obscure these problems in the next few months.
"It was a short war and that's wonderful, but I'm not certain it's going to be a panacea," said psychologist Renee H. Frengut, president of Market Insights Inc., a Bronxville, N.Y., consulting firm on consumer behavior.
"America's very good at pretending, jumping on the bandwagon," she said. "Everything's great and we're on top of the heap, without looking at the other realities."
But others say the successes of the war have helped restore American self-esteem, in contrast to the cynical emotions of the post-Vietnam War era and its disaffected generation.
"My best guess is that it will have an impact on the whole population and perhaps most on those who are teen-agers, and in their 20s, in terms of the emphasis on America, the United States as victorious," said University of Michigan sociologist Howard Schuman. "That's closer to what happened in World War II, a successful war where the enemy could be characterized as bad."
Perhaps equally important is the war's apparent vindication of U.S. technology and management skill, which has for years been characterized as shoddy when compared with the best that Japan and Germany have to offer. The almost nightly televised shots of U.S.-made Patriot missiles obliterating Iraqi Scuds became one of the war's enduring symbols.
"All Americans are more proud today than they were 90 days ago about the value of 'Made in America' stamped on products," said Philip Lader, president of the Business Executives for National Security, a Washington group. "The war showed us that we were prepared and thanks to engineering and production as well as military ingenuity, we showed the world that America's products work."
Matthew B. Coffee, president of the National Tooling and Machining Association in Fort Washington, Md., predicted that the war would result in much higher demand for U.S.-made aerospace and electronic products.
"In a war, you've got two kinds of troops, the troops that do the shooting and the troops that make the stuff they shoot," he said. "What we've seen here is our industrial troops are just as good as our troops in the field."

 

End of Document
