

The Breakup of the Soviet Union
The Associated Press
December 9, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 774 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Here are some key events in the breakup of the Soviet Union:
March 11, 1985 - Mikhail S. Gorbachev is elected general secretary of Communist Party, which adopts his platform of "perestroika," or restructuring of the Soviet system, in April.
June 28, 1988 - 19th Communist Party conference closes with call for creation of a new parliament, strengthened presidency, market economy, consideration of allowing republics greater control of economic affairs.
March 1989 - The new Congress of Peoples' Deputies is elected. Its opening session is characterized by open political debate.
Aug.-Dec. 1989 - Communist governments in eastern Europe fall after Gorbachev says he won't use force to save them.
March 11, 1990 - Lithuania declares independence. Its Baltic neighbors, Latvia and Estonia, follow suit.
May 29, 1990 - Boris N. Yeltsin is elected president of the Russian republic, which declares "sovereignty," claiming control of natural resources. By year's end, all 15 Soviet republics declare some form of sovereignty and Gorbachev proposes a Union Treaty to keep them together.
July 1990 - Conservatives criticize Gorbachev at the 28th Communist Congress. Yeltsin and other radicals quit the party. Gorbachev purges several old guard members from Politburo.
Jan. 13 - Fourteen people are killed when Soviet tanks attack the main television tower in Vilnius, Lithuania.
March 17 - The Union Treaty is approved in a nationwide referendum.
April 2 - Prices on a wide range of consumer goods rise by as much as 1,000 percent.
June 27 - Ukrainian lawmakers reject Union Treaty.
July 26 - Communist leaders overwhelmingly approve Gorbachev's new party platform, abandoning decades of Marxist dogma.
Aug. 19 - The day before Gorbachev planned to sign Union Treaty with several republics, a hard-line Communist junta moves to overthrow him.
Aug. 21 - Coup fails, Gorbachev returns to Moscow.
Aug. 22 - Lithuania outlaws the Communist Party.
Aug. 24 - Gorbachev resigns as Communist Party chief and urges it be disbanded; Ukraine becomes seventh of 15 Soviet republics to declare itself independent.
Aug. 25 - Norway and Denmark formally recognize independent Baltic republics of Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia.
Aug. 27 - Gorbachev appeals to 15 Soviet republics to preserve military and economic union; European Community recognizes independence of Baltic republics.
Aug. 29 - Soviet lawmakers suspend Communist Party activities nationwide and freeze its bank accounts because of party's role in failed coup; Russia and Ukraine bypass Kremlin to form military and economic alliance.
Aug. 30 - Azerbaijan declares independence and begins forming its own army.
Aug. 31 - Uzbekistan and Kirghizia become ninth and 10th republics to declare independence.
Sept. 2 - Congress of People's Deputies approves plan to reduce Kremlin authority in the Soviet Union but retain a loose federation of states; U.S. formally recognizes Baltic states.
Sept. 5 - Soviet lawmakers approve creation of interim government to usher in new confederation of sovereign states.
Sept. 6 - Soviet Union recognizes Baltics' independence.
Sept. 12 - Officials of Baltic states and 12 remaining Soviet republics agree to maintain collective defense framework and single control over Soviet nuclear arsenal.
Sept. 21 - Armenia votes in favor of independence from Soviet government.
Oct. 1 - Twelve remaining Soviet republics agree to new economic union to coordinate everything from communications to defense.
Oct. 17 - Ukraine says it won't join economic union with other Soviet republics.
Oct. 18 - Gorbachev and presidents of eight Soviet republics sign treaty to create economic union.
Oct. 28 - Twelve remaining Soviet republics agree to share responsibility for repaying nation's foreign debt.
Nov. 4 - Ukraine agrees to join 11 other remaining Soviet republics in new economic union.
Nov. 16 - Yeltsin issues 10 decrees declaring his Russian republic's control over Soviet money supply and trade in oil, gold, diamonds and foreign currency.
Nov. 22 - World's richest democracies defer $ 3.6 billion in debt payments and eight of the 12 republics agree to repay entire Soviet debt, estimated at more than $ 100 billion.
Nov. 25 - Seven republics fail to endorse Union Treaty but promise to send it to their individual legislatures for consideration.
Dec. 1 - Ukraine voters approve referendum declaring independence.
Dec. 3 - Gorbachev issues appeal to save Soviet Union, warning of possible warfare and "catastrophe for all mankind."
Dec. 4 - Supreme Soviet endorses Union Treaty; seven republics say they will sign.
Dec. 8 - Russia, Ukraine, Byelorussia form a "commonwealth" and declare Gorbachev's government dead.

 

End of Document
