

The Big Breakup: Soviet Congress OKs Plan Ending Central Rule
The Associated Press
September 5, 1991, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1047 words
Byline: By DEBORAH SEWARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Soviet lawmakers, bowing to Mikhail S. Gorbachev's will, voted today to end seven decades of monolithic Kremlin rule and set up an interim government to be dominated by sovereign republics.
In a sign of the republics' new standing, Gorbachev was poised to formally recognize the independence of the three Baltic states. All but five of the 15 Soviet republics have declared independence.
The 1,900-member Congress of People's Deputies overwhelmingly endorsed the plan to salvage some form of union for the huge but economically troubled country disintegrating in the wake of last month's failed coup by hard-liners.
Even Vladimir Lenin, the founder of the Soviet state, did not escape the upheaval. Before the Congress adjourned, it was proposed that Lenin's body be removed from its stately mausoleum in Red Square and reburied in Leningrad beside his mother.
The Congress effectively put itself out of business, and Lenin's fate is to be taken up by a smaller legislature set up under the restructuring plan.
The plan - approved 1,682 to 43 - was rammed through the Congress by a forceful and commanding Gorbachev, who squelched debate and refused to accept proposals from the chamber.
At one point, he threatened to close the session and suggested changing the constitution to eliminate the need for two-thirds approval.
"I will not yield the microphone to anyone from the floor!" Gorbachev said as some deputies tried to speak. "Either make a decision or not. That's all!"
Many lawmakers believed that if they had not approved the measures, Gorbachev would simply have implemented them by decree. Also, many believed they had to act to stave off the possibility of a chaotic breakup that could even lead to civil war.
The restructuring plan was forged by Gorbachev and the leaders of 10 republics - including Russian President Boris Yeltsin, who emerged as his governing partner after leading nationwide resistance to last month's abortive coup. In the wake of the takeover, central power and the Communist Party collapsed.
Gorbachev had encountered strong resistance from hard-line lawmakers at Wednesday's session of Congress, but afterward, he sent lawmakers into caucuses with their republic leaders. Those leaders had helped write the proposal and stood to gain enormous power with its passage, and by this morning opposition had been beaten down.
Despite his harsh tone during the debate, Gorbachev praised lawmakers after the measures' passage, saying they "rose to the occasion" at a crucial moment in Soviet history.
After lawmakers gave their approval, Gorbachev nodded and clapped, and Yeltsin, seated next to him, smiled broadly.
On Wednesday, Gorbachev had told Baltic representatives he would recognize their independence by decree after the session. Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia have won diplomatic recognition from the United States and most of Europe.
But with Gorbachev's decree, they would become the first breakaway Soviet states to have their independence drives win official Kremlin acceptance.
When it appeared today that parts of the restructuring proposal were running into trouble, Latvian deputy Yuri Boyars said, he instructed his delegation to cast ballots for it. The Latvians usually do not vote in the Congress because they consider their republic independent.
In Washington, the White House termed the lawmakers' actions an internal Soviet affair, but appeared to welcome prospects for an orderly transition of power.
"We've said all along, as long as they continue on the reform path in both economics and politics, as long as they arrive at decisions in a peaceful manner that's mutually acceptable to the center and the republics, the final outcome is something that they have to decide for themselves," said deputy White House press secretary Roman Popadiuk.
The Bush administration has previously expressed concern about keeping central control over the Soviet nuclear arsenal.
Some details of the Soviet plan remained unclear, but under it:
-A new executive body will run the country, led by the Soviet president and consisting of the leaders of all the republics. It will coordinate decisions on questions of domestic and foreign policy affecting "the common interests of the republic."
The body, the State Council, will run defense, security, law enforcement and foreign affairs. Its decisions are legally binding. There is no vice president; if the president is unable to fulfill his duties, the council will elect an acting leader.
Another body, the inter-republic economic committee, was to coordinate the national economy and implementation of the economic reforms. Its chairman will be named by the president, with the agreement of the State Council.
-Lawmakers also overwhelmingly approved a resolution pledging to respect "the declarations of sovereignty and acts of independence taken by the republics." All but five of the 15 Soviet republics have declared their independence.
The legislatures of the republics will have the right to suspend on the territory of the republic those laws adopted by the Supreme Soviet that contradict the constitutions of the republics. And all republics must approve any changes in the Soviet Constitution that are passed by the Supreme Soviet.
-The Congress, which had been the Soviet Union's highest legislative body, agreed to transfer its power to a smaller, reconstituted version of the standing Supreme Soviet legislature.
The Congress, a quasi-democratic body, was seated under a formula that allowed Communists a dominant role at a time they were increasingly falling out of favor. Its makeup contrasted radically with that of republican parliaments that, since its creation, were elected entirely by direct popular balloting.
Historian and lawmaker Yuri Afanasyev told reporters that further meetings of the Congress "are not excluded but would mean little."
Although the Congress probably will never meet again, the lawmakers voted to keep their privileges - including salaries of 300 rubles ($ 540) a month and free train and airplane tickets - until the end of their terms in 1994.
And although the lawmakers agreed to transfer power away from themselves, they balked at wording that said: "It is acknowledged that holding meetings of the Congress of People's Deputies during the transition period is pointless."
 Graphic



 
LaserPhotos NY4,5; MOSB2-4

 

End of Document
