

The Artists: Kaethe Kollwitz, Banned by the Nazis, Looked to America
The Associated Press
May 29, 1992, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 604 words
Byline: By CARL HARTMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




When the Nazis interrogated her, banned her work and stole at least one of her powerful images for their own propaganda, Kaethe Kollwitz looked to America for her art to bloom again.
Now, 47 years after her death, the National Gallery of Art is giving what Director J. Carter Brown calls Kollwitz's first international exhibit. The work comes from the gallery's own big collection, with large borrowings from Germany and Britain.
Kollwitz is known for her fierce depiction of war and poverty - not the violence, but the grief and despair of those left behind. She lost a son in World War I and a grandson in World War II. The gloom is heightened by the austere blacks and grays of her drawings, etchings and lithographs; she gave up painting after her student days.
"The beautiful is the ugly," she liked to say.
The National Museum of Women in the Arts also is putting on a show of her work here. In Germany, two museums - one in Berlin and one in Cologne - are devoted to Kollwitz.
Though her figures often are strained to express pain and mourning, none is distorted in the style that turns so many people away from other modern artists.
The National Gallery shows a different side of her work. The picture on the catalogue cover is a striking female nude, in color. Of the 105 works in the show, 56 have color in them and no less than 27 are self-portraits - one even shows Kollwitz laughing.
The other exhibit has even more self-portraits.
"Every time she had a new idea about drawing, she seemed to try it out on her own face," said Elizabeth Prelinger, the curator of the show.
The exhibit does not show one little-known side of her.
"Plausibly in the aftermath of a relationship with Viennese book dealer and gallery owner Hugo Heller, Kollwitz executed a series of overtly erotic drawings, which she called the 'Sekreta,' " the catalogue says.
"She did not intend that they be seen, and only recently have they been made available for public viewing."
Kaethe Schmidt married Dr. Karl Kollwitz when she was 23, and the marriage endured until his death 49 years later. He practiced among poor industrial workers in Berlin, who became the subjects of many of her works.
Though she never joined any political party, her obvious leftist sympathies made the Nazis her enemies. When they took over Germany, she was forced to resign from the Prussian Academy of Arts and her work was removed from an exhibition of sculptors.
During the Spanish Civil War, when the Nazis backed Generalissimo Francisco Franco, the signature "St. Frank" and a text in German and Spanish were added to one of her drawings. The text said it was distributed in areas occupied by Franco's troops.
It was about this time that her work became well-known in this country. After a show in Los Angeles in 1937, critic Arthur Millier of the Los Angeles Times called her "the greatest woman artist of our time, certainly the most complete master of tragedy, perhaps the greatest living artist of either sex."
To her friend, Hanna Loehnberg, who emigrated to this country, Kollwitz wrote of her life in Germany:
"Being left out and silenced was the applied method. Now something begins to bloom again over there, that is gratifying."
But Kollwitz refused an invitation to come to the United States.
When the Soviet newspaper Izvestia printed an interview with her, the Gestapo interrogated her and threatened to send her to a concentration camp. She managed to stay in Berlin until 1943, when she left to escape allied bombing.
She died on April 22, 1945, eight days before the suicide of Adolf Hitler.
The exhibit at the National Gallery's East Building is open until Aug. 16.

 

End of Document
