

The Gardener's Guide: The Inelegant Potato Has Rich History
The Associated Press
May 7, 1993, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 639 words
Byline: By LEE REICH
Body




The potato is not usually considered an elegant vegetable. It lacks the glamour of purple cauliflower, and might be considered unworthy of sharing a plate with radicchio.
But wait … what if potatoes came in colors like blue, mauve or violet? Or if their shapes, instead of smooth and oblong, were slender as fingers, or knobby, with deep-set eyes?
Such characteristics would at least elevate a potato to the level of a curio. As you might have guessed, there are potato varieties in these colors and shapes, mostly old varieties with colorful names such as Hundred-Fold (violet), Canadian Purple, Garnet Chili, and Lady Finger.
Even if your tastebuds gravitate towards the standard white potatoes on grocers' shelves, growing at least a few potato plants provides an educational experience. How many people know firsthand how a potato grows?
Potatoes are planted as "sets," which are small potatoes or pieces cut from large potatoes. Shoots emerge from sets' eyes, and from the underground portions of these shoots emerge roots and a few, underground stems. Those underground stems swell to become the potatoes we eat.
And what a rich history the potato has! This vegetable was cultivated for thousands of years by natives of the South American Andes, then brought to Europe in the 16th century by the Spanish explorer, Pizarro.
From Spain, cultivation of the potato spread through Europe. The potato replaced grains as the staple of the Irish, but two successive years of crop failure resulted in mass starvation and emigration. (Among those who emigrated to America were the Kennedys.) Even before the Irish migration, the potato had come full circle and migrated back across the Atlantic, to North America.
Potatoes are not hard to grow. Before you plant the sets, keep them warm for a week to start the eyes sprouting. There are two planting methods. The conventional way is to plant the sets 4 inches deep and cover them. A couple of times during the growing season, mound soil up around the growing stems.
A second way to grow potatoes is to lay them on top of the ground, then cover them with a thick mulch of straw or leaves. You may have to add more mulch or a shovelful of soil around the stems as they grow.
With both methods, the stems need to be well-covered so that the developing tubers are not exposed to light. Otherwise they turn green and become bitter-tasting and poisonous.
Plant the sets 12 inches apart in rows a couple of feet apart anytime in spring. The soil should be well-fertilized, but not with fresh manure. Also, potatoes dislike lime, which makes them susceptable to corkiness of the skin called scab.
A steaming dish of peas and "new" potatoes is a traditional spring delicacy from the garden. New potatoes are immature potatoes with thin, tender skins.
Early planting and an early variety of potato (Norland or Superior, for example) are needed to bring potatoes to the table in time for ripening peas. No need to dig up the whole plant to harvest new potatoes; just grope around in the soil beneath the plants with your hands.
Harvest potatoes for winter storage when dying foliage shows that the plants' growth cycle is completed.
Although potatoes are not grown from seed, sometimes small fruits follow the showy potato flowers, and within these fruits are seeds. If you planted these seeds, the resulting plants would each yield a different type of potato.
Potato sets, on the other hand, are clones, identical to each other and to plants of previous years. When you plant a potato set, you are planting a piece of a plant that grew in a garden one year or perhaps a hundred years ago, depending on how long the variety has been around.
Varieties are perpetuated by saving some tubers from one year to the next for planting. Consider offering a few sets of a notable potato variety as a gift for a fellow gardener.

 

End of Document
