

The Artists: British Pop Artist Explains His Art
The Associated Press
July 31, 1992, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1288 words
Byline: By GRAHAM HEATHCOTE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Art doesn't always speak for itself. The living artist can.
Richard Hamilton, a founder of pop art, did just that to the surprise and delight of visitors on press day in June at a big exhibition of his work in London's Tate Gallery.
"It was our idea," said Tate spokeswoman Alison Wright.
"We asked him if he'd like to go round the exhibits and talk about them and he said he would be pleased to do it. It was the first time an artist has ever done that at the Tate, apart from David Hockney doing a question-and-answer session at his exhibition in 1988," she said.
"I was criticized for being sexist when I did these," said Hamilton, standing beside pictures of the late 1950s and early '60s inspired by sex symbols in American advertising.
"But I didn't want them to be seen as satirical. One critic said I was sending up America but that wasn't the case. This one was really an exploration of the pin-up, like 'The Odalisque,"' he said, referring to the famous picture of a harem woman by Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres.
"I painted a beautiful, naked woman, not a glorification of the Playboy idea," Hamilton said.
But he saw no contradiction in including the word "sexy" in his definition of "pop art" when he was asked in 1957 to explain it. He wrote that pop art was: "Popular (designed for a mass audience). Transient (short-term solution). Expendable (easily forgotten). Low Cost. Mass produced. Young (aimed at youth). Witty. Sexy. Gimmicky. Glamorous. Big business."
The term "pop art" is attributed to critic Lawrence Alloway, who described it as an ironic style celebrating the imagery and techniques of the mass media, advertising and popular culture. In reaction to abstract expressionism, pop artists made art out of everyday images such as Andy Warhol's soup cans.
In 1957, Hamilton made a pop art picture which typified his definition, fusing a female image with a sleek auto front. He called it, "Hommage to the Chrysler Corp."
Hamilton had taken part in discussions some years earlier on how people were persuaded to buy things through advertising and marketing. He said that although the futurist artists on the eve of World War I did paintings of cars, it was nearly impossible to find a car in art in 1957, yet cars had probably changed the world more than anything else.
Over the years, attitudes to paintings change and "all paintings mature," Hamilton said on his guided tour.
"Some people like the Sistine Chapel all cleaned up and some prefer it as it was, all the paintings covered with tar. This presents problems for conservation departments."
Contrasts and contradictions and the sometimes curious byways of art always have interested Hamilton.
His "My Marilyn" of 1965 reproduced photographs of Marilyn Monroe which the actress herself had marked to show which she preferred - with notes, crossings-out, scratches, ticks and words of approval.
"Marilyn used lipstick and nail varnish to make her marks and even a nail file or scissors," Hamilton said. "The marks have themselves become illustrations, in conflict with the high-quality photographic images."
"My painting was in a German collection for 10 years before anyone noticed that a red mark on it was not put there by Marilyn or by me but by a visitor who had smeared lipstick on it."
Among his paintings are works incorporating fiberglass reliefs, news clippings or bits of wood. There is an inlaid mirror in his 1964 picture, "Interior I," and a metal relief in the later version, "Interior II."
The two works were inspired by a still shot from a 1949 B-movie called "Shockproof." Hamilton took a black and white photo of an actress in the movie and put her, looking at the viewer, in a painted living-room.
He said he did two versions for silk-screen printing "in case the first one didn't work." He used the same photo of the actress but different layouts and put old master paintings in one and modern American works by Larry Rivers and Yves Klein in the other.
The furniture is changed and there is less of it in the second version, but a television receiver has been added and it is showing the famous amateur film footage of President Kennedy's assassination. But the woman is not looking at that.
"The woman has a gun and shoots a man. She establishes drama by just standing there. If I'd put the man's body in the picture the effect would be too dramatic, but there is a feeling of menace," Hamilton said.
Pointing to the TV screen, he said: "It is extraordinary, isn't it, to have the idea that an assassination can happen in real time in your living-room and you might be more interested in something else?"
Hamilton, who was a designer for engineering companies, says he is fascinated by how things work. Vacuum cleaners and hi-fi sets appear in his pictures and sometimes he fastens bits of machines to the canvas.
There is a hi-fi in the exhibition simply because he feels it's an elegant design. "The critic laughs" is an elegantly designed electric toothbrush standing beside its elegant case with an inelegant but very functional upper plate of false teeth on top of the toothbrush.
"My son gave me a set of dentures which were made of sugar and designed to be eaten. He got them on a seaside holiday," said Hamilton.
"Jasper Johns … made a sculpture of a toothbrush with teeth instead of bristles and called it 'The Critic Smiles.' Then he did a pair of spectacles in which the eyes were replaced by open mouths revealing teeth. It was a joke about the way some critics can't see the point of an art work. Then I made 'The critic laughs,' which is a metaphor for bad-mouthing artists."
When the sugar teeth became very sticky, Hamilton got a dentist to reproduce them in dental plastic. Hamilton laughed when describing the work and it is one he has kept for himself.
At the end of the '60s, Hamilton made a celebrated series in oil on canvas and screenprint called "Swingeing London."
It was based on a single newspaper photograph in 1967 of Mick Jagger of the Rolling Stones handcuffed to Robert Fraser, taken through the window of a police van.
"Fraser was my art dealer and he was busted with the Stones for marijuana possession," Hamilton recalled.
The case was on the front pages for months.
Hamilton said it made an extraordinary contrast between the loose lifestyle which everyone thought was represented by the pop and rock musicians and the restraints on personal choice imposed by the law.
"Jagger and Fraser were sentenced to six months in jail but there was such an outcry over the severity of it that Jagger was released on appeal," said Hamilton.
Fraser was not so lucky and his gallery closed.
"In the photo which led to the paintings, both men appear to be hiding their faces. But there was a slight smile on Jagger's face and he was actually holding up his hands to show the cuffs," said Hamilton.
The paintings made a terrific impact and were all sold. The Tate Gallery bought one, so did the Museum Ludwig in Cologne. The remaining five went into private collections.
Almost everyone gets the title wrong, reading it as "Swinging London," the term used by Time magazine in its celebrated issue of April 15, 1966, to describe London in the era of lighthearted permissiveness, of the Beatles and miniskirts.
But "swinge" is a 16th-century word, meaning great, huge or thumping. The judge in the drugs case said a "swingeing" sentence could act as a deterrent and the unfamiliar word re-entered the language.
Hamilton comes from a London working-class family, and trained as an engineer in World War II.
He is now 70, with long, straggly gray hair around his high, domed forehead, tall, lean and invariably dressed in denim.
The Tate show of 106 works from 1940 to 1992 is the Tate's third retrospective of Hamilton's art. It runs through Sept. 6.

 

End of Document
