

The Headquarters Yeltsin Won't Visit - Stripped Clean By The Departed
The Associated Press
August 29, 1994, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 643 words
Byline: By FRANK BAJAK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WUENSDORF, Germany
Body




Until the fall of the Berlin Wall, the Wuensdorf base served as the command center for Europe's largest occupation force. It was a thriving city of 70,000, a plum posting for Russian officers.
Now it's such a sad sight that even Russian President Boris Yeltsin plans to avoid it.
Yeltsin arrives Tuesday night on a state visit to deactivate the Russian army's West Group. He will preside Wednesday as departing Russian troops bid a final ceremonial farewell in Berlin, an hour away.
The troops' final days are being marked with much fanfare and mutual expressions of friendship as the Russians hand over the last of some 130 bases and other property comprising 2 percent of former East Germany.
But try as politicians might to put a happy face on the pullout, the dismantling of this huge force - 540,000 soldiers and civilians prior to 1989 - and has been painful and demoralizing.
Many Russians fear returning to a poverty-stricken homeland.
"The future looks very dark," said Sgt. Maj. Valentin Russakov, emcee of the West Group's beloved song and dance ensemble, which is being dissolved. He is leaving the military after a 30-year career.
"We were very satisfied here. Now things will be harder," said Russakov, 50, who'll be looking for a job when he gets home to St. Petersburg. "Perhaps our great-grandchildren will live well."
Thousands of career officers who enjoyed the Red Army's prize posting are now taking a huge step backward, giving up comfortable homes and good salaries in German marks.
Back in Russia and other former Soviet states, just 18,700 of the 46,050 apartments being built for returning officers are ready, Gen. Hartmut Foertsch, the German commissioner for withdrawal, said Monday. The apartments are being built with 14 billion marks ($ 8.3 billion) in German aid.
Officers' families have been forced to move in with in-laws or live three to an apartment in converted barracks.
A third of the 10,600-acre Wuensdorf base has already been turned over to the Germans. Security guards on the base say they are chasing squatters away daily, mostly former base inhabitants.
The base itself is a mess. Buildings have been stripped of everything useful: Plumbing fixtures, doors, window frames, wiring. Even a helipad was removed. In cleared-out apartments, empty vodka bottles stand in clusters on filthy floors.
German authorities say the base is seething with Russian mafia, mostly involved in car theft. More than 200 cars without license plates were parked in apartment lots on its grounds last week. On one truck, a Volkswagen Golf without a license plate sat secured, ready for the trip to Russia.
Other cars - from cheap German-made Ladas to BMWs - have handmade temporary cardboard plates returning soldiers and their families rely on as they travel through Poland in convoys as protection against highwaymen.
The West Group commander, Gen. Matvei Burlakov, has been dogged by charges of high-level corruption in his command.
German police seized 9,000 black-market Makarov pistols at a Russian military airfield near Wuensdorf in January. And the German tabloid Bild reported last week that Burlakov had a Mercedes sedan flown to Moscow as a wedding gift for Russian Defense Minister Pavel Grachev's daughter.
Last week, Burlakov was named one of Grachev's four deputy ministers.
Foertsch said 3,000 soldiers and 130 Russian civilians were still in Germany, and the last Russians will be leaving on Sept. 9.
That's a day after the final farewell ceremony in Berlin for U.S., French and British troops, who also are leaving as part of the agreement that brought German reunification in 1990.
While stripping bases bare from the Baltic to the Harz mountains, the Russians have left one big living legacy: stray cats. The German Feline Friends Association plans to spend the equivalent of $ 14,750 a month through December to have the cats neutered.
 Load-Date: August 29, 1994

 

End of Document
