

The Dollar or the Mark?
The Associated Press
September 15, 1992, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 522 words
Byline: By JOHN CUNNIFF, AP Business Analyst
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The commotion about the German decision to lower interest rates leaves many Americans as perplexed as a Berlin youngster might be when witnessing his first American football game.
But the decision, long awaited by U.S. officials and those of many other nations, could have a significant impact on the finances of American households, and on the fortunes of U.S. companies, workers, investors and others.
The first impact could be felt as early as this week in the form of even lower U.S. interest rates, and perhaps in anticipation of lower U.S. rates, in stronger stock and bond markets.
The impact might conceivably be felt even in the presidential and congressional elections.
Later, it could mean more business for American exporters and a boost to hiring and profits as European economies are spurred to greater activity and perhaps to greater demands for U.S. goods.
The lowering of German rates, which had been unusually high in relation to those of other companies, had brought economic growth almost to a standstill in parts of Europe and produced fears about the future of the dollar.
Reacting to the high German rates, which reflected that nation's deeply imbedded fear of inflation and the big bills to be faced in rebuilding eastern Germany, other European nations felt compelled to also retain high rates.
Meanwhile, the dollar's value in international trade had been steadily declining, producing fears among investors that the American economy might be in more serious straits than foreseen earlier.
One reason for the dollar's low desirability was the meager return for those who invested in it. With U.S. rates so much lower than those in Germany and many other countries, money tended to flow toward the greater return.
As U.S. officials viewed the situation, however, the weakness of the U.S. economy left them little choice but to try to spur domestic activity via lower interest rates, even at the risk of weakening the dollar further.
Oddly, at the same time that the declining dollar produced many worries, it bolstered the ability of American companies to sell abroad, making U.S. exports the star performer in an otherwise drab economy.
The explanation lies in the fact that the dollar's low valuation allowed U.S. goods to be sold at relatively low prices abroad, while simultaneously raising the price of imports from Europe, the Far East and elsewhere.
True, any strengthening of the dollar in regard to the German mark or other currencies will reduce benefits to American exporters, but this negative impact might be more than offset by renewed growth of foreign markets.
While currency alignments sometimes have unforeseen consequences, one important question seems to have been answered, at least for the time being.
In recent weeks, the big debate among those who follow international monetary affairs was whether the German mark was too strong, requiring lower rates, or the U.S. dollar was too weak and in need of higher borrowing costs.
In short, was world trade and economic recovery being thwarted more by a weak dollar or a super-strong mark? For the time being, the blame seems to have been placed on the mark.

 

End of Document
