

The Peace Corps: It's Not Just for the Third World Anymore
The Associated Press
December 31, 1991, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 319 words
Byline: By RUTH SINAI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




If you doubted the magnitude of the changes sweeping the former Soviet empire, consider this.
The Peace Corps, that embodiment of American principles and goodwill, has been asked to send volunteers to several former Soviet republics to teach English and the basics of Western-style market economies.
The agency, which is funded by the U.S. government, hopes to send some 500 volunteers to several of the republics in the next two years, said director Elaine Chao.
The communist rulers of the Soviet Union refused to allow the Peace Corps in, viewing it as a beacon of capitalism and Western corruption.
But as soon as the Soviet empire started crumbling, the Peace Corps began storming Eastern Europe. Since the summer of 1990, it has sent volunteers into Hungary, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Romania and Bulgaria.
In recent weeks, Armenia and Ukraine invited the Peace Corps in, said Chao. They are seeking help in learning how to set up small businesses and how to clean up pollution, she said.
A team of experts will head to the three Baltic states in mid-January to set up several programs there, too. The first wave of volunteers will reach Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania in the summer, Chao said.
The Peace Corps, conceived by President John F. Kennedy and established in 1961, has traditionally focused on helping African and Asian countries.
Chao said the administration was seeking new money for the East European projects and would not divert money from the Third World. Its 1992 budget was roughly $ 200 million.
"The need in other parts of the world remains very strong," said Chao, and so does U.S. commitment to them.
The Peace Corps is seeking volunteers with advanced business degrees or experience in the business world, she said. The volunteers will be put through a three-month training period, including language skills.
The 6,000 Peace Corps volunteers receive housing, travel expenses and a living allowance.

 

End of Document
