

The Tale of the Torpedo Scores a Direct Hit
The Associated Press
March 27, 1992, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 614 words
Body




THE DEVIL'S DEVICE: Robert Whitehead and the History of the Torpedo.  By Edwyn Gray. Naval Institute Press. 310 Pages. $ 28.95.
 
 "The Devil's Device," first published in England to deservedly favorable reviews in 1975, is available to readers in America for the first time in this revised and updated edition.
Edwyn Gray, the prestigious British naval affairs writer, tells us that the name of the weapon which in the past century has exerted enormous influence on naval warfare derives from that of the "torpedo or cramp fish which stuns its intended victims with a burst of electricity."
The word "torpedo" already existed more than four centuries ago but became current in the English language only after American David Bushnell started applying it to explosive devices he invented for the purpose of sinking British ships. These devices would nowadays more aptly be called mines.
The true locomotive torpedo as we now know it was the fruit of the inventiveness, technical proficiency and unflagging dedication of an expatriate British gentleman named Robert Whitehead.
Whitehead was born in 1823 into a family of mechanically minded individuals at a time when the Industrial Revolution was changing the face of England. After the requisite years of study and apprenticeship in the engineering trades, he was as a young married man induced by financial prospects to emigrate to Marseille and later to Milan and to Fiume, then part of the Austrian Empire.
Whitehead - according to this, his only existing biography - led a happy, prosperous life. He built sturdy, reliable machinery for the Austrian navy. Emperor Francis Josef thanked him personally for so doing, gave him a diamond ring and eventually made him a baron. Admiral Wilhelm von Tegethoff told him in a telegram, "Thanks to your engines I was able to win the battle of Lissa" over the Italian fleet in July 1866.
Two years earlier, Whitehead had been approached by Austrian navy commander Giovanni de Luppis with a request to develop an unmanned automotive boat loaded with explosives. Its purpose was to attack ships blockading harbors.
From this bare-bones, seminal idea, the modern torpedo developed. Whitehead started designing, tinkering and thinking of the means to deliver explosives beneath the armor of the ironclad ships of the day. The project struck his fancy and eventually absorbed him completely. His engineering expertise and resourcefulness eventually brought forth the torpedo as we now know it. Over the years, other inventors have incorporated new features into the weapon and endowed it with new capabilities, but its basic characteristics remain in essence those devised by Whitehead.
Whitehead was never an arms dealer comparable to his sinister contemporary Basil Zaharoff. He was a dedicated engineer who cared not a whit for politics: He sold his invention to all comers, provided they paid hard cash. Since there were many customers for his wares, which were of top quality, he prospered greatly. He died quietly and content in 1905 a few months after the historic Battle of Tsushima, in which his invention played an outstanding part.
Author Gray also examines the evolution of the torpedo at the hands of the British, the Germans and the Japanese in this century. He also describes the inexplicably half-hearted development of the weapon by the U.S. Navy, and its scandalous failures well into the war in the Pacific of 1941-1945.
Gray paints an interesting overview of the 120-odd-year span during which the torpedo was born and developed, with many significant historical details.
One does not have to be - as Whitehead wasn't - a war lover to enjoy this book.
 
 By Norman N. Brown
 
 ociated Press Writer

 

End of Document
