

The Art of the Deal Lives
The Associated Press
May 11, 1991, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 1113 words
Byline: By JAMES M. KENNEDY
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Merger mania was flushed away with other excesses of the '80s, but dealmaking is alive and well and living through the recession.
The headlines of the past week show the art of the deal is flourishing, even in the absence of such notable dropouts as the imprisoned Michael Milken and the indebted Donald Trump.
A sampling:
-NCR Corp. finally agreed to an acquisition by American Telephone & Telegraph Co. in a stock swap valued at $$7.4 billion.
-NBC's Consumer News and Business Channel was selected by a bankruptcy judge as the winner of a bidding war for Financial News Network. CNBC sweetened its bid for FNN to $$154.3 million, besting a proposal from a Dow Jones-Westinghouse partnership.
-Occidental Petroleum Corp. said it would sell its North Sea oil and natural gas interests to a French company for $$1.5 billion. Oxy Pete also agreed to sell a half-interest in its natural gas liquids business for about $$700 million to a Dallas partnership.
-USX Corp. shareholders approved a plan to split the company's stock into energy and steel issues, and the company said it was seeking a buyer for part of the newly separated steel business.
-Comcast Corp. agreed to buy the cellular telephone business of Metromedia Co. for $$1.1 billion in cash and stock.
-Time Warner Inc. and a Japanese supermarket chain said they would jointly build and operate Japan's first multiple-theater complexes at 30 suburban shopping malls.
The experts said the survival of such transactions in rough times was a sign that good, strategic deals could still get done. Companies with cash and clout, like AT&T, retain the ability to engineer a takeover even as other overleveraged dealmeisters lick their wounds from the so-called decade of greed.
The end of the '80s also set the stage for the unwinding of old deals, as in the case of Oxy Pete's furious attempts to trim about $$3 billion worth of heavy debts, or USX's efforts to undo its once tidy package of oil and steel.
Every once in a while an opportunity still comes along for a smart investor to cash in on a wise investment. Metromedia's deal was the latest in a string of cellular sales by chairman John Kluge, who has reaped a $$3 billion payoff for Metromedia peddling its cellular holdings since 1986. The nation's richest man initially invested $$20 million in the business.
At least one big deal fell apart during the week. California state utility regulators put the kibosh to a $$2.5 billion merger of Southern California Edison and San Diego Gas & Electric Co., which would have created the nation's biggest investor-owned utility.
The regulators spiked the deal for competitive, rather than economic reasons. They said it would have resulted in higher rates and poorer service for customers.
 
 ECONOMY: An Embarrassing Error in the Data
 
 Getting a handle on the current state of the economy was complicated during the week by an unusual error in some government numbers.
The government first reported that the productivity of American workers fell 0.9 percent in the first quarter. Hours later, in a startling correction, the figure was reported up by 1 percent.
Although they could not remember a more embarrassing mix-up in 25 years of calculating the data, government officials were nonetheless relieved by the apparent rebound.
In other hopeful signs, inflation moderated at the wholesale level during April and the number of Americans filing new claims for unemployment benefits declined significantly at the end of the month.
 
 RETAILING: Sears Confronts a Dissident
 
 The annual meeting of Sears, Roebuck and Co. shareholders became a forum for the continuing debate over the future of what was once the nation's biggest retailer.
Chairman Edward A. Brennan promised new marketing efforts to revive weak store sales, while a dissident stockholder said the company ought to be broken up. The dissident, Robert Monks, failed in his bid to grab a seat on the board, but vowed to keep pressing the company to spin off its financial services as separate businesses.
While the debate raged, Wal-Mart Stores, the new leader in the business, posted stronger sales numbers and a 21 percent increase in first-quarter profits. Its discount strategy, a favorite through the recession, helped push sales up 11 percent in April at stores open at least a year. Comparable figures for Sears were off 0.5 percent.
 
 COMPANIES: Some Competition for the Bells
 
 The Federal Communications Commission decided to let independent fiber-optic networks compete for local telephone business with the Bell companies and GTE Corp. The move was expected to encourage some businesses to set up private phone networks linking their branch offices.
In the airline business, America West launched a salvo in the fare wars by cutting coach fares by an average of almost 40 percent. But the ad campaign it rolled out to promote the cuts was criticized by the Veterans of Foreign Wars for using Jonathan Winters as a Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf look-alike, promising "air superiority for civilians."
In the entertainment business, Walt Disney Co. announced plans for expanding Disneyland in California. The $$3 billion project would transform the 35-year-old Disneyland in the image of Disney World, its younger Florida sister, complete with a "Westcot Center" patterned after Epcot.
Also in California, state insurance regulators ordered First Capital Life Insurance Co. to stop writing new policies and redeeming old ones until it can shore up its junk-bond debt. First Capital became the second big insurer to slide into the junk tank. California and New York regulators earlier seized two units of First Executive Corp. for similar reasons.
 
 PEOPLE: Famous Couples Come and Go
 
 In the world of beautiful business people, one couple was broken up while another was joined.
The dynamic duo hired by Sony Corp. to run Columbia Pictures was dissolved as Jon Peters ended his co-chairmanship with Peter Guber. Peters will pursue his own entertainment production company under the Sony umbrella.
Sony recruited Peters and Guber to be co-chairmen of Columbia when it bought the Hollywood studio in 1989. The pair were longtime collaborators with "Batman" and other blockbusters to their mutual credit.
Back east, a more-recent partnership grew even closer. Marla Maples was spotted wearing a diamond ring from The Donald that looked suspiciously like an engagement rock. A new book shed even more light on the relationship.
"Trumped!: The Inside Story of the Real Donald Trump" by former employee Jack O'Donnell says Ivana, the ex, only got her job running New York's Plaza Hotel to accommodate Trump's affair with Marla.
Trump's camp called the book "the work of a disgruntled employee."

 

End of Document
