

The Issue: U.S. Aid to the Republics of the Former Soviet Union
The Associated Press
January 22, 1992, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 517 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Here are the views of the major presidential candidates on the question: "What assistance should the United States provide for the former Soviet republics to help in their transition to democracy and how should this assistance be financed?"
 
 DEMOCRATS
Jerry Brown - "We should provide technical assistance and encourage our private industries to help in their transition to democracy, and to aid them in the famine issue."
 
 Bill Clinton - Not available.
 
 Tom Harkin - "In the short term, I believe that the United States should provide humanitarian assistance - in the form of medicine and food - to the suffering citizens of the former Soviet state this winter, as long as that assistance is provided by organizations that will ensure that our help directly reaches the people who are without the basics of life. Over time, we can help the evolving government there by providing loans and loan guarantees to private organizations seeking to promote American business and the purchase of American-made products - and by encouraging the establishment of a free-market economy, through technical assistance from American businessmen and women, workers, farmers, and professional managers."
Bob Kerrey - "The United States should first make full use of the $ 400 million already appropriated by Congress to initiate the dismantlement of the nuclear arsenals in the four nuclear republics. We should also begin to work with our NATO allies to provide immediate short-term humanitarian aid by transporting medical supplies and foodstuffs to targeted population centers in the member republics of the commonwealth to help them survive the harsh winter. Financing for this aid should be a multilateral effort done in concert with the European Community and Japan."
 
 Paul Tsongas - "In order to assist the former Soviet republics, the United States must take three basic actions. First, provide the republics with food aid to avert economic chaos; second, establish an Enterprise Corps of American businessmen to assist the republics in moving their economies toward capitalism; finally, help dismantle their nuclear arsenals. All of these actions can be funded from decreases in the defense budget, and will do more to create stability than spending the same dollars on defense."
 
 REPUBLICANS
George Bush - No response.
 
 Pat Buchanan - "If people are starving in the old Soviet Union we will be the first there with food aid. But taxing American workers to send billions of dollars to politicians in the C.I.S. (Commonwealth of Independent States) works against everybody's interests. Private capital will pour into the resource-rich C.I.S. so long as C.I.S. policies make the C.I.S. an attractive place to invest. If the vestiges of socialism survive there, no amount of American aid will help."
 
 David Duke - "I don't subscribe to the notion that we are obligated to finance the government of any country other than the United States of America. As the breakup of the Soviet Union is seen by all as a unique opportunity, we may assist in the stabilization of the breakaway republics by providing humanitarian aid."

 

End of Document
