

The Artists: Winning Hearts and Minds on the American Home Front
The Associated Press
April 15, 1994, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 731 words
Byline: By RONALD POWERS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The images point, peek, implore and alarm. During World War II they were virtually everywhere, fighting for the hearts and minds of the millions of Americans on the home front.
"They succeeded in stopping you in your tracks," said Stacey Bredhoff, curator of "The Powers of Persuasion," the National Archives' new exhibit of wartime poster art.
A half century after Hitler and Tojo, VE Day and Hiroshima, the images of Rosie the Riveter rolling up her sleeves to do a man's work - "We Can Do It!" - or the silhouette of a helmeted Nazi peering from behind a wall - "He's Watching You" - remain startlingly compelling.
Today the posters are hung as American artifacts opening a window to life in the war years. But in the 1940s they were an important part of the visual landscape, tacked up in schools and post offices, restaurants, train stations and factories.
"You Make It Right … They'll Make It Fight," one poster advises workers. Says another: "Everytime You Twist a Nut, Think of Hitler."
"If they didn't succeed in delivering a clear message in a moment then they hadn't really worked," Bredhoff said during a recent tour of the exhibit. "What's evident is they do work. They're very successful in grabbing your attention, even 50 years later."
The show, 70 examples selected from the repository's collection of more than 5,000 war-era posters, are on display through next February in the archives' gallery. The exhibit is part of the National Archives' commemoration of the 50th anniversary of U.S. participation in the war.
As the 1940s opened, most Americans wanted no part of a foreign war and all the personal sacrifice, shortages, conservation and debt it would entail.
That all changed on Dec. 7, 1941, when on an otherwise quiet Sunday morning the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor and left most of America's Pacific fleet resting on the ocean floor.
America's war machinery was quick into action. In Europe and Asia, U.S. soldiers soon were flying fighters and manning tanks, guns and ships. At home, many American artists were waging a more subtle fight.
"The principal battleground of this war is not the South Pacific. It is not the Middle East. It is not England, or Norway, or the Russian steppe. It is American opinion," observed poet Archibald MacLeish, director of the wartime Office of Facts and Figures, later the Office of War Information.
In those days before television, American propagandists relied on all the nation's media - newspapers, radio and the movies - to boost morale and rally support.
But the poster was the most widely circulated, and it was used to promote every major government wartime campaign: bond drives, conservation, rationing, patriotism and security awareness.
"Loose Lips Might Sink Ships," admonishes one well-known example.
The posters were produced not only by the government, but by businesses, industries, schools and magazines. Some are the work of little-known illustrators while others are the product of famed artists.
Commissioned by The Saturday Evening Post, Norman Rockwell contributed a series of paintings inspired by President Roosevelt's historic 1941 "Four Freedoms" speech.
Others were created by Ben Shahn, William Grooper and Thomas Hart Benton.
The foremost example of American wartime poster art is known by virtually every young man who has found his fate in the hands of his local draft board.
"I Want You for the U.S. Army," declares the Uncle Sam figure created by illustrator and caricaturist James Montgomery Flagg.
Born in Pelham Manor, N.Y., in 1877, Flagg used himself as a model for the patriot whose pointing finger and unflinching gaze commanded generations of Americans to take up arms and defend their land.
The design was first used on World War I recruiting posters, then revived during World War II. It's gained the stature of an American icon and is described widely as the best known poster of any era.
Bredhoff has divided her exhibit into two parts. The first accentuates the positive with images of patriotism and confidence. The second aims to shock viewers with images of dead soldiers, threatened children and monstrous enemies.
"There were many posters that went beyond the emotions of suspicion and fear to evoke terror and hatred," Bredhoff writes in her exhibit catalog. "Dehumanization of the enemy was not new to war propaganda. It was one way to rationalize the irrational destruction of human life."
 Load-Date: April 15, 1994

 

End of Document
