

The Bigger the Scandal, the More France Loves Tycoon Tapie
The Associated Press
June 15, 1994, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 582 words
Byline: By PATRICK McDOWELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




The league took away his soccer club. The bank wants to seize his furniture. The taxman is after his yacht. But Bernard Tapie is no ordinary self-made tycoon in trouble.
It is probably too early yet to call the brash, charismatic, scandal-ridden populist presidential material, but only just.
The European Parliament elections last week shot Tapie from the political margins to a force to be reckoned with, despite, or because of a slew of investigations and scandals into his dealings.
Tapie polled 12 percent of the vote on Sunday and won 13 seats in the parliament for his Radical movement of the Left ticket, stripping support from the once-powerful Socialists, who fared only a few points better.
It was a great showing for Tapie and a disaster for Socialist leader Michel Rocard, whose ambitions to lead the left in next year's race to succeed President Francois Mitterrand look doomed.
Who might fill that role now?
Though Tapie for the moment says he's not running, he broadly hints he'd go for it if no one capable of rallying the left turns up. So far, none is on the horizon.
The 51-year-old son of a boilermaker, Tapie dabbled in singing and bike racing before making millions in the 1980s by buying broke companies and selling them at a profit.
This was often done by laying off workers, causing many on the left to distrust Tapie despite his poor-boy roots.
But many ordinary French respect his winner's ways, even if a little cheating is involved.
Tapie did not attend elite Establishment schools and does not speak in obscure legalisms. He exudes a cockiness and gusto unknown among the technocrats who rule France.
That appeals to youths, who gave Tapie the largest share of their votes even if he had no other stated policy plan than to "outlaw unemployment."
Right-wing voters gave support equal to Tapie's to another outsider, Philippe de Villiers, a Roman Catholic traditionalist who rejects the closer European Union touted by the mainstream.
De Villiers, often seen as the respectable far-right alternative to the openly racist Jean-Marie Le Pen, culled backing from retired people and middle-aged women.
Both men now have been propelled into contenders to be reckoned with. Tapie, at least, seems assured of more bad publicity in the campaign before next year's presidential race, which should only increase his standing among French who consider him something of an underdog folk hero.
On Monday, tax authorities filed writs to lift Tapie's immunity as a member of the French National Assembly. They wish to pursue probes into his luxury sailing yacht which, might illegally be registered as a merchant ship for lower tax rates. The conservative-dominated assembly will issue a ruling June 29.
"I've decided to fight it. They're going to organize this circus just to have a big show the 29th, where they'll attack me," Tapie told a news conference Tuesday.
Tapie already faces charges of trying to buy off a witness in the match-fixing scandal that brought shame on his soccer club, Olympique Marseille. Tapie is being forced to sell the team.
Tapie's main banker, Credit Lyonnais, last month placed slapped a lien on his valuable antique furniture collection.
That means the bank can sell it to collect part of the $ 210 million Tapie owes. Credit Lyonnais said it wanted to act quickly before other claimants show up.
But Sunday's vote may keep Tapie out of jail. European Parliament deputies enjoy immunity from ordinary prosecution. They have never yet lifted protection from a colleague.
 Load-Date: June 15, 1994

 

End of Document
