

The Spy Who Came in from the Kitchen
 The Associated Press
September 13, 1995, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 374 words
Byline: By SUSANNE RUHLAND, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BERLIN
Body




Part of the secret of Markus Wolf's success as East Germany's spy chief, to hear him tell it, was his skill in the kitchen. And those waiting to read about his legendary career are getting herring before derring-do.
"Secrets of the Russian Kitchen" is a 236-page compilation of Wolf's favorite recipes, along with anecdotes from his years in the Soviet Union - as a boy fleeing the Nazis with his family and later as a spy for East Germany and the Kremlin.
Cooking and spying both require craftsmanship and creative inspiration, the 72-year-old retired spy writes.
Yet there's little "caviar-style" spying a la James Bond. "Normal espionage is more to be compared with daily bread or potatoes from the normal kitchen," he writes.
The book, already in stores here, features lots of plain cooking, Russian-style: herring salad, pirogis, thick soups and kvass, a beer-like brew made from bread.
At a news conference Wednesday, Wolf described his spy work as his "other kitchen" and said he was influenced by Russia's tradition of hospitality and "culture of drink," which he could use as a weapon "because I could handle more than others."
Convicted two years ago of treason, Wolf is free on appeal and unlikely to serve time, though he spent months in pre-trial confinement where, he said, passed the time talking to himself.
He has completed the manuscript of his memoirs, although no publication date has been announced. His exploits as spymaster inspired authors of Cold War novels, and he used high-placed moles and seducers of secretaries to amass secrets in West Germany and NATO councils.
Asked about lingering resentment among East Germans of the state security apparatus he served, Wolf said he understood their pain and unwillingness to forget, but took no responsibility for Communist prisons.
He defended himself against the accusation that he was "hiding behind an apron" in writing about cooking rather than East German repression.
"If I had to ask myself with every piece of paper I write if I have done enough penance and expressed enough regret," he said, "then I could give up making my daily bread as a writer."
A Russian-language edition of the cookbook is to be published next month, but there are no plans as yet for an English version.
 Load-Date: September 13, 1995

 

End of Document
