

The Funny Side of the First 100 Days
The Associated Press
May 2, 1993, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 445 words
Byline: By LAWRENCE L. KNUTSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Clinton humorously summed up his first 100 days in office Saturday night, telling reporters that if he stumbles it's because he wants to do far more than just run in place.
"It is my job to do more than enjoy the honor of being president of the United States," he said.
Clinton had barbs for friend and foe alike in remarks that closed the 79th annual dinner of the White House Correspondents Association.
But at the end he turned mostly serious, saying that campaign chief James Carville had leaned across the head table to share some Southern folk wisdom.
"He told me, 'If you never want to stumble, stand still," Clinton said.
And then addressing himself to the reporters who cover his administration, he said: "You tell them when I stumble. But always tell them I'm not standing still."
Clinton had a jocular verbal elbow for many of his associates, including Budget Director Leon Panetta, who was widely quoted last week in a startlingly candid and very gloomy assessment of the fate of Clinton's legislative program in Congress.
The president led into it this way:
"My daughter Chelsea came to me and said that since she had been in Washington she no longer believed in the Easter Bunny, Santa Claus or even the tooth fairy," the president said.
"I said, 'Did you learn all this at your fancy new school?"'
"She said, 'No, I had a long talk with Leon Panetta."'
Panetta, seated at a table nearby, burst into laughter and Clinton said: "He's a good Catholic, but he just can't keep it straight when he's supposed to go to confession."
In a few minutes, Clinton covered a wide variety of high and low points of his first days in office.
At one point he referred both to the national referendum that strengthened President Boris Yeltsin's hold on power in Russia and the Republican filibuster that killed Clinton's jobs bill in the Senate.
"Who would have thought just a few years ago that today we would have majority rule in the former Soviet Union and minority rule in the United States Senate," Clinton said.
Did he really cut the White House staff by 25 percent as he said he would during the campaign?
That's easy, Clinton said. "Just compare George Stephanopoulos (skinny) with Marlin Fitzwater (not so skinny)."
And he had jokes about himself.
He said he didn't complain when someone gave Hillary Rodham Clinton higher marks as first lady than they gave him as president.;
"It's just law school all over again," he said of his wife and former classmate.
And he had a final summing up.
"I am not doing so bad," Clinton said. "At this point in his administration William Henry Harrison had been dead for 68 days.
"Why, my economic stimulus package lasted longer than that."

 

End of Document
