

The Scene Shifts to the Global Battle of the Titans
The Associated Press
January 14, 1992, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 715 words
Byline: By DIRK BEVERIDGE, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




It may seem as if the only thing happening these days in aviation has been the death of weak airlines, but that's only half the picture.
At the same time, strong carriers are flexing their muscles in an escalating global battle to dominate the skies.
Just this week, Northwest Airlines beat out American Airlines for a new route from Boston to Paris. Continental Airlines is picking up service from Newark, N.J., to Madrid in a windfall it received when now-defunct Pan American World Airways pulled out of Spain in the fall.
United Airlines begins flying Wednesday into South America, also on routes scavenged from the remains of Pan Am. That makes United the only U.S. carrier serving all major international markets.
The consolidation trend also has led airlines to forge partnerships with foreign and domestic rivals that fly through different territories.
"If you're going to survive in this industry at all, you've got to have … mass," said Barbara Beyer, president of Avmark Inc., an aviation consulting firm in Arlington, Va. "You've got to be able to take on anyone who's big or go and run over the little guy."
The process accelerated as Eastern Airlines, Midway Airlines and Pan Am all succumbed in bankruptcy court last year.
United, the Chicago-based mega-carrier, begins flying some of Pan Am's abandoned routes into Latin America on Wednesday, with service that will gradually be expanded over the next several months. The move puts United in head-to-head competition with archrival American in the lucrative South American markets.
It also makes United the only U.S. carrier with large presence in Latin America as well as the trans-Atlantic and trans-Pacific markets.
"This will be a very dramatic expansion," United spokesman Joe Hopkins said Tuesday.
It could even make United bigger than American, based in Fort Worth, Texas.
Delta Air Lines, based in Atlanta, ranks a strong third after picking up most of Pan Am's trans-Atlantic service last fall.
The huge U.S. airlines are the world's largest, with the exception of Aeroflot, the state carrier of the former Soviet Union that has long been biggest, but perhaps worst, among the world's major airlines.
Aeroflot came in dead last in a 1990 Zagat Airline Survey, a compilation of comments from travelers who complained about flies buzzing through Aeroflot's cabins and live chickens stored in the overhead luggage bins.
But looking at the rest of the carriers, the current U.S. aviation superpowers may not be biggest forever as the business evolves.
There has been talk for months about a partnership between British Airways, KLM Royal Dutch Airlines and Northwest Airlines.
KLM already owns 49 percent of Northwest and has acknowledged it is in talks with British Airways aimed at "strengthening the position of KLM … in the world airline market."
British Airways Chairman Lord King has said his carrier could seek partnerships to further its global development. Northwest has said it will talk to anybody in the industry about beneficial business arrangements.
They have declined to comment on the possibility of a three-way partnership, but analysts say it might make sense, marrying Northwest's strong presence in the domestic U.S. market and its big trans-Pacific business with the sizable trans-Atlantic and European service of British Airways and KLM.
That, says Beyer, would be "pretty awesome."
"Those three carriers would become probably the largest carrier in the world," she said.
It would not be the first partnership between a U.S. carrier and foreign rivals, however.
Delta, Swissair and Singapore Airlines own about 5 percent of one another, and Scandanivian Airlines System bought out Frank Lorenzo's stake in Continental in a 1990 deal that gives SAS 16.8 percent ownership of Continental and 18.4 percent voting power.
Others, such as American, are not now interested in such arrangements.
But many carriers have entered "code-sharing" agreements with rivals, which enables them to sell seats on a competitor's plane under their own name.
Where will it all lead?
Aviation analyst Daniel Kasper at Harbridge House in Boston envisions a world that will someday be dominated by a handful of carriers - maybe six or eight.
"Those would not be the only airlines in the world, but that would be the predominant pattern," Kasper said.

 

End of Document
