

The Official Goat Cheese of the Olympics - And More
The Associated Press
January 23, 1994, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 688 words
Byline: By DOUG MELLGREN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LILLEHAMMER, Norway
Body




What are the official products of the 1994 Winter Olympics? Just about everything you could imagine, and a few things you might not.
How about the Official Goat Cheese or the Official Pickled Herring or the Official Cheese Slicer?
There are about 500 official licensed products for the Lillehammer Games, from official T-shirts to skis. There also are hundreds of products, ranging from sardines to cowbells, provided by the official suppliers to the Games.
Official Olympic products are so popular that even Norwegian sheep, goats and cows are wearing them.
"One of the conditions of being allowed to make a licensed product was that the manufacturer had a national distribution network," said Judith Gloppen of the organizing committee's licensing office. "The Moen Cowbell Factory said that was no problem on the official cowbells because it delivers bells to almost every sheep in the country."
Gloppen said the factory claims that livestock all over the country are wearing official Lillehammer cowbells, even though there are no athletes around to cheer on.
The Lillehammer Olympic Organizing Committee has so far sold almost $ 17 million in licensed products, more than six times original projections, Gloppen said.
Another $ 11.7 million came from companies that bought the rights to be official suppliers of food, drink, cars credit cards, televisions and just about everything else.
Most of the trinkets, products and souvenirs are of high quality, made of wool, pewter, steel, wood, or other natural materials Norwegians have been using since Viking times.
"I think that is why they have sold so well. Plus that our quality control has been very strict," Gloppen said.
Gloppen said 12 million official Olympic pins have been made, or nearly three each for every man, woman and child in the country.
And things like official goat cheese - a brown cube of cheese pressed with Olympic symbols - and official canned fish seem perfectly natural to Norwegians, who love to spread either on bread, official or otherwise.
At grocery stores, there is indeed official bread, as well as milk, snacks, soft drinks, fruit juice and beer.
Sometimes Norwegians laugh at their own products, especially when they play on the official Norwegian abbreviation for the Olympic Games, which is "OL" for Olympiske Leker.
For example, the Norwegian word for beer is "ol," actually spelled which the Scandinavian letter that looks like an 'O' with a slash through it.
Official beer - "Ol-94" - it was close enough to OL-94 - the official abbreviation of the Games - to make usually quiet Norwegians guffaw.
The same applies to the official herring of the Game, because the Norwegian word for herring is "sild" and the word for flame is "ild." The Olympic herring "OL-Sild" ended up sounding a lot like the Olympic flame, "OL-Ild."
At the Official Store of the 1994 Winter Games, near the organizing committee headquarters in Lillehammer, there are hundreds of official products.
Outside the shop, visitors often stop to have their pictures taken with life-sized wooden statues of Haakon and Kristin, the Viking children who are the official mascots of the Games.
Smaller Haakons and Kristins are available as statues, key rings, dolls, paper cutouts, on knife and cheese slicer handles, and T-shirts.
There are also official sweaters, jackets, hats, headbands, sunglasses and ties. Official underwear was not spotted.
Around the corner, the Official Store of the 1996 Atlanta Games sells more official products.
One Lillehammer T-shirt seems to be more official than the rest: Official countdown T-shirts, one for each day starting 1,000 days before the Games, are auctioned off near the official countdown monument of the Lillehammer Games. The highest bid so far was $ 3,700.
One of the few things that is not official - to the intense irritation of many Norwegians - is the flame they lit in Morgedal, a valley they call "The Cradle of Modern Skiing."
The Morgedal flame, which Norwegians have been carrying in a national relay, will probably be forced off the torch when the original Olympians, the Greeks, reach Norway with the official Olympic flame next month.
 Load-Date: January 23, 1994

 

End of Document
