

The Girl Behind The Shattered Bus Window Safe in German Hospital
The Associated Press
August 8, 1992, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 700 words
Byline: By LARRY THORSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SCHOENEBECK, Germany
Body




Alexandra Kujacic has big, gray-blue eyes and a bright smile that brings relief to the German doctors caring for the tiniest refugees from the tragic civil war in Bosnia.
Last weekend, Alexandra's crying face, pictured behind the bullet-shattered window of a bus in Sarajevo in an Associated Press photograph, became one of the most eloquent Yugoslav war images yet.
The photo of 17-month-old Alexandra that appeared on the front pages of newspapers around the world prompted an outpouring of support, including a flood of calls for adoptions, for Yugoslavia's young war victims.
"She's very clinging, a very sweet child," said Dagmar Fischer, the intern in charge Friday at the children's ward of the Schoenebeck District Hospital.
After a harrowing odyssey in which two children on the bus were killed trying to escape from Sarajevo, 38 children reached Germany on Tuesday.
The Associated Press learned Friday from the Ljubica Ivecic orphanage in Sarajevo that Alexandra is not a war orphan, but was left at the orphanage by her mother, an unwed high school girl from a Serbian town near Sarajevo. The father's name was not known to the orphanage.
The mother has finished school and eventually wants the baby back after the war, but agreed for Alexandra to be sent to Germany, said Ermin Terko, the social worker with the Sarajevo orphanage.
Though the hospital in Schoenebeck didn't know her birth date, Terko said she was born March 5, 1991, in Trebinje, a mostly Serb town in eastern Herzegovina.
"If we had not sent Alexandra with the other kids, she would have been the only baby left in the orphanage," Terko told the AP in Sarajevo.
Serb militiamen took nine children from the bus because they had Serb names, but Alexandra was not taken off the trip that eventually brought the group to eastern Germany.
The rescue mission was criticized for exposing the children to danger, but two German organizers said it was necessary to take some risks to save lives.
With the 38 tots came several adult orphanage workers and three of their children.
Alexandra and three others who were in a nearly dehydrated condition were put in the Schoenebeck hospital, and the others were split among three children's homes around nearby Magdeburg, 100 miles west of Berlin in former East Germany.
"Now they are all in quite good condition," Ms. Fischer said.
The German doctors and caregivers know little about the backgrounds of the tots, not even birth dates. In some cases their full names aren't known, but they all have numbers and perhaps their files will catch up to them.
"At first it was hard to get a smile from them. But today they are standing up in bed and smiling," said Waltraud Kasperczyk, director of the Marienheim children's home, run by the Roman Catholic Caritas charity in Schoenebeck, which has 11 of the tots.
The youngest in the home appears to be 6-8 weeks old.
Mrs. Kasperczyk said they were "all very thin babies" from the conditions they endured in Sarajevo, and had to be fed carefully to avoid making them sick with too-rich food, but she expected them to be in better condition next week.
After nap time Friday, attendants dressed the tots in bright clothes, and they played cheerfully with two of the older refugee children. The oldest, 16-year-old Jakob Ibrahimovic, is especially helpful at the children's home because he knows some of the names of the waifs.
But the staff can only communicate with Jakob in sign language. Yugoslavs living in Germany are expected shortly to come help as translators.
At the hospital, Ms. Fischer said it wasn't important to know the children's names. They get medical care if needed, and the public has given a flood of toys to the hospital.
And there appear to be continual hugs from a staff of six doctors and 20 nurses taking care of about 40 children around the clock.
The children's home says none of the children are being put up for adoption in Germany.
Some undoubtedly are orphans whose parents were killed in the fighting, but their relatives may eventually claim them after the war.
In Schoenebeck District Hospital, Alexandra is sharing her crib with a stuffed Donald Duck toy twice as big as she is, and acts as if she has more reason to smile than to cry.

 

End of Document
