

The Pontiff Still on the Road at 75
The Associated Press
May 15, 1995, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 330 words
Byline: By VICTOR L. SIMPSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: VATICAN CITY
Body




When most Roman Catholic bishops turn 75, they retire. Two days after Pope John Paul II reaches that age, he'll set off for the 64th foreign tour of his papacy.
John Paul's birthday is Thursday. He will mark the day with a quiet celebration with close aides, while preparing for a two-day pilgrimage to the Czech Republic and a nine-hour stopover in his native Poland.
In the 17th year of his papacy and with his place in history secured as the pope who helped to bring down communism, John Paul might be expected to tailor his schedule to his age and loss of vigor.
He generally takes afternoon naps and uses a cane to support a right leg broken in a fall last year, but otherwise has made few concessions.
Nor is there any sign he ever gave any serious thought to stepping down, as allowed under church law if a pope becomes incapacitated.
Last year, after spending his 74th birthday in a hospital following hip replacement surgery, he joked about the issue with his surgeon.
"Doctor, neither you nor I have any choice. You have to cure me because there is no room for a pope emeritus," papal spokesman Joaquin Navarro quoted John Paul as saying.
Neither his uncompromising stand against abortion, contraception and women priests, nor his firm hand on the levers of power - shown in January when he dismissed a French bishop who questioned such positions - has shown any sign of loosening.
While his voice is no longer booming, John Paul has been found other ways to send his message.
His recent book, "Crossing the Threshold of Hope," has sold 4 million copies, according to his Italian publisher, and his speeches to young people have been published in book form. A recording of the pope reciting the rosary sold widely in Spain, England and the United States. His latest encyclical is available on cassette.
The pope has a full travel schedule in the coming months - Belgium, Slovakia, Africa and the United States.
Only Pius XII, pope from 1939 to 1958, has reigned longer this century.
 Load-Date: May 15, 1995

 

End of Document
