

The People Of Shattered Dubrovnik Fear The Worst Yet To Come
The Associated Press
February 5, 1992, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 675 words
Byline: By MORT ROSENBLUM, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: DUBROVNIK, Croatia
Body




When the shells hit Ulica Zudioska - Jewish Street - Marija Kotlaric-Matana acquired a skylight and lost a kitchen. She does not expect to forget the nightmares.
She spent two days alone, crouching in smoke as fragments exploded around her. When she emerged on Nov. 13, the 78-year-old woman learned her only grandson had been killed in a skirmish on the hill above town.
One of the first rounds of the siege vaporized Ana Knego's bed, but she wasn't in it. She was hiding under city walls where she still squats four months later, owning only a discarded parka.
Like many Dubrovnik survivors, both women fear that even if the Yugoslav army goes home, the worst is yet to come. Their young country is at war, and their penniless city is crippled.
They say the outside world ignored them during the nine-week onslaught that began Oct. 1, and little help appears on the way now as they struggle to repair broken lives.
Vibration from explosions damaged homes and monuments, adding to devastation remaining from a 1979 earthquake.
First estimates say restoration could cost $ 350 million. A month after the siege, the only pledge is $ 200,000 from the U.N. Education, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO),
"We asked for money from Zagreb, but what little they have has to feed refugees," said Bozo Letunic, head of the Institute for the Restoration of Dubrovnik.
"You ask George Bush why he didn't do anything," demanded Knego, a school secretary, on seeing an American visitor. "One word could have saved us. Where was everyone? Where are they now? We have no oil. We're not Kuwait."
She and her parents live among scores of refugees in the bowels of Fort Revelin, a massive medieval redoubt built into Dubrovnik's walls, which sheltered townsfolk during the shelling.
Kotlaric-Matana, a psychology professor, was more puzzled than angry. This ancient city has always repelled invaders by sheer force of presence.
"It all came so suddenly that we couldn't prepare," she said.
Other survivors say Dubrovnik could have prepared but didn't.
"It was total confusion, and city officials did not believe that anyone could actually attack Dubrovnik," said a government department chief, who spoke on condition of anonymity lest he lose his job.
The Knegos fled after federal troops shelled the outskirts on Sept. 20. Ten days later, artillery hit the newer parts of Dubronik, where they had lived.
"We are alive, but that is all," Knego said. "Everything is gone, burned, lost. All I have are these clothes. I don't even know who wore them before."
Shelling remained outside the walls until mid-November. Then a brief barrage struck the old center, including Jewish Street. Eight hundred projectiles hammered the old town on Dec. 6.
Kotlaric-Matana went into shock for two weeks. Now, she wants to fix the damage but has no money.
At Peskaria Gate at the old port, one polished paving stone showed what lies ahead for Dubrovnik.
Workmen filled a crater with it - a glaring blemish in the immaculate rock expanse. It was replaced after hours of argument among architects and artisans.
"If we have to do this for every stone, you can imagine what this will take," said Dinu Bumbaru, a Canadian consultant for UNESCO.
Even the most optimistic townsfolk say rebuilding their storied stone city could take decades.
The bombardment all but eliminated hotel capacity. Few people expect tourists to return until long after peace is permanent.
Most people say the city's spirit is too strong to be suppressed. Already, schools have reopened, businesses are starting again and those who fled are flocking back home.
But widespread resentment lingers that outsiders allowed the siege to last so long against a world treasure.
Architect Vronimir Franic took a reporter up the Minceta Tower, high above the stunning expanse of tile roofs and sculpted stone.
"Look at this," he said, sweeping a hand over a panorama of black tarpaper, exposed wooden planks, new red tiles clashing with weathered originals.
"Such a beautiful city, nothing like it in the world. How could they let this happen?"

 

End of Document
