

The Artists: The Prado at 175: Which Way Into the Future?
The Associated Press
December 9, 1994, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 868 words
Byline: By CIARAN GILES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MADRID, Spain
Body




The Prado is the jewel of Spain's cultural crown.
But as the museum begins celebrating its 175th anniversary, critics and art experts point to an absence of leadership they say is jeopardizing Spain's most precious possession.
"The Prado seems to be awaiting the magical arrival of some white knight to lead it forward, but until then it seems content just to fumble on in the darkness and this undermines its integrity," said Jonathan Brown, a specialist in Spanish Old Master painting at New York University's Institute of Fine Arts.
From the time the art treasures of the Spanish monarchy were first unveiled to the public at the Prado on Nov. 19, 1819, the museum has been considered among the top three public collections in the world of Old Master and 19th-century art.
The Spanish state always has controlled the Prado through its appointed directors. The latest whirlwind of four different heads since 1990 has made many wonder whether the Prado's ultimate boss, Culture Minister Carmen Alborch, is certain how she wants the museum to be managed.
"It's like a large orchestra without a conductor," Brown observed.
The conservative opposition Populary Party hit out at socialist government-appointee Alborch last month for not giving priority to the Prado in her ministry's 1995 budget.
Newspapers have been dishing out a steady diet of damning articles on the museum's lack of professional staff, its critical space problems and the deterioration of the elegant 18th-century building.
Even the president of the Prado's board of trustees, Jose Antonio Fernandez Ordonez, has joined the furor, saying he wouldn't be surprised if rats were having a field day in the cellar because of the restaurant's rubbish collection system.
Some experts call the Prado the laggard of the museum world.
How could this have happened?
Brown believes that while the Prado benefited from a boom in the 1980s when museums moved into the mainstream of the cultural life of the United States and western Europe, it has fallen sharply behind in the drive by top museums to remain major attractions through self-promotion, innovative exhibitions and other initiatives.
While Paris' Louvre has gone in for the luxury underground mall approach with glass pyramids pointing up and down, the Prado remains sober and discreet.
And except for a major retrospective in 1990 of Velazquez - the Prado's favorite son - the museum has not gone in for the blockbuster exhibits for which New York's Metropolitan is famous.
Archaeology professor Jose Maria Luzon, the latest director, doesn't agree that the Prado is in the doldrums.
"From outside, the change of directors and other problems looks traumatic, when in fact it's not," said Luzon, who views the museum in a more academic light, expressing polite disdain at calls for more dynamism and pizazz.
For him, the fact that the museum is not blatantly modern is part of its charm.
"I see the Prado and the problems it faces as part of the museum's history," he said. "It's been 175 years of continual growth. This has led to problems like the need for more specialized staff and space that naturally demand to be resolved."
According to the board of trustees, the Prado needs at least 24 instead of its current four curators. Luzon thinks a dozen would be a good number and says the museum sorely needs its own school to train art professionals.
Demand for office space for 400 employees has encroached on exhibit space, robbing the museum of 18 rooms. New acquisitions are squeezed into the building or loaned out.
The Prado is only able to exhibit about 10 percent of its estimated 19,000 pieces, although most experts agree that its best possessions are already on display. An underground expansion and the incorporation of the nearby Army Museum are two solutions under consideration.
However, the lengthy and complex process of making decisions affecting the museum means any serious change can only come about at a snail's pace. So much so that Luzon confesses he will be completely satisfied if he can just sow the seeds for solving the most pressing problems during his tenure.
Image is one.
The transfer of one of the Prado's best-known works, Picasso's "Guernica," to the nearby Queen Sofia Modern Art Museum in 1992, led to criticism that the Culture Ministry was downgrading Spain's premier cultural landmark.
Newspapers played up leaks in the roof as rainwater dripped down a wall close to Veleazquez's "Las Meninas" - the Prado's star attraction.
But the fuss doesn't seem to bother museum-goers. For most foreign visitors, the Prado is the one must-see on their program in Madrid.
"I think its beautiful, there's nothing like it in Tokyo," said one Japanese visitor who shyly refused to give his name during a recent visit.
His only complaint: sore feet from hours of walking the seemingly endless halls of polished stone floors.
Critics do agree on the most pressing problems, but they insist they have become urgent precisely because nobody ever seriously has considered where the Prado is heading.
"Although it may not appear so to the public, the Prado is basically a mess, " said a leading art dealer, who for business reasons asked not to be named. "The leaks were just a symptom of its problems."
 Load-Date: December 9, 1994

 

End of Document
