

The Grumpy Traveler Takes on the Mediterranean
 The Associated Press
December 20, 1995, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 830 words
Byline: By ALAN FLIPPEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




There goes grumpy traveler Paul Theroux again, sneering and unleashing his bile, this time on that most sacred cradle of Western civilization, the Mediterranean Sea.
Or so the reviewers say. To hear Theroux himself tell it, he's a happy-go-lucky, optimistic voyager whose humor, in books such as his new "The Pillars of Hercules," isn't always appreciated by unimaginative readers.
"To tell you the truth, I think that I'm a very, very cheery person," Theroux said. "What I think of as irony, another person thinks of as criticism. … A person who's literal-minded would take a lot of my writing as aggressive."
The irony in "The Pillars of Hercules" will be familiar to fans of Theroux's earlier travel books, which include "The Great Railway Bazaar," "The Old Patagonian Express" and "Riding the Iron Rooster."
What's different is that Theroux decided this time to take on one of the world's most traveled regions. While he normally seeks out lands that are unexplored, at least by Westerners, Theroux said he always had wanted to see the Mediterranean.
"It's like a book that you hadn't read that everyone else has read," he says. "I felt somewhat obliged and somewhat curious to take the imaginative leap and see if I could write about it."
He writes about it unsparingly, starting from the very first scene, in which a tourist confronts a Gibraltar ape and comes off as distinctly the less civilized of the two. It sets the tone for a work whose villains are tourists and the locals who pander to them - above all the Greeks, described with a scorn that borders on ethnic bias.
"The whole of Greece seemed to me a cut-price theme park of broken marble, a place where you were harangued in a high-minded way about ancient Greek culture while some swarthy little person picked your pocket," he writes.
"The Greeks had not taken very much interest in their past until Europeans became enthusiastic discoverers and diggers of their ruins," he adds a page later. "And why should they have cared? The Greeks were not Greek, but rather the illiterate descendants of Slavs and Albanian fishermen, who spoke a debased Greek dialect and had little interest in the broken columns and temples except as places to graze their sheep."
In the interview, Theroux insisted he's not anti-Greek.
"I was surprised by how, in the Mediterranean, local people would take credit for whatever ruin happened to be in their village," he said. "I didn't mean in any sense a racial slur, but I was questioning weird ethnic pride and what it's based on."
Some local people treat their ruins in a way that impressed Theroux, however, particularly in Siracusa, the Sicilian town that was once the mighty Greek city of Syracuse, which include the famed Fountain of Arethusa.
"It is not really a Greek ruin," he wrote. "It is a place Siracusans take their kids to say 'Look at the duckies' and throw pizza crusts at them. Probably the Greeks did the same thing."
That passage drew the ire of New York Times reviewer Stephen Greenblatt, who wrote that Theroux "writes sourly" of Siracusa and "is particularly immune to the ache of ruins."
But to Theroux, the scene indicated that the ruins are just a part of ordinary Siracusan life - the same as they were to the Greeks.
"People think we have to venerate ruins," Theroux said. "It's an excessive kind of reverence, and sometimes a bamboozled reverence. That's exactly what people were doing (in ancient times) - sitting there and feeding the ducks."
While Theroux insists he doesn't read his reviews, he is clearly nettled by his grumpy image. He takes it on in the book's second sentence: "I had traveled past clumps of runty stunted trees and ugly houses (the person who just muttered, 'Oh, there he goes again!' must read no further) ..."
"I hear that a lot and I thought, if I say that, then they can't complain," he said. "Also, I thought it was funny."
Seeking out the ordinary lives of people always has been a theme in Theroux's travel writing. For "The Pillars of Hercules," he traveled in the spring and fall of 1993 and 1994, avoiding the high tourist seasons, and found some of his greatest pleasure in places where tourists seldom go: crime-ridden Marseilles, France; the tiny village of Aliano, Italy, setting for Carlo Levi's memoir "Christ Stopped at Eboli"; authoritarian Syria; teeming Tangier, Morocco, where his trip ended.
At that point - for the first time in his traveling life - he decided "The journey was over, but the experience wasn't. … My trip had not cured me of the Mediterranean, and I knew I would go back."
But there won't be another Mediterranean book, he said: Future trips will be vacations, "which are trips that I'm not writing about."
There will, however, be more Theroux travel books. The writer can instantly reel off a long list of places he would like to visit and write about: Scandinavia, Brazil, the Philippines, the lesser islands of Indonesia.
"The list is endless," he said.
---
"The Pillars of Hercules." G.P. Putnam's Sons. $ 27.50.
 Load-Date: December 20, 1995

 

End of Document
