

The Coup, One Year Later: Where Has All The Euphoria Gone?
The Associated Press
August 6, 1992, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 791 words
Byline: By WENDY SLOANE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Zinaida Zakrevskaya was carrying flowers to place on the graves of her loved ones when she came upon those of the three young men killed by Soviet troops during last year's coup.
Hundreds of thousands of mourners attended the victims' funeral last year, hailing them as Russia's saviors. Former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev awarded them the highest civilian honor. Russian President Boris Yeltsin read their eulogy, and U.S. Ambassador Bob Strauss spoke to the crowd.
But these days, few come to pay respects to the martyrs of the failed putsch that led to the collapse of the Soviet Union.
The graves of other famous Russians buried in Vagankovskoye Cemetery, such as folk singer Vladimir Vysotsky and writer Sergei Yesenin, have been transformed into sites of pilgrimage. But the plots of the three young men are overgrown, with faded plastic flowers littering the mounds of soil instead of fresh ones, and discarded watering cans collecting rust.
In a post-Soviet era marked by rampant inflation, soaring prices, rising crime and social instability, those who died for democracy have been forgotten.
"After the coup our lives have gotten better morally, but worse materially," said Zakrevskaya, 73. Her grandsons, close in age to the three who were killed, also manned the barricades to defend the Russian parliament building during the three tense days in August.
"We lived badly before, and we're still living badly," said the retired actress, looking sadly at the large black-and-white portraits of the baby-faced young men propped next to the graves.
Thousands of people, most of them young, risked their lives outside the White House, or parliament building, to take up Yeltsin's call to oppose the coup. A year later, many are disillusioned, saying they have yet to witness many of the changes they thought would come.
Their joy has been replaced by anger and anxiety in a society where money becomes more worthless daily, where most consumer goods are only for the rich, where the future is uncertain.
"During the coup there was a kind of euphoria that at long last something was finally about to begin," said Valery Lemzikov, 28, a businessman and father of two. He spent the three tense days of the coup barricaded inside an armored personnel carrier.
"Now the democrats are in power, but of course they're not real democrats, they're doing the same things the communists did.
"The only thing that really has changed is in how people think. Most people are used to thinking that government can help them, and now they realize they have to help themselves," he said.
Some people who supported Yeltsin have seen their lives disintegrate so rapidly that they almost wish the coup had turned out differently.
Former Defense Ministry worker Valentina Zhdanova, 57, said her pension is so miserly that she has been forced to sell things on the street. On a recent day she had placed a flashlight, some safety pins, a dusty roll of electrical tape, three paintbrushes and a handful of rusty hair clips on a cardboard box for passers-by to purchase.
"My son was at the barricades for two days and I respected Yeltsin very much. Now we still respect him, but we aren't able to take the government seriously anymore," Zhdanova said.
"They promised us heaven on earth, but then they made our lives not four times more expensive, but 104 times more expensive!" she said.
For others, the failed coup meant their lives would never be the same.
"I try to make the loss of my son abstract, as if he has just gone somewhere for a while," said Inessa Krichevskaya, the mother of Ilya Krichevsky, one of the three men killed in Moscow during the coup. Two others died in the now-independent Baltic states of Latvia and Lithuania.
"I try to forget that he's my son because grief and blood are now everywhere. It seems shameful for me to talk about my own personal tragedy," Krichevskaya said in an interview in her apartment, where she displays human rights awards from the United States given posthumously to her son and the same portrait of him that graces the Vagankovskoye Cemetery.
Krichevsky had been standing next to a man who yelled insults at the Soviet troops as their tanks lumbered near the White House, and was caught in the fire as a sergeant answered the epithet with his gun.
A handsome man who was studying architecture and wrote poetry, he was only 28.
The other two Muscovites killed that night, Dmitry Komar and Vladimir Usov, were run over by Soviet troops in military vehicles near a barricade.
Ilya's father, Marat, was so unnerved by his son's abrupt death that he refused to talk to a reporter.
"I'll only talk to you if you pay for the interview," he said. "Because every interview takes three, four months out of our lives."
End Adv for use anytime

 

End of Document
