

The American Dream Has Become An Economic Nightmare
The Associated Press
November 23, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 2194 words
Body




EDITOR'S NOTE - Work hard, live within your means and you'll get ahead in life. So went the advice passed from generation to generation. Yet millions of Americans who are doing just that are wondering if the old formula has gone stale. Many are scraping by these days, burdened by a feeble economy that has produced thousands of layoffs, higher taxes and cuts in social services. In a special report on "The New Frugality," The Associated Press examines how the American dream has turned into an economic nightmare.
---
By VIVIAN MARINO
AP Business Writer
The economic recovery is fizzling and Americans everywhere are feeling the pinch of lingering hard times, from boardrooms to boarding rooms.
While periodic downturns in the U.S. economy are nothing new, there is growing sentiment that more is at stake this time.
Profound changes are occurring in consumer confidence and business strategy. After more than a year of economic uncertainty, people are worrying about the well-being of future generations, not just another tough year ahead.
"It's really more than economics. It's a social, psychological change," observed Robert J. Eggert, publisher of Blue Chip Economic Indicators, a Sedona, Ariz., newsletter that polls leading economic forecasters.
The shock of hard times after the booming decade of the '80s may be at the root of this change in attitude. Instead of rising prosperity, Americans are becoming accustomed to business retrenchment, layoffs and recurring stock market slides.
In response, businesses and consumers are pulling their belts tighter than they have in decades in a "new frugality" that may well define the waning years of this century.
"We have to go back 100 years to the Industrial Revolution to see the types of fundamental changes we're seeing now," said Larry M. Elkin, a tax manager in Arthur Andersen & Co.'s New York office.
Confronted with keener competition overseas and rising costs here, businesses of all sizes are keeping leaner inventories, even as the holidays approach, and laying off tens of thousands of workers to help cut costs.
International Business Machines Corp., for instance, plans to eliminate 20,000 jobs worldwide, or about 5 percent of its work force, by year's end, and analysts expect an equal number of jobs to be eliminated in 1992.
Rob Wilson, a spokesman for the computer giant, said a leaner-and-meaner approach is part of an ongoing restructuring "designed to make IBM more efficient with our customers."
Small businesses are rethinking their business plans, too. N.R. Underwood and Sons Enterprises Inc., a hardware business in Hudson, Mass., recently opened on Sundays, breaking a 117-year-old tradition. Owner Norman Underwood said that despite the move, sales still are off about 10 percent from a year ago.
Many larger companies have been looking overseas for opportunities, especially in Europe, where 19 countries plan to unify into one giant marketplace by 1993. But even Europe's economies are muddling along these days; Japan isn't doing much better.
In the United States, consumers, like businesses, are downsizing their expectations and spending. The notorious yuppies of the 1980s have turned into "grumpies," or grown-up mature professionals, who think less about second homes and expensive cars and more about sending their children through college, supporting elderly parents and preparing for their own retirements.
"They've been hit by a triple whammy," said Elkin, the tax consultant.
Dale Braman, 44, was pulling in $ 54,000 a year, plus bonus, before being laid off last year as national marketing sales director for Towa Sankiden Corp., an Edison, N.J., company that makes electronic cash registers.
Nearly 100 resumes and 20 job interviews later, he has yet to find a similar position even after relocating to the western United States. Braman had to settle for a $ 6-an-hour sales job at a Radio Shack store. His wife, Carol, 40, took a $ 21,000-a-year bookkeeping position.
The family, which includes two school-aged children, has had to cut back substantially. Vacations are relegated to visits to relatives. Eating out is a rarity, and for entertainment they borrow videos from the local library.
These frugal attitudes have inspired a slew of recently published cost-cutting advice books. In his "500 Simple Money-Saving Ideas" booklet, consumer economics consultant Joel Martin suggests Depression-like remedies: Cut your own children's hair; dilute shampoo; refrain from idling your car for more than a minute since it's cheaper to restart the engine then; and don't wash or dry clean clothes more than necessary to avoid wearing out the fabric.
"We'll be seeing a lot more of carefully planned spending rather than impulse buying. More businesses will fold before they wake up and adjust to this change," said Cheryl Russell, a demographic consultant from Ithaca, N.Y., and author of the 1987 book "100 Predictions For The Baby Boom."
"During the '90s and early in the next century, the dominating thing will be raising children and family life" for the 75 million baby boomers, born between 1946 and 1964, she says.
To be sure, many experts expect the worst of the suffering to be temporary. They say a slow recovery from the recession will help correct some of the excesses of a fundamentally strong economy and produce even greater prosperity later.
"I think over the long run, it's probably a good thing for the economy as long as changes are not made in a way that will hurt company productivity," said Eggert. "While that's going on there are often adjustments that are troublesome."
According to Eggert's Blue Chip Indicators, the general consensus is that the inflation-adjusted gross national product will decline 0.4 percent this year but grow by 2.3 percent in 1992. Through the turn of the century, economic growth will average 2.5 percent a year, the publication said recently.
The economy was moving ahead strongly in the spring on a wave of consumer confidence from the U.S. victory in the Gulf War. But things went sour by summer, with growing layoffs and worsening budgetary problems among many of the nation's cities and states. The reversal of fortune led some economists to predict another economic downturn, or "double dip."
"The whole economy has not erased the recession yet," conceded Geoffrey Moore, a member of the privately run National Bureau of Economic Research, designated by the federal government as the official arbiter of when recessions begin and end.
The bureau declared that the recession started in July 1990, and some economists say it ended in May.
Moore said the recovery has been subdued because the recession, the first in eight years, also was mild by historical standards. But Moore says he's encouraged by the fact that inflation remains in check and interest rates low.
Rates on 30-year conventional mortgages are at 14-year lows, averaging well below 9 percent, while the commercial bank prime lending rate, now at 7.5 percent, is the lowest in five years.
"When the prime rate starts going up, it usually means the end of an expansion," Moore said.
Others don't see an immediate end to the new frugality. They argue that it may become entrenched in businessess and households because it will take years to overcome the stockpiled debts of the go-go '80s and the harsh cutbacks the payback has demanded.
Benjamin M. Friedman, economics chairman at Harvard University, sees underlying problems in the economy that can't be easily shaken off. In his 1988 best-selling book "Day of Reckoning," Friedman blames the Reagan administration's policy of heavy spending and borrowing for creating a "false prosperity" during the 1980s, one that has been copied by corporations and individuals alike.
In fact, total public and private debt was estimated at $ 10 trillion last year, and could grow further as the bill to bail out failed savings and loans and banks rises, according to the Jerome Levy Economics Institute of Bard College in Chappaqua, N.Y.
All that debt, while used to finance past economic growth, could hinder future expansion. Last year, the net interest paid on debt by the federal government accounted for 3.4 percent of the nation's GNP, the Jerome Levy group said. By comparison, Washington's net interest was just 1.9 percent of GNP in 1946, it said.
Those live-for-today policies, Friedman said, violate basic moral principles that have bound each generation of Americans to the next: "That men and women should work and eat, earn and spend, both privately and collectively, so that their children and their children's children would inherit a better world."
"During the '80s," Friedman said in an interview, "we have underinvested in just about all the makings of a strong economy."
Research and development is one example. The National Science Foundation began detecting a significant drop in growth of annual R&D spending by U.S. companies about five years ago. Such spending for new and improved products and technology grew 4 percent to 10 percent a year in the early 1980s after adjusting for inflation, but fell 2 percent to 3 percent a year since 1986, the foundation said.
Productivity gains also have been small. Annual business productivity, which measures workers' efficiency, rose an average 0.6 percent from 1973 to 1979, and 0.9 percent from 1979 to 1986, which is not enough to obtain even moderate standard-of-living improvements, according to the Conference Board, a business research group based in New York.
"We have not saved or invested," said Audrey Freedman, a Conference Board economist. "And it's more than just investing in better equipment and tools. (It's) in the regeneration of our infrastructure, or in education of our people to make them more efficient producers or better managers."
A poll sponsored by the Committee for Economic Development and the Business Roundtable found that only 30 percent of recently surveyed employers positively ranked the overall preparedness of students to hold jobs in their businesses. Sixty-seven percent gave them negative ratings.
At the same time, real personal income has been declining, noted Harvard's Friedman. He said the average American worker earned $ 281 a week in 1983, the first year of the eight-year economic expansion, the longest in recent history. In constant dollars, that same person earns just $ 260 today.
Until the latest recession, these gaps had been masked for years, economists say, by more two-income households and an increase in borrowing.
"(But) borrowing has its natural limits … and you can't send a third family member to work. You can only go so far," said Freedman, of the Conference Board.
Many experts see trouble ahead if these limitations continue.
William Strauss, co-author of the recently published book, "Generations," believes those born just after the baby boomers, from the early 1960s to 1981, will have the toughest time achieving the so-called American dream of a better life.
A product of divorce, two-income earners and a "latchkey" environment, this generation is less likely to be college-educated than its elders but more likely to bear the fiscal burdens of a debt-happy government and aging population, he said.
"The decade of the '70s brought a steep decline in the economic fortunes of children," Strauss noted in his book, which analyzes the 18 generations since the founding of the United States. "From the 1950s through the early 1970s, the over-65 age bracket showed the highest poverty rate; since 1974, the under-18 bracket has shown the highest.
"Through the 1980s … (their) economic stress has moved right up the age ladder with them."
Richard L. Walters, 60, a retired steelworker from New Brighton, Pa., with three grown children, says he's glad he doesn't have to raise a family in today's economic conditions.
"You used to be able to support a family on one salary. You were even able to eat out once in a while," said Walters, who is barely making ends meet on a $ 922 monthly pension from former employee LTV Corp.
"It's way harder these days. It takes twice as much to raise one child as it did before. I wouldn't have any children today if I had to get through it again."
The downside of the new frugality is that it is basically a defensive, get-by strategy. And it arrives at a time when the economy actually needs more spending - not less - to get the forces of supply and demand moving again.
Policymakers in Washington have been facing this economic Catch-22 in the growing shadow of the presidential election in 1992.
The Federal Reserve, the nation's central bank, has helped bring mortgage and other interest rates down by steadily lowering key lending rates since the recession began last year.
But the Fed's moves - including another round of cuts this month - haven't done much good yet.
That lack of success is now amplifying calls for even more drastic action, like a tax cut, which might only pad the debts the economy is struggling to repay.
In fact, Harvard's Friedman says the entire tax structure needs to be revamped.
"We ought to have much more of a pro-saving, pro-investing policy stance from the government," he said. "We need a tax structure that favors equity financing instead of debt financing."

 

End of Document
