

The Adventure of the Furtive Painters
The Associated Press
July 17, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 679 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev's arrival provoked a bit of cloak-and-dagger work and some baldfaced disinformation at the Group of Seven summit press center on Wednesday.
Word got around that organizers were redecorating the auditorium where Gorbachev and Prime Minister John Major were to hold a joint a news conference. Reporters turned up to take a look.
"Nothing is being painted and no Soviet flags are being put there," a staffer said. Some of his colleagues held the door handles to prevent anyone from looking in at what was described as a bit of "tidying up."
A little later, a reporter managed to look in and saw an elongated, red Soviet flag with a yellow hammer and sickle freshly painted on the wall.
 
 ---
World's largest G-7 summit?
So the British claimed in the headline of a news release, then immediately thought better of it. "One of the largest such events ever held," the text claimed.
For the record, there were 3,600 accredited media staff at the main press center, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office said. That fell short of the 4,000-plus at Houston last year.
The summit might have claimed a record for most world leaders in a group of seven, but everyone insisted that Gorbachev wasn't there, officially. Even so, there were eight men among the seven, counting Dutch Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers, representing the European Community.
One record seemed beyond dispute:
Most World Leaders Sitting Around Talking Right After a Group of Seven Summit - Nine, London, 1991 (G. Bush, J. Major, F. Mitterrand, H. Kohl, T. Kaifu, B. Mulroney, M. Gorbachev, G. Andreotti, R. Lubbers).
 
 President Bush appeared to commit a faux pas Tuesday night when he sat down at Buckingham Palace while Queen Elizabeth II was still standing. According to Barbara Bush, however, the queen told him to sit.
"Then, he jumped up. He said, 'This is crazy, I'm not going to sit down,"' Mrs. Bush told reporters at the U.S. ambassador's residence Wednesday.
She said the queen tried to make her stand right in the middle of the arch on the palace balcony for a good view of Tuesday night's sound, light and fireworks spectacular.
Mrs. Bush said she got out of it by making "poor, sweet, little Mrs. Kaifu," the Japanese first lady, stand in front. "I said, 'You can't see. You've got to stand there."'
Mrs. Bush said the show at Buckingham Palace was "gaspingly beautiful."
"I was thrilled with the choice they had for the United States of America. I think to play 'God Bless America' was more than generous."
Mrs. Bush added that the queen seemed to like the music too.
"She sang every song -- hummed away," Mrs. Bush said.
 
 A cheesemaker-shepherd from Switzerland gained police attention by climbing a tall lamp pole opposite near the press center, chaining himself in place and holding a banner demanding action to save the Malaysian rain forest.
As 37-year-old Bruno Manser settled in, about five dozen policemen gathered around. An officer cupped his hands and shouted: "Do you speak English?"
Manser stared down and shouted: "I don't understand."
His banner twirling in the breeze read: "Sarawak! Forest? Destruction! Human rights violations! Moratorium now!"
His International Rainforest Action Group was demonstrating during the G-7 summit for pressure on Malaysia to reduce logging in Sarawak on the island of Borneo which the group says threatens indigenous peoples.
It took nearly three hours to get him down. Manser was hauled off to Bow Street Magistrates Court, and released without charge.
 
 Chester, Charlie and Bonnie have been working like dogs at summit. Like explosive-sniffing dogs.
Instead of the conventional German shepherds, the team includes an 18-month-old border collie, a three-year-old springer spaniel, and a four-year-old Labrador, respectively.
"In this country we find these sort of dogs are more socially acceptable," said Constable Terry Blackmore, one of the handlers.
"You see, everybody is coming up and stroking them. If it were a German shepherd, they wouldn't do that," Blackmore said. "If we had a German shepherd everybody would be walking around in a big arc."

 

End of Document
