

Theater Under the Stars - Paris Talent Seeks Fame in the Vineyards
 The Associated Press
September 22, 1995, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 642 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER BURNS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DURAS, France
Body




As the sun sets over vineyards, lights go up on a stage erected in front of a chateau, where a coquettish widow plays cat-and-mouse with eager suitors.
The audience, a mix of locals and tourists, is delighted by the production under the stars, a hilarious and lively portrayal of Carlo Goldoni's "The Shrewd Widow."
While the Festival d'Avignon and its hundreds of shows is the best-known outdoor event in France, there are myriad productions whose curtains don't fall with the leaves.
And provincial theater is more than a weary selection of campy annual town plays; it attracts talent from Paris by offering opportunity to the up-and-coming.
"It's great to walk through the fields and past the cows and then you're on the stage, in the open air," said actress Marie Piton, who brilliantly plays the seductive widow Rosaura.
"And it's nice to get away from Paris for awhile," she said, sipping the local white wine as she sat on the front of the stage while stagehands started dismantling the backdrop.
The play was part of the annual festival in Duras, an hour's drive east of Bordeaux, that included baroque and big band music, choirs and plenty of wine-tasting.
The theater company that produced the play, Les Baladins en Agenais, is based in the tiny southwestern town of Monclar, where the troupe lives in a rustic dormitory.
"Even if most of our work is in the provinces, we don't have any amateurs," said actor-director Roger Louret, 45, who was the intensely wacky harlequin in the Goldoni play.
Louret's company also has produced "The Twist Years," playing at the Folies-Bergere in Paris, and he says he depends on talent from Paris such as Piton who are looking for a career boost.
"We can't avoid the trampoline effect, but we'd sell our souls if that was our purpose," Louret said. "My Baladins is a prison with open doors. I just look for their talent."
There are hundreds of other open-door prisons. Among them: the Theatre Pirate in Toulouse, the Theatre Populaire d'Occitanie in Montauban, the Theatre Quotidien of Montpellier, the Theatre Populaire du Midi in Nimes and the Zinc Theater in Beziers.
Many can't do it on their own. About $ 480 million - 10 percent of France's culture budget - combine with local contributions and ticket sales to run about 500 subsidized theater companies across the country.
It's part of the government's effort to fight the image of "Paris et le desert Francais," the dying countryside neglected by the capital.
The role of provincial theater, says the Culture Ministry's Yves Deschamps, "is artistic decentralization, to bring shows to where people live.
"We don't just want to have them, but to ensure there's quality," said Deschamps, who travels around the country to make sure the money is being spent wisely.
"There's a sentimental factor that becomes dangerous," he said in Paris. "What's important is that it be original and done well. The fact it's in a rural region doesn't enter into my considerations."
The bottom line is, the government that prides itself on culture is pumping millions into events that can be worked into a wine-safari or a sojourn in Provence.
It does help to have a basic knowledge of French to understand the plays, though Louret said provincial plays tend to be more graphic than some of the cerebral Paris productions.
"We want to touch the senses, which are the same for all," he said. "Theater represents not only intellectual life but life in your guts. That goes even for Racine."
Louret's next production was the 17th-century playwright's drama "Andromaque."
The Culture Ministry publishes a thick guide every year listing music, theater, mime and marionette shows, dance, cinema, art exhibits and "sound-and-light" events that bring historical sites to life.
The latest one, more than 500 pages with 10,000 events, costs $ 12 and can be obtained through a French Embassy or Consulate.
 Load-Date: September 22, 1995

 

End of Document
