

Top Cop's License Plate Is the Talk of the Town
The Associated Press
May 20, 1993, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 530 words
Byline: By MARCUS ELIASON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HONG KONG
Body




A dispute over the police chief's license plate has provoked a curious bout of one-upmanship in Hong Kong.
The issue exercising police officers, legislators and editorial writers is whether the British colony's top cop should be allowed to keep his "1" license plate.
Some legislators want it auctioned off for charity. But Li Kwan-ha, commissioner of the Royal Hong Kong Police, says that without the No. 1 plate on his Toyota, his force's morale will suffer.
With bigger problems looming over Hong Kong, chiefly the 1997 takeover by China, some critics say the police and legislature have better things to do than squabble over a vanity plate.
"Enough of this dotty behavior, please," tut-tutted the South China Morning Post, an English-language daily.
The dispute, which surfaced in a meeting this month between Li and Hong Kong's Legislative Council, appears to reflect a cultural clash.
To Hong Kong's British masters, a license plate may seem a small sacrifice to make for charity. But Chinese VIPs like Li are keenly aware of the mystical spell of numbers in Hong Kong society.
Just last February, businessman Wong Ming-hung paid a record $ 1.2 million for Financial Secretary Hamish Macleod's "2" plate. MacLeod's plate now has his title's initials, FS.
One reason why vanity plates mean megabucks is that some digits, when spoken aloud in English, sound like upbeat words in Cantonese. "Three" sounds like the word for "life." "Eight" is "prosperity," "two" is "easy."
"One" sounds like the Cantonese for "no doubt" - not a particularly loaded word, but coveted nonetheless for its connotations of supremacy. And 55-year-old Li, a career policeman and the first Chinese to head the colony's force, left the legislators in no doubt that he is looking out for No. 1.
"When the balloon goes up, our many fine young men and women are working in the street. If No. 1 comes up it has a tremendous morale-boosting effect," newspapers quoted him as saying.
"If that's the case, then the commissioner should drive his No. 1 car around town 24 hours a day," legislator Albert Chan responded.
Li's supporters say he should keep the plate if only to prevent it falling into the hands of a gangland boss - a loss of face too enormous to contemplate.
Chan said in an interview that such a reversal of fortune might spur the force into cracking down on organized crime.
The Chinese-language Ming Pao daily said 83 percent of 556 people polled by telephone favored auctioning off the plate. But the government-owned RTHK radio station reported sentiment running more than 2-1 in the police chief's favor on a phone-in show.
Kevin Sinclair, author of a history of the Hong Kong force, urged the commish to stand firm.
Past police chiefs, imported from Britain, had resisted pressure to relinquish the plate, and "it is unthinkable that Li Kwan-ha, more attuned to the cultural significance it embraces, would surrender No. 1," Sinclair wrote in the South China Morning Post.
Meanwhile the numbers game shows no sign of winding down. More than 40,000 lucky plates await distribution, and transport authorities say they are extending the twice-monthly auctions from a half-day to a full day to increase sales.

 

End of Document
