

Tradition of the New at the Guggenheim
The Associated Press
June 3, 1994, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 697 words
Byline: By GREG DALTON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




For American artists, the Declaration of Independence came not in 1776, but in 1959, when legendary critic Harold Rosenberg coined the phrase, "the tradition of the new."
"The famous 'modern break with tradition,"' Rosenberg said, "has lasted long enough to have produced its own tradition." In other words, American artists had finally come into their own.
Rosenberg's phrase, the tradition of the new, has been aptly chosen as the title of a sweeping new exhibition that encompasses the entire rotunda at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum.
The Tradition of the New: Postwar Masterpieces from the Guggenheim Collection presents the greatest hits of abstract expressionism, pop art and art informel, and includes works from Franz Kline, Wilem de Kooning, Mark Rothko, Asger Jorn and Georg Baselitz.
Michael Govan, deputy director of the Guggenheim Museum and an organizer of the exhibition, rejects the notion of distinct European and American aesthetics. But he says the show offers a fascinating and rare opportunity to compare and contrast postwar art from both sides of the Atlantic.
One can, for example, compare the strict, rational sculpture of American Donald Judd based on a mathematical formula with the casual, slouched red aprons of Mario Merz that refers to the same principle of numbers and space. Another intriguing point of comparison is the use of materials.
Americans, Govan says, employed materials for their aesthetic properties while Europeans used them as metaphors.
Richard Serra elegantly exposed the inherent qualities of leather in a set of earth tone belts dangling from the wall.
German artist Joseph Beuys was not so easily satisfied. He was obsessed with two substances, one sensual and the other slimy, and constructed what Govan terms a"mythology of felt and fat" that permeates his provocative work. The basis of that mythology is a story that Beuys was wrapped in felt and fat after he was rescued from a plane crash in the Crimea during World War II.
Though some experts say that story itself is a myth, Beuys nonetheless combined art and experience in a way that impacted other artists.
"Some would argue that Beuys is the most important postwar artist and was a radical, interesting thinker," says Govan.
Terremoto, completed after a 1980 earthquake near Naples, Italy, is a bold, altar-shaped sculpture that consists of blackboards and a grungy cast-iron typesetting machine. On the side is a rolled-up Italian flag, embraced by a protective blanket of gray felt, just as Beuys himself had been several decades earlier. The manifesto of a group advocating Neopolitan independence is emblazoned above the keyboard, testament to Beuys' political activism and his belief that art should be socially responsible.
Beuys, who died in 1986, displayed his infatuation with fat in public performances by scrawling words, symbols and chemical equations with a white, sudsy bar of soap, a fat-based substance. The blackboards that he wrote on were a tool and, in the end, a work of art.
One of Beuys' most prominent blackboards, "Jungfrau" or Virgin, shows the chemical formula for soap and a heart which he used to associate virginity and motherhood with cleanliness and impurity.
Cleanliness and virginity were certainly not on the mind of Austrian artist Hermann Nitsch had when he painted Schuttbild, an explosion of red on white canvas that is one of the many striking works on display at the Tradition of the New that plays with the idea of fine art as performance.
A student of ancient Roman and Christian rituals, Nitsch was inspired by the reading of animal entrails as an indication of luck before an important event. Though Schuttbild was done in paint, Nitsch did use animal blood in some of his art.
His bold and progressive work was the catalyst for a movement known as Viennese actionism, an offshoot from abstract expressionism that considered art as action.
---
The Tradition of the New: Postwar Masterpieces from the Guggenheim Collection runs until Sept. 11, 1994 at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1071 Fifth Ave., New York. Hours are Friday to Wednesday, 10 a.m. to 8 p.m. Closed Thursday. Admission: Adults $ 7, students and seniors, $ 4. 212-423-3500.
 Load-Date: June 3, 1994

 

End of Document
