

Traveling With the Circus of the Sun
The Associated Press
September 6, 1994, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 377 words
Byline: By ELIZABETH WEISE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN FRANCISCO
Body




When the 110 people who make up the traveling arm of Cirque du Soleil hit the road, they do it in style.
With them on their current two-year tour of 10 U.S. cities are their families, a bilingual school and a full kitchen, complete with five chefs.
It takes 29 tractor-trailer rigs to move the circus, so many that in some towns, they're required to enter one truck at a time over several nights, according to tour director Jacques Marois.
Just setting up the blue and yellow striped Big Top takes seven days. Three more are needed to tear it down.
In each new town, the circus hires an additional 150 locals, bringing the Cirque community up to 260.
The kitchen trailer is the hub of the compound. The four chefs on duty staff the stoves, producing prodigious amounts of French-inspired cuisine, with side trips to China, Mongolia and Russia in deference to the United Nations makeup of the troupe.
As knots of performers and stagehands drink bowls of cafe au lait on the dining car's veranda, a cook comes out to chalk the night's menu on the board. The traveling community brings with it so many children - both performers and performer's children - that it supports its own school, in two languages and to the requirements of two countries.
Most students are educated in French, in accordance with Quebec's school requirements, though a few work with an English-speaking teacher who provides accredited courses for American students.
The troupe functions in three main languages - French, English and Russian, with a little Chinese on the side. At 5 p.m. one afternoon on a foggy San Francisco summer's day, artistic coordinator Pavel Brun runs the full cast through some changes in the finale.
Brun, who grew up in a circus family in St. Petersburg, first gives his orders in Russian, and a wave of Russian speakers walk across the stage in character, contorting themselves into fantastic shapes as they move.
Next, he repeats his directions in charming, if heavily accented, English, and the English speakers move.
Finally, a chic-looking French-Canadian floor director dressed entirely in black repeats the commands in Quebecois, and the mostly Francophone house troupe sidle across the floor.
"This is the mythical circus life on the road," says Marois. "It's fantastic."
 Load-Date: September 6, 1994

 

End of Document
