

U.S. Decision's Biggest Impact on the Allies, Not the Guns
The Associated Press
November 11, 1994, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 303 words
Byline: By MAUD S. BEELMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: VIENNA, Austria
Body




Significant amounts of weapons and ammunition have been reaching Bosnian government forces since spring, so the U.S. decision not to enforce the arms embargo will have little immediate impact.
Washington says it will stop enforcing the embargo against Bosnia after midnight Saturday.
That means three U.S. ships, part of a 19-warship flotilla, patrolling the Adriatic Sea will not stop or divert ships suspected of carrying weapons bound for Bosnia.
A White House official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the United States will help enforce other embargos.
The Bosnian Serbs also are under an arms embargo, and the former Yugoslavia has been under an economic embargo since November 1992 for fomenting war.
According to NATO, nearly all ships found to be carrying contraband were headed for Montenegro or Serbia, the two republics remaining in Yugoslavia, which supplied their Serb brethren with weapons, fuel and ammunution until August.
Most weapons reaching the Muslim-led Bosnian government are believed to have arrived at one of Croatia's 50 airfields, which range from large airports such as Zagreb and Split, to small grass airstrips. They reach Bosnia by land or in small boats which skirt Croatia's nook-and-cranny coastline.
In addition, Bosnia has been building a large airfield near Visoko, north of Sarajevo, which army sources say is to receive arms and ammunitions shipments.
It is not clear what effect the U.S. decision will have on the overall monitoring operation on the Adriatic.
One western military official, speaking on condition he not be named, said the options are either to eliminate all U.S. participation, which also includes vital communications and intelligence capabilities, or to position U.S. warships where they are likely to encounter only ships carrying Yugoslav-bound contraband.
 Load-Date: November 11, 1994

 

End of Document
