

WALTER MEARS: Gibbons the Paratrooper Returns as Gibbons the Congressman
The Associated Press
May 26, 1994, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 734 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Sam Gibbons is taking off for Normandy again. He's going in ahead, just as he did 50 years ago. This time, though, he won't be jumping out of the airplane.
Gibbons, the senior Florida congressman, parachuted into France before the D-Day landings, but said he wasn't even tempted to join the 40 or so paratroop veterans who are planning to do it again. "When they quit paying me to do it, I quit jumping," he said.
Gibbons will be President Clinton's special representative at ceremonies leading up to the 50th anniversary of D-Day, a week from Monday. "I'm going to do the speechmaking until the president gets there," he said.
Now 74, Gibbons was a captain in the parachute infantry when Allied forces stormed ashore at Normandy, part of the volunteer force of 12,000 men that went first, behind the German lines.
The hour and the minute are part of his encyclopedic memory of everything that happened. "The time was 1:26 a.m., June 6, 1944," he recounted years later. "For most of us, the rest of the war seems to be a blur with a few high spots that we can remember - but D-Day and the day following seemed to be burned into our memories."
That is the day and those are the memories Clinton will commemorate during an eight-day trip to Europe beginning next week.
He'll leave unfinished business at home, and that also involves Gibbons, next in line for the chairmanship of the House Ways and Means Committee, a panel that will be crucial in the slowed quest for health care legislation.
With Rep. Dan Rostenkowski, D-Ill., all but certain to be forced out as chairman because of criminal charges involving his use of House and campaign funds, Gibbons, the next senior Democrat on the panel, would take over unless House Democrats deny him the post and choose somebody else.
There's been talk of an effort to try, perhaps with Rep. Richard Gephardt, the majority leader, among Democrats who doubt Gibbons could manage the health care bill to House passage.
Either way, that complicates handling of an already contentious issue.
Gibbons and Sen. Strom Thurmond, now 91, are the only current members of Congress who went into France on D-Day, both as volunteers. Gibbons went in by parachute, Thurmond by glider. Thurmond is not going back for the anniversary; he will be at his youngest son's high school graduation.
Fifty-six members of Congress are World War II veterans.
Gibbons recorded his memoir of D-Day a decade ago, from his jump, under German fire - "instantly I knew I was in the wrong place," deeper than planned in enemy territory.
The planes dropping American parachute troops had been scattered by poor visibility and German antiaircraft fire, so the men formed their own units as they encountered one another on the ground, identifying themselves as friends, not foes, with clicks on "crickets," pocket metal devices that looked like toys.
Uncertain of his whereabouts, Gibbons tried to head toward the river bridges and dam that were his original objective. About 50 Americans joined the group. They faced periodic fire fights, a German ambush, Capt. Gibbons in command, although it struck him as peculiar. "I had never envisioned myself leading a combat patrol," he said, especially one he believes to have been the largest organized unit deepest into German territory early on D-Day.
Of about 2,200 men who went to France with his unit, the 501st Parachute Infantry of the 101st Airborne Division, "we brought back about 800," Gibbons said, recounting those days in an hour's conversation in his House office.
Gibbons will deliver the keynote address June 5 at ceremonies honoring the two airborne divisions that dropped troops early on D-Day, the 101st and the 82nd. About 500 paratroopers who serve in those units now will jump near St. Mere-Eglise as part of the commemoration.
Then the veterans of D-Day plan their jump, with the reluctant blessing of the Pentagon, where they're concerned about the safety of parachutists now 67 to 83 years old.
Gibbons said one of the generals supervising the ceremonies had tried to enlist his help to talk the veterans out of it, for fear some would be injured, possibly killed.
"I said, hell, don't worry, they'll die happy," Gibbons said. "They're doing it in the daytime. Nobody's shooting at them."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.
 Load-Date: May 26, 1994

 

End of Document
