

When the Going Gets Tough, the Clintons Go Shopping
The Associated Press
May 11, 1995, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 449 words
Byline: By TERENCE HUNT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




In the symbolic gesture department, Hillary Rodham Clinton clearly upstaged her husband during a Moscow shopping spree. She insisted on paying for a memento, citing a desire to "help your economy," after he'd accepted one as a gift.
Before departing the Russian capital today after a contentious summit with Russian President Boris Yeltsin, President Clinton and his wife managed to relax with some impromptu shopping at the House of Books, Moscow's largest bookstore.
Clinton stopped at a counter and tried to buy a lacquered box. But the owner insisted that he take it as a gift. Clinton accepted.
Mrs. Clinton then joined him at the counter and picked out three lacquered pins. A sales person tried to make them a gift also.
But Mrs. Clinton refused, saying, "We want to help your economy, we want very much want to help your economy."
Clinton could argue that he'd already done his part, by earlier purchasing a wood block icon in the same establishment.
"I bought an old icon, 17th century. It was beautiful. It cost $ 176 or 900,000 rubles," Clinton told reporters. "We've got several icons at home but nothing like this."
After selecting his purchase, Clinton turned to an aide and said, "You'll take care of it?"
Contrary to Clinton's description of his purchase, the shop owner said the icon - depicting Mary, Jesus and John the Baptist - dated from the late 18th century.
Russian shoppers were surprised and delighted by the visit, and pressed forward to see the president and first lady. As he left the shop, Clinton shook hands with a group of Russian well wishers.
 
 Russian newspapers had a muted reaction to the U.S.-Russian summit, preferring to focus instead on the huge celebrations commemorating victory in World War II.
Most nationwide dailies avoided passing judgment on the Clinton-Yeltsin talks, pointing out that problems still remain in relations between the two nations.
One of the few papers to take a strong stand was the popular and hard-hitting Moskovsky Komsomolets. It dismissed the summit as unsuccessful in a front-page story headlined: "Not a single step forward!"
The newspaper noted that neither side had gotten much out of the meeting: "The somberness of Boris Nikolayevich (Yeltsin) was too evident. Despite his love for his friend Bill, he had to disappoint the American guest."
Another leading paper, Segodnya, said "the sides have remained on their old positions regarding the majority of issues."
Publishing for the first time in four days because of the long holiday weekend, papers gave much more prominent play to stories about the nation's biggest holiday celebration in years - the 50th anniversary of Victory Day.
Many relegated Clinton-Yeltsin to the inside pages.
 Load-Date: May 11, 1995

 

End of Document
