

Where Does The Cold War's End Leave the Winners?
The Associated Press
December 24, 1991, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 997 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




It was a boast of breathtaking impudence. And a historic miscalculation, though no one knew it then.
"Whether you like it or not, history is on our side. We will bury you," a strutting Kremlin boss Nikita Khrushchev said three decades ago during a confrontation with his Cold War adversary, the United States of America.
But the burial this New Year's Eve, in the Kremlin, will be of communism. They'll haul down the hammer and sickle.
Everyone knows where that leaves the losers, the ex-Soviet people: struggling for bread and order.
But where does it leave the winners?
According to the Census Bureau, 171,097,033 Americans - more than half the population - were born during the Cold War. They've lived with both the unnerving threat of cataclysm and the unifying purposefulness it offered.
So what happens now?
Have Americans - who gave up 110,000 lives in Korea and Vietnam and $ 4 trillion in taxes fighting the Cold War - been so affected by the prospect of universal destruction that they're hooked on anxiety?
Does the country need an enemy to have a purpose?
Who will take the Soviet Union's place?
Questions to ask the people who used to think about the unthinkable.
A demurrer first from John E. Mueller, author of "The Retreat from Doomsday" and a student of war.
He thinks the end of the Cold War is no big deal to the American people, because they never let it shape their lives.
It is noteworthy, but not surprising, that there were no victory parades when the news sank in that the struggle was over and the U.S.A. had won, he said.
There weren't any parades either, he noted, to celebrate the development of a vaccine against smallpox, which had killed hundreds of millions.
Mueller, a political scientist at the University of Rochester, said that to most ordinary people, the absence of war between the superpowers was "history's greatest non-event."
When asked during the Cold War what they worried about, people gave the same old, unexciting answers: The kids. The state of their marriage. The job. The cost of living.
"I don't think that people spent that much time getting tense over these big issues," Mueller said, especially in the years after the 13 anxious days of the Cuban missile crisis in 1962.
In his book, Mueller argues that war among developed nations has become obsolescent, just as such other human institutions - slavery, dueling, flogging, infanticide, eunuchism and human sacrifice - are no longer in fashion.
Thomas Jefferson called war "the natural state of man." Do people need one, occasionally?
Psychologist Ervin Staub of the University of Massachusetts doesn't think so, but he believes that people do yearn to satisfy the needs that Cold War competition fulfilled: for a sense of personal significance, for allies, a need to make sense of a confusing world.
In the Cold War, he said, "We were doing something important, holding off communism, maintaining the world order, upholding democracy and freedom… I don't go with the notion that we need enemies. But I do believe that we need a fulfillment of these needs."
Gaddis Smith of Yale, a distinguished historian of U.S. foreign policy, says fighting the Cold War stimulated self-righteousness.
As evidence, he cites what he calls the arrogant undertone in the title that Dean Acheson, secretary of state under President Harry Truman, gave his memoirs. Acheson's title was "Present at the Creation," as though, said Smith, "the start of the Cold War was comparable to what God did."
Staub believes a Cold War substitute can be found, possibly in creating a community of nations to combat regional aggressions along the lines of the alliance that imposed an embargo against Iraq last year.
Or purposefulness could be found in stopping civil wars (as Western Europe attempted in Yugoslavia), Staub said, or in vast environmental undertakings, something people can do "for ourselves, our children, for everyone on earth."
On the other hand, Staub said it is also possible that the stresses that found their outlet in ideological battle with the Soviets can find other negative releases - hate crimes, child abuse or satanic cults.
Another psychologist, Robert Solso of the University of Nevada, offers the conquest of the forces of nature - hurricanes, droughts - as a mission for Cold War energies.
But he, too, sees negative possibilities, perhaps a search for substitute enemies - the Japanese, the Arab states, for example.
Frank Farley of the University of Wisconsin at Madison, president-elect of the American Psychological Association, said he anticipates a period of exhilaration and optimism in this country once it finally sinks in that nuclear annihilation is less likely.
As a war substitute, Farley nominates a massive increase in the exploration of space as something "that will become the great preoccupation of the American people in the decades ahead."
These aren't new ideas. Pioneer psychologist William James, tracing war's persistence to "the rooted bellicosity of human nature," came up with the notion - in 1910 - of a "moral equivalent of war," a phrase later swiped by Jimmy Carter for his energy program.
James wanted to draft "the whole youthful population" to spend a number of years digging mines, washing dishes, building roads and tunnels, creating skyscrapers - activities that would knock the "childishness" out of them so they would return to society "with healthier sympathies and soberer ideas."
"Healthier sympathies and soberer ideas" - is that what the country needs to get over the Cold War's demise?
Mueller thinks seeking a substitute for conflict can lead to a dead end. Just as people learned to ignore the Cold War, they will accept peace as routine and ordinary - and not necessarily good incarnate.
Peace can accommodate conflict, hostility, racism, injustice, greed, vice, squalor, malice, he says.
"It is not a utopian condition," he says. "It is merely better than the alternative. If we stop envisioning it as heaven on earth, it will be easier to achieve and to maintain."

 

End of Document
