

Why does the poorest nation in the Western Hemisphere command so much attention?
The Associated Press
August 5, 1994, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 466 words
Byline: By Michael Norton, Associated Press writer
Body




Haiti, born of revolution against slavery, has developed its own tradition of tyranny.
Once France's richest colony, Haiti is now the poorest nation in the Western Hemisphere, its people repressed by a clique of corrupt military officers and a tiny business elite. More than 60,000 Haitians have fled in rickety boats since the army toppled President Jean-Bertrand Aristide nearly three years ago.
They are fleeing a land where 1,000 children a month die of hunger, only one-fifth of the population has access to drinking water, more than three-quarters are functionally illiterate, and more than 1 million people a day get their only meal from food provided by the United States.
Mutilated bodies are dumped daily on city streets. The United Nations estimates as many as 3,000 people have been killed for political reasons since Aristide's overthrow.
Haitian slaves from Africa rebelled in 1791 and by 1804 had achieved independence from France. When Napoleon attempted to reinstate slavery, Haitians massacred the white French sugar barons.
Haitian generals, heroes of the revolution, took power and imitated their masters by exploiting the poor and wielding the power of life or death. It has been that way nearly ever since.
Political turmoil, unpaid foreign debt, and Caribbean strategical concerns as World War I approached led to a U.S. occupation from 1915 until 1934. The Americans built roads and public buildings. They also killed thousands of Haitian rebels, created a new Haitian army, and propped up the existing elite. Later, when the country was once again in turmoil, Francois "Papa Doc" Duvalier gained power in 1957 and founded a family dynasty that ruled by intimidation for 29 years.
The dark-skinned country doctor pitted the impoverished black masses against the light-skinned elite. A new black middle class was born, but thousands were killed in the turmoil.
Before his death, Duvalier named his son Jean-Claude as president-for-life. Food riots and street demonstrations forced "Baby Doc" into exile in 1986.
The poor began to dream again of freedom from oppression. But the army betrayed the hopes of the people in November 1987 by sending thugs to kill voters at the polls and aborting the first attempted free elections in Haitian history. Political parties stumbled in their efforts to build democracy. But from the grass-roots Roman Catholic church emerged a political leader whose fiery criticism of dictatorship won the admiration of the urban poor: the Rev. Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Aristide became Haiti's first democratically elected president in 1990, but in championing the poor he alienated the middle and upper classes and the army. On Sept. 30, 1991, claiming to be saving the country from popular tyranny, the army overthrew Aristide and restored elitist tyranny again.
 Load-Date: August 6, 1994

 

End of Document
