

Will the Yeltsinites Share the Spotlight Fairly?
The Associated Press
October 24, 1993, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 564 words
Byline: By CANDICE HUGHES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




As Russia approaches its first post-Soviet parliamentary election, President Boris Yeltsin's allies seem at times to be playing a game of political solitaire.
Critics say Yeltsin stacked the deck in their favor.
While opposition candidates scramble for attention, the most ardently pro-Yeltsin bloc is the darling of the media and appears likely to dominate the voting Dec. 12.
Yeltsin's opponents have a lot to contend with. Many parties and coalitions are new, disorganized and short of cash. Some opposition newspapers and six parties are banned, although a major communist group and a hard-line party founded by Vice President Alexander Rutskoi will be allowed on the ballot.
The government has urged the print media, which rely heavily on state subsidies, to guard against extremist propaganda. Most important, Yeltsin has a firm grip on the most powerful medium, national TV.
"Political opposition has basically no voice on Russian television," the human rights group Helsinki Watch said last week.
In a presidential decree on elections, Yeltsin ordered state television to set aside air time for parties and candidates in the last weeks of the campaign.
"Every party will get equal time," Oleg Poptsov, head of state television, told The Associated Press. "They can do with it what they want. They can stand on their ear if they want, just as long as they don't break the law."
The news is another matter. The main pro-Yeltsin alliance, Russia's Choice, is getting heavy media coverage, including almost nightly television news reports on its grassroots campaign.
"They have practically total control of the mass media," said Sergei Pustovoit, spokesman for the new, centrist Party of Consolidation. "We are not expecting fully fair access for new parties."
Poptsov acknowledged that smaller parties would not get as much coverage as Russia's Choice, which includes some of Yeltsin's top aides. He explained it this way:
"A major bloc like Russia's Choice will get more time because it consists of several parties. But everything will be fair and determined by law."
Yeltsin clamped down on the media earlier this month, when he ordered troops and tanks to open fire on the parliament building, ending a long stalemate with enemies of his reforms.
As Secretary of State Warren Christopher met with Russian officials last week, Helsinki Watch urged that he press for an end to the newspaper ban.
"These restrictions on the press demonstrate a profound lack of respect for freedom of expression and suggest that President Yeltsin intends to control the flow of opinion and information in Russian society," it said.
In defense of Yeltsin, the Information Ministry said the banned papers had "boosted militant opposition to economic and political reforms, to the president and government, and were in fact the ideological headquarters of the rebellion."
Yeltsin's principal opponents - Rutskoi and the former parliament speaker, Ruslan Khasbulatov - are in jail on charges of inciting mass disturbances, so they cannot run. Hard-liners are coalescing around the Russian Communist Party, which claims a membership of 500,000, and the Party of Free Russia, founded by Rutskoi.
Alexander Krasov, an opposition deputy in the parliament Yeltsin disbanded Sept. 21, complained that the electoral rules are being written by one man without the checks and balances of a legislature or constitutional court.
 Load-Date: October 24, 1993

 

End of Document
