

Will the Shipyard and Solidarity Survive The Victory?
The Associated Press
August 7, 1991, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 832 words
Byline: By DRUSILLA MENAKER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GDANSK, Poland
Body




The shipyard where Solidarity was born, symbol of the anti-communist fight through a decade of banners and truncheons, survived to see its most famous worker, Lech Walesa, become president of Poland.
Now, the question is whether the shipyard has the economic wherewithal to make it through the victory.
The same can be said of the whole Solidarity union.
"We are not thinking of fighting for all of Poland, like it used to be, but today we are thinking of ourselves," said Jerzy Borowczak, deputy chairman of Solidarity at the Gdansk Shipyard, which used to be named for Lenin.
At Solidarity's national headquarters a few blocks away, the union is caught in an uneasy transition from political success to labor power.
Just as the shipyard Solidarity chapter must decide how many layoffs to accept, national Solidarity leaders wonder to what degree they should protect the non-communist government they formed in 1989.
The issue is especially ticklish when that government's reform objectives conflict with traditional union goals like job security and higher pay. Should Solidarity, for instance, keep a lid on strikes or promote workers rights?
"Solidarity is still the major anti-communist and pro-reform element in Poland," its national chairman, Marian Krzaklewski, said in an interview. "Even if we don't want that responsibility, no other force has appeared."
There is serious tension in the ranks and Solidarity feels "the pressure of waiting for effects" from economic reform, he said. Krzaklewski, 44, traveled 6,000 miles to 60 "very wild" membership meetings in two months after his election in February.
Commentators suggest Solidarity already has folded the "protective umbrella" it held over the government and its painful economic reforms, and has begun using it as a poker.
So far, the jabs have been fairly gentle. Newspapers carry reports of strikes everywhere from bakeries to bus depots, but most are settled when Solidarity accepts raises far below initial demands, acknowledging the nation's empty coffers and low tolerance for job actions.
Even so, the government concedes an increase in social tensions. Walesa felt obliged to request special decree powers to speed reforms, and consultations with Solidarity were intensified.
Solidarity has found it isn't calling all the shots anymore. Although it divorced itself from a strike of air traffic controllers in June, the controllers walked out anyway and Walesa had to threaten military action.
"People seem to have lost the feeling of their group identity, wrote an observer, Pawel Spiewak. "The slightest spark could ignite the barely concealed discontent and send a wave of unrest rolling across all segments of society."
Others discount predictions of serious labor trouble. "People are apprehensive, yet the majority seems disinclined to strike," said Ireneusz Krzeminski, a sociologist.
It would be hard to overestimate the emotional import of the word Solidarity, but a goverment poll in May found 42 percent of respondents indifferent to the union itself. Fifteen percent even disapproved of it.
Today's Solidarity has about 2.5 million members, one-quarter of the 10 million claimed during its first period of legality in 1980.
Chairman Krzaklewski makes expanding the membership top priority, but also believes Solidarity needs "concrete achievements" to secure its position.
While concentrating on union issues, Solidarity keeps a hand in politics. It plans to enter its own list of candidates in the fall parliamentary elections.
Krzaklewski believes the union must become professional, training negotiators, assembling an industrial information bank, promoting favorable labor laws and regaining property confiscated by the communist regime when it cracked down in 1981.
He defined another, unusual role as helping "create an employer."
Solidarity must support the transformation of Poland's economy, in which most companies are state-owned, into a capitalist system where a union can enter the traditional give-and-take between managers and employees, he said.
"A modern trade union means looking for positive solutions jointly with employers … activating people rather than scaring them out of their wits or inciting disorder," Krzaklewski said.
That's what Solidarity hopes is happening at the shipyard, which all parties agree must become privately owned.
The last strike at the yard fizzled in March because most workers thought it was self-defeating. Solidarity has accepted hundreds of layoffs to finance raises for employees who remain, and management has pleaded with the government to allow higher pay.
Like Solidarity's own prospects, the shipyard's are murky.
Despite optimistic talk about foreign contracts to keep 8,000 workers on the job through 1994, hulls actually being built are Soviet and Polish orders. Several were commissioned by customers that now cannot pay.
"As a trade union, we achieved some political success," said Borowczak, of the yard's Solidarity chapter. "Now we are trying to work for union success."

 

End of Document
