

World Cup History Filled with Passion, Politics - and the Peculiar
The Associated Press
June 5, 1994, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 1256 words
Byline: By FRED LIEF, AP Sports Writer
Body




Four years ago, a woman in Bangladesh killed herself after Cameroon lost to England in the quarterfinals of the World Cup in Italy.
Italy's leading sports newspaper, Corrieri Dello Sport, reported that the 30-year-old woman from the capital city of Dhaka had written a suicide note.
"I leave this world," it said, "now that Cameroon has left the Cup."
With soccer's moveable feast shifting to the United States, college students in Bangladesh are holding street protests, demanding that their government postpone final exams so they can watch the World Cup on television.
"There is nothing like the World Cup," said Altaf Hossain, a Dhaka University student. "I can sacrifice everything in my life to watch the world's most fascinating game."
And Bangladesh didn't even come close to qualifying to the 24-nation soccer showcase that begins June 17.
For a brief spell every four years, the World Cup commands the attention of much of the planet. It silences government ministries. It shuts down commerce. It turns otherwise reasonable men and women into fanatics.
This is the 15th World Cup. And the tournament, which began in 1930 with modest expectations, mostly has been the stage for some of the sport's grandest moments:
There was a lithe 17-year-old Brazilian named Pele, dazzling in his first World Cup in 1958.
There was the English goalkeeper Gordan Banks in 1970 making perhaps the greatest save in World Cup history - a move Pele later would liken to a "salmon leaping up a falls.")
And there was Diego Maradona in 1986, cutting through the entire English defense for a goal as if he were slaloming down a snowy mountainside.
But, as befitting the biggest sports spectacle on earth, the World Cup has had all manner of subplots, by turns political, passionate and peculiar.
Like the Olympics, the World Cup has been played on treacherous political terrain.
In the first tournament in 1930, thousands of Argentines poured into neighboring Uruguay, only to be welcomed by mounted police who searched them for weapons. Uruguay won the World Cup and proclaimed a national holiday. In Buenos Aires, the populace stoned the Uruguayan Embassy.
Two years before Hitler made a Nazi showcase of the 1936 Berlin Olympics, Benito Mussolini exploited the World Cup for his own ends in Italy. By 1938, the World Cup in France, the specter of fascism was no longer in the shadows. Austria withdrew from the tournament, its country overrun by Germany; Italian players gave the fascist salute on the field.
World War II halted the World Cup until 1950. The Hungarian team that had advanced to the title game in the 1954 World Cup was no longer a force by 1958, two years after Moscow crushed an anti-Soviet rebellion in Hungary.
World Cup politics reached an incendiary level in 1969 with the "Football War" between El Salvador and Honduras. The two countries already had a long history of economic and territorial disputes, and a playoff game leading to the 1970 tournament sparked fighting that lasted two weeks and killed about 2,000 people.
In 1973, the Soviet Union refused to play a qualifier in Chile. The Soviets, at odds with the rightist regime that had seized power in a bloody coup, wanted the site switched. FIFA, soccer's governing body, refused and the Chileans advanced, playing a mock game against no opponent in the stadium that had been used as a detention center during the military takeover.
Argentina was the 1978 host, with the head of the local organizers a retired general. On the way to his first news conference, he was assassinated by leftist rebels. But the rebels quickly announced they would allow World Cup preparations to go forward, boosting their popularity.
The next World Cup, in Spain, brought allegations of collusion by West Germany and Austria. A 1-0 victory by West Germany - and only a 1-0 outcome - would allow both teams to make the next round at the expense of Algeria. West Germany scored in the 10th minute, and both sides basically stopped playing. The crowd, angered by this sham, cheered for Algeria. FIFA took no action.
The 1986 tournament in Mexico City brought together England and Argentina in their first major sports event since the 1982 Falklands War. The buildup was tense but the match was played in relative tranquility, having little to do with militarism and everything to do with Maradona. He scored twice in the second half in a 2-1 victory - including the famous "Hand of God" goal that he punched past the goalkeeper - to put Argentina on its way to the semifinals and eventually the title.
Soccer doesn't get any more passionate than when the stakes are high and the game is in Brazil. In the 1950 World Cup, in newly built Maracana Stadium before nearly 200,000 fans, Brazil played Uruguay for the title.
Before the game, the governor of Rio de Janeiro told the home team that 50 million Brazilians awaited victory. After Uruguay won, 2-1, scores of spectators fainted. Some fans died while listening to the match on the radio. Eight heart attacks in the Uruguayan capital of Montevideo were attributed to the game.
The following World Cup in Switzerland featured the "Battle of Bern," a Brazil-Hungary quarterfinal marked by fighting that spilled over to the locker room. Police and photographers skirmished and the Hungarian coach was punched in the face.
In 1966, the Italian team felt the full fury of a nation scorned. In one of the most outlandish upsets, Italy lost 1-0 to North Korea. An embarrassed Italian team returned home in the dead of night, only to be met at the airport by hundreds of fans who pelted the players with rotten fruit and vegetables.
Argentina beat the Netherlands in the 1978 final, triggering as wild a celebration as any at a World Cup. The rollicking parties went into the night, the streams of confetti became blinding snowstorms. After watching the triumphs of Uruguay and Brazil, Argentina finally had its championship.
World Cup passion turned violent in 1990 in Italy. German fans rampaged in Milan; English fans hurled rocks and bottles in Caliguiri. England was assigned to the island of Sardinia for the opening round to contain its followers.
The United States hasn't been in the World Cup very often or for very long, but it has made its bizarre contributions.
In 1930, the Americans played Argentina in the semifinals. A call by the referee outraged the U.S. team, whose trainer bolted from the bench to protest. He ran toward the referee and tossed his medical kit, breaking a bottle of chloroform. He was overcome by the fumes and had to be helped off the field.
The 1938 tournament in Italy brought one of the finest World Cup games - Brazil vs. Poland. The Brazilian star Leonidas tried to play barefoot but the referee would not allow it. No matter. Leonidas scored four goals on a muddy field and Brazil won 6-5 in overtime, offsetting four goals by Poland's Ernest Willimowski.
No result in World Cup history was more preposterous than the U.S.-England game in 1950 in Belo Horizonte, Brazil. England was the hallowed bedrock of soccer; the United States was a semi-pro outfit that had played all of two games together. Astoundingly, the Americans won 1-0 on a goal by Haitian-born Joe Gaetjens. The Brazilians hoisted him off the field on their shoulders. Around the world, many thought the score was a typographical error.
The World Cup arrived at last in England in 1966, and the hosts promptly lost the gold and onyx trophy that had been on display. After a week of frantic searching, it was found under a bush in south London by a dog named Pickles.
 Load-Date: June 5, 1994

 

End of Document
