

Yeltsin's Address to the Russian Nation
The Associated Press
October 6, 1993, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1289 words
Byline: From The Associated Press
Body




Text of Russian President Boris Yeltsin's televised address Wednesday, translated by The Associated Press:
Dear citizens of Russia!
On Oct. 3 and 4, Russia suffered a great tragedy. Bands of killers and pogromists rampaged through the streets of our capital. They threatened state institutions and humiliated the people they took hostage. They seized buses and trucks. Many weapons, ammunition and military equipment turned up in the militants' hands. The lives of peaceful residents were in mortal danger.
What happened in Moscow last Sunday was not some kind of spontaneous event. It has a different name: an armed revolt, planned and prepared by the leaders of the former Supreme Soviet, the former vice president and the leaders of a number of parties and public organizations. …
Among the organizers and active participants in the revolt were former people's deputies (lawmakers) who for a long time had been engaged in essentially criminal activity. They hid behind their parliamentary immunity, using it to incite violence and organize bloody mass riots, to unleash civil war.
The goal was to establish a bloody Communist-fascist dictatorship. Today it is clear they had been preparing it for many months. …
The bloody events of that night forced us to bring regular army units into Moscow. We made the difficult decision to storm the building of the former Supreme Soviet, which had turned into a citadel of terrorism with piles of weapons and ammunition, and had become the most dangerous factor in unleashing civil war in Russia.
The militants' actions were coordinated from the parliament building. It was precisely there that some of the illegal armed bands were formed. Calls of "To the mayor's office!" "To Ostankino TV!" and "To the Kremlin!" came from the parliament.
The White House (parliament building) also had become a symbol of treachery and treason. All preparations for the revolt were conducted under the cover of negotiations. They trampled on the noble efforts of the Russian Orthodox Church to help resolve the crisis. …
The flame of civil war in Russia has been extinguished. But my soul aches because a huge price had to be paid. …
In order to prevent a repetition of this, we need to draw most serious lessons.
Why had we reconciled ourselves to the idea that organizations that not only called for violence but also prepared it were acting legally in Russia?
Society had almost come to accept the fact that the Supreme Soviet and the Congress (of People's Deputies) were the main patrons (of such organizations). As a result, each new escapade became more impudent and sinister.
Why did any action to strengthen order, any step with an element of firmness meet with, to put it mildly, a cool reception from many journalists and other people who consider themselves democrats?
Even when, for the sake of Muscovites' safety, we were forced to put a cordon around the White House, which had been filled with deadly weapons, we were showered from all sides with reproaches for cruelty and heartlessness, for restoring authoritarian rule.
The main lesson is that democracy must be reliably protected. The state must use force if there is a threat of violence, a threat to the lives and safety of citizens. Without that, there is no democracy.
Everyone who took up arms and participated in the disturbances will be punished to the full extent of the law. Everyone who preached fascist-Communist ideas and incitement to rebellion also will be held answerable under the law. There will be no more forgiveness for Communist-fascism in Russia.
The reason for the tragic events in Moscow was also that too many of us wanted to see the continuation of the fatal dual power (of the president and parliament) that was tearing Russia apart. …
I think that the Constitutional Court shares a large part of the blame for what has happened. A long time ago that organ violated the most important principle - the independence of the Constitutional Court from political affairs.
A long time ago the judges - or at least some of them - turned into accusers of the executive branch and defenders of the legislative branch. Meanwhile, the court, and especially its chairman, did not seem to see how the Russian Constitution was being violated by endless amendments, and did not notice the blatant contradictions in the constitution which were deliberately intensified by the Congress.
I especially want to speak about the soviets (local and regional councils).
In each of them there are deputies who support reforms, but regardless of that, the position of most regional soviets after September 21 was practically to justify all actions of the former Supreme Soviet in advance. Moreover, (the Supreme Soviet) was provoked, pushed to violence, by all kinds of hinted assurances of support. And I have no doubt that if the rebels had been successful, the majority of soviets would have supported them.
I declare full responsibility: The majority of the organs of soviet power are directly responsible for the extreme exacerbation of the situation in Moscow. The system of soviets has been totally negligent of the security of the state and the safety of its citizens, thus sealing its own political fate.
I think the soviets that took an irreconcilable position must not adjust now to the new situation, but must take a dignified and courageous decision to dissolve themselves and leave peacefully, with civility, without shocks and scandal. This is a demand of our life.
The adminstrations of the provinces and regions have been ordered to prepare steps for social (welfare) guarantees for the deputies.
At the same time we need to think urgently about a mechanism for transforming soviets into normal organs of representative power. … And, of course, elections to the new local representative organs should be held without delay, in December.
Dear countrymen!
Having survived terrible days and nights, we now can rest assured that civil war has not been unleashed in Russia. …
But the problems revealed by the revolt are very serious.
We need, like air itself, a normal democratic constitution. We need a united Russia. Games of regional separatism are contrary to the interests and will of the majority of the country's population. We need a full-fledged reform of the army and security organs.
We need a consistent continuation of economic transformations and support for all the efforts made by the government in that direction. …
Some of the tough measures envisaged by the law on the state of emergency are excessive in the present conditions. Instructions have already been issued to lift censorship of mass media.
But I would like to give a warning. If anyone thinks the situation has completely normalized, that's a great mistake. Passions have not died down. A careless or irresponsible word could ignite them again. I appeal to the civic responsibility of journalists. …
My heartfelt thanks to (soldiers, police and firefighters) who removed the danger of pogroms and anarchy from Moscow. …
The worst is over. But to make sure that peace and quiet in the country become inviolable, we must together strengthen our democracy and our state. On Dec. 12 there will be elections to the Federal Assembly and, I think, to new representative bodies on the regional and local level.
Equal opportunities are guaranteed to all politicians, parties and public movements that did not tarnish themselves by direct involvement in the revolt. …
People have died, our compatriots. They cannot be brought back to life. Pain and suffering have visited many families.
However different their convictions may have been, all of them were Russia's children. It is our common tragedy, our common grief, great grief.
Let us remember this madness, so that it may never be repeated.
 Load-Date: October 6, 1993

 

End of Document
