

205 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Sunday
The Associated Press
April 13, 2008 Sunday 11:09 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 938 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
One of last two uncommitted Minn. superdelegates backs Obama ... Presidential candidates' positions on Iraq war ... Chelsea Clinton deflects question about No. 2 spot for her mom ... Clinton vows to produce more military equipment in the United States ...
Superdelegate goes for Obama
MINNEAPOLIS (AP) One of Minnesota's last uncommitted Democratic superdelegates is backing Barack Obama, the Obama campaign announced Sunday.
Nancy Larson, of Dassel, a Democratic National Committee member, told The Associated Press she decided to support Obama because his campaign will bring new people into the political process, and she believes he has the best chance of winning in November.
"It's looking more and more that the one person who can do it is Barack Obama," Larson said.
But Larson said the choice wasn't easy. As one of the last two uncommitted superdelegates in Minnesota, Larson had been lobbied heavily by Obama's and Hillary Clinton's campaigns. She said she spent countless hours speaking with the campaigns and others about her choice.
Larson joins eight other Minnesota superdelegates who are supporting Obama. Three are backing Clinton.
Larson's announcement leaves Rep. Collin Peterson as the only uncommitted superdelegate from the state.
Clinton, McCain and Obama on Iraq war
A look at where Republican presidential candidate Sen. John McCain and the Democratic rivals, Sens. Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama, stand on the Iraq war:
Clinton: Voted for war, opposed troop increase. Would begin withdrawal within two months of taking office but has not committed to a timetable for completing it without knowing situation on the ground in 2009.
McCain: Opposes scheduling a troop withdrawal, saying latest strategy is succeeding. Supported decision to go to war, but was early critic of the manner in which administration prosecuted it. Key backer of the troop increase. Willing to have permanent U.S. peacekeeping forces in Iraq.
Obama: Spoke against war at start, opposed troop increase. Now says his plan would complete withdrawal of combat troops by end of 2009, four months sooner than his previous commitment. Before that, had said a timetable for completing withdrawal would be irresponsible without knowing what facts he'd face in office.
Chelsea asked about VP slot for mom
EUGENE, Ore. (AP) Chelsea Clinton sparred with a Barack Obama supporter who asked whether she would advise her mother Hillary Rodham Clinton to accept the No. 2 spot on the ticket if Obama wins the presidential nomination.
"Well, sir, you make a lot of assumptions," Chelsea Clinton said, drawing laughter and applause from the Oregon Democrats on hand Saturday to hear the former first daughter make a campaign pitch for her mom.
The exchange, which took place at the state Democrats' platform convention, began when Lane Community College theater arts student Matt Keating stepped to a microphone and began by saying "With all due respect ..."
"Oh dear," Chelsea shot back.
Undeterred, Keating then went on to ask what advice she would give her mom if Obama offered her the vice presidential spot on the ticket.
The younger Clinton indicated she thought the question was premature, given that voters in Oregon and other primary states have yet to vote on a presidential nominee.
But she also made it clear she fervently backs her mom's bid for the White House.
Clinton: Pentagon must buy US goods
INDIANAPOLIS (AP) Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton outlined a plan to keep more military-related manufacturing in the United States, calling it an economic and security priority.
Speaking at a plant here that builds transmissions for military vehicles, Clinton said she would limit the Defense Department's ability to buy foreign-made products, in part by making the agency consider the impact on U.S. jobs when it awards contracts.
The New York senator, seeking support in Indiana's May 6 Democratic presidential primary, said Saturday she would launch a "comprehensive review of our defense industrial base" to determine "where U.S. capabilities are lacking." It would involve doubling the Defense Department's basic and applied research operations.
Clinton said she also would:
 Beef up policies that ensure "that technologies and industries critical to U.S. national security are not sold off and outsourced to foreign governments."
 Strengthen policies requiring that certain "vital metals" used in military manufacturing are produced domestically.
 Spend $75 million to create an "Interagency Task Force on Industrial Espionage" to combat existing and potential security threats.
"Because of the Bush administration's failed policies, we're not just outsourcing jobs, we're outsourcing our security," Clinton told workers at the Allison Transmission plant.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama attend a forum on faith issues in Grantham, Pa.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain has no scheduled public events.
QUOTE OF THE DAY: "I do believe that when people put this election in the context of their own lives, I believe they will reach the same conclusion that I have that my mom's the strongest candidate and would be the best president." Chelsea Clinton, speaking about Hillary Rodham Clinton during a campaign event in Eugene, Ore.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Hillary Rodham Clinton is losing her advantage among women in the Democratic presidential race, according to a recent Associated Press-Ipsos national poll. In February, 51 percent of Democratic women supported Clinton while 38 percent were for rival Barack Obama. Now they're statistically tied at 44 percent for Clinton, 42 percent for Obama.
Compiled by Ann Sanner and Ronald Powers.
 Load-Date: April 14, 2008

 

End of Document
