

208 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Thursday
The Associated Press
April 10, 2008 Thursday 7:58 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1200 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
McCain erases Obama's 10-point edge, GOP candidate essentially tied with both Democrats ... McCain calls for federal aid for some homeowners hit by housing crisis ... Obama says he wouldn't require Joint Chiefs to be opposed to 'don't ask, don't tell' gay policy ... Colin Powell says next president will have to reduce US forces in Iraq
McCain erases Obama lead
WASHINGTON (AP) Republican Sen. John McCain has erased Sen. Barack Obama's 10-point advantage in a head-to-head matchup, leaving him essentially tied with both Democratic candidates in an Associated Press-Ipsos national poll released Thursday.
The survey showed the extended Democratic primary campaign creating divisions among supporters of Obama and rival Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton and suggests a tight race for the presidency in November no matter which Democrat becomes the nominee.
McCain is benefiting from a bounce since he clinched the GOP nomination a month ago. The four-term Arizona senator has moved up in matchups with each of the Democratic candidates, particularly Obama.
An AP-Ipsos poll taken in late February had Obama leading McCain 51-41 percent. The current survey, conducted April 7-9, had them at 45 percent each. McCain leads Obama among men, whites, Southerners, married women and independents.
Clinton led McCain, 48-43 percent, in February. The latest survey showed the New York senator with 48 percent support to McCain's 45 percent. Factoring in the poll's margin of error of 3.1 percentage points, Clinton and McCain are statistically tied.
McCain seeks aid for some homeowners
NEW YORK (AP) Sen. John McCain called for federal aid for well-meaning homeowners who can't pay their mortgages, an attempt to fend off criticism that he has been indifferent to the housing crisis and the market upheaval it has spawned.
McCain sketched out a plan Thursday to help 200,000 to 400,000 homeowners trade burdensome mortgages for manageable loans in a speech in Brooklyn. Aides said the plan could cost from $3 billion to $10 billion.
Still missing were details on exactly who would be eligible for help; McCain said he wants to aid those who borrowed sensibly but now can't handle their mortgages.
"There is nothing more important than keeping alive the American dream to own your home," the likely GOP presidential nominee said in a speech before joining in a roundtable discussion at a Brooklyn company, Windows We Are Inc.
In proposing specific aid, McCain struck a different tone than he did in an address last month. Then, McCain said he opposed aggressive intervention by the government to solve the crisis and that he preferred only limited intervention and letting market forces play out.
Democratic Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton called his plan a halfhearted version of her own efforts, while Barack Obama said McCain's plan offers little in the way of solutions.
Obama: Repeal of "don't ask" possible
WASHINGTON (AP) Barack Obama says if elected president he won't require that his appointees to the Joint Chiefs of Staff support allowing gays to serve openly in the military.
The Democratic presidential front-runner favors repealing the "don't ask, don't tell" policy on gays, which was instituted during the Clinton administration. He said his priority for the Joint Chiefs will be that they make decisions to strengthen the military and keep the country safe, not their position on the policy.
"I would never make this a litmus test for the Joint Chiefs of Staff," Obama said in an interview with The Advocate, a gay newsmagazine.
"But I think there's increasing recognition within the Armed Forces that this is a counterproductive strategy," he said. "We're spending large sums of money to kick highly qualified gays or lesbians out of our military, some of whom possess specialties like Arab-language capabilities that we desperately need. That doesn't make us more safe."
The Advocate provided The Associated Press with excerpts of the interview, posted on its Web site Thursday.
McCain urges China to clean up its act
NEW YORK (AP) Republican Sen. John McCain said Thursday that if he were president, he would only go to the opening ceremonies of the Olympic Games in Beijing if China improves its record on human rights and other issues.
But the likely Republican presidential nominee stopped short of joining Democratic rivals Barack Obama and Hillary Rodham Clinton in calling on President Bush to boycott the ceremonies.
"Unless they change something pretty quickly, I would not go to the opening ceremonies," McCain said on ABC's "The View" when asked what he would do if he occupied the White House. His campaign has said McCain believes Bush should monitor the situation and "keep his options open."
Activists are urging world leaders to stay away from the ceremonies to underscore concerns about China's human rights record, its handling of recent unrest in Tibet and its relationship with Sudan.
Powell: Troops in Iraq must be reduced
WASHINGTON (AP) Former Secretary of State Colin Powell said Thursday that President Bush's successor will have to come to grips with the reality that the United States cannot continue to keep such large numbers of troops in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Without taking sides in the race for the White House, Powell said, "Whichever one of them becomes president ... they will face a military force that cannot continue to sustain 140,000 people deployed in Iraq and the 20 (thousand) odd or 25,000 people we have deployed in Afghanistan and our other deployments."
Powell's comments in an interview on ABC's "Good Morning America" seemed to undercut Republican presidential nominee-in-waiting John McCain's position that the U.S. should stay the course in Iraq. But Powell also said that the next president will face limitations on bringing troops home, as Sens. Barack Obama and Hillary Rodham Clinton rivals for the Democratic nomination have promised to do.
"They will have to continue to draw down at some pace," he said. "None of them are going to have the flexibility of just saying we're out of here, turn off the switch, turn off the lights, we're leaving. They will have a situation before them."
THE NUMBERS
Barack Obama has an 8-point lead nationally over Hillary Rodham Clinton in the Democratic presidential race, 50 percent to 42 percent, in the latest Gallup Poll. The survey had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3 percentage points. The poll was conducted April 7-9 and involved interviews with 1,204 Democratic and Democratic-leaning voters. The survey was a tracking poll, in which Gallup interviews voters every night and uses the results from the three most recent evenings.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton speaks at two Democratic dinners in Pennsylvania. Barack Obama campaigns in Indiana.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain held a meeting on small business in New York.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"He is someone who is nothing if not forthright." New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg, in introducing Republican John McCain.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Voters in Pennsylvania rarely elect black and female candidates. The state currently has only one black and one woman in its 21-member congressional delegation and has never had a black or female governor.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: April 11, 2008

 

End of Document
