

220 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Friday
The Associated Press
March 29, 2008 Saturday 7:12 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 749 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Chelsea likes mom better than dad for president ... McCain wants America to get to know him ... Obama has praise for Bush the elder
Former first daughter prefers Hillary
ALLENTOWN, Pa. (AP) Would Hillary Rodham Clinton be a better president than her husband, Bill?
Posed that question Friday, former first daughter Chelsea Clinton laughed at first and then came up with an answer.
"His question is, 'Do I think my mother will be a better president than my father,'" Clinton, 28, told the crowd at Lehigh Valley Hospital, where she had been discussing her mother's health care proposals.
"Well, again, I don't take anything for granted," she said, "but hopefully with Pennsylvania's help, she will be our next president, and yes, I do think she'll be a better president."
"I agree," former president Bill Clinton told a crowd at Asheville High School in North Carolina later Friday.
Asked about her daughter's comment at a news conference in Hammond, Ind., the former first lady smiled broadly and laughed.
"I have to talk to her before I answer that question," she said.
This is your life, John McCain
LAS VEGAS (AP) The race is on to define John McCain.
The likely Republican nominee launched his first television ad of the general election campaign Friday, casting himself as a ready-to-lead wartime president in advance of a biographical tour to pivotal places in his life. Son of a military man, midshipman, Navy pilot, Vietnam POW, member of Congress for nearly three decades this is the resume of the 71-year-old McCain.
"In some ways, I'm well-known to the American people. In other ways, I'm not well-known," McCain told The Associated Press on Friday.
The Democratic Party still lacking a nominee and its supporters offer a starkly different portrait. In their view, McCain is a Washington insider, backer of an unpopular war in Iraq, hair-trigger quick on Iran and indifferent on the economic woes of average Americans. They cast McCain as four more years of President Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney.
"All he wants to do is continue on the George Bush failed policies of the past," says Democratic Sen. Barack Obama. His rival, Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton, talks about "a Bush/McCain Iraq policy" and argues that "we've had enough of a president who didn't know enough about economics."
Recent polls indicate that while McCain would run a competitive race against either Obama or Clinton, the Republican has work to do to boost voters' positive impressions of him.
Obama praises previous President Bush.
GREENSBURG, Pa. (AP) Sen. Barack Obama said Friday he would return the country to the more "traditional" foreign policy efforts of past presidents, such as George H.W. Bush, John F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan.
At a town hall event at a local high school gymnasium, Obama praised George H.W. Bush father of the president for the way he handled the Persian Gulf War: with a large coalition and carefully defined objectives.
Obama began a six-day bus tour through Pennsylvania, the largest remaining primary prize in the contest with Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton for the Democratic nomination. Sen. John McCain is the Republican nominee-in-waiting.
"The truth is that my foreign policy is actually a return to the traditional bipartisan realistic policy of George Bush's father, of John F. Kennedy, of, in some ways, Ronald Reagan, and it is George Bush that's been naive and it's people like John McCain and, unfortunately, some Democrats that have facilitated him acting in these naive ways that have caused us so much damage in our reputation around the world," he said.
Obama faced criticism in January from Clinton and then-challenger John Edwards for saying Reagan had changed the trajectory of American politics and that Republicans had been the party of ideas for the last decade or more.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton holds events in Indiana and Kentucky. Barack Obama campaigns in Pennsylvania.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain has no scheduled campaign events.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"Well, again, I don't take anything for granted, but hopefully with Pennsylvania's help, she will be our next president, and yes, I do think she'll be a better president." Former first daughter Chelsea Clinton in Pennsylvania, when asked whether her mother would be a better president than father was.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Caucuses in Texas, which mark the second stage of the state's Democratic primary, allocate 67 delegates to the national convention this summer.
Compiled by Ann Sanner and John Dunbar.
 Load-Date: March 30, 2008

 

End of Document
