

231 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Tuesday
The Associated Press
March 19, 2008 Wednesday 2:44 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1185 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Obama confronts nation's legacy of racial division ... Clinton to campaign in Michigan on Wednesday ... McCain mistakenly says Iran allowing al-Qaida fighters into the country, later corrects error ... Poll: Clinton regains ground in Pa. Democratic contest
Obama calls pastor's remarks divisive
PHILADELPHIA (AP) Barack Obama confronted the nation's racial divide head-on Tuesday, tackling both black grievance and white resentment in a bold effort to quiet a campaign uproar over race and his former pastor's incendiary statements.
Standing before a row of eight American flags near the building where the Declaration of Independence was adopted, Obama urged the nation to break "a racial stalemate we've been stuck in for years.'"
"The anger is real," he said. "It is powerful, and to simply wish it away, to condemn it without understanding its roots, only serves to widen the chasm of misunderstanding that exists between the races."
The speech, at the National Constitution Center, was by far the most prominent airing of racial issues in Obama's 13-month campaign to become the first black president. It was prompted by the wider notice his former pastor's racial statements have been receiving recently.
He said he recognized his race has been a major issue in a campaign that has taken a "particularly divisive turn." Many people have been turning to the Internet to view statements by his longtime pastor, the Rev. Jeremiah Wright. In one sermon, Wright suggested that the United States brought the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on itself. In another, he said blacks should damn America for continuing to mistreat them.
Obama rejected Wright's divisive statements but still embraced the man who brought him to Christianity, officiated at his wedding, baptized his two daughters and inspired the title of his book "The Audacity of Hope."
Clinton to visit Michigan on Wed
LANSING, Mich. (AP) Hillary Rodham Clinton's campaign accused Barack Obama on Tuesday of standing in the way of a second presidential primary in Michigan, as several state lawmakers expressed concerns over suggested rules governing any revote.
The former first lady planned a hastily scheduled appearance in Detroit on Wednesday. Aides said she would argue for going ahead despite the obstacles.
Mo Elleithee, a spokesman, said Clinton would "make the case for counting the people of Michigan, that every vote must count and that Senator Obama is standing in the way of a revote, and that snubbing Michigan would hurt the Democratic party in November."
Even before Clinton announced her travel plans, Obama's spokesman accused her of merely looking out for her own political interests.
"As others in Michigan have pointed out, there are valid concerns about the proposal currently being discussed, including severe restrictions on voter eligibility and the reliance on private funding," said Obama spokesman Tommy Vietor. "We have raised these concerns, as legislators in Michigan did today, and we're waiting to see if these issues can be resolved by the Legislature."
Michigan and Florida violated Democratic Party rules by holding primaries too early in the year. As punishment, the party stripped both states of their delegates to the national nominating convention.
Plans for a revote in the other state, Florida, collapsed over the weekend, leaving the future of its delegation unclear.
Clinton won both contests and trails Obama in the race for delegates needed to become the presidential nominee. She now argues that the outcome of both of those contests should count and the delegates be seated.
McCain wary of Iran's influence in Iraq
AMMAN, Jordan (AP) Sen. John McCain, the Republican presidential nominee-in-waiting, mistakenly said Tuesday that Iran was allowing al-Qaida fighters into the country to be trained and returned to Iraq.
McCain, expressing concern about Iran's rising sway in the Mideast, said, "al-Qaida is going back into Iran and is receiving training and are coming back into Iraq from Iran." He made the comments Tuesday at a news conference in Jordan; he made similar comments earlier to radio talk show host Hugh Hewitt.
Iran is a predominantly Shiite Muslim country and has been at pains to close its borders to al-Qaida fighters of the rival Sunni sect.
Iran has been accused by the United States of funding, training and arming Iraqi Shiite militants in their uprising against the United States. But there have been no allegations by Washington and no evidence that al-Qaida has benefited from Iranian assistance.
After Sen. Joe Lieberman, an independent from Connecticut who is traveling with McCain, stepped forward to whisper in the candidate's ear, McCain said: "I'm sorry; the Iranians are training the extremists, not al-Qaida. Not al-Qaida. I'm sorry."
McCain, who has linked his political future to U.S. success in Iraq, had just completed his eighth visit to Iraq. He was in the country on Monday for meetings with Iraqi and U.S. diplomatic and military officials.
Later Tuesday, McCain received a celebrity welcome in Jerusalem, beginning a two-day visit to Israel with a stop at the Yad Vashem Holocaust memorial.
Poll: Clinton leads Obama in Pa.
WASHINGTON (AP) Hillary Rodham Clinton has regained ground she had lost in Pennsylvania five weeks ahead of its primary, a new poll shows.
Clinton holds a 12 percentage point lead over rival Obama, according to a Quinnipiac University poll. She has 53 percent compared with Obama's 41 percent. On Feb. 27, the same survey showed her leading Obama 49 percent to 43 percent.
Clinton continues to lead among women, whites, voters older than 45 and those without college degrees. Obama leads among men, blacks, voters with college degrees and those under 45. Forty-eight percent of the respondents said the economy is the nation's most pressing issue, and 23 percent said it is the Iraq war. Among those concerned most about the economy, 55 percent favored Clinton, while those who cited the war were split between the two candidates.
Pennsylvania votes April 22.
The telephone poll was conducted from March 10-16. It involved interviews with 1,304 likely Democratic voters in Pennsylvania and has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 2.7 percentage points.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama campaign in Pennsylvania.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain stops in Jordan and Israel on a congressional trip.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"If your neighbor is still on the couch after five years, what do you know? It's not about the fire anymore, it's about not having to get off the couch. That's where we are in Iraq. It's not about the fire anymore." Former President Clinton, comparing Republican John McCain's approach to the Iraq war to taking in a neighbor who has lost a home in a fire, at a campaign stop Tuesday in Lawrenceburg, Ind.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Pennsylvania Democrats have added more than 85,000 voters to their rolls since last fall. The number of Democrats increased 2.2 percent from 3,883,378 in November to 3,968,998 as of March 11. GOP enrollment declined by 0.1 percent, from 3,245,271 to 3,241,528, during the period.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: March 19, 2008

 

End of Document
