

244 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Wednesday
The Associated Press
March 6, 2008 Thursday 12:44 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1148 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Clinton says wins make it a new race; Obama starts talking tougher ... Nomination clinched, McCain gets Bush endorsement, weight of GOP behind him ... Obama says he will sharpen criticism of Clinton after losses in Ohio and Texas ... Union official: AFL-CIO endorsement of either Obama or Clinton not expected soon ... Huckabee drops his quixotic campaign after 'journey of a lifetime'
Clinton sees new race; Obama talks tough
WASHINGTON (AP) Hillary Rodham Clinton declared Wednesday that her primary victories in Ohio, Texas and Rhode Island had reordered the Democratic presidential race in her favor. A resilient Barack Obama countered with fresh pledges of support from superdelegates and said his lead remained intact.
One day after his worst showing in a month, Obama blamed negative attacks by the former first lady for his defeats and quickly made good on a promise to sharpen his criticism of her.
But there was no disputing he had missed a chance to drive her from the race. Or that in contrast to the Republicans, who have settled on Arizona Sen. John McCain as their nominee, the Democrats face the prospect of a potentially divisive campaign lasting deep into spring.
"I'm concerned about unity. That's the major reason I've stayed out of this," said Sen. Bob Casey of Pennsylvania, who is neutral. "The longer this campaign goes on, the more difficult it will be to unify and heal."
Returns from Texas caucuses showed Obama reclaiming some of the ground in the delegate competition that he lost Tuesday night as Clinton piled up victories. Overall, she showed a gain of 12 delegates for the contests on the ballot, according to The Associated Press count, with another dozen to be awarded. In all 370 were at stake. Texas Democrats were still counting ballots from the Tuesday night caucuses.
McCain wins Bush's White House embrace
WASHINGTON (AP) John McCain got a White House embrace from President Bush on Wednesday, along with the party perks that go with sewing up the Republican nomination. The endorsement has baggage, though, reminding voters of the drawn-out Iraq war and the nation's economic woes under an unpopular GOP president.
Bush, who defeated McCain in a bitter 2000 primary campaign before winning the presidency, said the Arizona senator's "incredible courage and strength of character and perseverance" carried him to the nomination this time.
Those characteristics, Bush said, are what the nation needs in a president: "somebody that can handle the tough decisions, somebody who won't flinch in the face of danger."
The words held special resonance as the president who ordered the Iraq invasion five years ago stood outside the White House alongside one of the war's most resolute supporters. Neither man mentioned Iraq, though Bush said McCain would be "sitting in there behind that desk making decisions on war and peace."
Even that mention was coupled with Bush's lighter statement that "I'm going to be in Crawford with my feet up."
Obama says he will sharpen criticism
CHICAGO (AP) Democrat Barack Obama on Wednesday blamed his primary defeats in Ohio and Texas on rival Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton's criticism and news coverage that he argued benefited her at his expense.
The presidential candidate said he planned to do more in the days ahead to raise doubts about his opponent's claims to foreign policy and other Washington experience. In a television ad that her campaign credits with helping her win, she portrayed herself as most prepared to handle an international crisis.
"What exactly is this foreign policy experience?" Obama asked mockingly. "Was she negotiating treaties? Was she handling crises? The answer is no."
Clinton, asked in TV interviews Wednesday about her national security qualifications, ticked off a series events in which she played a role, including peace talks in Northern Ireland, the Kosovo refugee crisis and standing up for women's rights in China. She also cited her work on the Senate Armed Services Committee.
Obama's campaign immediately delivered on his pledge to criticize Clinton. Aides distributed a memo and held a conference call to question why she won't release her income tax returns.
AFL-CIO endorsement not expected soon
WASHINGTON (AP) A top union official said he doesn't expect the AFL-CIO to immediately endorse either Barack Obama or Hillary Rodham Clinton for president.
Gerald McEntee, the president of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, said neither Democratic candidate had enough support to get the nomination at the AFL-CIO's executive council meeting in San Diego.
McEntee, head of the AFL-CIO's political education committee, said the count was taken before Tuesday night's primary results. Clinton won contests in Ohio, Texas and Rhode Island, while Obama won Vermont. Obama still has more delegates than Clinton.
McEntee, a Clinton supporter, said she has majority support from the AFL-CIO. However, he said she does not have support from more than 66 percent of the AFL-CIO's 10 million members, which is required for an endorsement.
Clinton has more AFL-CIO endorsements than Obama, with 12 of its unions already endorsing her. But Obama has already secured the endorsement of rival labor organization Change to Win to go along with his endorsement by five AFL-CIO unions.
Huckabee went farther than expected
DALLAS (AP) Mike Huckabee's appearance on NBC's "Saturday Night Live" was a metaphor for his presidential campaign. He declared, "Mike Huckabee does not overstay his welcome," yet he lingered, missing repeated cues to leave the stage.
He hung on longer than anyone could have imagined, even after rival John McCain won South Carolina and rolled up a series of Super Tuesday victories to build a lead that rapidly became insurmountable.
Yet Huckabee did a lot with very little in his underdog campaign.
In some ways, the former Arkansas governor ended the race as he began it, a long-shot with little money and little electoral appeal beyond bedrock, born-again Christian conservatives.
He said so Tuesday night, when he lost Texas and Ohio and finally quit the race. "We started this effort with very little recognition and virtually no resources," Huckabee told supporters. "We ended with slightly more recognition and very few resources."
The crowd laughed.
"But what a journey," he said. "What a journey. A journey of a lifetime."
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton is in the District of Columbia. Barack Obama is in Chicago.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain met with President Bush at the White House.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"If my showing up and endorsing him helps him or if I'm against him and it helps him either way, I want him to win." President Bush, in endorsing Republican nominee-in-waiting John McCain.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Without winning Ohio, no Republican has won the White House in more than a century; only two Democrats have done so.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: March 6, 2008

 

End of Document
