

246 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Monday
The Associated Press
March 3, 2008 Monday 10:28 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1119 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Obama denies assuring Canada on NAFTA ... Clinton suggests she'll push on past Tuesday's primaries ... Obama restates he made mistake involving Chicago businessman in his real estate deal ... Delegate math could cloud Democratic results Tuesday ... Five-year-old Iraq war expected to affect Ohio, Texas votes and general election ...
Obama denies assuring Canada on NAFTA, despite memo
SAN ANTONIO (AP) Barack Obama said Monday that his campaign never gave Canada back-channel assurances that his harsh words about the North American Free Trade Agreement were for political show despite the disclosure of a Canadian memo indicating otherwise.
According to the memo obtained by The Associated Press, Obama's senior economic adviser told Canadian officials in Chicago that the debate over free trade in the Democratic presidential primary campaign was "political positioning" and that Obama was not really protectionist.
The adviser, Austan Goolsbee, said his comments to those officials were misinterpreted by the author, Joseph DeMora, who works for the Canadian consulate in Chicago and attended the meeting.
In Carrollton, Texas, Obama told reporters: "Nobody reached out to the Canadians to try to assure them of anything."
Asked why he had appeared to deny a report last week that such a meeting had taken place, Obama said: "That was the information I had at the time."
The original report by CTV in Canada suggested an Obama emissary had reached out to officials at the Canadian Embassy in Washington. Embassy officials artfully denied any such contact had been made with them.
As it turned out, the meeting took place in Chicago instead, with Canadian Consul General Georges Rioux and DeMora taking notes.
Obama said that one of his advisers had been invited by someone at the consulate to visit and discuss trade.
Clinton says she's pushing ahead
TOLEDO, Ohio (AP) Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton suggested Monday she'll press on with the campaign after Tuesday's crucial primaries, arguing that momentum is on her side despite 11 straight losses to rival Barack Obama.
"I'm just getting warmed up," Clinton told reporters, looking ahead to a busy day of campaign events in Ohio and Texas where polls show a close race.
Clinton's husband, former President Clinton, has asserted that his wife must win both Texas and Ohio to keep her campaign alive. On Friday, Hillary Clinton's advisers recast the stakes, saying if Obama lost any of the four primaries Rhode Island and Vermont also vote it would show Democrats are having second thoughts about him.
Hillary Clinton predicted success on Tuesday and looked ahead to the next big contest Pennsylvania on April 22.
Also on Monday, the New York senator launched a new 30-second ad in Texas that criticizes Obama for failing to hold hearings as chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations subcommittee on European Affairs, which has oversight for Afghanistan.
Obama pushes away from indicted donor
SAN ANTONIO (AP) Democratic presidential contender Sen. Barack Obama on Monday reiterated the steps he has taken to separate himself from longtime donor Antoin "Tony" Rezko, as jury selection began in the Chicago businessman's political corruption trial.
The Illinois senator was pressed by reporters at an informal news conference about his relations with the 52-year-old real estate developer and fast-food magnate. Rezko is charged with buying political influence with campaign money and using it to launch a multimillion-dollar shakedown scheme aimed at companies hoping to build hospitals or invest state pension money.
Obama has not been accused of any wrongdoing in the case brought by federal prosecutors.
"Tony Rezko was a friend and supporter of mine for many years," Obama told reporters. "These charges are completely unrelated to me, and nobody disputes that."
"There's no dispute that he raised money for us, and there's no dispute that we've tried to get rid of it," he added.
Delegate math could cloud results
WASHINGTON (AP) Tuesday's contests could go a long way toward determining both nominees for president once the delegates are calculated. But for the Democrats, that could get complicated.
Barack Obama goes into the contests with a 110-delegate lead over Hillary Rodham Clinton, according to the latest Associated Press tally.
There are 370 Democratic delegates at stake in Texas, Ohio, Rhode Island and Vermont, but the party's system of awarding delegates proportionally will make it tough for either candidate to post big gains.
In the overall race for the Democratic nomination, Obama leads with 1,386 delegates, including separately chosen party and elected officials known as superdelegates. Clinton has 1,276.
On the Republican side, John McCain could officially clinch the presidential nomination with a strong showing Tuesday.
McCain goes into the contests with 1,014 delegates 177 short of the 1,191 needed for the nomination. Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee is far behind with 257 delegates.
There are 256 Republican delegates at stake in the four states.
Iraq casts shadow on Ohio, Texas votes
McCONNELSVILLE, Ohio (AP) Two big states holding presidential primaries Tuesday have something more tragic in common high numbers of military casualties in Iraq.
Combined, Ohio and Texas have sustained roughly one-eighth of all U.S. troop deaths in a war that's certain to shape the general election as candidates with two vastly different approaches stay or go compete for votes in communities that have been personally touched by the conflict that began with a U.S.-led invasion five years ago this month.
"This strategy is succeeding," insists Republican Sen. John McCain, the likely GOP nominee who plans to keep U.S. troops in Iraq for the near future and who daily derides his Democratic rivals as defeatists.
Countering, Democratic presidential contenders Sens. Barack Obama and Hillary Rodham Clinton want the military out now and argue that the Republican would keep the country's armed forces entangled in Iraq indefinitely.
With such disparate positions, the Iraq war is certain to be a dominant topic, perhaps the defining issue, in the election as U.S. military deaths near 4,000 and the cost approaches $500 billion.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton campaigns in Ohio and Texas. Barack Obama is in Texas.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain and Mike Huckabee campaign in Texas.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"I intend to do as well as I can on Tuesday and we'll see what happens after that." Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton, speaking to reporters aboard her campaign plane Monday.
STAT OF THE DAY:
In 2004, only 33 percent of registered voters in Ohio turned out in the primary; a whopping 72 percent ultimately voted in the general election.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: March 4, 2008

 

End of Document
