

247 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Sunday
The Associated Press
March 2, 2008 Sunday 8:32 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 942 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Obama accuses Clinton of political expediency in campaign stop in Rhode Island ... Huckabee, on border visit, calls for stronger security ... Clinton does 'SNL,' but gets no endorsement ...
Obama makes only stop in RI
PROVIDENCE, R.I. (AP) Democrat Barack Obama, on his first visit to Rhode Island as a presidential candidate, sought to portray Hillary Rodham Clinton as a candidate who shifted positions for political expediency.
"Real change isn't about changing your position to fit the politics of the moment. And that's the choice in this election," Obama told a packed recreation center as thousands more listened from outside.
Four days ahead of primary contests here and in three other states, the Illinois senator stopped on his way from campaigning in Texas to events in Ohio, the two marquee contests next Tuesday. Vermont also votes.
Obama spoke on Saturday, six days after Clinton came to the same arena and depicted Obama as naive and unrealistic about dealing with tough issues like health care reform and global warming.
In his remarks, Obama challenged his rival's judgment and commitment on trade and foreign policy.
He asserted that Clinton had changed her position to oppose the North American Free Trade Agreement only after deciding to run for president. He also said she waffled on legislation to make it harder for low-income individuals to file for bankruptcy protection.
He depicted himself as having better judgment to deal with a national security emergencies, renewing his criticism of Clinton's October 2002 vote to authorize President Bush to use military force in Iraq.
"Real change isn't voting for George Bush's war in Iraq and then telling the American people it was actually a vote for more diplomacy when you start running for president," Obama said. "The title of the bill was `A Resolution to Authorize the Use of United States Armed Forces Against Iraq.' I knew what it was, Lincoln Chafee knew what it was," said Obama. Chafee is a former Republican Rhode Island senator who was an outspoken opponent of the war.
That line drew big cheers from the crowd.
Clinton, campaigning in Texas, told reporters, "I know that Senator Obama has been complaining that talking about national security is fear-mongering and I could not disagree more."
Huckabee calls for stronger border security
LAREDO, Texas (AP) Presidential hopeful Mike Huckabee toured Border Patrol facilities and hiked to the edge of Rio Grande during a campaign stop in which he called for stronger border security and stricter immigration laws.
As he stood under a railroad bridge in Laredo, the former Arkansas governor and ordained Baptist minister was flanked by actor Chuck Norris and Jim Gilchrist, founder of the anti-illegal immigrant Minutemen Project.
"I come away from this with a better understanding of this, but also a sense of urgency that as a country we need to put our resources on border protection rather than waiting until people have gotten past our borders into our country and then creating problems," the Republican candidate said Saturday.
"There's an old saying: It cost a whole lot more to do it over than it does to do it right. Doing it right is capturing criminals at the border."
Huckabee, who addressed a small crowd of reporters and several local members of the Republican Party, stressed that the U.S. government needs to have stricter immigration laws.
"If they're people with a criminal background or they're people who happen to have a suitcase with a dirty bomb, I'd kind of like to know that before they walk through the border," Huckabee said.
Huckabee's visit coincided with a local protest against the border fence.
Clinton takes break for 'SNL'
NEW YORK (AP) Hillary Rodham Clinton took a break from the campaign trail to thank "Saturday Night Live" for giving her candidacy a boost although she failed to get an official endorsement from the show.
Clinton's campaign has gotten a good deal of mileage out of an "SNL" sketch from a week ago in which reporters fawned over her rival, Barack Obama. Clinton brought up the sketch during last Tuesday's debate between the two candidates, and the campaign has encouraged supporters and voters to watch it on NBC's Web site.
This weekend's episode opened with a similar sketch recreating Tuesday's debate. It portrayed NBC anchors Brian Williams and Tim Russert asking Clinton, played by Amy Poehler, tough questions while serving softballs to Obama.
Then the real Clinton appeared onscreen with an "editorial response."
The sketch, she said, "wasn't an endorsement of one candidate over another. I can say this confidently because when I asked if I could take it as an endorsement, I was told, 'Absolutely not.' But I still enjoyed that sketch a great deal because I simply adore Amy's impression of me."
When Poehler asked her how the campaign was going, Clinton responded: "The campaign is going very well. Very, very well. Why, what have you heard?"
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama campaign in Ohio.
THE REPUBLICANS
Mike Huckabee campaigns in Texas. John McCain has no scheduled appearances.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"And now folks, it's time for who do you trust. Hubba, hubba, hubba. Money, money, money," Jack Nicholson, as The Joker, says in a new Internet video. The actor is backing Clinton and took his endorsement to the Internet with a humorous collection of clips that puts his support into the mouths of his most famous film characters.
STAT OF THE DAY:
In the last presidential primary in Texas, 839,000 people cast Democratic ballots. That number should be higher this time around, according to state officials.
Compiled by Ann Sanner and Ronald Powers.
 Load-Date: March 3, 2008

 

End of Document
