

249 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Friday
The Associated Press
February 29, 2008 Friday 11:43 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1329 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Stark Clinton ad sparks debate with Obama over who's got the judgment to be commander in chief ... Polls: Clinton leads Obama modestly in Ohio; both are even in Texas ... McCain: Desire to renegotiate NAFTA would jeopardize Canadian military support ... Clinton campaign concerns on caucus rules prompts warning from state party about legal action ... Bill Clinton says wife is only candidate proven to bring change
Clinton ad stirs waters
HOUSTON (AP) A stark new Hillary Rodham Clinton ad portrays her as the leader voters want on the phone when crisis occurs in the middle of the night, "while your children are safely asleep." Barack Obama retorted that his Democratic rival already had her "red phone moment" and it helped draw the U.S. into a misbegotten war.
The ad, with its visuals of sleeping children, prompted an immediate denunciation Friday from Obama, who said it's meant to scare people. The Obama campaign rolled out testimonials from national security supporters that the Illinois senator has the temperament and judgment for perilous times.
Obama said he called it right on the war, "the most important foreign policy decision of our generation, and that's the kind of judgment I'll show when I answer that phone in the White House as president of the United States."
"We've had a red phone moment," he added. "It was the decision to invade Iraq. And Senator Clinton gave the wrong answer."
Clinton adviser Howard Wolfson contended the ad "speaks to what people really know in their hearts" about his candidate's experience and, by inference, her opponent's lack of it. "This is a legitimate matter for a presidential campaign," he said. "We would be derelict if we didn't raise it."
Poll: Obama, Clinton even in Texas
WASHINGTON (AP) Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton has a slight lead over rival Sen. Barack Obama in Ohio, but the two Democratic presidential candidates are even in Texas, according to Fox News polls.
Both delegate-rich states hold primaries on Tuesday.
Clinton has an 8-percentage-point lead over Obama in Ohio, 46 percent to 38 percent. She leads there among women, whites, less educated and lower earning people, and people over age 45. Eight in 10 said they would be satisfied if Clinton is the party's nominee, while seven in 10 said so about Obama including just half of Clinton's supporters.
In Texas, Obama has 48 percent compared with Clinton's 45 percent. He leads among all men there, including a 20-percentage-point lead among white men. Clinton is ahead with women and has a large edge with the oldest voters.
Both polls were conducted from Feb. 26-28 and involved telephone interviews with 600 likely Democratic voters from each state. Both have a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 4 percentage points.
McCain tags Dems on trade treaty
ROUND ROCK, Texas (AP) Republican John McCain said the desire by Democratic presidential rivals Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama to renegotiate the North American Free Trade Agreement would jeopardize crucial military support from Canada.
McCain used a town-hall style meeting Friday at Dell Inc. headquarters to emphasize his support for NAFTA. The effects of the 1994 trade pact are still hotly debated, but studies indicate the deal has resulted in record exports from Texas to Canada and Mexico.
Trade and national security are "interconnected with each other," the Arizona senator said.
"One of our greatest assets in Afghanistan are our Canadian friends. We need our Canadian friends, and we need their continued support in Afghanistan," McCain said.
Both Democrats said at a debate Tuesday in Cleveland they would insist on renegotiating NAFTA and would threaten to opt out of the agreement unless Canada and Mexico come to the negotiating table.
Texas party warns against legal action
LAREDO, Texas (AP) Hillary Rodham Clinton's campaign has raised the possibility of a challenge to Texas' primary and caucus rules just days before the contest, drawing a warning against legal action from the state's Democratic Party.
Top strategists for Democratic rival Barack Obama said Friday they supported the party's action, suggesting the Clinton campaign was trying to block the reporting of caucus results.
Clinton aides said earlier this week they were alarmed at the lack of clarity about many of the caucus rules and expressed their concerns on a conference call with Obama's staff and state party officials. Texas has a two-step voting process, with a primary and then caucuses shortly after the polls close.
Specifically, Clinton aides questioned a provision allowing caucus attendees to vote to move the location if they choose to do so, and whether people who had cast so-called "provisional ballots" in the primary would have their votes counted in the caucus.
They also expressed concern about the automated phone system precinct chairs would use to call in the results of each caucus, saying the party hadn't yet trained anyone to use the system properly.
Clinton political director Guy Cecil said he asked party officials to spell out the rules in memo form and to send them to both campaigns.
Cecil on Friday denied that the campaign planned to sue the party, which will manage roughly 8,700 caucuses Tuesday evening.
Clinton says wife would bring change
FINDLAY, Ohio (AP) Former President Clinton acknowledged on Friday that voters are torn between Democrats Barack Obama and Hillary Rodham Clinton.
"The truth is most like them both," Bill Clinton told an estimated 1,200 students and supporters at the University of Findlay, the first of five stops through Ohio.
While he never mentioned Obama by name, the former president said his wife is the only candidate who has proven she can bring about change. "It's one thing to talk about change, it's another to do it," he said.
Bill Clinton told the crowd his wife has fought for women's rights in China and is respected by people around the world. He also said her administration would restore America's global standing.
Ohio holds its primary Tuesday.
Obama visits US-Mexican border
BROWNSVILLE, Texas (AP) Democratic presidential candidate Barack Obama took a side trip Friday to the Mexican border, standing near a U.S. check point and looking at Mexicans and Americans passing both ways over a bridge over the Rio Grande.
Obama was told by a local official, state Rep. Eddie Lucio III, that 75 percent of Brownsville's tax revenues comes from Mexicans who come from communities across the river. Obama said: "I think it's fascinating. It gives you a sense of how knit together these communities are. We have to find a way to secure our own borders in an intelligent way."
Obama was speaking to a group on the Brownsville campus of the University of Texas, some 500 yards from the border. Obama said that the U.S. government had intended at one point to build its security fence right across the campus.
"It's a significant challenge," Obama told reporters who accompanied him.
The Illinois senator then went to a local festival and plunged into a crowd, shaking hands and signing T-shirts and grabbing a bite to eat of the local specialty.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama hold campaign rallies in Texas.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain held a town-hall style meeting with Dell employees in Round Rock, Texas. Mike Huckabee visits the Fort Worth Stockyards while campaigning in Texas.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"It's 3 a.m. and your children are safe and asleep. But there's a phone in the White House and it's ringing. Something's happening in the world. Your vote will decide who answers that call, whether it's someone who already knows the world's leaders, knows the military, someone tested and ready to lead in a dangerous world." Announcer in a Hillary Rodham Clinton TV ad that was released Friday.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts garnered 68 percent of the vote in Rhode Island's Democratic primary in 1980. Jimmy Carter, who was the incumbent president, collected 26 percent.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: March 1, 2008

 

End of Document
