

250 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Thursday
The Associated Press
February 29, 2008 Friday 5:46 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1344 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Clinton raises $35 million in February; Obama camp says it will surpass ... Obama says economy on verge of recession, blames Bush, McCain for failed leadership ... McCain says critics distort his remark about U.S. troops staying 100 years in Iraq ... Clinton offers plan to cut child poverty in half in a dozen years ... Huckabee: Public financing questions could hamper McCain ... Clinton turns tables on Letterman ...
Clinton raises $35 million in February
WASHINGTON (AP) More than doubling her January fundraising total, Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton's advisers said Thursday that she will raise $35 million in February, a figure rival Sen. Barack Obama's campaign said it would surpass.
The $35 million would be Clinton's biggest fundraising mark yet and represents a remarkable recovery for her campaign. Obama raised more than she did last month, $36 million to $14 million, and she was forced to lend her campaign $5 million.
"It was incredibly gratifying to see people come forth with this vote of confidence in me," Clinton told reporters in Hanging Rock, Ohio. "Obviously this is a tremendous benefit to my campaign."
Obama's campaign, reacting promptly to her campaign announcement, promised an even higher number but divulged no totals.
"We've raised considerably more than that," Obama spokesman Bill Burton said.
Obama told reporters on his campaign plane, "I have no idea how much money we've raised, but we've been paying our bills. Right now, I believe we're doing very good."
That would make February an astounding fundraising month for the Democrats. At that rate, both candidates would break records for contestants in a primary fight.
Obama slams Bush, McCain on economy
AUSTIN, Texas (AP) Democratic candidate Sen. Barack Obama said Thursday the economy is "on the brink of a recession" and blamed economic policies espoused by President Bush and Republican presidential contender Sen. John McCain.
Obama mocked a more optimistic economic picture painted by Bush at a White House news conference: "People are struggling in the midst of an economy that George Bush says is not a recession but is experienced differently by folks on the ground."
For the second day in a row, Obama focused on the likely GOP nominee McCain and all but ignored Hillary Rodham Clinton's continuing campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination, although key Democratic primaries come next Tuesday in Texas and Ohio.
"We are not standing on the brink of recession because of forces beyond our control," Obama told a town hall forum in Austin. "This was not an inevitable part of the business cycle. It was a failure of leadership in Washington a Washington where George Bush hands out billions of tax cuts to the wealthiest few for eight long years, and John McCain promises to make those same tax cuts permanent, embracing the central principle of the Bush economic program."
McCain says 100-year remark distorted
HOUSTON (AP) Republican Sen. John McCain said his remark that American troops could stay in Iraq for 100 years has been distorted, yet he still suggests a lengthy U.S. presence comparable to that in Korea and other countries.
"Of course, that comment of mine was distorted. Life isn't fair, as Jack Kennedy said," McCain told a town hall meeting at Rice University. "I was talking about American presence after the war."
Responding to a student who had criticized his 100-year remark, McCain added, "No American argues against our military presence in Korea or Japan or Germany or Kuwait or other places, or Turkey, because America is not receiving casualties."
The student had referred to McCain's response at a New Hampshire town hall meeting in January when he was asked about a comment President Bush had made about U.S. troops remaining in Iraq for 50 years.
"Maybe 100," McCain answered. "As long as Americans are not being injured or harmed or wounded or killed, it's fine with me, and I hope it would be fine with you, if we maintain a presence in a very volatile part of the world where al-Qaida is training, recruiting, equipping and motivating people every single day."
Clinton offers child poverty plan
HANGING ROCK, Ohio (AP) Democratic Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton offered a plan to improve childhood nutrition and set a goal to reduce by half the 12 million youngsters living in poverty over the next dozen years.
The package of proposals includes a "comprehensive" early education initiative that starts with nurse's visits for pregnant women, lets children begin the Head Start program earlier and calls for universal pre-kindergarten programs.
The New York senator also says she would deal with childhood hunger by putting in place a food safety net, and give children "greater access to healthy, fresh food."
She spelled out her proposals in a speech Thursday at the child care development center on Ohio University's southern campus, and toured a Head Start program serving economically challenged southern Ohio. It was part of her effort to focus the Democratic campaign on bedrock economic issues.
"You should have a president again who actually gets up thinking about you every day," Clinton told about 200 people at the event. "I have spent a lifetime working to help children, which is my first passion. If our children get off to a good start so much of the other stuff is taken care of."
Huckabee: Financing could stymie McCain
LITTLE ROCK, Ark. (AP) Republican Mike Huckabee said Thursday that John McCain may be unable to campaign for months because of questions about his effort to exit the primary election's public financing system.
"Not only do we not have all the delegates all in place for him, there is a question as to whether his campaign is even going to be able to be active between now and September," Huckabee told reporters in a conference call Thursday.
The Democratic National Committee has asked the Federal Election Commission to investigate whether McCain would violate money-in-politics laws by withdrawing from the system. McCain, who had been entitled to $5.8 million in federal funds for the primary, has decided to bypass the system so he can avoid spending limits between now and the GOP's national convention in September.
McCain's campaign told federal regulators Monday that he does not need their approval to withdraw from the system.
Rep. Barrow of Georgia backs Obama
WASHINGTON (AP) Rep. John Barrow became the third Georgia Democrat this month to announce his support for Barack Obama's presidential campaign.
Barrow, who had withheld his endorsement, said Thursday that Obama has demonstrated he can bring people together and work across the aisle.
"The more I saw and the more closely I watched, the more convinced I was that he was the best choice for bringing us together as a party and as a country," Barrow said Thursday.
Barrow is a Democratic superdelegate, meaning he has a vote at this summer's national convention in Denver.
Clinton gets back at Letterman
WASHINGTON (AP) Hillary Rodham Clinton, often the victim of David Letterman's caustic wit, turned the tables on the talk show host Thursday night.
In a taped appearance on Letterman's show, the Democratic presidential candidate says to the "Late Show" audience: "My fellow Americans, I pose this simple question to you: 'Are you better off now than you were when this disappointing show began?'"
She also made a crack about Dave approaching Social Security age.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton held a town-hall style meeting in Ohio before an event in Texas. Barack Obama campaigns in Texas.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain and Mike Huckabee campaign in Texas.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"I believe Senator Obama better stay focused on his campaign with Senator Clinton, neither of whom has secured their party's nominee yet nomination yet." President Bush, when asked at a news conference about comments Democrat Barack Obama made about al-Qaida in Iraq.
STAT OF THE DAY:
About 12.7 million people were eligible to vote in the Texas primary as of Feb. 20, according to preliminary figures from the Texas Secretary of State's office.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: March 1, 2008

 

End of Document
