

251 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Wednesday
The Associated Press
February 28, 2008 Thursday 3:31 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1309 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Bloomberg says he will not run for president ... John Lewis switches support from Clinton to Obama; Dorgan backs Democrat ... Clinton focused on upcoming states ... McCain and Obama tangle long distance over al-Qaida in Iraq ... Clinton won't release tax returns until she's the Democratic presidential nominee ... Poll: Pennsylvania Democratic race tightens as Obama gains on Clinton
Bloomberg says he's not running
NEW YORK (AP) New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg said Wednesday he is not running for president.
The New York mayor wrote in a New York Times op-ed posted on its Web site that he has listened carefully to those who encouraged him to run for the White House, but that he is not and will not be a candidate for president.
Bloomberg, an independent, has played coy about his presidential ambitions for two years.
The 66-year-old billionaire businessman had publicly denied interest in running for president ever since one of his political advisers planted the first seeds more than two years ago. But his denials grew weaker in recent months as aides and supporters quietly began laying the groundwork for a third-party campaign.
"I listened carefully to those who encouraged me to run, but I am not and will not be a candidate for president," Bloomberg wrote.
Among his biggest obstacles was getting on the ballot. The process varies wildly from state to state and would have required him to collect hundreds of thousands of signatures according to a timetable on which the first key date is March 5.
Bloomberg said he will instead work to "steer the national conversation away from partisanship and toward unity; away from ideology and toward common sense; away from sound bites and toward substance."
Lewis switches to Obama
WASHINGTON (AP) Civil rights leader John Lewis has dropped his support for Hillary Rodham Clinton's presidential bid in favor of Barack Obama.
Lewis, a Democratic congressman from Atlanta, is the most prominent black leader to defect from Clinton's campaign in the face of near-unanimous black support for Obama in recent voting. He also is a superdelegate who gets a vote at this summer's national convention in Denver.
"After taking some time for serious reflection on this issue, I have decided that when I cast my vote as a superdelegate at the Democratic convention, it is my duty as a representative of the 5th Congressional District to express the will of the people," Lewis said in a statement.
Lewis' constituents supported Obama roughly 3-to-1 in Georgia's Feb. 5 primary. His endorsement had been a coveted prize among the Democratic candidates thanks to his standing as one of the last major civil rights leaders of the 1960s.
"John Lewis is an American hero and a giant of the civil rights movement, and I am deeply honored to have his support," Obama said.
Sen. Byron Dorgan of North Dakota endorsed Obama on Wednesday, citing his record on trade.
Clinton looks ahead to Tuesday's races
COLUMBUS, Ohio (AP) Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton said she is optimistic about Tuesday's upcoming primaries and isn't thinking about dropping her presidential bid after the results.
"I don't think about it like that," she told reporters aboard her campaign plane between Cleveland and Columbus, Ohio. "I'm doing everything I can to win. That's what I intend to do."
"I feel good about these upcoming states," she added.
Rival Barack Obama has won 11 straight primaries and caucuses and has been increasingly gathering delegates. Texas and Ohio are among four states holding primaries Tuesday. Rhode Island and Vermont also have contests.
"What keeps me going is knowing I would be the best president," she said. "I know that I could handle the problems we have here at home and around the world and I believe I'm the best candidate to take on John McCain in what will be a very challenging election."
McCain, Obama spar over al-Qaida in Iraq
TYLER, Texas (AP) Republican presidential hopeful John McCain mocked Barack Obama's view of al-Qaida in Iraq, and the Democratic contender responded that GOP policies brought the terrorist group there.
The rapid-fire, long-distance exchange Wednesday underscored that the two consider each other likely general election rivals, even though the Democratic contest remains unresolved.
McCain criticized Obama for saying in Tuesday night's Democratic debate that, after U.S. troops were withdrawn, as president he would act "if al-Qaida is forming a base in Iraq."
"I have some news. Al-Qaida is in Iraq. It's called 'al-Qaida in Iraq,'" McCain told a crowd in Tyler, Texas, drawing laughter at Obama's expense. He said Obama's statement was "pretty remarkable,"
Obama quickly answered back while campaigning in Ohio. "I do know that al-Qaida is in Iraq and that's why I have said we should continue to strike al-Qaida targets," he told a rally at Ohio State University in Columbus.
"But I have some news for John McCain," Obama added. "There was no such thing as al-Qaida in Iraq until George Bush and John McCain decided to invade Iraq. ... They took their eye off the people who were responsible for 9/11, and that would be al-Qaida in Afghanistan, that is stronger now than at any time since 2001."
Clinton won't release taxes soon
CLEVELAND (AP) Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton says she won't release her tax returns until she has the Democratic presidential nomination in hand, and not before tax filing time comes in mid-April.
Clinton argued for openness Tuesday night during her latest debate with Democratic rival Barack Obama.
"I will release my tax returns," Clinton said during the debate. "I have consistently said I will do that once I become the nominee, or even earlier."
Pressed about the timing of releasing her tax returns, campaign aides were more reticent Wednesday, indicating that Clinton would not release the sensitive financial data during a hotly contested primary, but only at tax filing time.
"As is customary, as the Democratic nominee Senator Clinton will release her tax information in April at tax time," said spokesman Jay Carson.
Poll: Pa. Democratic race tightens
WASHINGTON (AP) Barack Obama is closing in on rival Hillary Rodham Clinton's once 16-percentage-point lead in Pennsylvania, according to a Quinnipiac University poll.
Clinton led in this survey by 52 percent to 36 percent just two weeks ago. The latest poll indicates that her lead is down to 6 points, 49 percent to 43 percent.
Pennsylvania's primary is not until April 22, but the poll is yet another measurement of Obama's momentum. In two weeks, voters under age 45 have gone from favoring Clinton by 11 percentage points to preferring Obama by 17 points. She leads among women, whites, older voters and those without college degrees; Obama leads among men, blacks and college graduates. A quarter of each candidate's supporters say they might change their minds about whom to back.
The Quinnipiac University poll was conducted by telephone from Feb. 21-25. It involved interviews with 506 likely Democratic voters in Pennsylvania and has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 4.4 percentage points.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton holds a forum on the economy and rallies in Ohio. Barack Obama holds a rally in Ohio before heading to Texas to campaign.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain holds town-hall style meetings in Texas.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"I think the candidacy of Senator Obama represents the beginning of a new movement in American political history that began in the hearts and minds of the people of this nation. And I want to be on the side of the people, on the side of the spirit of history." Rep. John Lewis, in a statement announcing he was switching his support from Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton to Barack Obama.
STAT OF THE DAY:
John McCain won Vermont's Republican primary in 2000 with 60 percent of the vote, compared with George W. Bush's 35 percent.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: February 28, 2008

 

End of Document
