

278 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Thursday
The Associated Press
January 31, 2008 Thursday 11:34 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1301 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Democrat Barack Obama raises $32 million in January ... Polls finds high expectations for the next president, but doubts about changing Washington ... Romney accuses McCain of adopting a Nixon-style strategy ... California Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger endorses McCain ... Huckabee brushes off suggestions that he drop out of GOP race ... National Journal ranks Obama as most liberal senator of 2007 ... Obama, Paul among candidates participating in youth forum
Obama raises $32 million in January
WASHINGTON (AP) Democrat Barack Obama raised $32 million in the single month of January, a whopping figure that has permitted the campaign to boost staff and extend advertising to states beyond the Feb. 5 contests.
Obama is now advertising in 20 of the 22 states in play for next week's Super Tuesday and plans to begin advertising in seven more states that hold primaries or caucuses later in February. Rival Hillary Rodham Clinton is advertising in 12 Super Tuesday states, including her own home state of New York.
With John Edwards out of the race, Clinton and Obama are in a fierce race for delegates to secure the nomination. Feb. 5 offers the biggest single opportunity for delegates, but is impossible for either one to seal the nomination on that day.
The $32 million raised in one month matches the campaign's best three-month fundraising period in 2007, when the campaign raised $30 million in primary money and $2 million for the general. The money raised in January was all for the primaries.
Poll: Big expectations for new president
WASHINGTON (AP) Americans have a decidedly dour view of how things are going in the country and an outsized view of what one person the president can do about it.
In a year when talk of change is all the rage in the presidential campaign, people have great expectations for the next president's ability to get things done, according to an extensive Associated Press-Yahoo News survey released Thursday.
Large majorities of voters believe the president has considerable sway on a range of big issues such as inflation, interest rates, the federal deficit, taxes and more.
They are less certain, though, about the president's ability to change how things really work in Washington: 55 percent think it's possible; 44 percent are doubtful, no matter who's elected.
Call it optimism with a cynical streak. Or cynicism with an optimistic streak.
Romney says McCain used Nixon-like tactic
LONG BEACH, Calif. (AP) Republican Mitt Romney accused rival John McCain of adopting underhanded tactics from Richard Nixon, the GOP president who resigned in disgrace.
"I don't think I want to see our party go back to that kind of campaigning," Romney said in his most pointed rebuttal yet to front-runner McCain's claim that the former Massachusetts governor favors a timetable for withdrawing troops from Iraq. Romney denies this charge and most media analyses have disputed it.
McCain's decision to level the timetable charge during the Florida primary before Romney could rebut it "was reminiscent of the Nixon era," Romney said. McCain ended up winning the Florida contest Tuesday.
McCain adviser Steve Schmidt responded that Romney "is lashing out because he's unable to defend his comments about a timeline, albeit a secret one ... . John McCain has simply pointed out a fundamental difference between them at the time when John McCain was advocating a strategy for victory."
Both camps readied ad campaigns for the Super Tuesday contests in 21 states. Both called the buys significant, but it was not immediately clear just how far-reaching they would be.
McCain gets Schwarzenegger nod
LOS ANGELES (AP) California Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger endorsed John McCain in the Republican presidential race on Thursday, praising him as an extraordinary leader who can reach across the political aisle to get things done.
McCain predicted a "flood of endorsements across this country from both liberals and conservatives" would soon come his way as he tries to take command of the nominating fight after a bruising series of early primaries and caucuses.
"I won a Republican-only primary in the state of Florida but I also have been able to gain the support of independents, as well, which is vital to winning a national election," he said.
The Arizona senator also won the backing of Texas Gov. Rick Perry, who had endorsed Rudy Giuliani.
Huckabee: 'I still think I can win'
SAN FRANCISCO (AP) Republican Mike Huckabee bristled Thursday at suggestions that he drop out of the presidential race, brushing aside questions about whether he was sticking it out for a running mate spot.
"I'm staying in the race because I still think I can win," said Huckabee, who hasn't won a state since Iowa's caucus on Jan. 3.
Huckabee was scornful of suggestions that he would siphon votes from rival Mitt Romney, and thus help ensure John McCain wins the nomination.
"I think it's pretty desperate when you say a vote for Mike Huckabee is a vote for John McCain. A vote for Huckabee is a vote for Huckabee," the former Arkansas governor said.
Huckabee said he'd be glad to capture some big-name Republican endorsements, but added, "I've never been the pick of the establishment. I probably will never be. That's OK. Ronald Reagan wasn't either."
Obama ranked as most liberal senator
WASHINGTON (AP) Barack Obama was the most liberal senator last year, according to National Journal magazine who ranked the Illinois Democrat based on his 2007 voting record. His presidential rival Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York came in 16th.
The ratings, based on 99 votes, are detailed in Friday's issue of National Journal. The scores come from the lawmakers' votes on foreign policy and economic and social issues.
The magazine said Obama took the liberal position on 65 of the 66 votes in which he participated, while Clinton voted the liberal position on 77 of 82. Arizona Republican John McCain did not participate in enough votes to receive a score.
Obama, Paul to reach out to young voters
WASHINGTON (AP) Democrat Barack Obama and Republican Ron Paul are the latest presidential candidates who plan to reach out to young voters through an interactive forum Saturday sponsored by MySpace, MTV and The Associated Press.
Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton and Republican Mike Huckabee had previously agreed to participate in the event, which will be held just three days before 24 states vote. Republicans John McCain and Mitt Romney have been invited, too.
The candidates will answer questions posed by online viewers or from a live audience at MTV's studio in New York. The White House hopefuls can join the discussion from the studio or via satellite from wherever they are on the campaign trail.
"Closing Arguments: A Presidential Super Dialogue" will be broadcast on MTV channels, XM Satellite Radio and AP Radio, among other stations. It will be streamed live on MySpace and MTV's Web sites, as well as mobile devices via MTV Mobile. It also will be distributed live to the Associated Press Online Video Network.
The event begins at 6 p.m. EST.
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama participate in a debate in California.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain, Mitt Romney and Mike Huckabee campaign in California.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"I'm so tired of the pat on the back and 'you do it for me, and I'll do it for you' kind of thing." Barbara Ellis, an independent from Mesa, Ariz., who thinks a presidential candidate who is an outsider is best positioned to change the way Washington works.
STAT OF THE DAY:
When asked who is best positioned to change the way Washington works someone with Washington experience who can get things done or an outsider who can change how things are done 52 percent favor someone with experience, while 47 percent opt for an outsider, according to an AP-Yahoo News Survey.
Compiled by Ann Sanner
 Load-Date: February 1, 2008

 

End of Document
