

285 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008 on Thursday
The Associated Press
January 24, 2008 Thursday 11:45 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1386 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Obama renews criticism of Clinton's Iraq war vote ... Clinton defends husband's role in her campaign ... Huckabee criticizes Romney's business past ... Former president takes new role as wife's defender-in-chief, and not quietly ... Standing drops as Giuliani spends money, time in must-win Florida ... Edwards: Bush economic stimulus package one month too late ... Huckabee faces questions about donors to Arkansas fund
Obama raps Clinton on Iraq war vote
BEAUFORT, S.C. (AP) Democrat Barack Obama suggested Hillary Rodham Clinton cannot be trusted to make good judgments on national security and military matters, citing her Iraq war vote.
Accusing the New York senator of trying "to rewrite history," Obama said Clinton still contends that her 2002 vote authorizing military intervention in Iraq was "not really a vote for war."
"She cast her vote after failing to read the national intelligence estimates on Iraq," which raised doubts in some lawmakers' minds about the justification of ousting Saddam Hussein, Obama said at a discussion with armed service members Thursday in Beaufort, S.C. Obama, who was in the Illinois Senate at the time, publicly opposed the invasion.
"We need accountability in our leaders," he said. "You can't undo a vote for war just because the war stopped being popular."
Obama said voters "need to judge us on the judgments we've made and the lessons we've learned." Instead of saying her vote was wrong, Obama said, Clinton "has simply blamed the civilian and military leaders who carried out the policy she authorized."
Clinton has said her vote was intended to strengthen President Bush's hand in building international pressure against Hussein, not to approve a prompt invasion.
Clinton defends husband on stump
GREENVILLE, S.C. (AP) Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton, defending her husband's increasingly vocal role in her presidential effort, sidestepped questions about whether Bill Clinton's suggestion that Barack Obama had put a "hit job" on him was language befitting a former president.
"We're in a very heated campaign, and people are coming out and saying all kinds of things," Hillary Clinton said in an interview Wednesday. "I'm out there every day making a positive case for my candidacy. I have a lot of wonderful people, including my husband, who are out there making the case for me."
The former first lady spoke to The Associated Press before a speech here where she outlined ways to address U.S. economic challenges.
Addressing an audience at Furman University, Clinton chided President Bush for taking a hands-off approach to U.S. economic woes. Without naming him, she suggested Obama who has said he wouldn't be "an operating officer" as president might follow Bush's path.
Huckabee assails Romney's business past
FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. (AP) Republican Mike Huckabee criticized rival Mitt Romney's past as a venture capitalist Thursday, saying some workers lost their jobs as a result.
Romney founded Bain Capital, a firm that developed a reputation for turning around ailing companies and earned him millions of dollars. Asked about Romney's experience, Huckabee said the former Massachusetts governor's success came at the expense of workers.
"If that's the turnaround, a lot of Americans would not want to see their lives turned around like that," Huckabee told reporters before running with a group of supporters.
Romney defended the takeovers during a Fox News interview on Sunday: "We grew jobs quite dramatically in many settings. But oftentimes, when an enterprise is in real trouble, you have to try and cut back to save it."
Recent polls place Huckabee near the bottom of the Republican field in Florida, but he said he still hopes to finish at or near the top in Tuesday's primary.
Bill Clinton: Wife's 'defender-in-chief'
WASHINGTON (AP) It started with dismissive talk of a fairy tale and deteriorated into more of a nightmare.
As he campaigns for his wife's presidential run, Bill Clinton has been taking aim at Barack Obama and the media with increasing rancor, trading the roles of elder statesman and supportive spouse for that of attack dog.
Obama has joined in, going after the former president with increasingly heated criticism.
Bill Clinton, campaigning in South Carolina, complained Wednesday that Obama had put out a "hit job" on him. He didn't explain what that meant.
Leading political figures supporting both Hillary Rodham Clinton and Obama have complained that things have gotten out of hand. By Thursday, it was left to an ordinary voter to call for a time out.
Giuliani's Florida win appears in danger
DEERFIELD BEACH, Fla. (AP) Rudy Giuliani splurged on Florida, lavishing time and money on a high-risk gamble that the state would vault him to the Republican presidential nomination. But five days before his make-or-break primary, all that last year's national front-runner has to show for the love he's given the Sunshine State is a diminished standing.
In Florida, a new poll shows his rivals John McCain and Mitt Romney neck-and-neck for the lead, with 25 percent and 23 percent, respectively, while Giuliani and Mike Huckabee trail at 15 percent. More than one-fourth of the likely voters surveyed between Sunday and Tuesday 27 percent said they still may change their minds. The poll was sponsored by the St. Petersburg Times, The Miami Herald and Bay News 9.
Another survey, by Mason-Dixon and reported Thursday, showed Romney with 30 percent and McCain with 26 percent, while Giuliani had 18. Giuliani contended his message just needs a little more time to sink in.
As he told a few hundred people at a Boca Raton rally on Thursday, ahead of the evening GOP debate here: "I'm your candidate because I'll get it done. ... I'm the candidate that is good on all of these things, national security and economic security."
Edwards: Bush economic help a month late
SPARTANBURG, S.C. (AP) Democrat John Edwards said President Bush waited too long to offer an economic stimulus package.
"If we had a grown-up in the White House ... 30 days ago we'd have been doing something about this economic downturn," Edwards told about 200 people Thursday at a restaurant. "We'd already be on the edge of creating new jobs."
Edwards has consistently trailed Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama in polls here before Saturday's primary. He is hoping to gain ground with a focus on working-class families and earlier this week said the country was in a recession while pressing his economic plan.
The South Carolina native said he would offer this state's struggling economy at least $1.5 billion in relief and extend benefits to 9,000 long-term unemployed workers. Income limits and administration of the program would be left to states, Edwards' campaign said.
Huckabee faces questions about Arkansas fund
LITTLE ROCK (AP) Republican Mike Huckabee says he would not be bothered by the release of contributors' names to a private fund he used as Arkansas governor.
Huckabee has not disclosed donors to the fund, which he used to raise money for his official portrait and for a ceremony in honor of the state quarter. A 2001 state law requires officials to disclose donors of gifts received on behalf of the state.
He was asked Thursday after a rally in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., why the names were not released and if he would mind if they were made public.
"Fine with me if they do. I never had anything to do with it," he said. "The interesting question is why I've been out of office now for 13 months why is somebody just now even interested in this? You have to wonder what kind of story this is. If it's so important, how come somebody didn't ask this question while I was in office?"
THE DEMOCRATS
Hillary Rodham Clinton, Barack Obama and John Edwards campaign in South Carolina.
THE REPUBLICANS
Mitt Romney, Rudy Giuliani, John McCain and Mike Huckabee campaign in Florida before participating in a presidential debate in Boca Raton, Fla.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"When I was running, I didn't give a rip what anybody said about me. It's weird, you know, but if you love somebody and you think that they'd be good, it's harder." Bill Clinton at a campaign stop in Columbia, S.C.
STAT OF THE DAY:
On the economy, 34 percent of those questioned last month in an AP-Yahoo News survey trust Democrats more, compared with 22 percent who prefer Republicans.
Compiled by Ann Sanner
 Load-Date: January 25, 2008

 

End of Document
