

307 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008
The Associated Press
January 2, 2008 Wednesday 10:18 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1333 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Romney defends himself against McCain comments ... Giuliani wants to double number of troops under U.S. command in Afghanistan ... Obama cautions against electing 'same old folks' ... Edwards stresses his anti-corporate sentiments ... Clinton asks Iowans in closing pitch to vote for her because she is ready to be president ... McCain, at 71, says he has the endurance for the presidency ... N.H. Union Leader publishes a front-page anti-Romney editorial.
Romney focuses on McCain comments
BETTENDORF, Iowa (AP) Republican Mitt Romney defended himself against accusations by rival John McCain that he lacks foreign policy experience.
"If you want an expert in Pakistan, I guess we could go to the State Department and pick out somebody (who's) been at the Pakistan desk. But if you want a leader, and a person who has led in critical times and in critical ways, I think I fit the bill," Romney said.
Romney focused his remarks in Bettendorf almost entirely on McCain, wryly noting his return to the state by saying "Welcome to Iowa, senator."
Romney then repeated his recent criticism of the Arizona senator for voting against the Bush administration tax cuts and accused him of sponsoring an immigration bill that would allow illegal immigrants to remain in the country indefinitely.
Asked by reporters why he was singling out McCain rather than Mike Huckabee, Romney said with a laugh: "I figured you guys would talk to me about Mike Huckabee, so I took the chance to talk about John McCain."
Giuliani wants Afghanistan troop buildup
WOLFEBORO, N.H. (AP) Republican Rudy Giuliani said Wednesday he would immediately double the number of troops under U.S. command in Afghanistan, arguing it would increase the chances of capturing Osama bin Laden and stabilize the region.
"We need to bring a surge to Afghanistan and make it effective, right now," he said.
Surrounded by World War II memorabilia at Wolfeboro's Wright Museum, Giuliani said extra combat troops are needed to stabilize the region and solidify the gains made in Afghanistan following the United States-led invasion in 2001 and 2002.
Giuliani's comments come the same day a University of New Hampshire Survey Center poll conducted for CNN and WMUR suggests him losing ownership of his core issue fighting terrorism.
The United States has about 26,000 troops in Afghanistan. At a later stop in Somersworth, N.H., Giuliani clarified his comments, saying he was speaking about the number of U.S. troops under U.S. command, as opposed to those under international command.
Obama continues with message of change
DAVENPORT, Iowa (AP) Democrat Barack Obama said the stakes are too high for voters to "do the same old things with the same old folks."
The Illinois senator said some people have complained he may be inspiring, but he doesn't have enough Washington experience and that "we need to stew him and season him a little more, boil all the hope out of him so he sounds like everybody else."
Obama is in a tight three-way race in Iowa with Hillary Rodham Clinton and John Edwards.
Edwards rails against 'corporate greed'
FORT MADISON (AP) Democrat John Edwards hit his populist theme as hard as ever, railing against "corporate greed" in a series of stops in central and eastern Iowa.
Trade pacts such as the North America Free Trade agreement cost Americans millions of jobs, he said, a claim that economists dispute. Jobs move overseas "for the glorification of corporate profits," Edwards told a standing-room-only crowd here, his seventh stop of the day even though it began before noon.
The former North Carolina senator began the new year with a 36-hour bus tour of more than a dozen Iowa towns, stopping at cafes, offices and the homes of supporters. The blitz included three pre-dawn stops Wednesday.
Clinton to offer closing pitch to Iowans
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton will make her closing argument to Iowa voters Wednesday evening during a televised message in which she tells them to "take the first step" toward changing the direction of the country by voting for her at the caucuses.
"After all the town meetings, the pie and coffee, it all comes down to this: Who is ready to be president and ready to start solving the big challenges we face on Day One?" Clinton says in the two-minute appeal to be broadcast during evening news programs on the eve of the caucuses.
Voter questions McCain's stamina at 71
PEMBROKE, N.H. (AP) Republican John McCain said Wednesday he is feeling "very vigorous" in response to a voter's question about whether the 71-year-old has the stamina to endure a possible eight years as president.
"Eight years in the White House is a long time, and I'm wondering if you have the health and endurance to do eight years, because it's very demanding," one voter said.
McCain said candidates should not think in terms of eight years.
"I feel very vigorous," he said. "But the decision as to whether to run for re-election has to do with the circumstances of the time.
"You shouldn't run for eight years because then you think you have eight years to get these things done," he said, listing issues such as Social Security and illegal immigration.
The Arizona senator joked about his age later, when a reporter asked if he was afraid of not being able to match the momentum other candidates may have coming out of Thursday's Iowa caucus.
"I'm not fearful of anything. I'm too old to be fearful," he said, then quickly modified that statement. "I mean, I'm too young to be fearful."
NH's Union Leader criticizes Romney
MANCHESTER, N.H. (AP) New Hampshire's largest newspaper criticized Republican Mitt Romney for distorting information about his rival John McCain, the candidate that the paper has endorsed.
In a front-page editorial in The New Hampshire Union Leader, publisher Joseph McQuaid writes in support of McCain that "when the campaigning gets serious and the gloves come off, McCain sticks to the facts; Romney plays loose with them."
Romney is running ads that assail McCain's effort at comprehensive immigration reform, a subject that has dogged McCain on the campaign trail. The ad says McCain supports Social Security for illegal immigrants.
"That is patently and demonstrably false," the paper writes.
McCain and Romney are in a tight race with less than a week before voters cast ballots in the primary.
A Romney spokesman defended the ad, pointing to a failed 2006 vote that would have allowed illegal immigrants to collect Social Security benefits.
"The ad is accurate and entirely verifiable," Craig Stevens said.
Weather forecast for Des Moines, Iowa, on Thursday, the day of the caucuses:
Temperature: High of 33 degrees; Low of 21 degrees.
Conditions: Mostly sunny, with winds at 20 to 30 mph.
Expected turnout: About 120,000 to 150,000 people are expected to vote in the Democratic caucuses, while 80,000 to 90,000 are likely to participate in the GOP contest.
THE DEMOCRATS
Sens. Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York, Barack Obama of Illinois, Chris Dodd of Connecticut and Joe Biden of Delaware, as well as former North Carolina Sen. John Edwards and New Mexico Gov. Bill Richardson campaign in Iowa. Ohio Rep. Dennis Kucinich holds a rally in New Hampshire.
THE REPUBLICANS
Former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney and former Tennessee Sen. Fred Thompson talk to voters in Iowa. Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee also makes stops there before flying to Los Angeles to tape the "Tonight Show" with Jay Leno. Arizona Sen. John McCain campaigns in New Hampshire before attending rallies in Iowa. Former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani meets with supporters in New Hampshire.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"I'm not going to run his campaign, but I guess he's more focused on the caucus in L.A. rather than the caucus in Iowa." Republican Mitt Romney, on his rival Mike Huckabee who is heading to Los Angeles on the eve of the Iowa caucuses to appear on the "Tonight Show" with Jay Leno.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Seventy-one percent of Iowans voted in the 2004 presidential election, according to the Census Bureau.
 Load-Date: January 3, 2008

 

End of Document
