

321 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008
The Associated Press
December 20, 2007 Thursday 4:04 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 2110 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Tancredo to quit presidential race ... Huckabee defends record on clemencies ... Romney praises Bush, Iraq troop increase in bid for support of Iowa Republicans ... Giuliani talks baseball to explain his unconventional campaign travels ... Richardson focuses on Iraq in new ad, campaign stops in NH ... McCain appears at Boston campaign stop with Kissinger ... Paul tells NH audience he'd lift sanctions with Iran, pull Navy from its shores ... Biden unveils education plan ... Clinton tells Iowans she measures her success in public life by helping people ...
Tancredo to quit presidential race
DENVER (AP) Republican Rep. Tom Tancredo, whose forceful opposition to illegal immigration vaulted him to national prominence, plans to announce he is abandoning his long-shot bid for the presidency, a person close to Tancredo said Wednesday.
The five-term Colorado congressman planned to make the announcement at a news conference in Des Moines, Iowa, on Thursday, the person said, speaking on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak for Tancredo or his campaign.
Tancredo's campaign would only say he planned a "major announcement" Thursday.
Tancredo has consistently polled at the back of the nine-person GOP field. He has based his campaign on opposition to illegal immigration, a top issue in many areas of the country. He has run television ads that link lax border security to terrorist attacks, rape and other crimes.
Huckabee defends clemency record
WEST DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) Republican Mike Huckabee on Wednesday defended his handling of requests for clemency when he was Arkansas governor and in turn accused Mitt Romney of denying such requests to protect his political future.
Huckabee has surged into first place in Iowa and ahead of Romney, who had held a comfortable lead in the state for months. Since then, the two have engaged in an near-daily exchange of charges and countercharges as Romney seeks to recover. Romney, a former governor of Massachusetts, recently started running a television ad that accuses Huckabee of passing out pardons to hardened criminals while he was governor.
Opening his latest Iowa campaign swing on Wednesday, Huckabee defended his handling of requests for clemency.
"Many of the clemencies were 35-year-old single moms trying to get a job and raise a family and they couldn't get hired because we require background checks," he said. "They wrote a hot check when they were 17 or 18 years old. I think they were good decisions and I stand by them."
Turning the tables, Huckabee pointed to Romney's denial in Massachusetts of the request for pardon from an Iraq war veteran who was trying to become a police officer after his National Guard service. Anthony Circosta's offense was that, as a 13-year-old, he shot a friend in the arm with a BB gun.
"Here's a young man who made a mistake when he was 13," Huckabee said. "You have to decide whether we make a decision based on our political future or the future of a young man who was strong and went to war. The smart political thing is always deny all of them."
Romney aligns himself with Bush in Iowa
DAVENPORT, Iowa (AP) Republican Mitt Romney aligned himself squarely with President Bush and his national security policies Wednesday, reaching out to GOP loyalists who hold the president in high regard, back the Iraq war and could sway the high-stakes nomination race.
"I support our troops, and I support what our troops are doing. I also support our president. I believe that the president has acted in good faith and out of a desire to protect this country to do everything in his power to keep America safe," the GOP presidential candidate said. He spoke after touring the Army's Rock Island Arsenal near this eastern Iowa river city.
Romney defended Bush in Iowa a few days after rival Mike Huckabee criticized the Bush administration's efforts in a Foreign Affairs journal article, denouncing a go-it-alone "arrogant bunker mentality" and questioning decisions on Iraq. The former Arkansas governor says his comments have been misinterpreted.
Giuliani explains unconventional travels
KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) Republican Rudy Giuliani offered a baseball analogy Wednesday to explain his political geography.
Challenging tradition, the presidential hopeful is devoting more of his attention to the delegate-rich Feb. 5 states some two dozen including New York, California and New Jersey hold primaries and caucuses that day while spending limited time in the early voting states of Iowa and New Hampshire where he trails his rivals in polls.
On Wednesday, Giuliani traveled to points in Missouri, a Feb. 5 state that has gotten little campaign attention but offers 58 delegates, as many as Iowa and New Hampshire combined.
After meeting with supporters, he spoke to reporters about his strategy.
"A baseball game, you've got to play nine innings and whoever gets the most runs at the end of the nine innings wins," he said. "So here, you've got to play in 29 primaries. Nobody's going to win all of them, that's for sure. I think on the Republican or Democratic side, that has never happened in contested primaries with great candidates. They've never won every single primary."
"You recognize the reality that you aren't going to win all of them. You've got to win most of them, and most of them are coming on February 5," he said.
Richardson focused on Iraq in NH
HUDSON, N.H. (AP) Democrat Bill Richardson on Wednesday said the latest Senate vote to fund the Iraq war has strengthened his resolve to become president because the current administration and Congress "can't get anything done."
"Just last night the United States Senate gave the president $70 billion more to continue this war... without any restraint, without any timetable to reduce troops, basically a blank check," he told students at Alvirne High School. "This gives me more reason to want to be president the fact that the president and Congress can't get anything done."
The Senate on Tuesday approved $70 billion for U.S. military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan along with a massive $555 billion spending bill combining funding for 14 Cabinet departments. In condemning the vote, Richardson also criticized his rivals for the Democratic presidential nomination for skipping it.
Sens. Hillary Rodham Clinton, Barack Obama, Chris Dodd and Joe Biden did not vote for the war fund measure. Republican presidential candidate John McCain voted for it.
Richardson, the governor of New Mexico, has been emphasizing Iraq as he campaigns in New Hampshire, which holds the first primary Jan. 8. A recent poll by The Associated Press and the Pew Research Center showed that the Iraq war continued to be the top issue for likely Democratic voters in New Hampshire, though it was about even with health care among Democrats nationally.
Richardson's campaign began airing a new ad Wednesday in New Hampshire in which he takes rivals Clinton, Obama and John Edwards to task for saying they could not commit to removing all U.S. troops from Iraq by 2013.
    McCain campaigns with Kissinger
BOSTON (AP) Republican presidential hopeful John McCain said the United States should declare it would never torture anyone in its custody and close its military prison at Guantanamo Bay.
Speaking at an event with former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, the Arizona senator said tribunals should be set up for those still detained at Guantanamo.
While he has seen no evidence of detainee mistreatment, McCain, a former Vietnam prisoner of war who suffered mistreatment, said the prison is harming the United States' reputation in the world. In addition, the CIA's destruction of videotaped terror interrogations has led to the impression that the U.S. is torturing suspects, he said.
Kissinger, secretary of state for presidents Nixon and Ford, said McCain's experience as a prisoner of war helped forge his character.
"The senator had five years in solitary figuring out who he is and why he is serving his country," he said.
Paul says he'd lift sanctions on Iran
MANCHESTER, N.H. (AP) Republican presidential hopeful Ron Paul, who advocates the removal of U.S. troops from Iraq, said Wednesday he also would lift sanctions on Iran and order the Navy to pull back from its shores.
"People would breathe a sign of relief. I believe interest rates would not go up. I believe oil prices would probably drop," the Texas congressman told a campaign audience.
Paul said the Bush administration has been "looking for war with Iran." Despite White House claims, he said a recent intelligence report says the Iranians stopped working on a nuclear weapons program several years ago. Instead, he said the country has a right under international treaties to pursue a peaceful nuclear power program.
Paul gained notice in early campaign debates for advocating an end to the war in Iraq. While he polls in single digits in New Hampshire, he recently shattered a one-day campaign fundraising record when he collected $6.2 million in online donations.
His campaign plans a 30-minute television program Sunday in Iowa, where precinct caucuses will provide the first test of the presidential campaign on Jan. 3. The New Hampshire primary is Jan. 8.
Biden unveils education plan
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) Democrat Joe Biden unveiled an education plan Wednesday that would provide free preschool to every child and bonuses to teachers who work in poor neighborhoods.
The presidential candidate said the U.S. education system needs an overhaul because its students are lagging behind their peers in other countries. He cited recent test results from the Program for International Student Assessment that showed U.S. students' scores in math and science were lower than the average of the 30 countries involved in the study.
"But we've known this. ... We're not investing in our kids the way we should," Biden told The Associated Press in an interview.
Biden, a Delaware senator, estimated his plan would cost $30 billion annually. He would pay for it by reducing defense spending and not renewing tax cuts for the wealthy.
Biden's also supports incentives for districts to either lengthen the school year or the school day, and says he would overhaul the federal education accountability law known as No Child Left Behind. Critics say it has led to an overemphasis on standardized tests.
Clinton: We've become indifferent
INDEPENDENCE, Iowa (AP) Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton told an audience Wednesday that she measures her success in public life by helping people.
"That's really all I care about. That's what matters to me," Clinton said. "I want to see more of that in American politics. I think we've become very indifferent and even insensitive to the plight of so many of our fellow Americans."
The New York senator was continuing a five-day campaign blitz through Iowa, which holds its caucuses Jan. 3.
As she has been throughout the week, Clinton was introduced to the crowd by friends paying tribute to her warmth and generosity.
Clinton was endorsed Wednesday by the International Union of Painters and Allied Trades, her 11th major union endorsement. The union has more than 160,000 members and retirees who work as painters, drywall finishers, wallcoverers, sign makers and convention and show decorators.
Former Democratic National Committee national chairman Don Fowler also endorsed Clinton on Wednesday, lauding her experience while saying South Carolina has become a close race for the New York senator. Fowler's wife, Carol, chairs the state's Democratic Party.
THE DEMOCRATS
Sens. Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York, Joe Biden of Delaware and Chris Dodd of Connecticut talk to voters in Iowa.
Sen. Barack Obama of Illinois, New Mexico Gov. Bill Richardson and former North Carolina Sen. John Edwards campaign in New Hampshire.
THE REPUBLICANS
Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney and former Tennessee Sen. Fred Thompson campaign in Iowa.
Sen. John McCain of Arizona has an event in Boston before heading to New Hampshire to hold town hall meetings. Rep. Ron Paul of Texas also visits the early voting state.
Former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani makes several stops in Missouri.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"Somehow the discussion of the war has receded and some are saying it's being replaced by other issues like health care or education. I firmly disagree." New Mexico Gov. Bill Richardson, a Democratic presidential candidate, speaking about the Iraq war at a stop in New Hampshire.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Democrat Bill Clinton won Iowa with 586,353 votes in the 1992 presidential election. Republican George H.W. Bush garnered 504,891 votes, while independent Ross Perot got 253,468 votes.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: December 20, 2007

 

End of Document
