

336 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008
The Associated Press
December 5, 2007 Wednesday 3:18 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 2441 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Poll: GOP race in early states unsettled ... Dem rivals take on Clinton on Iran ... Another episode of illegal workers on Romney's lawn ... Thompson questions intelligence report ... Huckabee won't give views on Mormonism ... 130 black SC ministers back Obama ... Gingrich handicaps race ... Giuliani no longer heads firm ... Obama urges out-of-state students in Iowa to join caucus ... Biden eligible for public money.
AP-Pew Poll: GOP presidential candidates in early voting states struggle for supremacy
WASHINGTON (AP) No one Republican presidential candidate is a shoo-in in Iowa, New Hampshire and South Carolina, according to in-depth polling by The Associated Press and the nonpartisan Pew Research Center.
Across the three states, tight battles are being waged for voters' trust on Iraq, immigration and other key Republican issues and for control of pivotal groups including conservatives, white evangelicals and men. And it is Mitt Romney, not national front-runner Rudy Giuliani, who is ahead in New Hampshire and fighting for the lead in Iowa and South Carolina three very different races. Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee has been surging lately in Iowa.
Underscoring the tumult so far, only 57 percent of Republicans in Iowa say they strongly support their favorite candidate. That figure is even lower in New Hampshire, 49 percent, and South Carolina, 44 percent, in an indication that many have yet to make up their minds for good.
As for Giuliani, the former New York mayor is seen as the most electable candidate by Iowa and South Carolina Republicans and is tied with Romney in that category in New Hampshire. However, solid majorities in each state say that is less important than finding a candidate they agree with on the issues.
Here's a look at how the Republican presidential race is shaping up in the three early states, according to an AP-Pew poll Tuesday:
 In Iowa, where the Jan. 3 caucuses will provide the nation's first votes, Mitt Romney has 25 percent support among Republicans, Mike Huckabee 24 percent, Rudy Giuliani 14 percent and Fred Thompson 12 percent.
 In New Hampshire, Romney has 37 percent, Giuliani 19 percent and John McCain 15 percent. The primary is Jan. 8.
 In South Carolina, where the poll shows voters are less focused on the race, Romney and Giuliani have 19 percent each, Thompson 18 percent, McCain 13 percent and Huckabee 10 percent. Republicans there vote Jan. 19.
Democratic rivals rap Clinton anew on Iran vote in radio debate in Iowa
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) Democratic rivals assailed front-runner Hillary Rodham Clinton Tuesday for a vote against Iran that they portrayed as misguided and dangerous in light of a new intelligence report that says the Iranians stopped pursuing a nuclear weapon years ago.
One month before Iowa's leadoff caucuses in a debate broadcast only on radio the presidential candidates stood together in welcoming the report's assessment and criticizing President Bush's assertion that "nothing's changed" because of it. They divided on the three-month-old Senate vote to designate Iran's Revolutionary Guard a terrorist organization a resolution that only Clinton supported among the Democratic candidates. She said her vote was meant to encourage diplomacy, but several of her foes were having none of that and John Edwards said it sounded like war.
Broadcast on NPR, the debate was limited to three subjects: Iran, China and immigration. The Democrats, unlike the campaign's Republican contenders, proposed no drastic crackdown on illegal immigrants. On China, they said more should be done to put U.S. companies on equal footing with Chinese imports, but again they proposed no radical new remedies.
Iowa is scheduled to hold the first presidential nominating contest during caucuses on Jan. 3. While Clinton is the clear front-runner in national polls, Iowa is a more heated contest and her Iranian vote has been an issue with the state's voters.
Another episode of illegal workers on Romney's lawn
MEREDITH, N.H. (AP) Republican Mitt Romney, ridiculed by rival Rudy Giuliani for employing illegal immigrants at his "sanctuary mansion," said Tuesday he had fired the landscaper for his suburban Boston home after learning for a second time about undocumented workers laboring on the property.
Romney said in a statement he had given the Community Lawn Service of Chelsea, Mass., "a second chance with very specific conditions. They were instructed to make sure people working for the company were of legal status." He termed the recurrence "disappointing and inexcusable."
The Boston Globe said it observed at least two illegal workers on Romney's property, raking leaves from the grass and debris from the tennis court. One said he had paid $7,000 to a smuggler to escort him across the desert into Arizona; the other said he had come to the country with a student visa that has since expired. This was the morning after a debate in St. Petersburg, Fla., last week, when Romney chastised Giuliani for continuing sanctuary status for New York while he served as the city's mayor. That prompted Giuliani to accuse Romney of owning a "sanctuary mansion" after the discovery last year that his landscaper employed illegal workers.
Thompson, McCain react to new intelligence report on Iran
GREER, S.C. (AP) Republican presidential candidate Fred Thompson said Tuesday he's skeptical of a new report that Iran halted its nuclear weapons program four years ago and questioned the United States' ability to gather intelligence.
"I hope that they are accurate with this assessment, but right now, I don't have the confidence in our own intelligence capabilities to make that assessment," the former Tennessee senator said after speaking to dozens of supporters at a gun shop in this early voting state. "One thing that crosses my mind is that this is information that the Iranians have put out, that they want us to kind of relax a little bit."
The new national intelligence estimate found that Iran stopped its development of a nuclear bomb in the fall of 2003, largely because of international scrutiny and pressure. The finding is in stark contrast to the comparable intelligence estimate two years ago, when U.S. agencies believed Tehran was determined to develop a nuclear weapons capability.
Republican presidential hopeful John McCain said the report highlights the need to expand U.S. intelligence capabilities.
"I don't know any of the inside details ... but I do know this means we should examine what brought us to the previous conclusion," McCain told workers at a wholesale grocery distributor in Keene, N.H. "The next step is to figure out what changed between 2005 and 2007."
Human intelligence lags far behind satellite and other technology-based intelligence, and McCain said that in some countries, U.S. intelligence efforts amount to "sitting in the embassy waiting for someone to come in and give them information."
Huckabee declines to say what he thinks about Mormonism, the religion of rival Romney
NEWTON, Iowa (AP) Republican presidential candidate Mike Huckabee, a one-time Southern Baptist preacher who's seen his standing in Iowa surge with Christian evangelicals' support, wouldn't say Tuesday whether he thought Mormonism rival Mitt Romney's religion was a cult.
"I'm just not going to go off into evaluating other people's doctrines and faiths. I think that is absolutely not a role for a president," the former Arkansas governor said during a week in which religion has become an important issue in the Republican presidential race, particularly in Iowa.
In recent weeks, Huckabee has moved from the back of the GOP pack in Iowa to challenge longtime leader Romney, who would be the first Mormon president. The race is now a dead heat in the state, with the Iowa caucuses the first contest in the nomination fight set for Jan. 3. Christian evangelicals, by many estimates, make up anywhere from 30 percent to 50 percent of Republicans who will attend the caucuses.
More than 60 Iowa pastors endorsed Huckabee at a news conference Tuesday. Among those giving their support were best-selling author Tim LaHaye of "Left Behind" fame and his wife, Beverly. Also endorsing him was Chuck Hurley, an influential Iowa conservative who had backed Kansas Sen. Sam Brownback, a conservative who quit the race in October.
Obama endorsed by dozens of black SC ministers
CHARLESTON, S.C. (AP) Democratic presidential candidate Barack Obama picked up the endorsements of almost 130 black South Carolina ministers Tuesday in this early voting state where he runs even with rival Hillary Rodham Clinton for the crucial black vote.
Noted leaders of the civil rights movement including the Rev. Joseph Lowery and the Rev. C.T. Vivian attended the announcement.
"We believe Barack Obama will not use his religion as a crutch or a hammer but will draw on the moral imperatives of our faith and apply them to the political, social and economic problems of our country," said Lowery, a co-founder of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference.
A poll this week by The Associated Press and the nonpartisan Pew Research Center found Clinton and Obama even in support from black voters, which comprise about half of the Democratic primary voters in South Carolina.
Clinton announced the endorsements of 88 black ministers last week in upstate South Carolina.
Gingrich handicaps race
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) Handicapping the 2008 presidential contests from the sidelines, former House Speaker Newt Gingrich sees "amazingly wide open" races for both Democrats and Republicans in the coming early contests and potential turmoil for Republicans.
The Georgia Republican raised the possibility that former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee could win the Jan. 3 Iowa GOP caucuses, Sen. John McCain the Jan. 8 New Hampshire primary, former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney the Jan. 15 Michigan primary and former Tennessee Sen. Fred Thompson the Jan. 19 GOP South Carolina primary.
If that happened, former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani "would have a lot riding on Florida," where Republicans vote Jan. 29, Gingrich said Tuesday in an interview with The Associated Press.
"Huckabee has a huge upside," Gingrich said. "That's what you see now. If he wins by one vote here, it's a huge upset."
On the Democratic side, Gingrich sees former North Carolina Sen. John Edwards as the prime beneficiary in Iowa of the tight contest between Sens. Hillary Clinton of New York and Barrack Obama of Illinois, now deemed a statistical dead heat.
Edwards, third in the polls, could move past both Clinton and Obama under caucus rules that allow participants to shift their votes if their own candidates, lower in the pack, don't get at least 15 percent of the vote.
Giuliani no longer heads the Giuliani Partners consulting firm linked to Qatar
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) Republican presidential hopeful Rudy Giuliani has stepped down as head of his consulting firm, Giuliani Partners, after months of refusing to disclose the firm's clients or the role he played.
Giuliani has been replaced as chairman by Peter Powers, a longtime friend and former aide, Giuliani Partners spokeswoman Sunny Mindel said Tuesday. The change was reported by The Wall Street Journal earlier Tuesday, and Mindel noted news stories over recent months saying Giuliani was handing control to Powers.
The firm, started by the former New York mayor when he left City Hall, earned Giuliani around $4 million last year. The spokeswoman said he would retain his equity stake in the company.
Giuliani aides said he has not been involved in day-to-day operations of the firm since last spring. Yet he never formally announced he had relinquished his titles, despite being asked repeatedly about it. The firm's Web site listed him as chairman as recently as last month.
Obama urges students from out of state to join caucus
GRINNELL, Iowa (AP) Despite criticism from a few rivals, Sen. Barack Obama on Tuesday kept pressing out-of-state students attending college in Iowa to return over their holiday break and vote in the Democratic caucus on Jan. 3.
"Don't listen to them, " he said of the critics. "Don't let somebody tell you that you are not part of this process because your future is at stake, and America's future is at stake."
He told a packed hall at Grinnell College that students who attend school in the state have established residency by doing so and are able to take part in the caucuses. The Illinois senator is polling strongly among young people in Iowa and could gain from coeds willing to cut short their holiday and take part in the caucus.
Democratic rivals are divided over whether Obama is playing by the spirit of the rules. Sens. Hillary Rodham Clinton and Chris Dodd have criticized the effort, with Dodd saying, "That may be the way politics is played in Chicago, but not in Iowa." John Edwards said the rules are "fairly liberal" when it comes to out-of-state students caucusing.
Biden eligible for presidential matching funds
WASHINGTON (AP) Democratic presidential candidate Joe Biden became eligible Tuesday for federal matching money to help finance his back-of-the-pack campaign.
The Federal Election Commission announced that Biden met the minimum requirement to receive public money from the Presidential Public Funding Program, a fund financed by taxpayers who set aside $3 in their tax returns.
Biden, a veteran senator from Delaware, has been lagging in fundraising and in national and state polls far behind pack leaders Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama. As of Sept. 30, he had raised $6.2 million.
The presidential fund matches the first $250 of each individual primary contribution to an eligible candidate. To accept the money, candidates must agree to an overall spending limit of about $50 million and must meet spending thresholds in individuals states as well.
Biden joins John Edwards and Chris Dodd as the only three Democrats to be declared eligible for matching funds so far. Republican presidential candidates John McCain and Tom Tancredo have also been declared eligible for public funds.
THE DEMOCRATS
All the candidates participated in an afternoon debate in Iowa, except for Bill Richardson who missed the debate to attend a memorial service for a Korean war soldier.
THE REPUBLICANS
Mitt Romney and John McCain talk to voters in New Hampshire.
Mike Huckabee campaigns in Iowa.
Fred Thompson makes stops in South Carolina.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"It varies from day to day. I'm listening to everybody." Deb Bartholoma, a 53-year-old Republican from Timmonsville, S.C., on whom she supports in the GOP presidential race.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Virginia has produced eight presidents, the most of any state.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: December 5, 2007

 

End of Document
