

344 Days to the Election: A look at the race for 2008
The Associated Press
November 26, 2007 Monday 10:31 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 869 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
McCain sees progress, problems in Iraq ... Giuliani wants U.S. to promote benefits abroad ... Edwards touts record as trial lawyer ... Obama focuses on his time away from Washington ... New Hampshire's first lady endorses Clinton
McCain guarded in Iraq assessment, sees his war stance as distinctive in campaign
WASHINGTON (AP) Sen. John McCain, back from a Thanksgiving visit to Iraq, said Monday there are signs of progress though the country remains mired in corruption and U.S. commanders anticipate increased violence from a desperate al-Qaida.
The Republican presidential candidate said Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki "was more upbeat than I've seen him in the past." Still, McCain said he and other members of a congressional delegation made it clear that al-Maliki needed to show political advances.
McCain had been a vocal critic of former Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld's strategy in Iraq and had called for the United States to increase the number of troops in Iraq. Earlier this year, following Rumsfeld's resignation, the Bush administration did boost its military presence, and violence has been reported to have decreased somewhat.
In a new ad airing in New Hampshire, McCain paints himself as a reformer who has taken on special interests and his own Republican president.
GIULIANI-FOREIGN POLICY
Giuliani calls for State Department that sells U.S., benefits abroad
BEDFORD, N.H. (AP) Republican Rudy Giuliani said Monday the reputation of the United States has suffered globally not so much because of arrogant actions but for lack of salesmanship about benefits of democracy.
If he is elected president, he said, he would seek ambassadors who would work hard to sell U.S. strengths to foreigners, not just explain those distant nations to Washington.
Giuliani, who is making a late push in the first primary state, also rekindled a dispute with rival Mitt Romney, accusing the former governor of neighboring Massachusetts of presiding over a crime surge while in office.
(AP Photos NHCK106-1126070912, NHCK105-1126070912, NHCK102-1126070851, NHCK101-1126070952)
EDWARDS-LAWYER
Edwards turns to lawyer record in presidential bid, says he'll give the establishment grief
BOW, N.H. (AP) Democrat John Edwards says his experience as a trial lawyer makes him the presidential contender best able to give voters hope and to give the establishment grief.
Edwards, a former senator from North Carolina, has focused his campaign on pledges to change a government system he says is rigged against most voters.
"While you shop (for candidates), I hope you will think about two key things: Who can you trust to tell you the truth about what's wrong in Washington, and who can you trust to fight like hell to make it right?" Edwards said during a town hall-style meeting.
Edwards has separate ads airing in South Carolina and Iowa that focus on what he calls 'corrupt' Washington.
OBAMA-EXPERIENCE
Obama touts his experience before he reached Washington
LITTLETON, N.H. (AP) The nation needs a president who is more a stranger than an insider when it comes to the capital's way of doing business, Barack Obama said Monday, portraying his relatively modest experience in Washington as an asset.
"We don't need somebody who can play the game better," the Illinois senator told about 600 people in a high school gym in this northern New Hampshire town. "We need somebody to put an end to the game plan."
Obama seemed to be directing his comments at New York Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton, who often suggests that her husband's administration gave her valuable experience in addition to her time in the Senate. Clinton, also campaigning in New Hampshire Monday, leads in polls of likely Democratic voters, but Obama is making a push in the first primary state. TV talk-show host Oprah Winfrey will campaign with him here and in Iowa next month.
(NHRB101-1126071021, NHRB103-1126071047, NHRB105-1126071121, NHRB106-1126070930, NHRB108-1126071022)
CLINTON-ENDORSEMENT
New Hampshire's first lady backs Clinton
CONCORD, N.H. (AP) Dr. Susan Lynch, a pediatrician who is married to New Hampshire's Democratic governor, endorsed Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton for president Monday.
THE DEMOCRATS
Sen. Barack Obama of Illinois met with undeclared voters in New Hampshire. Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York attends a round-table discussion of health care and a potluck dinner in the state. John Edwards talks to New Hampshire teachers in between several stops there. Rep. Dennis Kucinich also has scheduled events.
Sen. Chris Dodd of Connecticut holds a round-table discussions on women's issues in Cedar Rapids, Iowa. New Mexico Gov. Bill Richardson and Delaware Sen. Joe Biden also campaign in the state.
THE REPUBLICANS
Arizona Sen. John McCain and Texas Rep. Ron Paul make stops in South Carolina.
Mike Huckabee attends a fundraiser in Austin, Texas.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"I'm ahead of any Republican candidate for president either 23-0 or 15-0. That's almost a Patriots score." Rudy Giuliani, alluding to New England's undefeated football team.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Voter registration for the 2004 presidential election was 142 million people, an increase of 12.5 million since the 2000 election. (Census Bureau)
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: November 27, 2007

 

End of Document
