

A look at economic developments around the globe
The Associated Press
September 30, 2009 Wednesday 05:58 PM GMT

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1287 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at economic developments and activity in major stock markets around the world Wednesday:
ISTANBUL, Turkey Likely losses from the financial crisis in the three years to 2010 have been reduced by $600 billion to $3.4 trillion as the world economy grows faster than previously expected, the International Monetary Fund said.
The organization warned, however, that the impetus for significant financial reforms risked being lost if the improving situation leads to complacency.
In its half-yearly Global Financial Stability Report, the fund said concerted efforts by governments and central banks to deal with the crisis and fledgling signs of a global economic recovery have helped limit the losses.
BEIJING China announced curbs on surging investment in steelmaking, cement and other industries, warning that chaotic overexpansion was raising the danger of job losses and trouble for banks.
Business groups and economists have warned that Beijing's huge stimulus might fuel a dangerous boom and bust. The government said in August it would rein in investment in a range of industries but gave no details until now.
Under the order, new aluminum production projects are banned for three years and regulators will limit spending on factories to make steel, cement, glass, polysilicon used in solar panels and wind power equipment.
Beijing appeared to be trying to fine-tune measures to keep China's recovery going by ensuring adequate supplies of industrial goods while preventing a glut that could set off price wars, hurting financially weak producers.
Separately, a survey showed China's manufacturing expanded in September for a sixth month and employment rose at its fastest rate in two years, indicating a recovery in the world's third-largest economy is on track.
In Asian trading, Japan's Nikkei 225 stock average closed up 0.3 percent, while Hong Kong's Hang Seng shed 0.3 percent. South Korea's Kospi lost 1 percent, Australia's market slipped 0.2 percent, Singapore lost 0.4 percent. Taiwan's index gained 1.1 percent and China's Shanghai index rose 0.9 percent.
KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia The chairman of Wal-Mart Stores Inc. warned the global economic recovery will likely be lethargic, even as the retailing behemoth sees great growth potential in China and India.
"The world recovery is going to be led by Asia although it's going to be very challenging. I think this recovery is going to be a slow one," Robson Walton told a global CEO business conference here.
Walton said "sales have been tough" for Wal-Mart, the world's biggest retailer, even though it was benefiting from the economic downturn as more people shop at discounters for bargains including over-the-counter drugs and eat-at-home food.
BRUSSELS Yearly inflation in the 16 nations that use the euro slipped 0.3 percent in September after falling 0.2 percent in August, according to the EU statistics agency Eurostat.
Eurozone inflation has fallen for four straight months as energy costs plunged from record highs in July 2008. It hit an all-time low at minus 0.7 percent in July.
TOKYO Japan's factory output rose for the sixth straight month in August as stimulus measures around the world spurred global demand for the nation's exports.
Industrial production in the world's second largest economy increased 1.8 percent from July and "continues to show an upward movement," the government said Wednesday.
It represents the first time production has expanded uninterrupted for half a year since October 1996-March 1997.
BERLIN German unemployment declined 8 percent in September from 8.3 percent in August, the Federal Labor Agency said.
Frank-Juergen Weise, head of the Federal Labor Agency, said the usual upturn in employment following the summer vacation was the reason and the decline was not evidence of a turnaround in employment in Europe's biggest economy.
Separately, the Finance Ministry revised its 2009 budget deficit projection, saying it would be 3.7 percent of GDP rather than 3.9 percent previously forecast.
In European markets, Germany's DAX closed down 0.7 percent, while Britain's FTSE 100 and France's CAC-40 each lost 0.5 percent.
PARIS France said its budget deficit will grow to a record this year and next as the global recession causes tax receipts to shrivel and a government stimulus package boosts spending.
The budget gap is expected to widen to 8.2 percent of gross domestic product in 2009, from 3.4 percent last year, French Budget Minister Eric Woerth said. In 2010, the budget shortfall will grow to 8.5 percent of GDP.
Accounts will remain in the red for the forseeable future, underlying the challenges for France's second largest economy as it turns from crisis management to trying to support the country's fragile economic recovery.
Although France plans to start reducing its deficit after 2010, it is still forecasting a budget shortfall of 5 percent of GDP in 2013.
LONDON Britain's five biggest banks have agreed to curb bonuses as agreed upon at the Group of 20 nations meeting in Pittsburgh and called for other financial institutions to follow suit, Treasury chief Alistair Darling said.
TOKYO Japan needs major reforms in taxation, healthcare and employment to sustain recovery from recession and foster long-term growth, said a report from the Paris-based Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
The country is aging rapidly, and health care costs are rising. Public debt will likely hit record levels next year. Domestic demand remains lackluster amid job and wage cuts. Deflation is accelerating. And greenhouse emissions have climbed even as the country vows to cut levels by 25 percent by 2020.
Japan's heavy reliance on exports, which drove economic expansion for five years through 2007, backfired in the aftermath of last year's global financial crisis.
The OECD estimates Japan's gross domestic product will shrink 6 percent in 2009, then edge up 0.9 percent in 2010.
SEOUL, South Korea South Korea's president cautioned that the world economy could worsen if massive stimulus efforts put in place to deal with the global financial crisis are withdrawn too soon.
BRUSSELS European Union finance ministers will hammer out a new financial oversight framework for Europe during a two-day meeting Thursday and Friday in Goteborg, Sweden.
EU ministers will also start mapping out how they should start withdrawing economic stimulus packages that are helping to pull Europe out of the worst recession since the 1930s.
RIGA, Latvia Retail trade in Latvia dropped 30.3 percent in August compared with the same month a year ago, the Baltic nation's statistics agency said.
Latvians have drastically cut back on shopping as more people lose jobs or see their salaries slashed.
ROME Climate change will hurt agriculture and hit developing nations hardest, leading to unreliable food production and higher prices, a U.N. agency warned.
The Food and Agriculture Organization said climate change may cut into potential agricultural productivity in developing countries and push food prices moderately up until 2050. After that, prices will rise more significantly in line with further increases in temperatures.
ROME Italian Premier Silvio Berlusconi said his government is willing to consider renewing incentives for the auto industry at the end of the year if necessary.
Fiat and Chrysler CEO Sergio Marchionne has said that dropping the incentives, which have helped the auto industry through the crisis, would be disastrous for automakers.
WARSAW, Poland Poland's central bank left its key interest rate unchanged at 3.5 percent, keeping the cost of borrowing at a 19-year low.
DUBLIN Ireland's unemployment rate held steady at 12.6 percent in September following 20 straight months of rapid rises, the government said.
 Load-Date: October 1, 2009

 

End of Document
