

A look at the quesions swirling around the 1981 shooting of John Paul II
The Associated Press
January 13, 2006 Friday 1:23 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 587 words
Byline: By FRANCES D'EMILIO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ROME 
Body




Historians, justice officials and admirers of Pope John Paul II have long had questions about the May 13, 1981, assassination attempt against him during some of the tensest years of the Cold War, particularly if the attack resulted from a broader conspiracy.
Some have voiced hope that the early release Thursday from an Istanbul prison of convicted gunma Mehmet Ali Agca will help shed light on lingering questions.
Here, in question and answer form, is a look at some of those questions and prospects that they might be answered:
Q: Can Agca now reveal all he knows about the slaying attempt?
A: Agca's track record on providing a consistent, impartial, credible version of the truth isn't very good. He kept company before the shooting with the Gray Wolves, a right-wing militant group in Turkey. While being investigated in Italy for the attempt on the life of the pontiff, Agca contradicted himself many times and declared himself to be Jesus Christ.
In the words of Rosario Priore, the Italian magistrate who in 1986 failed to convince a jury in Rome that Bulgaria and the KGB conspired to kill the Polish-born pope, Agca now "is potentially freer to tell the truth." But Agca also "could be, in some sense, attracted by persons who could manipulate him," Priore cautioned in an interview Thursday with AP Television News.
Q. What about allegations that Bulgarian authorities, then in the Soviet orbit, or the KGB, worried about the pope's championing of the Polish independent labor movement Solidarity, and conspired to try to kill the pope?
A. That question has frustrated both Italian prosecutors and juries. Agca suggested that Bulgaria and the Soviet intelligence service were behind the attack, but later backed off that.
Italian juries, in the so-called 1985-86 "Bulgarian connection" trial, and then again in a 1987 appeals trial, ruled that there was not enough evidence to convict the three Bulgarians and three Turks implicated by Agca's testimony.
Q. Forget elaborate theories for a moment. Could Agca had acted alone?
A. Minutes after he was arrested for the shooting that gravely wounded John Paul, Agca did say he had acted alone.
But he also identified a man seen, in a photo, fleeing from the square with a gun, as a Bulgarian accomplice. Later he identified the man as a Turk. The Turk was among those acquitted in the pope plot trial.
On the 10th anniversary of the shooting, Agca, in a letter from his Italian prison cell, renewed his allegations that the Bulgarian secret services, backed by the Soviets, ordered the shooting.
In a 2005 interview with a Rome daily, Agca alleged that Vatican prelates helped him carry out the shooting, a claim quickly dismissed by a prelate who helped organize John Paul's travels.
Q. Did other Western countries, Cold War rivals to the Soviets, ever gather evidence of a Soviet-bloc plot?
A. An Italian magistrate who had probed the shooting, Ferdinando Imposimato, claimed several years ago that U.S. and French authorities withheld evidence of a Soviet link to the shooting out of concern about increasing Cold War tensions.
Q. Can we gain clues to what happened from the words of the John Paul, who met privately with Agca in prison to pardon him?
A. They don't shed much light. In a visit in 2002 to Bulgaria, he said that he never believed there was a Bulgarian connection. But in his book "Memory and Identity: Conversations Between Millenniums," the pope said of his attacker and the shooting: "someone else planned it, someone else commissioned it."
John Paul died in 2005.
 Load-Date: January 13, 2006

 

End of Document
