

A look at the Gaza Strip and the factional fighting between Hamas and Fatah
The Associated Press
May 16, 2007 Wednesday 7:11 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 375 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Questions and answers about the Gaza Strip and the factional fighting there:
Q: Where is the Gaza Strip, how big is it, and how many people live there?
A. The Gaza Strip lies on the Mediterranean coast, with Israel on two sides and Egypt on the other. The territory is 25 miles long and 6 to 9 miles wide. About 1.3 million Palestinians live there, making it one of the most crowded territories on Earth.
Q. Who are the opposing forces in the factional fighting?
A. The moderate Fatah movement, the traditional ruler, is on one side and controls most of the Palestinian security forces. It is clashing with the militia set up by the Islamic hard-liners of the Hamas movement, which won an election and took power a year ago. Palestinian militants also have joined the fight.
Q. What are the main differences between Fatah and Hamas?
A. Fatah, led for decades by the late Yasser Arafat, is a largely secular movement that carried out hundreds of attacks on Israel before signing a partial peace accord in 1993 and setting up an autonomous administration in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Hamas is a fundamentalist Islamic movement that does not accept a Jewish state in the Middle East. Fatah has a reputation for corruption and nepotism, one of the main reasons for its election loss to Hamas, which presents itself as a clean-governing alternative.
Q. How will the factional fighting affect diplomatic efforts to bring peace between the Palestinians and Israel?
A. It is unlikely any progress can be made as long as large-scale fighting continues. The Palestinians will be preoccupied with their internal troubles, and Israel will be hesitant to negotiate with leaders who do not have control of their people.
Q. Are the factions equipped for a long war?
A. Both sides are heavily armed, drawing on weapon stocks replenished over the years through large-scale smuggling across the Egyptian border.
Q. How will the fighting affect the residents of Gaza?
A. If the fighting continues, it could deteriorate into an all-out civil war and plunge the impoverished territory into extreme economic disarray. If a cease-fire is imposed and order is restored, aid and diplomatic efforts could be resumed but only if the warring factions make a real peace and work together.
 Load-Date: May 17, 2007

 

End of Document
