

A look at the 4 suspects in the JFK airport plot
The Associated Press
June 5, 2007 Tuesday 6:52 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 455 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Key figures in the alleged plot to blow up New York's John F. Kennedy International Airport:
 RUSSELL DEFREITAS: The accused mastermind of the alleged plot, Defreitas, 63, is a retired air cargo employee at John F. Kennedy International Airport. A U.S. citizen native to Guyana, he immigrated to the U.S. more than 30 years ago, but he told a federal informant that his feelings of disgust toward his adopted homeland had lingered for years.
Authorities said that Defreitas made four reconnaissance missions to the New York airport with the federal informant, and federal agents recorded each one on audio and video. Investigators said Defreitas and suspect Kareem Ibrahim visited a compound belonging to the Jamaat al Muslimeen, a radical Muslim group based in Trinidad.
 ABDUL KADIR: A former opposition legislator in Guyana's Parliament until last year, Kadir is a Shiite Muslim who also served as mayor in Linden, a small city south of Georgetown, the Guyanese capital. The 55-year-old also worked for years as a civil engineer in Guyana's state-owned bauxite company before leaving to set up his own building contractor business.
Guyanese authorities said that Kadir, who is a cleric, had studied Islam in Iran in the 1990s. He was a friend and associate of an Iranian cleric, Muhammad Hassan Abrahemi, who was abducted, shot to death and left in a sand pit east of Georgetown in 2004. Kadir's wife said her husband was traveling to Venezuela to pick up a travel visa to attend an Islamic religious conference in Iran when he was arrested in connection with the alleged plot.
 ABDEL NUR: A Guyanese Muslim originally named Compton Eversley, met with the leader of radical Islamic group Jamaat al Muslimeen to seek support for the alleged terrorist plot, authorities said. Nur said Yasin Abu Bakr, Jamaat al Muslimeen's leader, suggested during a meeting in Trinidad that he return later with others involved "to discuss the plan in detail," according to court documents.
Nur, who is in his late 50s, worked odd jobs for a foreign exchange office, according to an employee of a rooming house where Nur lived in a low-income area of the Guyanese capital. He was deported from the United States in the late 1980s and often called Americans "oppressors," acquaintances said.
 KAREEM IBRAHIM: The 56-year-old Trinidadian was identified by the Trinidad Express newspaper as an Islamic cleric at a Shia mosque. Ibrahim was arrested on June 1 in a cane farming town about 20 miles away from Trinidad's capital, Port-of-Spain. He and Kadir are fighting extradition to the United States.
Ibrahim, also known as "Amir Kareem," and Defreitas together visited a compound belonging to the Jamaat al Muslimeen in Trinidad, according to investigators.
 Load-Date: June 6, 2007

 

End of Document
