

A look at details of the U.N. Security Council resolution agreed to by the U.S. and France
The Associated Press
August 5, 2006 Saturday 11:34 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 460 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at key elements of the draft resolution circulated to the U.N. Security Council on Saturday.
HALT TO FIGHTING:
 The resolution's central demand is for "a full cessation of hostilities" under which Hezbollah must stop all attacks, and Israel must stop all offensive attacks. That's a victory for Israel because its military is not prohibited from defensive operations, a term that can be interpreted broadly.
 Lebanon has indicated it opposes that stipulation because the resolution includes no timetable for Israel to withdraw thousands of troops from southern Lebanon, an area that has been under Hezbollah control for several years.
CONDITIONS FOR PEACE:
 The document charts a detailed path for the two sides to follow to achieve a lasting peace. It envisions a second resolution in a week or two that would authorize an international military force for the Israel-Lebanon frontier.
 Those principles include the creation of a large buffer zone in southern Lebanon free of both Israeli troops and Hezbollah militants, monitored by the Lebanese army and international peacekeepers.
 Hezbollah must be disarmed and Lebanon's borders must be solidified, especially in the disputed Chebaa Farms area, occupied by Israel since 1967.
 An arms embargo would block any entity in Lebanon except the national government from obtaining weapons from abroad. That's aimed at blocking the sale or supply of arms to Hezbollah from Iran and Syria, which are believed to be the militia's main backers.
WHAT'S MISSING:
 The text ignores several Lebanese demands: setting a timetable for an Israeli withdrawal from south Lebanon; demanding Israel halt all attacks, not just offensive operations; and putting the disputed Chebaa Farms area under U.N. control. It also does not order the immediate lifting of a blockade imposed by Israel after the fighting began.
 While the draft seeks the "unconditional release" of the two Israeli soldiers captured by Hezbollah, it is weaker on Lebanese prisoners held by Israel. It only encourages efforts "aimed at settling the issue" of those prisoners. Lebanon had wanted those prisoners released, or for the U.N. to arrange a prisoner swap.
WHAT'S NEXT:
 The full Security Council will negotiate details of the draft. Once that happens, the foreign ministers of the 15 council nations will convene in New York to approve the draft.
 U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan has a week to report back to the council on the implementation of the resolution.
 Annan then has a month to report back on efforts to get Israel and Lebanon to agree to the conditions for a lasting peace. Once they're onboard, the council would then approve a robust international peacekeeping force to help the Lebanese government gain full control over the south of the country.
 Load-Date: August 6, 2006

 

End of Document
