

A package of business news briefs from the Caribbean
The Associated Press
March 15, 2007 Thursday 10:27 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1536 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: Haitian president seeks development ideas from neighbor
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) Haitian President Rene Preval looked for ways to bolster the struggling economy of his desperately poor country during a recent visit to a Dominican resort and power plant.
The Haitian president rode in a golf cart around parts of the PuntaCana Resort & Club's golf courses and beaches on Wednesday, a sharp contrast to the poverty found on much of Hispaniola, the Caribbean island shared by Haiti and the Dominican Republic.
Preval discussed the role of tourism in developing the economy during a private lunch, said hospitality company's spokeswoman, Victoria Martinez. She said she was not privy to specific details about the talk.
His delegation also visited the nearby Basic Energy Ltd.-owned power plant, the only facility to provide electricity 24 hours a day in the Dominican Republic, company spokeswoman Marta Fernandez said.
The plant is considered a success story in the Dominican Republic, which has regular blackouts and energy shortages.
ST. LUCIA: China pledges more aid amid speculation Taiwan is wooing island
CASTRIES, St. Lucia (AP) China has pledged more aid and technical assistance to St. Lucia amid speculation that rival Taiwan is seeking to re-establish diplomatic ties with the small Caribbean island.
St. Lucia's External Affairs Minister Rufus Bousquet said Wednesday that Beijing's new aid package was under Cabinet review, but he did not disclose any details.
The proposal came shortly after Taiwanese officials based in St. Kitts and Nevis, one of the few Caribbean nations that still maintains relations with Taipei, met with St. Lucia Prime Minister John Compton.
Compton has not made public commitments to the Taiwanese delegation or disclosed details about their January meeting.
But in a speech last month, Compton, whose party maintained ties with Taiwan for 13 years until it was defeated by the Labor Party in 1996 elections, said St. Lucia "remains firm" in its relations with China.
China and Taiwan both engage in "dollar diplomacy," trying to win diplomatic alliances with other nations by offering aid packages and reconstruction projects. Taiwan has official ties with only about two dozen countries, mostly in Africa and Latin America.
BERMUDA: Hotel company seeks approval to build Bermuda's first new luxury resort in 35 years
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) A Dubai government-held company is seeking Bermuda's approval to build the wealthy British enclave's first new luxury resort in 35 years.
Construction of the high-end resort by Jumeirah Group, a hotel operator owned by state-owned Dubai Holding, will begin as soon as final planning approval is given to the proposed development, Cherie Whitter, director of Bermuda's tourism department, said Thursday.
"It's been quite a long time since we've had a new project," Whitter said of the hospitality company's proposed complex, which would be named the Jumeirah Southlands Resort and is expected to open in mid-2008 on the south shore of the British Atlantic territory.
Plans call for the resort to include 300 suites, five restaurants and bars, a spa and boutique shops.
It was not clear how long it might take to receive approval.
Whitter said local officials, including Premier Ewart Brown, are promoting Bermuda's potential to hotel developers and investors.
"The market is once again deemed interesting," she said.
GUYANA: New sugar factory expected to help weather EU subsidy cuts
GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP) A sugar factory under construction in Guyana is expected to help the South American nation survive sharp subsidy cuts to cane growers, the government said.
Agriculture Minister Robert Persaud said the plant in the sugar-producing community of Skeldon will ease a crunch on cane farmers in Guyana, where the crop accounts for roughly 20 percent of gross domestic product, by increasing local production capacity.
Built with assistance from the Chinese government, the factory is expected to produce 110,000 tons (100,000 metric tons) of sugar a year, boosting Guyana's annual production to some 450,000 tons (410,00 metric tons) when it opens in 2008, Persaud said.
Other Caribbean nations, such as Trinidad and St. Kitts, have been squeezed out of the region's beleaguered sugar industry after the European Union cut subsidies for producers from the Caribbean, Africa and the Pacific by 36 percent.
The cuts came after rival sugar-producing nations including Brazil, Thailand and Australia, complained to the World Trade Organization about the decades-old policy under which the EU gave former colonies preferential market access and paid high prices for commodities to encourage development.
BARBADOS: Premier delivers new budget, fueling forecasts that elections are near
BRIDGETOWN, Barbados (AP) Fueling predictions he is preparing to call early elections, Barbados Prime Minister Owen Arthur proposed a budget that he said would tackle inflation and ease burdens faced by low-income families on the Caribbean island.
Presenting his suggested budget to the House of Assembly on Wednesday night, Arthur said projected growth gave him room to propose a budget of 3 billion Barbados dollars ($1US.5 million; €1.1 million), a roughly 3 percent increase in spending.
Arthur, who has led Barbados since 1994, pledged during his televised budget address that he would create more affordable housing for islanders, who have long complained that spiraling costs are squeezing them out of the tropical island's real estate market.
The premier also emphasized new development must be bonded with strong environmental management in the island nation of some 280,000 people.
Barbadian lawmakers said Arthur's new budget, which will be debated next week, will likely pave the way for elections. General elections are not constitutionally due until May 2008.
JAMAICA: Czech experts evaluating Jamaica's quarries to enhance mining sector
KINGSTON, Jamaica (AP) A team of Czech experts are evaluating quarries in this Caribbean nation to help it improve mining operations and develop plans for maximum efficiency.
"We're developing a plan for our quarries where we're going to show people that you can mine in such a manner that it is attractive and sustainable," said Victor Cummings, minister of state in Jamaica's Ministry of Agriculture and Lands.
Cummings said he organized the experts' visit after an official trip to the Czech Republic where he toured mined-out quarries developed as tourist attractions. "These are some of the same things that we would like to do here," he said March 10 in the statement.
The Jamaican government recently hired a consultant to determine the boundaries of a jungle territory home to descendants of freed African slaves who are fighting plans for bauxite mining in the area. The area, called Cockpit Country, spans four parishes in northwest Jamaica.
Jamaica is the world's fifth largest producer of bauxite, the principal ore used in aluminum.
JAMAICA: Dutch officials seek island's cooperation in probe of company's donation
KINGSTON, Jamaica (AP) Dutch authorities are seeking Jamaica's cooperation in a probe into a donation the island's ruling party received last year from a Dutch-based commodities company.
Bruce Golding, chief of the Jamaica Labour Party, said one week ago that he received a letter from a Dutch official saying the island's help was needed to investigate a donation of 31 million Jamaican dollars ($460US,000; euro349,677) from Trafigura Beheer BV.
"They proposed to send a team of investigators to Jamaica but they have indicated that they will need to have the agreement of the government," said Golding, who did not disclose the identity of the Dutch official or agency that sent the letter.
Trafigura said it believed it was contributing to a fund related to its oil contract with the government.
But former Information Minister Colin Campbell acknowledged that he appealed to company executives for a contribution to a People's National Party campaign fund. The ensuing scandal led to Campbell's resignation.
PUERTO RICO: Ash from Montserrat's volcano disrupts Puerto Rico flights
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) Ash from the active Soufriere Hills volcano on the Caribbean island of Montserrat disrupted airport traffic in Puerto Rico, prompting delays and cancellations by several airlines.
Most of the problems were in the small airport in the southern city of Ponce, but four Delta Airlines flights were canceled in San Juan on the north coast on March 10, said Fred Sosa, the general manager of the capital's Luis Munos Marin International Airport.
Most flights out of San Juan were unaffected, Sosa said.
A large cloud of dust from the Sahara Desert also was contributing to the poor visibility, said Miguel Calimano, general manager of Puerto Rico's regional airport system.
Ash from the volcano in Montserrat, a British territory about 275 miles (about 440 kilometers) southwest of Puerto Rico, often clouds the skies of the Caribbean.
Officials had warned that a dome of hardened lava over the volcano has swollen to near-record size and could collapse. On Wednesday, the Montserrat Volcano Observatory said the ash cloud had reached 8,000 feet (2,400 meters) and was blowing west.
 Load-Date: March 16, 2007

 

End of Document
