

AP Interview: Top NATO commander said more eyes in the sky needed in Afghanistan
The Associated Press
January 28, 2008 Monday 10:48 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON DATELINE
Length: 916 words
Byline: By LOLITA C. BALDOR
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




Military commanders are looking for more surveillance and other intelligence-gathering systems to help aid the fight in Afghanistan, the top NATO commander said Monday.
Gen. John Craddock, who also is chief of U.S. European Command, said that while the U.S. currently provides much of the eye-in-the-sky capabilities which include unmanned aircraft other allied nations could also contribute needed sensors and other technologies.
"There is an increased requirement for intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance capabilities," Craddock said during an interview with The Associated Press. "I think we're seeing now the value to cross check and reference different sensors and make sure we've got a better perspective."
Craddock's comments come as commanders begin to put together their list of troop and equipment needs from the allies in advance of a NATO meeting next month. Last year Craddock presented NATO ministers with a plan that called for several thousand additional troops, as well as helicopters and other equipment needs.
This year, he said the updated request likely would include surveillance capabilities, as well as some troop shifts on the battlefield, which he did not detail.
The problem, Craddock said, is the ongoing competition for what he called the "unblinking eye" often provided by unmanned aircraft such as Global Hawks and Predators, which are in heavy use for the war in Iraq. The Predators provide live video links to commanders and can be armed with missiles.
"The problem with ISR (intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance) with all the nations is there is never enough to go around," said Craddock, sitting in his cramped office in the Pentagon. "The U.S. has a lot of ISR, but there are demands and there has to be a prioritization."
As an example, Craddock pointed to efforts by insurgents last year to move more into areas where there were civilians leading to several incidents in which U.S. and allied troops were criticized for killing innocents as they fought suspected terrorists.
To deal with that, he said, the military had to use more drones to get a clear picture of what was going on.
The Pentagon is increasingly turning its attention to Afghanistan, as fears grow of a resurgence of al-Qaida in the ungoverned tribal region along the Pakistan border. The rugged mountains there have provided insurgents with safe havens, including many believe the Taliban and al-Qaida's elusive leader, Osama bin Laden.
As the U.S. looks to other NATO allies to meet some of the ongoing military needs in Afghanistan, Craddock said a new document being drafted by allies which lays out long-term goals for Afghanistan could encourage greater allied participation.
Noting that the need for more forces has yet to be filled by the allies, Craddock said, "one could deduce (that) in many of the countries they have not come to the understanding of how important this is."
Recently the Pentagon announced it would send about 3,200 Marines to Afghanistan, to fill part of the need for more combat troops and trainers. But Defense Secretary Robert Gates in insisting that NATO countries will have to come up with the troops to replace the Marines when the leave in the fall.
The allies, Craddock said, must understand that it is in their interest to contribute more as part of an effort to stop the spread of terrorism.
"Will this (NATO) document be a catalyst, I don't know," he said. "Will it be a reinforcement to the faithful and maybe a convincer of the unconvinced? I hope."
The long-term goals document is expected to include things that need to be accomplished before security can be turned over to the Afghans, how long it might take and what the risks will be. It also will talk about the need to reduce corruption, improve governance and boost development. Gates wants it to be ready for consideration by NATO leaders at a summit meeting in Romania in early April.
Craddock also emphasized the importance of NATO and U.S. forces being nimble and able to react quickly as the Taliban and other extremist fighters adjust to changing conditions on the Pakistan side of the border.
"This is going to be, over the next 12 months, very important to watch what happens with the Pakistani forces there," he said. "We are encouraged with what we've seen and what we've been told" about Pakistan putting more conventional military forces into the border area that serves as a sanctuary for the extremists.
The Pakistanis have told U.S. and NATO officials that more regular army troops will supplement the work of a Pakistani paramilitary force known as the Frontier Corps, which Craddock said "are not really the capability needed" to deal with the extremist fighters.
In other comments, Craddock said he believes it is important to have a person, operating under U.N. auspices, coordinate the international aid effort in Afghanistan. And he said it was "unfortunate" that the attempt to get British diplomat Paddy Ashdown to take the job did not work out.
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said Monday that the United States was sorry Ashdown had withdrawn himself from consideration for the job.
Ashdown said he would not take the envoy post after Afghan President Hamid Karzai suddenly revoked his support. Ashdown, the top international administrator in Bosnia from 2002 to 2005, was considered the leading candidate to serve as overall coordinator of international aid, government and political efforts in Afghanistan.
On the Net:
Defense Department: http://www.defenselink.mil
 Load-Date: January 29, 2008

 

End of Document
