

AP Interview: Pakistani foreign minister says truce aims to prevent support for the Taliban
The Associated Press
September 28, 2006 Thursday 10:05 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 911 words
Byline: By EDITH M. LEDERER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS 
Body




Pakistan's foreign minister defended a truce between the Pakistani army and tribesmen along the Afghan border, rejecting U.S. and Afghan criticism that it amounts to a victory for the Taliban.
The Sept. 5 cease-fire ended more than four years of fighting in the semiautonomous North Waziristan tribal region bordering Afghanistan.
But since the truce took effect, American troops on the Afghan side of the border have seen a threefold increase in attacks, a U.S. military officer said Wednesday. The officer agreed to discuss the situation only if not quoted by name due to the sensitivity of the issue.
Foreign Minister Khurshid Kasuri wouldn't comment on the report by the unnamed officer, saying he hadn't read it. But in an interview Wednesday with The Associated Press, he strongly supported the truce as a way to prevent the bulk of Pashtun tribes on the border "from going to the sides of the extremists."
"If this is not done, there's a fear that the Taliban might be able to convert the Pashtun tribes on both sides ... to their way of thinking," Kasuri said, stressing that this would be "a disaster."
The foreign minister said tribal elders in North Waziristan asked for the cease-fire and now tribal elders in South Waziristan are asking the government for a similar deal.
Kasuri stressed that the Pakistani army is not being withdrawn from North Waziristan. "In fact, the army has now been freed from policing duties in the tribal areas and it can focus on preventing cross-border movement," he said.
The Pakistani government will give the truce "a few months," he said.
Kasuri said Pakistan's President Gen. Pervez Musharraf has three bottom lines for continuing the cease-fire: no activity by the Taliban either in North Waziristan or across the border in Afghanistan, no activity by al-Qaida in either place, and no "Talibanization" in the area.
"We feel it will prevent the bulk of Pashtuns from going over to the side of the Taliban. There's nothing to be lost," he said. "If, God forbid, it doesn't work, the military is still there. So the military option has not been removed.
"If it works," Kasuri added, "maybe this can be replicated on the other side in Afghanistan."
Since the U.S.-led offensive that ousted the Taliban in late 2001, many of Afghanistan's former rulers are thought to have found sanctuary across the border in Pakistan. Most Taliban are Pashtuns, the main ethnic group in Afghanistan and along Pakistan's border.
Some 30 members of the Taliban's top leadership, including Mullah Omar, are believed to be in Pakistan, mainly Quetta, Miran Shah and Peshawar, the U.S. officer said.
Musharraf has said Omar is not in Pakistan, and that he's more likely to be in his former powerbase of Kandahar in southern Afghanistan. Kasuri said if the Taliban leader is hiding he should be in a cave or on a mountain, not in a city of a million people where U.S. and Pakistani intelligence operate.
"Let them give us the details today and we'll make a raid," Kasuri said.
On the sidelines of the U.N. General Assembly ministerial meeting, Musharraf and Afghan President Hamid Karzai have been trading barbs and criticizing each other's efforts to fight terrorists along their long, remote mountain border.
Afghan officials allege that Pakistan is letting Taliban militants hide out and launch attacks into Afghanistan. Pakistan bristles at such charges, and Kasuri pointed to a new U.N. report which he said found that most of the violence in Afghanistan is by Afghans based in the country, with help from across the border.
Kasuri said this is what Musharraf has been saying for months. The Pakistani leader refuses to accept Afghanistan's attempts to push the blame for the rise in terrorist activity on Pakistan, he said.
Kasuri said improved cooperation between Afghan and Pakistani intelligence authorities "is vital."
"We want Taliban activity to end," he said. "We want Afghanistan government to stabilize, to become strong."
A report released Wednesday by a U.N. Security Council committee said Taliban gains in Afghanistan are evident from the surge of violence that has led to more than 2,000 deaths between January and July.
"While ideological support for the Taliban may be low, high levels of unemployment, poverty, hunger, illiteracy, and a general sense of insecurity have made farmers vulnerable to Taliban inducements on the one hand and intimidation on the other," the experts' report said.
"By murdering non-Taliban imams, school teachers and tribal and community leaders who might have encouraged a new generation of Afghans to believe in the possibility of peace, the Taliban have managed to undermine earlier progress and have further highlighted the huge problems that face the Afghan government," it said.
Kasuri stressed that "a strong prosperous Afghanistan is in Pakistan's interest" because it is crucial to Pakistan's continued economic growth, which has averaged 7 percent for the last five years. Pakistan wants to link central and south Asia with a gas pipeline through Afghanistan to meet its growing energy needs but cannot do it unless there is peace, he said.
What is also crucial, Kasuri said, is greater trust between the Afghan and Pakistani leaders.
"We want an end to finger-pointing, because you see if there is no end to finger-pointing, it will only encourage the Taliban and the enemies of the Pakistan and Afghan governments," he said.
Associated Press Writer Jim Krane contributed to this report from Kabul, Afghanistan.
 Load-Date: September 29, 2006

 

End of Document
