

Bush urges nation to stand strong on economy, Iraq war in final State of the Union
The Associated Press
January 29, 2008 Tuesday 1:45 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1282 words
Byline: By TERENCE HUNT, AP White House Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




President Bush, going before Congress one last time, urged the nation Monday night to stand confident against gnawing recession fears and be patient with the grinding war in Iraq.
"We have unfinished business before us, and the American people expect us to get it done," Bush said in his final State of the Union address. He faced a hostile, Democratic-led Congress eager for the end of his term next January.
With his approval rating near its all-time low, Bush lacked the political clout to push bold ideas and he didn't try. He called on lawmakers to urgently approve a $150 billion plan worked out with House leaders to stave off recession through tax rebates for families and incentives for businesses to invest in new plants and equipment.
"As we meet tonight, our economy is undergoing a period of uncertainty," Bush said. "And at kitchen tables across our country there is concern about our economic future. In the long run, Americans can be confident about our economic growth."
Since the 2003 invasion of Iraq, the war has been a main topic of Bush's annual addresses to Congress. He said Monday night the buildup of 30,000 U.S. troops and an increase in Iraqi forces "have achieved results few of us could have imagined just one year ago."
"Some may deny the surge is working," Bush said, "but among the terrorists there is no doubt. Al-Qaida is on the run in Iraq and this enemy will be defeated."
Delivering the Democratic response, Kansas Gov. Kathleen Sebelius urged Bush to work with Congress and help the U.S. regain global standing lost because of the war.
"The last five years have cost us dearly in lives lost, in thousands of wounded warriors whose futures may never be the same, in challenges not met here at home because our resources were committed elsewhere," she said. "America's foreign policy has left us with fewer allies and more enemies."
The war in Iraq has claimed the lives of 3,940 members of the U.S. military.
On the domestic side, Bush renewed a proposal to spend $300 million for a "grants for kids" program to help poor children in struggling public schools pay for the cost of attending a private school or a better public school outside their district.
Excerpts of his prepared text were released in advance by the White House.
On two issues that were centerpieces of State of the Union addresses past Social Security and immigration Bush passed the buck back to Congress, which had ignored the president's earlier proposals. Contending that entitlement spending is "growing faster than we can afford," he said, "I ask members of Congress to offer your proposals and come up with a bipartisan solution to save these vital programs for our children and grandchildren."
A major challenge for Bush in his address to Congress was simply being heard when many Americans already are looking beyond him to the next president.
His speech came hours before Florida's presidential primary election and just eight days before Super Tuesday when voters in more than 20 states go to the polls on the biggest day of the primary campaign. Republicans running for president rarely mention Bush, preferring to focus on conservative hero Ronald Reagan instead. Bush will turn from Monday's speech and plunge into politics, raising money for Republicans from Wednesday through Friday at events in California, Nevada, Colorado and Missouri, sandwiched around other appearances to tout themes from his speech.
As for the Democrats, presidential candidate Hillary Rodham Clinton said, "Tonight is a red-letter night in American history. It is the last time George Bush will give the State of the Union. Next year it will be a Democratic president giving it."
Bush, calling for bipartisan cooperation in Congress, said, "Let us show them that Republicans and Democrats can compete for votes and cooperate for results at the same time."
In Iraq, he said, U.S. adversaries have been hit hard, though "they are not yet defeated and we can still expect tough fighting ahead."
The address came one year after Bush, defying the wishes of Congress and rising anti-war sentiment in the country, ordered a major troop buildup in Iraq. The increase has helped quell violence, but there is no end in sight to the U.S. troop commitment, which Bush says will extend beyond his presidency. There are 158,000 U.S. troops in Iraq, a number that is expected to drop to 135,000 by July. There are 28,000 in Afghanistan, the highest number of the war, which began there in October 2001. The Iraq war began in March 2003.
Bush did not announce any troop withdrawals Monday night. The White House said that would depend on the advice of Gen. David Petraeus, the top U.S. commander in Iraq, and Ryan Crocker, the U.S. ambassador to Baghdad. Congress, despite repeated attempts, has been unable to force troop withdrawals or deadlines for pullbacks, and Iraq has receded as an issue in Washington.
Reviving a theme from his trip to the Mideast this month, Bush called on Iran to suspend uranium enrichment that the White House says could easily be transferred to a nuclear weapons program. A recent U.S. intelligence report concluded Iran halted its nuclear weapons program in 2003, but Bush says it could be restarted easily.
On the economy, Bush boasted 12 months ago about unemployment. Now the jobless rate has climbed to a two-year high and the nation is sagging toward recession amid turmoil in housing and financial markets. The economy is No. 1 on the U.S. worry list.
Bush's top priority is for Congress to swiftly approve an anti-recession package to provide tax rebate checks to 117 million families and give businesses $50 billion in incentives to invest in new plants and equipment. The program has been endorsed by Democratic and Republican leaders of the House, but the Senate is preparing a package of add-ons. Senate Democrats want more money for senior citizens living off Social Security; they also want an extension of unemployment benefits.
The president also was to:
 Announce a White House summit on inner-city children and religious schools.
 Urge elimination of 150 federal programs he considers wasteful.
 Announce that his annual meeting with the leaders of Mexico and Canada will be held this year in New Orleans, to show off recovery efforts.
 Call for an effort to crack down on the pork barrel practices of Congress, saying he will veto any spending bill that does not cut in half the number and cost of congressional pet projects, known as earmarks.
The president planned to issue an executive order Tuesday ordering federal agencies to ignore earmarks that aren't explicitly enacted into law, erasing a common practice in which lawmakers' projects are outlined in nonbinding documents that accompany legislation. However, Bush's plan leaves untouched the more than 11,700 earmarks totaling $16.9 billion that Congress approved last year.
The president was expected to press Congress to make permanent the tax cuts that are set to expire in 2010; Democrats are cool to the idea. He will prod Congress to extend a law allowing surveillance on suspected terrorists, renew his education law and approve free-trade pacts with Colombia, Panama and South Korea.
He also was recycling ideas on alternative energy, affordable health care, housing reform and veterans' care. Bush also was renewing his ideas on climate change and stem cell research
Bush will promote the U.S.-backed Middle East peace effort and his administration's efforts to fight disease and hunger, and suggest that the United States fight hunger abroad by buying and distributing crops from developing countries rather than relying on U.S. farmers.
He has eight overseas trips scheduled for 2008 the most of any year of his presidency.
 Load-Date: January 29, 2008

 

End of Document
