

Convoys: the solution to the Somali piracy crisis?
The Associated Press
April 16, 2009 Thursday

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 1079 words
Byline: By TODD PITMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NAIROBI, Kenya 
Body




The U.S. employed them during World War II: armed convoys on the high seas to protect Allied shipping lanes from German subs. Could the same work with pirates?
Some maritime experts say escorting the more than 20,000 ships that transit the Horn of Africa every year would be impractical, outstripping available military resources and at a cost that would be too high. But the tactic is being revisited, and NATO is considering it.
"It's true that it's more expensive to convoy, but it's worth the money," said Peter D. Zimmerman, an American professor emeritus at King's College in London. "There is a clear and present danger, and it's extremely corrosive to the maritime system to allow these pirates to operate with impunity."
The Gulf of Aden, which links the Suez Canal and the Red Sea to the Indian Ocean, is the shortest route from Asia to Europe. It's one of the world's busiest shipping lanes, and these days among its most dangerous.
Piracy is skyrocketing in the region and at least 79 attacks have been reported this year, compared with only 21 in all of 2003, according to the International Maritime Bureau. Pirates are now holding more than 280 foreign crewmen on 15 ships at least 76 of those sailors captured in recent days.
The crisis has spawned fresh debate on how to stop it, but options are slim. Commercial vessels are loathe to travel with armed security aboard because they fear violence could escalate. And in many cases, they have no choice since carrying arms is illegal in many ports.
During World War II, Allied warships deployed to protect merchant vessels crossing the Atlantic after Nazi submarines began sinking them with impunity. Today, the threat is different with modern-day warships facing lightly armed, agile pirate skiffs that are not trying to destroy vessels, but seize them for ransom.
Cyrus Mody, of the International Maritime Bureau, said there are only 15 to 20 warships deployed in the Gulf of Aden and off Somalia's eastern coast at any one time a fraction of what is needed to guard tens of thousands of ships, even in convoys.
At the Pentagon, officials dismiss the use of convoys, partly because of the high number of personnel such a mission would entail. Also, the military has been adamant that ship security be the responsibility of shipping companies.
One senior defense official said privately that it would be impossible, with the number of U.S. and coalition ships available, to both escort convoys and patrol the gulf at the same time.
The U.S. Navy has destroyers in the region, but they do not run convoys, according to Lt. Stephanie Murdock, a spokeswoman for the U.S. 5th Fleet in Bahrain. She declined to give details or say why, and the military does not traditionally discuss future operations.
Cmdr. Chris Davies, a spokesman at NATO's Northwood maritime command center outside London, said NATO has looked into the idea but has not gone further.
"It hasn't been ruled out, but it's not something we've explicitly done," Davies said. "It's a proven method, and it is something we may well do given the circumstances."
He declined to discuss specific tactics, but said NATO is recommending cargo ships take proper defensive measures such as keeping a good lookout, and if approached, run at full speed and use evasive maneuvers and fire hoses to repel anyone who tries to board.
Pirates target the most vulnerable vessels slow-moving ships with decks low enough for them to climb onto, Davies said.
Mody said convoys could even increase risks "because that would require ships to wait in designated collection areas for long periods of time, either drifting or moving very slowly, thus exposing them to pirate attacks."
Though no figures are available, a Nairobi-based diplomat said about 10 percent of traffic in the Gulf of Aden is already using escorts for smaller convoys. Averaging four to six ships, some are protected by private maritime security companies, he said on condition of anonymity because he not authorized to speak to reporters.
Those security companies are expensive. But Zimmerman, former chief scientist for the U.S. Senate Foreign Relations Committee, points out that if piracy becomes more common, costs are likely to rise regardless because marine insurance premiums will go "way up."
Most hijackings are resolved by shipping companies, which pay million-dollar ransoms to get their ships and crews back, then recoup the money from insurance companies.
Protecting larger convoys of up to 50 ships would bring other challenges, said Graeme Gibbon-Brooks, the managing director of London-based firm Dryad Maritime Intelligence Ltd.
"You need ships in the middle and a screen of ships on the outside," he said. "To do it properly, you need an awful lot of warships to protect the outer screen."
Roger Middleton, a piracy expert at London-based think-tank Chatham House, said that in the Indian Ocean the divergent routes and speeds of ships also makes convoys impractical.
"You've got at least 20,000 ships a year going through the Gulf of Aden coming from all different parts of the world," he said. "It's not practical if you're going from India to Kenya to go in a convoy with a ship going from the Middle East to South Africa."
On one sea lane in the Gulf of Aden, the U.S. Navy's Maritime Liaison Office in Bahrain has already set up a "transit corridor" that, though not considered a naval convoy, is aimed at protecting ships by providing military security and advising ships of similar speeds to depart together at specific times.
According to a memorandum issued by the office Tuesday, naval and air forces "will be strategically deployed within the area to best provide protection and support to merchant vessels."
Peter Smerdon, a Nairobi-based spokesman for the U.N. World Food Program, said there was talk of extending such corridors south along the coasts of Somalia and Kenya, but that it was "only discussion" at this time.
European warships have since 2007 escorted larger vessels carrying food aid for the U.N. World Food Program, but usually only one ship at a time and on longer journeys to the Kenyan port of Mombasa, Smerdon said. The only convoys they've escorted are smaller ships, usually traveling three at a time, which offload food directly in Somali ports.
Associated Press writers contributing to this report include Michelle Faul and Katharine Houreld in Nairobi; Adam Schreck in Manama, Bahrain; Slobodan Lekic in Brussels; Angela Charlton in Paris; and Pauline Jelinek in Washington.
 Load-Date: April 17, 2009

 

End of Document
