

Democrats take back the House: A look at the new leadership
The Associated Press
November 8, 2006 Wednesday 6:53 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1939 words
Body




A look at the new Democratic leaders and likely committee chairmen in the U.S. House:
Speaker of the House: Nancy Pelosi, California. Pelosi, 66, has led House Democrats since 2002 and becomes the nation's first female speaker. A self-confident leader and power broker, Pelosi has demanded party loyalty on key Democratic issues such as health care and education. As speaker, the liberal Democrat from San Francisco has said she would work to curb the power of lobbyists and to roll back GOP tax cuts for higher-income Americans.
House Majority Leader: Steny Hoyer, Maryland. The consummate party man with stellar campaign skills, Hoyer, 67, has served as House whip since 2002. He has kept up a relentless attack on President Bush and the GOP Congress, faulting the president's handling of the Iraq war and harshly criticizing Republican budgets. And he's been the go-to man for some moderate and conservative Democrats who are not comfortable with the liberal Nancy Pelosi.
Committee on Agriculture: Collin Peterson, Minnesota. Peterson, 62, isn't shy about siding with Republicans on key votes. A founding member of the Blue Dog coalition of conservative Democrats, Peterson opposes abortion rights and gun control. He voted for Bush's tax cuts and for a GOP plan that created a new Medicare prescription drug benefit. But he criticized Bush's proposed budget that would have cut farm spending and is sharply critical of free trade deals, contending they are bad for U.S. farmers.
Committee on Appropriations: David Obey, Wisconsin. Obey, 68, has led the Democratic opposition, with some success, to Bush's cuts in education, health care and other domestic programs. He's intelligent and, occasionally, quick-tempered. But with 36 years in the House, he's also an inside player who negotiates effectively with Republicans and Senate counterparts.
Committee on Armed Services: Ike Skelton, Missouri. Skelton, 74, has served for more than two decades on the Armed Services Committee and has played a key role in shaping Democratic positions on national defense. Some of his conservative social positions mirror Republican stands: he is pro-gun, anti-abortion and pro-death penalty. His consistent support for large defense budgets and his hawkish, pro-troop criticism of the Bush administration's handling of the war in Iraq could help Democrats avoid being labeled soft on national security.
Committee on the Budget: John Spratt, South Carolina. Spratt, 63, the hand-picked assistant to Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi, provides a centrist counterweight to Pelosi's liberalism. A moderate who helped negotiate the Balanced Budget Agreement of 1997, Spratt has led efforts to call attention to the Bush administration's fiscal record. He has complained about the rising budget deficit, opposed Bush's plan to overhaul Social Security as too expensive and has urged Congress to again agree on a balanced budget plan.
Committee on Education and the Workforce: George Miller, California. Miller, 61, is a steadfast liberal known for giving fiery speeches against the Republican majority. He worked with the White House to negotiate the No Child Left Behind education legislation in 2001, when President Bush nicknamed him "Big George" to acknowledge Miller's key role in passing the bill. But Miller, co-chairman of the Democratic Policy Committee and a staunch ally of Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, doesn't hesitate to complain when he disagrees with his own party.
Committee on Energy and Commerce: John Dingell, Michigan. Dingell, 80, the longest-serving member of the House, has had a hand in major legislation for half a century. A moderate who has sided with Republicans on issues such as gun control and partial-birth abortion, Dingell has never been known to avoid a fight since being elected in 1955. When chairing the Energy and Commerce Committee from 1981 through 1994, he was a tough government watchdog, a reputation he's maintained throughout President Bush's tenure.    
Committee on Standards of Official Conduct: Howard Berman, California. Berman, 65, could be in line to lead the ethics committee if Democrats win the House, but that chairmanship is far from certain. Berman has a reputation for being able to work across party lines and is known for his legislative prowess in the House. His work on a Judiciary Committee panel that deals with emerging Internet technologies is important to the entertainment industry prevalent in his district, and he also serves on the International Relations Committee.
Committee on Financial Services: Barney Frank, Massachusetts. Quick-witted, opinionated and sometimes abrasive, Frank, 66, is a skilled political debater who has emerged as a national figure on issues ranging from gay rights to financial services. After more than two decades in Congress, he ranks as one of the House's most reliable liberal voices and fiercest critics of the Bush administration.
Committee on Government Reform: Henry Waxman, California. Waxman, 67, a diligent liberal and a deft politician, has a reputation for playing watchdog over the executive branch. A partisan for the camera and a pragmatist for his causes, Waxman sparked a fight with Vice President Dick Cheney's energy task force in a battle that wound up in the U.S. Supreme Court. He also worked to compile a database of misleading statements made by members of the Bush administration during buildup to the war in Iraq.
Committee on Homeland Security: Bennie Thompson, Mississippi. Thompson, 58, has made a name for himself in the House by casting a series of votes dissenting from his more conservative Mississippi colleagues. He opposes the war in Iraq, voted to ban assault-style weapons, supported federal abortion-rights protections and voted to lift the ban on gays in the military. In the wake of the Sept. 11, 2001 attacks, he urged the White House to increase Homeland Security funding for rural areas.
Committee on House Administration: Juanita Millender-McDonald, California. Born in the South as the civil rights era began to emerge, Millender-McDonald, 68, brought the movement and her experiences as a black woman into politics. In the House, she has opposed school vouchers and supported liberal positions on small business opportunities, women, children and the economy. A political pragmatist, she voiced concern about electronic voting machines during the 2004 elections.
Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence: Alcee Hastings of Florida or Silvestre Reyes of Texas. Hastings and Reyes are considered front-runners to take over the House Intelligence Committee, a snub to the current senior Democrat on the panel, Jane Harman of California. Nancy Pelosi has deep personal differences with Harman, and has told her she won't be reappointed to the committee after her position expires at year's end. The committee's direction will depend on who takes the helm. Generally, however, the panel is expected to conduct more public oversight of some of the hottest issues facing the United States going forward, including terrorism, Iraq and government surveillance.
Committee on International Relations: Tom Lantos, California. Lantos, 78, a Holocaust survivor and moderate founder of the Congressional Human Rights Caucus, has been an influential fixture on the International Relations Committee as term-limited Republican chairmen came and went. Lantos has been critical of the administration's handling of Iraq, despite playing a key role in passing the original resolution authorizing the war. He usually backs administration policy in the Middle East, including staunch support of Israel.
Committee on the Judiciary: John Conyers, Michigan. After more than 40 years in Congress, Conyers, 77, is the second most senior member of the House and one of its most liberal members. He has a reputation for making little effort to get along with colleagues who don't share his beliefs, and his influence is sometimes hindered by his refusal to compromise. A champion of black causes, Conyers has used his Judiciary Committee seat to criticize the Iraq war and to push legislation urging Congress to determine if there are grounds to impeach President Bush.
Committee on Resources: Nick Rahall, West Virginia. Rahall, 57, represents southern West Virginia and pushed for greater mine safety after 14 workers were killed during the 2006 Sago mine disaster. He's pro-labor but culturally conservative, opposing abortion and gay marriage, and his support for mining means he doesn't always vote with Democrats on environmental issues. One of five lawmakers of Arab descent, Rahall has been consistently critical of the Bush administration's Middle East policy.
Committee on Rules: Louise Slaughter, New York. Slaughter, 77, known for years in the House as a champion of women's rights, is now an important voice in the Democrats' attacks on Republicans for what she and others have branded a "culture of corruption" on Capitol Hill. A heeded voice within the party and a member of the Democratic Steering Committee, Slaughter has been a leader of Democratic efforts to capitalize on GOP problems after lobbying and sex scandals.
Committee on Science: Bart Gordon, Tennessee. Gordon, 57, frequently agrees with President Bush. He's conservative on taxes, abortion, gay marriage and guns. But he sometimes opposes Bush's scientific proposals, and he's asked for more openness from NASA after accusations that a public affairs officer filtered information about global warming and the Big Bang.
Committee on Small Business: Nydia Velazquez, New York. Velazquez, 53, would be the first Hispanic woman to chair a congressional committee. She has criticized the Small Business Administration, contending the Bush administration has favored big businesses at the expense of smaller ones, particularly after the 2001 terrorist attacks and Hurricane Katrina. A reliable Democratic vote who nevertheless works well with the Republican chairman of the Small Business Committee, Velazquez has said the administration hasn't given women- and minority-run businesses enough opportunities to compete for government contracts.
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure: James Oberstar, Minnesota. Oberstar, the 72-year-old dean of Minnesota's congressional delegation, has made his mark primarily through transportation policy. He supports increased transportation spending, even if it requires higher gasoline taxes. He has said that as committee chairman he would focus on getting more funding for Amtrak and on developing high-speed rail lines between Midwest cities. The seventh most senior Democrat in the House, Oberstar differs from his party on many social issues.
Committee on Veterans Affairs: Bob Filner, California. Filner, 64, a staunch liberal who is fond of loud political stunts, has called on veteran's groups to march on Washington to call for increased benefits. He was an outspoken critic of the Department of Veterans Affairs and Veterans Administration Secretary Jim Nicholson after it was revealed in May that personal data on 26.5 million veterans had been stolen. Filner also has worked to restore benefits to Filipino veterans and is heavily involved in immigration and border security issues.
Committee on Ways and Means: Charles Rangel, New York. Rangel, 76, is an outward liberal but a behind-the-scenes pragmatist. He orchestrated a public confrontation with the Republican Ways and Means chairman, but is known to corporate lobbyists as a pro-business advocate willing to cut a deal. As dean of the New York congressional delegation, Rangel's distinctive gravel-toned voice has been employed in angry opposition to the Iraq war.
 Load-Date: November 9, 2006

 

End of Document
