

Editorial Roundup: Excerpts From Recent Editorials in Newspapers in the US and Abroad
The Associated Press
January 30, 2008 Wednesday 8:58 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 3079 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Excerpts from recent editorials in newspapers in the United States and abroad:
Jan 22.
The Paducah (Ky.) Sun, on Roe. v. Wade:
Sometime between Jan. 22, 1973, and today, Americans who believe in the sanctity of human life shifted their efforts from changing the law to changing the culture.
Roe v. Wade was the U.S. Supreme Court's most notorious trampling of the Constitution, a fact acknowledged even by many pro-choice legal scholars, who defend the decision as the right decision, just wrongfully decided.
In the beginning, pro-life activists channeled their energies into overturning the decision, believing that its conspicuous flaws would be its undoing. ...
But as hopes faded in passing years, many pro-lifers adopted a different strategy. If they could not prevent abortions nationwide, perhaps they could at least prevent one abortion by the woman next door. ...
The efforts apparently paid off. The number of abortions, after hitting a high of more than 1.6 million in 1990, has dropped each year since, according to the Alan Guttmacher Institute, research arm of Planned Parenthood. The number fell 25 percent to 1.2 million in 2005, the most recent year for which complete numbers are available. ...
Pro-life Americans should continue making the case for life, reaching out to women with unplanned pregnancies. But along with hearts, the law must also be changed. ...
On the Net:
http://www.paducahsun.com
Jan. 28.
The Leader-Herald, Gloversville, N.Y., on Bush and Israel:
President Bush certainly picked an odd time to reformulate in a radical way U.S. policy toward Israel. On his first official visit to Israel, he declared in strong terms that the Israelis ought to end their "occupation" of territory seized during 1967 Six-Day War. What's more, he suggested that Palestinians should be paid compensation for property lost during the establishment of Israel.
Thank goodness Bush is a lame duck, or else he might have time to foist such a reckless non-solution upon Israel.
Let's remember who attacked whom in 1967. Arab nations gathered forces in an attempt to wipe Israel from the face of the Earth. But they underestimated the capabilities of the Israeli armed forces, and six days after they attacked, the Arab forces were vanquished and Israel had captured buffer territory necessary to preserve its security.
Forty years later, Israel still needs those buffers. And to suggest revisiting events of decades ago and conjure up reparations of some sort in the name of a "peace process" is the height of foolishness.
The problem of peace with Israel is not about reparations or foolish notions about returning back the consequences of past wars. It is quite simply about Israel's neighbors recognizing that it has a right to exist.
If and when Middle Eastern powers unequivocally recognize that right in all its implications among them lifting restrictions on trade and ending their funding and material support of terrorist organizations, then maybe it would be appropriate to re-examine borders. ...
On the Net:
http://www.leaderherald.com
Jan. 27
Vindicator, Youngstown, Ohio, on the economic stimulus plan:
It is difficult to justify adding another $150 billion or so to the national debt in an effort to convince Americans and the rest of the world that the U.S. economy isn't going in the tank. ...
Because the alternative, doing nothing about the very real threat of a recession, simply isn't an option. ...
An economic stimulus package makes sense now because too many Americans frightened by the economic signs they are seeing and pinched by stagnant wages and rising energy and food costs are simply not in a mood to buy.
The emergency package agreed to by the White House and bipartisan House leaders would provide tax rebate checks of up to $1,200 to 117 million families and give businesses $50 billion in incentives to invest in new plants and equipment.
That may not be a perfect plan, but it deserves quick action. The quicker the better, so that checks can get in the mail and business owners can start making investment plans.
On the Net:
http://www.vindy.com/news/how-we-see-it/
Jan. 28
Fort Worth (Texas) Star-Telegram, on debt and death in the military:
The fact that federal law requires the secretary of veterans affairs to contact the family of a soldier killed in combat to collect an outstanding VA debt is incomprehensible to most Americans. ...
As Title 38 of the U.S. Code stands today, if a member of the armed forces dies the specifics of the cause of death don't matter and owes money to the VA, the secretary is required to contact the family for repayment.
Twenty-two families have been asked to pay mostly GI bill education debt from the estates of loved ones who died in combat or of a service-connected injury incurred in a combat zone.
Rightfully outraged by this development, Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison of Texas last week filed the Combat Veterans Debt Elimination Act to remove the provision that requires the VA to seek collection of unpaid debt from the families of soldiers who die from combat-related injuries. Hutchison, who has been joined by Sen. John Cornyn as a co-sponsor, is asking to make the law retroactive to Sept. 11, 2001. ...
Regardless of one's support for or opposition to the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, it's hard to fathom any American thinking it's appropriate to add to the burdens of an already grieving family by asking for reimbursement on a VA loan.
Mark them "Paid in full." ...
On the Net:
http://www.star-telegram.com
Jan. 26
Denver (Colo.) Rocky Mountain News, on the economic stimulus package:
From the reaction by Washington policy-makers this past week, you'd think the U.S. economy is facing a major meltdown requiring emergency action rather than the possibility of a cyclical recession that is likely to be reasonably mild by historical standards.
So what do we get? A "stimulus package." It should be called "the bottomless debt package" instead since it amounts to a $150 billion jump in spending with no plans to pay for it, at a time when the federal deficit is already growing. Nor is $150 billion a little more than 1 percent of GDP likely to have much of a stimulative effect. The $14 trillion economy will treat it with a shrug.
Not only does the plan add to the national debt, it does too little to encourage the investment that will sustain growth and boost productivity. True, allowing companies more generous write-offs will help capital-intensive businesses. But something more dramatic was called for as a long-term incentive, perhaps a cut in corporate tax rates as key Democrats such as House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Charlie Rangel have been advocating.
As if the stimulus package weren't bad enough, the loose money policies being pursued by the Federal Reserve heighten the risk of a lengthy period of higher inflation and sluggish economic growth. ...
Inflation erodes purchasing power, devalues savings and makes it difficult to plan for the future. It's been nearly a generation since inflation plagued the economy, but stable prices and healthy economic growth are hardly guaranteed. They resulted from conscious decisions, and they can easily be reversed by policy-makers who are unwilling to stand firm when the economy gets shaky.
On the Net:
http://www.rockymountainnews.com/news/opinion/editorials/
Jan. 28
The Palm Beach (Fla.) Post, on abortions in the U.S.:
The number of abortions in the United States is down again, to its lowest level since 1976. That is news that supporters and opponents of abortion rights should celebrate.
But as with typical mention of abortion, especially during last week's 35th anniversary of the Supreme Court's Roe vs. Wade decision legalizing the procedure, the recent report has renewed debate over which side deserves credit for the continuing decline. ...
But as the researchers (at the Guttmacher Institute) acknowledged, there is no one reason for the decline to 1.2 million abortions in 2005, down 25 percent from the highest report of 1.6 million in 1990. The numbers reported, based on a census of abortion providers in the U.S., coincide with an increase in the use of the RU-486 medication that ends pregnancy without surgery within the first nine weeks, and the availability of the emergency contraceptive known as Plan B. It can prevent pregnancy if taken within 72 hours of unprotected sex.
The rate of abortions also fell, to its lowest level since 1974. ... Still, more than one in five pregnancies ended in abortion in 2005. That rate may better, but it's far from good. Only a drastic reduction in unplanned and unwanted pregnancies will get abortion to the point where, to quote former President Bill Clinton, the procedure is "safe, legal and rare."
On the Net:
http://tinyurl.com/2vrqlw
Jan. 25
The Star-Ledger, Newark, N.J., on charges made by presidential candidates:
More than just the public's perception of Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama took a hit the other night during the Democratic debate in Myrtle Beach, S.C., when the two perceived front-runners got so nasty with each other.
Truth got caught in the crossfire. That face-off, of course, wasn't the first time presidential candidates shaded the facts, and there's lots of evidence that the public has come to accept such skewering as a given, and sometimes, as in South Carolina, enjoys seeing opponents going at it.
But entertainment value aside, voters have an obligation to measure a candidate's pronouncements against the truth. Fortunately, it's easy to do in an Internet age. There's a slew of Web sites including FactCheck.org and PolitiFact.com that provide reliable background information. ...
Politicians resort to these tactics because experience has shown they work. The 2004 Swift Boat attacks on the Democratic nominee, Sen. John Kerry of Massachusetts virtually accusing him, a decorated war hero, of being a traitor gained traction even though they were ridiculous. In 2000, similar charges were leveled against McCain, who was a prisoner of war in North Vietnam.
An informed electorate is vital in a democracy. Voters have a responsibility not to take politicians at their word.
On the Net:
http://www.nj.com/opinion/ledger/editorials/
Jan. 30
Ha'aretz (Tel Aviv, Israel), on Sen. Barack Obama:
Not a year has passed since Danny Ayalon completed his term as Israel's ambassador in Washington, but he has already seen fit to criticize Barack Obama, who may well be the next U.S. president or vice president. In an article published in The Jerusalem Post, Ayalon wrote that during his two meetings with Obama, he got the impression that the Democratic candidate was "not entirely forthright" regarding Israel. Similar and even worse smears can be found in abundance in American blogs and e-mail chain letters.
While Obama was taking advantage of Martin Luther King Day to speak out against anti-Semitism among blacks, Jewish spokesmen were using racist language against him, solely because his father was Muslim. Since it is hard to find so much as a single anti-Jewish statement in Obama's political record, or even support for anti-Israel policies, his defamers base their arguments on the fact that his positions on the Middle East conflict are "leftist" solely because he rejects the right's positions, which are more acceptable to some Jewish-American leaders. ...
The U.S. elections are important to Israel because of the two countries' special relationship and America's support for Israel, whose value cannot be overstated. There is a major contradiction between this fact and a smear campaign against a candidate with a Muslim name, which risks causing many Americans, and especially blacks, to feel alienated from Israel and Jews. Obama is sensitive to Israel's security needs, and he proved this through his Senate votes, his visit to northern Israel during the Second Lebanon War, and his unequivocal statements against both Hezbollah, which violated Israel's sovereignty in the North, and Hamas, which violated Israel's sovereignty in the South. ...
Great damage has already been caused because Obama announced that an ugly campaign was being waged against him in the Jewish community. That alone ought to be enough at least to make Israel's leaders say something about Jews who preach against anti-Semitism while employing similar tactics against other minorities.
On the Net:
http://www.haaretz.com/hasen/spages/949364.html
Jan. 30
The Times, London, on Kenya:
Kofi Annan has rarely been blunter, more heartfelt or more anguished in his appeal. Kenya, he told its leaders yesterday, was in turmoil, its people suffering, its land untilled, its tranquillity rapidly descending into chaos. The former United Nations Secretary-General knows that he is racing against time in his desperate attempt to halt the downward spiral. No one, he said, could stand by and allow the violence and the killings to go unchecked. Kenya's leaders had to lead, to take charge and to act with urgency.
What he and the world have seen is the terrible example of what happened before, just across Kenya's borders. At the beginning of April 1994, Rwanda similarly stood at the abyss. Gangs of youths, armed with clubs and machetes, roamed the streets. Families were slaughtered in the streets, burnt alive in churches and refuges, hunted down and clubbed to death. French, Belgian and U.S. troops tried, feebly, to intervene but were overwhelmed. ...
... Kenya does not have the bloody history of Hutu and Tutsi hatred; but in too many chilling ways the descent into violence is as rapid and random as the apocalypse in Rwanda.
Mr. Annan's warnings are addressed as much to the outside world as they are to President Kibaki and Mr. Odinga. They could not be more urgent. Paralysed by indecision and conflicting interests, Western leaders have done little except urge restraint, hint at a suspension of aid and draw up plans to evacuate their nationals. It is time that George Bush, Gordon Brown and European leaders were more outspoken in their demands, robust in their diplomacy and forthright in their denunciations of the terrible events threatening to ruin not only Kenya but also, by that example, democracy and prosperity in much of Africa. ...
On the Net: http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/comment/leading(underscore)article/article3273125.ece
Jan. 30
Asahi Shimbun, Tokyo, on global warming:
Prime Minister Yasuo Fukuda on Saturday delivered a speech about his government's plans for tackling global warming under the spotlight of the World Economic Forum's annual meeting in Davos, Switzerland. The First Commitment Period of the Kyoto Protocol, which requires industrialized countries to lower their greenhouse gas emissions below 1990 levels, ends in 2012. Fukuda declared that Japan is ready to commit itself to a new specific emissions reduction target, along with other major emitters, after the expiration of the Kyoto treaty.
There have been strong arguments within the government against the idea of setting country-specific emissions targets, echoing opposition to the approach within the business community. The U.S. government is also opposed to such targets. Unfazed by the opposition, however, Fukuda sent the world a stronger message of Japan's commitment to the issue.
In the U.N.-sponsored conference on climate change held in December in Bali, Indonesia, countries agreed to work out by 2009 a post-Kyoto framework to fight global warming for the period after 2013.
Whether this year's Group of Eight summit, to be held in the Lake Toyako resort in Hokkaido, can build on the momentum created in Bali depends on environmental diplomacy in the next half year.
To use a baseball metaphor, Fukuda managed to get to first base in his attempt to raise Japan's profile in this environmental campaign.
To achieve the proposed target of halving global greenhouse gas emissions by 2050, which is attracting growing support from the international community, it is crucial to impose binding emissions caps on individual countries.
Such binding targets will force countries to make serious efforts to lead their societies and industries in the direction of reducing emissions of heat-trapping gases. ...
By voicing clear support to the target-based approach at this stage, Japan has gained the right to get actively involved in the development of the plan. ...
On the Net:
http://www.asahi.com/english/Herald-asahi/TKY200801290048.html
Jan. 30
The Sydney (Australia) Morning Herald, on the U.S. economy:
The last State of the Union address is the turning point for the final straight in the circuit of an American presidential term. It begins the countdown of the final year, in which we'll see the main parties soon choose their candidates for the succession, campaign into the November election, and then cheer the winner into the inauguration next January. For George Bush, yesterday was not the start of a glorious ride into history but a desperate flailing of the whips to keep up a decent show of progress.
Mr. Bush used the bully pulpit of the joint sitting of Congress and an hour of prime time television coverage to urge America to stay with his remedies for the faltering economy and the near debacle of the Iraq intervention. On both fronts, it has to be said, he is acting to fix the results of his past hubris. There's a financial system debased by fiscal laxity, easy credit and tax cuts to the point where some 2 million families may have their mortgages foreclosed this election year. There's Iraq where tens of thousands more U.S. troops have been poured into the surge to counter a horrific level of violence.
All the carefully cued clapping and standing ovations could not disguise the defensiveness of Mr. Bush's Republicans or the grim relish of the Democrats at his diminished standing. But even his toughest critics would concede Mr. Bush a great deal of determination in his familiar themes, and welcome his belated interest in other issues like climate change or the Israel-Palestine question. We should all be hoping Congress sets partisanship aside and negotiates pragmatically on the $US150 billion economic stimulus package Mr. Bush is proposing. Although the rise of Asia's industrial powers has decoupled us to some extent from the American locomotive, Australia still depends directly and indirectly on the health of the U.S. economy including through the support of the American public for free-trade initiatives, which would be imperilled by a serious U.S. downturn. ...
On the Net:
http://www.smh.com.au/news/editorial/the-economy-stupid/2008/01/29/1201369129302.html
 Load-Date: January 31, 2008

 

End of Document
