

Editorial Roundup: Excerpts from recent editorials in newspapers in the US and abroad
The Associated Press
February 27, 2008 Wednesday 9:51 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 3017 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Excerpts from recent editorials in newspapers in the United States and abroad:
Feb. 26
St. Petersburg (Fla.) Times, on public campaign financing for statewide candidates:
Some Republican legislators are using the state budget crisis as convenient cover for renewing their partisan attack against public campaign financing. Their time would be better spent repairing the damage they already have done instead of asking voters to kill it.
Public campaign financing for statewide candidates in Florida has been around for more than two decades. It provides matching money for smaller contributions to candidates who agree to a spending limit. It also protects those candidates from big-spending opponents by guaranteeing them a public dollar for every private dollar the opponent spends beyond the limit. Fortunately, voters like the concept so much they added it to the Constitution in 1998.
That hasn't quieted Republicans who can't stand the thought of a level playing field for campaign money. They are sponsoring resolutions (HJR 281 and SJR 956) that would ask voters this November to kill public campaign financing as a way to save money. The money involved, some $11 million in 2006, is a tiny investment in democracy and a blip in a $70 billion state budget or even the $2 billion legislators have to cut. The real issue is the political stubbornness of lawmakers such as Sen. Dennis Jones, R-Seminole, who challenged supporters to name a candidate who won because of public matching money. ...
Unlike Bush, who hated public campaign financing and never accepted it, Crist has accepted public money for his campaigns, including $3.3 million in 2006. While the governor cannot prevent the Legislature from placing constitutional amendments on the ballot, perhaps Crist can convince lawmakers that the concept is worth saving and that they should focus their cost-cutting efforts on more wasteful programs.
On the Net:
http://tinyurl.com/3bob3j
Feb. 26
The Star-Ledger, Newark, N.J., on Ralph Nader:
Ralph Nader, who turns 74 tomorrow, remains as obstinate, prickly and egotistical as ever, hewing to the idea that he must run for president because "dissent is the mother of ascent."
Using political protest to leverage social change is a sound principle. Nader's execution of it is not. His presidential run in 2000 wounded Al Gore enough to help George W. Bush sneak into the White House.
Events since have proven Nader was delusional when he insisted there was no difference between the major political parties. The deficit-spawning Bush tax cuts, the administration's assault on crucial environmental laws and, most tragically, the unnecessary war in Iraq Nader bears partial responsibility for all of it.
Nader's 2000 candidacy garnered almost 3 million votes. Nearly 100,000 of them were in Florida, where Bush defeated Gore by slightly more than 500 votes.
Despite eight years of some of the worst political and social backsliding in the history of the republic, Nader still confuses his narcissism with progress for the nation. ...
On the Net:
http://tinyurl.com/2mkt3r
Feb. 25
The Pueblo (Colo.) Chieftain, on frivolous government spending:
Another sad chapter from the ongoing saga "It's Only Money."
The inspector general of the Department of Homeland Security has reported that the Federal Emergency Management Agency misspent millions of dollars it received from selling used travel trailers.
After Hurricane Katrina, FEMA purchased 200,000 travel trailers and mobile homes. When displaced storm victims leave these housing units, FEMA may sell them to the general public.
Under the law, FEMA must use the proceeds to purchase new trailers or return the money to the Treasury. Instead, FEMA bureaucrats used more than $13 million buying fully loaded sports utility vehicles, or paying travel expenses and credit card accounts. ...
This is nothing new, though. In 2006, a congressional probe found that purchase cards were used improperly and that Homeland Security wasted hundreds of thousands of dollars on items such as iPods, beer-making equipment and designer jackets.
Guess we should be glad that stodgy bureaucrats would want to be hip with the latest music, brewing their own beer and wearing cool outerwear. Somehow, though, we don't think the average taxpayer is impressed. ...
On the Net:
http://tinyurl.com/3csg93
Feb. 24
The Paducah (Ky.) Sun, on The New York Times and John McCain:
Once again, The New York Times has become the story.
On Feb. 20, after learning that The New Republic was set to publish an expose on the internal conflict at the Times over whether to publish a decade-old and still weakly corroborated story hinting of an extramarital affair by John McCain, the Times did what any irresponsible media outlet with a severely tarnished reputation would do published the story. It was posted on the Times' Web site that night and appeared on the front page of the print edition the next morning.
Times readers might think the story is about another internal conflict, the one on McCain's staff in 1999 over what, if anything, to do about a relationship between the senator and lobbyist Vicki Iseman that some staffers thought might appear improper to voters. But the Times readers would be wrong. In the news business, that's not a story.
And so the real story is ... the story.
The Times piece ran 3,000 words, starting and ending with the observations and speculations of anonymous sources, with a history of alleged and unrelated ethical lapses over McCain's entire public career sandwiched in between. ...
The question is no longer whether McCain and lobbyist Vicki Iseman were romantically linked but why the Times, whose motto is "All The News That's Fit To Print," would print a story hinting at the liaison based on paper-thin evidence. ...
On the Net:
http://www.paducahsun.com
Feb. 24
The Buffalo (N.Y.) News, on wiretap laws.
President Bush is playing politics with the nation's security, and as he has done many times since 9/11, he is proving himself willing to frighten Americans with the specter of terrorism to get what he wants.
House Democrats are right to resist his efforts to expand the program of secret wiretapping. But Congress should renew the program, which expired last weekend, long enough that it can negotiate a permanent law next year with a new president one who is unsullied by this one's manipulations. ...
... When the president threatens to veto any wiretapping bill that does not grant retroactive immunity to telecommunications companies that provided information without warrants, the country has cause to say "enough." The president lacks the credibility to make the case.
Bush claims that the House, by letting the law lapse rather than pass the one he wants, is leaving the country more exposed to attack. But that's not true.
... Congress should pass legislation now to renew the just-expired law, but without the lawsuit protections Bush is demanding. Then, early next year, if the new president believes such safeguards are necessary, he or she can make that case to Congress and the public. That's the only way Americans can hope to be sure that these radical protections truly are needed.
On the Net:
http://tinyurl.com/yswlrq
Feb. 22
The Commercial Appeal, Memphis, Tenn., on the recent drought and border disputes:
Battles have been fought over lesser issues in the past, but, fortunately, bullets rarely fly nowadays in border disputes. At least we hope things can be settled amicably at the other end of the state where an alleged error by surveyors in 1818 has created an interstate face-off.
As the story goes, the surveyors were plotting the boundary between Tennessee and Georgia when they mistakenly marked it 1.1 miles south of where it should have been.
Tennesseans have never taken the matter seriously, but the recent drought has resurrected Georgia's claim to the land because moving the boundary north would give Georgians access to the Tennessee River.
Resolutions passed overwhelmingly by the Georgia House and Senate this week call for the creation of a commission to get the state line moved to its proper place and negotiate the transfer of water to the metro Atlanta area, by the first day of the 2009 legislative session.
They were not laughing at the time. Some in the chamber were singing "This Land Is Your Land," and they weren't trying to be ironic. ...
All of which creates a recipe for an expensive battle over the issue in the U.S. Supreme Court. How about if we wish real hard for many nights of bounteous precipitation in Georgia, instead. We would wish for a flood, but that would be unneighborly.
On the Net:
http://tinyurl.com/278mze
Feb. 23
Los Angeles Times, on space debris and destruction of an impotent spy satellite:
Any student of rocketry, ballistics or barroom darts can appreciate the Navy's feat this week in hitting a minibus-size object 153 miles above the Pacific Ocean. But questions about the timing of and the need for the Pentagon's destruction of a defective spy satellite will not go away anytime soon.
The official story seems credible. Titanium parts, such as the tank full of dangerous hydrazine fuel on satellite USA 193, do survive reentry, and the military had reason to be scrupulous about the vanishingly small risk of an impact in a populated area. The satellite was destroyed low enough in its orbit that most of the debris will burn up within a few months a sharp contrast with China's satellite kill in January 2007, which left a wide debris field in higher orbit. Nevertheless, it's not clear that the operation was absolutely necessary, and it is not out of place to wonder whether the Chinese test partly encouraged this unusual step.
The prospect of a space arms race is unappealing, and there's a reason anti-satellite missile testing fell into disuse. The more than 50 countries that maintain satellites are increasingly mindful of the problem of clutter in the precious resource of near-Earth space. We hope we've seen the last of shooting up the thermosphere, even for good reasons.
On the Net:
http://tinyurl.com/25lb9n
Feb. 24
The Dallas Morning News, on Steven Spielberg and the Beijing Olympics:
Director Steven Spielberg followed his conscience and resigned as artistic director of the Beijing Summer Olympics, upset by China's arms shipments to Sudan and a Security Council veto blocking U.N. efforts to halt the slaughter in Darfur.
Mr. Spielberg said he had tried gentler persuasion but got nowhere with Chinese leaders. Good for him. China's government needs to understand that there's no such thing as consequence-free support for the killings of 200,000 people in Darfur.
The question Mr. Spielberg's action raises, however, is whether Olympic sponsors, advisers, athletes and governments should join a formal boycott.
The Olympics are designed specifically so that athletes, including those from warring nations, can join in the spirit of friendly competition. It's a slippery slope whenever politics enters the Olympic arena. ...
We hope that in the lead-up to Beijing, China gets plenty of strong messages that its behavior regarding Sudan and Darfur is unacceptable.
But to have governments boycotting the Olympics would defeat the entire idea behind an event whose chief goal is to advance international understanding.
On the Net:
http://tinyurl.com/yu9rdn
Feb. 27
Taipei Times, Taiwan, on a recent presidential debate on environmental issues:
... How can we curb global warming to avert the catastrophic effects that the scientific community warns will follow?
Both Chinese Nationalist Party (KMT) (presidential) candidate Ma Ying-jeou and Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) (presidential) candidate Frank Hsieh responded to Green Party Taiwan Secretary-General Pan Han-shen's questions with vague promises that left environmental experts unimpressed. Promises varied from raising taxes on fuel to pushing companies to improve energy efficiency.
Experts can be forgiven for their skepticism, as neither Hsieh nor Ma, nor their parties, have the track records to put force behind their words. ...
Ma had eight years as mayor of Taipei during which he was in an excellent position to clean up one of the nation's most polluted cities and for which he has little to show.
Hsieh, on the other hand, deserves praise for cleaning up Kaohsiung's Love River. But that project along with changing street lamps to solar power didn't even begin to address the source and depth of the environmental challenge facing us: our lifestyles. Compared with the hazard that millions of cars on the roads pose, solar panels for street lamps are simply a token project. ...
On the Net:
http://tinyurl.com/26dsqs
Feb. 24
The Observer, London, on immigration and social cohesion:
For four decades, one speech has cast a shadow over British immigration policy. In April 1968, Enoch Powell told a Conservative rally that mass immigration from the Commonwealth would lead inevitably to bloody interracial conflict. ...
The fact that such a claim is only whispered now testifies to quite how wrong Powell actually was. ... London is an extraordinary patchwork of different ethnicities and cultures. Britain has the highest rate of interracial marriage in Europe. Most people, most of the time rub along together peacefully. Rivers of blood are there none.
And yet the anxiety that Powell exploited has not gone away. In fact, it has recently returned, thankfully stripped of violent forebodings and racist undertones, to the political mainstream. It is this: the scale and pace of immigration into Britain is undermining the sense of collective identity that holds society together. Or, to use the fashionable idiom of our time, immigration threatens "social cohesion."
The latest proponent of this view is Gordon Brown. In a speech last week, he introduced the notion of "earned citizenship." Society, he said, is a contract that can only be made to work when people have a "strong sense of collective belonging." Citizenship, he went on, confers rights, but they are contingent on accepting responsibilities. While the prime minister's speech implied that he believes this to be true of all Britons, the policies he then announced made clear he was really talking about immigrants. Newcomers, he said, should demonstrate greater willingness to join the collective enterprise that is Britain. He launched a green paper aimed at raising the price literally and metaphorically of becoming British. ...
... Enoch Powell is still wrong. The real barriers to integration and social cohesion, irrespective of ethnicity, are poverty, lack of social mobility and violent political ideology. Whether or not it has an answer to these challenges will be the real measure of Brownism.
On the Net:
http://tinyurl.com/2bm3u3
Feb. 27
The Moscow Times, on the upcoming presidential election:
Regional leaders appear to be anxious about Sunday's presidential election, even though the outcome is all but set in stone. Perhaps it is because their jobs are on the line.
The Kremlin has asked governors to deliver voter turnout at least 65 percent, Moscow Times Staff Writer Francesca Mereu reported in Friday's issue. If the turnout is too low, election officials are ready to stuff ballot boxes with absentee ballots.
The Kremlin and regional authorities have denied plans to maximize turnout. But a senior election official and voters themselves said people have been pressured to cast absentee ballots at their workplaces or schools, thus allowing employers and professors to make sure that they vote.
What Kremlin proponents of sovereign democracy are seeking is the legitimacy that a high turnout would give to Dmitry Medvedev's victory. Anything less would cast a shadow over his win, they think.
What the Kremlin officials are forgetting is that the election will be questionable regardless of the outcome, with real opposition candidates denied the right to run and state-controlled media heavily biased in its campaign coverage. ...
If the current trend continues, then one day the Kremlin will not even have to issue tacit orders on elections. Governors will scramble to fulfill whatever results are projected by opinion polls, especially those conducted by state-owned pollsters. ...
On the Net:
http://tinyurl.com/2h5zr2
Feb. 23
Khaleej Times, Dubai, United Arab Emirateas, on Kosovo:
... The former Yugoslavia's dissolution has not turned out as smooth and idealistic as many in the free world would have wished. But Serbs disgruntled with Kosovo's declaration of independence need to realize that their antics amount to little more than a destructive phase that will fizzle out on its own.
The more violence they resort to, the more they will highlight their helplessness in face of history's march forward.
For one thing, it makes little sense for Serbians to deny Kosovo's ethnic Albanians their little place in the world. Brutally oppressed in the old days till the NATO bombardment, they have suffered enough to justify a free land of their own. And if anything, their painful rendezvous with mechanized oppression should make them respect human rights and virtues that much more. Rightly, there seems considerable weight in the promise made by the new parliament that all representations will have freedom and security.
Secondly, Russia and China's siding with the Serbian stance owes to political considerations more related to the West, and adversely impact the Balkan region at a very critical time in its history. The US and EU's backing of the Kosovo independence initiative makes for a rare coming together of Western and Muslim interests in today's predominant climate of conflict. ...
The torching of the American embassy in Belgrade, along with attacks on numerous others, highlights this point aptly. Serbian failure to provide security to what is, owing to international relations nuances, foreign soil inside its homeland is not just a security blip, but a shouting indicator of its intentions. Therefore, America's strong reaction is understandable. And even though no such threat has yet been made, more of such assaults can understandably be viewed as acts of war, prompting much more serious reaction. ...
On the Net:
http://tinyurl.com/ywa97c
 Load-Date: February 28, 2008

 

End of Document
