

Edwards goes on the air in New Hampshire as part of a new push in the state 
The Associated Press
June 26, 2007 Tuesday 6:28 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 404 words
Byline: By NEDRA PICKLER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




Democratic presidential candidate John Edwards on Tuesday announced a new television ad in New Hampshire, part of an effort to improve his standing in the first primary state.
The 30-second spot features Edwards giving a speech on how he would make the United States "the country of the 21st Century" and includes a clip of his wife, Elizabeth, meeting with an elderly voter.
Elizabeth Edwards has been one of the most prominent spouses on the campaign trail. Her fight against breast cancer and her plainspoken appeal have made her a popular draw, especially among women a competitive voting bloc in a race featuring New York Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton as the first female front-runner in a presidential race.
The campaign placed a modest buy to run the spot, spending about $76,000 on broadcast and cable stations in New Hampshire and surrounding media markets.
In the ad, Edwards offers a populist message critical of President Bush, without naming him.
"The strength in America is not just in the Oval Office, the strength in America is in this room, right now," Edwards said as a crowd in a packed gymnasium rises in applause. "It's the American people. And it's time for the president of the United States to ask Americans to be patriotic about something other than war."
Spokesman Jonathan Prince said the campaign had decided to go on the air in New Hampshire earlier than planned in order to take advantage of the summer months to introduce Edwards to voters.
And while acknowledging that the campaign's second quarter fundraising would come in significantly behind last quarter's $14 million total, Prince said the campaign had enough cash now to buy the extra time.
"It's important to start making the case for John Edwards now," Prince said on a conference call with reporters.
Clinton has a wide lead in New Hampshire polls, followed by Illinois Sen. Barack Obama and Edwards. Although Edwards leads in Iowa, which holds the first caucus on Jan. 14, the campaign recognizes that he needs to improve his standing elsewhere to be a serious contender for the nomination.
Edwards went on the air for the first time last month in a spot in which he demanded that Congress stand up to Bush's veto of a withdrawal timetable for Iraq. The ad campaign ran on Washington broadcast and cable programs and briefly in Iowa.
Associated Press Writer Beth Fouhy contributed to this report from New York.
On the Net:
http://www.johnedwards.com
 Load-Date: June 27, 2007

 

End of Document
