

Excerpts from the program of the incoming Hamas-Fatah coalition government
The Associated Press
March 17, 2007 Saturday 7:49 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 314 words
Dateline: GAZA CITY Gaza Strip
Body




Excerpts from the program of the Hamas-Fatah coalition government, provided by incoming Palestinian Information Minister Mustafa Barghouti. The platform was finalized Friday and some of the language differs from a draft published on Hamas and Fatah Web sites earlier in the week.
 The government's "main goal is to establish an independent Palestinian state in the territories occupied in 1967."
 The government "seeks to consolidate a strong foundation of peace, security and prosperity for the whole region, for all generations, present and future."
 The government "respects all agreements reached by the PLO and respects international legitimacy."
 The government "affirms that resistance in all its forms, especially popular non-violent resistance against occupation, is the right of the Palestinian people, guaranteed by international law, and reserves the right of the people to defend itself against aggression. At the same time, the government will work through national consensus to consolidate and expand a cease-fire (with Israel) to become comprehensive, reciprocal and simultaneous."
 The government "will work for the immediate and speedy solution of the problem of the Israeli soldier (Cpl. Gilad Shalit, captured by Hamas-allied militants in June), on the basis of an exchange of prisoners."
 The government "affirms ... that conducting negotiations (with Israel) is the authority of the PLO and the head of the Palestinian Authority, on the basis of sticking to national objectives, and with the understanding that every agreement will be presented to a new Palestine National Council (a parliament-in-exile) or to a public referendum."
 The government "rejects the establishment of a state in provisional borders."
In other parts of the program, the government pledges to reform and depoliticize the security forces, restore law and order and fight corruption, Barghouti said.
 Load-Date: March 18, 2007

 

End of Document
