

Five fund managers search for the market's direction
The Associated Press
February 6, 2006 Monday 4:27 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 2336 words
Byline: By CRAIG KARMIN, The Wall Street Journal
Body




When picking investments, it is still about the economy if you don't want to look stupid.
Forecasting U.S. economic expansion this year looks particularly tricky: Will Iran's nuclear standoff send oil prices skyrocketing or will rising oil stockpiles keep prices steady? If consumers' appetite for toys flat-panel TVs, expensive handbags wanes, will spending by businesses be enough to keep the economy humming?
For millions of small investors, answers to these questions can be crucial as they try to figure out whether to put extra cash this year into their stock funds, or stuff it into a money-market account instead. Even the pros are struggling to read the tea leaves.
We asked five top-rated mutual-fund managers to take the pulse of the economy. They represent different money-management styles and are based in different regions of the country. Each has run a fund for at least 10 years, witnessing both stock-market booms and busts, and all have racked up returns superior to their peers.
While they don't agree about how well the economy will perform this year, all see consumer spending dropping. Most think businesses will pick up some of that slack, though they don't agree by how much. These managers see the economy expanding at a faster clip in the first half of the year than the second, with year-end expansion totaling as little as 2 percent to as much as 3.5 percent.
Their forecast is a bit more bearish than the consensus among economists, who see expansion of about 3.25 percent, according to The Wall Street Journal's annual economic-forecasting survey, conducted in December. Commerce Department figures showed that the U.S. economy expanded 1.1 percent in the fourth quarter, hurt by slower consumer spending, but some economists are predicting a sharp rebound.
These fund managers tend to see the stock market muddling through with another year of single-digit returns. They see energy companies, commodity producers and technology firms faring the best. Consumer-goods makers, retail stores and financial-service businesses, especially those tied to the mortgage market, look more vulnerable.
But, as Ron Muhlenkamp, manager of the $3.2 billion-in-assets Muhlenkamp Fund, puts it, "in economics, what everybody fears rarely happens." Instead, they get some wild card like Iran.
The other managers interviewed were Manu Daftary, manager of the $900 million Quaker Strategic Growth Fund; William Frels, who runs the $2.6 billion Mairs & Power Growth Fund; William Nasgovitz, manager of $1.6 billion Heartland Value Fund; and Robert Rodriguez, in charge of FPA Capital Fund, a $2.1 billion portfolio.
Here are developments they are watching for signs of what is ahead:
Over a barrel: Aside from the obvious benefits to major oil companies, most of the fund managers agree that high energy costs represent perhaps the biggest threat to the country's economic expansion.
But how high is too high? Despite oil prices that surged above $70 a barrel last summer, the economy continued to chug along, defying the expectation of some economists who recalled the toxic mix of inflation and slower expansion, known as stagflation, unleashed when prices spiked in the 1970s.
With strong demand for energy from China and fear of potential supply disruptions from volatile oil-producing nations like Iran and Nigeria, many oil experts predict energy prices could set new records this year.
If the price of oil, at $65.37 a barrel, is still above $60 by the summer, Mr. Frels says he would reassess the prospects for the economy this year. "That would dampen consumer spending," he says. "The longer you have high oil prices, the greater the effect on the inflation rate, and greater the likelihood that the Fed will continue to raise interest rates" to ward off higher inflation.
Mr. Muhlenkamp fears the combination of higher oil prices and steeper interest rates but says chances of recession this year are less than 20 percent, even if oil prices and rates continue going up. "That would slow things down," he says. "But it would take an outside surprise to bring about recession."
While high energy prices are translating into higher heating costs, Mr. Daftary sees the price at the gasoline pump as a critical variable. If families start paying $4 a gallon for gasoline, "that could have a debilitating effect."
The consumer's choices: Economists say that consumer spending barely increased in the fourth quarter, and the five fund managers are bracing for it to fall off sometime this year. That decline may be increasingly evident as higher energy costs mean more expensive heating costs for much of the country.
Mr. Muhlenkamp says surveys indicate that eating out, going to the movies and spending on clothes are some of the main areas susceptible to cutbacks. In particular, he is keeping an eye on retailers as they report their fourth-quarter results. "We're not confident in being able to predict which areas will be most affected," he says. "So we're watching the data."
Many of the managers look beyond financial statements for signs that consumers may be tightening their belts. Mr. Frels keeps an eye on how full restaurants are when he is dining out. He isn't seeing a lot of empty tables.
Mr. Rodriguez notes that the rate of increase in personal income fell below the inflation rate by the end of last year, a trend that he expects to continue this year and to cause the consumer to be more finicky. He says that residential investment as a percentage of gross domestic product is at its highest level ever.
"Consumers have a large percentage of their assets in a category that has inflated," he says. "Any kind of correction would have big implications for spending." The managers note that the mortgage-refinancing boom is coming to an end: Many homeowners have refinanced at low rates and increases in interest rates make additional refinancings less appealing, so a big source of money to buoy the economy is drying up.
Mr. Daftary counts "For Sale" signs in his suburban Boston neighborhood to detect whether one of the country's hotter housing markets is cooling down. He has seen more signs and more of them sticking around for a longer period. "That tells me housing prices are too high," he says.
Beyond the bottom line: Corporate earnings are going through a golden age. Operating earnings per share for the companies in the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index have risen 90 percent during the past four years, according to Citigroup Inc. (Operating earnings exclude some gains and losses that are part of net income as calculated under generally accepted accounting principles.) The consensus forecast calls for earnings this year to jump 13 percent from 2005, according to Thomson Financial. That would represent an unprecedented fourth straight year of double-digit profit increases.
Rather than zeroing in on the bottom line, Mr. Muhlenkamp focuses on the top line. Revenue expansion, unlike profits, can't be aided by cost cutting and is a more accurate gauge of the state of the economy, he says. He predicts revenue increases for blue-chip companies this year to average about 3.5 percent, which indicates GDP expansion of about the same.
Some of the managers are focused on the amount of money that companies spend on factories, information systems and other investments. As consumers feel less confident, business spending will have to pick up the slack to offset any drop in the consumer's appetite. Mr. Frels suggests looking at what big diversified companies like General Electric Co. or 3M Co. say about their capital expenditures. He sees their moves as a window into what many U.S. companies are doing.
Despite GE's disappointing earnings released last month, he remains relatively upbeat. "There was a lot of noise in the fourth quarter," he says. "But basic business is doing well, especially those sectors tied to the economy."
The dollar's direction: Last year, the U.S. currency enjoyed its biggest gains since 2001, rising 15 percent against the euro and the yen. While a stronger dollar helps keep a lid on inflation in the U.S. by encouraging the importation of cheaper goods from abroad, it also makes U.S. products less competitive abroad, by making them more expensive relative to European or Japanese goods.
A sudden and rapid decline in the dollar would be bad for the U.S. economy and capital markets, because the shock of it likely would provoke foreign investors to pull back from dollar-denominated securities. But a repeat of the gradual retreat the dollar experienced between 2002 and 2004 would benefit many U.S. exporters.
In that case, Mr. Daftary says, "you may see higher earnings estimates from agricultural companies like Archer-Daniels-Midland (Co.) and commodity producers."
Mr. Nasgovitz notes that the price of gold climbed to a 25-year high recently. Although gold and the dollar both rallied last year, a sharp spike in the price of the precious metal historically has coincided with a weaker U.S. currency and inflation. "It's negative for stocks when the price of gold goes through the roof," he says.
Asia's appetite: Commodity prices took off again in 2005: The Dow Jones-AIG Index of 20 commodities jumped 18 percent. Much of that rise was fueled by exploding demand in China and India for oil and natural resources to supply their rapidly expanding economies.
Mr. Frels thinks this demand will continue to lift the prices of a variety of commodities and raw materials, a trend that could be costly to U.S. companies. That could mean more inflation and it may put pressure on the Fed to continue raising interest rates.
At the same time, he is keeping an eye on Asian appetite for U.S. debt. Japan is the largest foreign holder of U.S. Treasury bonds, and while Tokyo's buying of this debt fell off dramatically last year in part because the Bank of Japan wasn't intervening to weaken its currency by buying dollars and selling yen China helped pick up the slack.
Chinese net purchases of U.S. Treasury debt stood at $35.3 billion through the first 11 months of 2005, according to the latest U.S. government figures, making 2005 China's biggest year for these purchases. Economists say Asian demand for U.S. Treasury debt is a big reason why long-term rates have remained low, and some investors worry that any significant diversification into other countries' debt would result in higher U.S. bond yields, which, in turn, could slow the economy.
Yielding direction: In the Treasury-bond market, the difference in the yield for short-term debt and long-term debt has become quite small, a phenomenon known as a flat yield curve. In December, the yield for the two-year note briefly exceeded that of the 10-year note. That development is known as a yield-curve inversion, and it often indicates that an economic downturn, or even recession, is looming. That is because investors usually demand more payment from governments and companies to tie up their money over longer periods. So if they are willing to accept a lower yield, it suggests they believe the Fed, which raised its target short-term rate to 4.5 percent last week, will soon have to bring those rates back down to ward off a recession.
Some of the managers, like Mr. Frels, say a yield-curve inversion matters less when interest rates are at relatively low levels. In this case, the curve flattens because long-term rates have come down faster than short-term ones have risen. This is more benign than when both long- and short-term rates are rising, pressuring the economy to slow.
Mr. Rodriguez thinks this flattening yield curve signals slower expansion ahead for the entire economy, and it is particularly worrisome for the financial sector. There, it isn't merely a signal, but a hindrance to core lending activities. When short-term and long-term rates are almost the same, these companies can't borrow at low short-term rates and lend at higher long-term rates, pocketing the difference as profit. Instead, they may have to make riskier loans to less credit-worthy borrowers to get a decent spread.
"We're likely to see a number of financial-services firms with difficult earnings," Mr. Rodriguez says.
Washington worries: This is an election year, with all 435 House seats and one-third of the Senate seats in play. Republicans are expected to retain their majorities in both chambers. But lobbying scandals that caused House Majority Leader Tom DeLay to give up his leadership post have led some political pundits to suggest that those majorities may be thinner after the November election.
That matters to some of the managers because they think pro-business legislation would be less likely to pass if the Republican majority is whittled down. Mr. Nasgovitz says uncertainty in Washington is a head wind for the stock market, and he thinks the Bush Administration's tax cuts may not be extended under the current political climate. "That would be a drag on the economy," he says.
Mr. Daftary thinks the less Congress does, the better, and that too much legislation tends to make matters worse. A divided Congress would suit him fine. Still, he thinks some sign from the White House that the U.S. is moving closer to bringing troops back from Iraq would offer a psychological lift to the market and could rev up consumer confidence.
Other tea leaves: During the 1990s, Mr. Muhlenkamp recalls, comments like Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan's famous warning that the stock market was responding to "irrational exuberance" gradually gave way to pundit claims that the market would keep going up because "this time is different." These assurances began to peak about the same time that stock prices did in 2000.
For now, analysts and financial journalists are writing furiously about a housing-market bubble, and what would happen if it bursts. Mr. Muhlenkamp is scanning headlines to find pundits who argue, instead, that conditions have changed, and prices can keep going higher.
"When guys making the warnings get tired of being shouted down and start keeping mum," he says, "that's when it's over."
 Load-Date: February 7, 2006

 

End of Document
