

From rappers to the religious, Jerusalemites consider city's future ahead of a big US meeting
The Associated Press
November 25, 2007 Sunday 8:34 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 1717 words
Byline: By MATTI FRIEDMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM 
Body




When Ali Qleibo was born in Jerusalem, his home was under Jordanian control. It was 1953, and not far away stretched the bleak gash of barbed wire, concrete walls and minefields that cut the city into Jewish and Arab halves.
Qleibo, a Palestinian lecturer, painter, photographer and ethnographer, was 14 when the walls came down and east Jerusalem was captured and annexed by Israel.
Today, Qleibo's Jerusalem includes the whole city, east and west.
Al-Quds university, where he teaches, is in Arab Jerusalem, as are his home and studio, in the middle-class neighborhood of Shuafat. On the Jewish side his haunts include Cafe Hillel, a downtown establishment where he sits with his daughter, Aida, nearly every morning before taking her to school also in west Jerusalem.
A division of the city, Qleibo said, would be "unbearable."
It's not that Qleibo is oblivious to the realities of Israeli rule. Over the years, Qleibo said, Israel has created a "symbiotic relationship based on political and economic inequality," with Arabs working in the Jewish part of the city in mainly menial jobs and living in neighborhoods that lack many municipal services.
But Palestinian rule, Qleibo said, would mean an end to the benefits Arab Jerusalemites get from Israel, like universal health care and welfare payments, and would threaten the city with the lawlessness and disorder common in the West Bank and Gaza.
"It's a morally problematic situation," he said. "One can't say we don't want a Palestinian state, but one is puzzled. As it stands, we are guests of the state of Israel and in the interim we'll remain beneficiaries of the system."
"The only other option," he said, "would be to live in Paris, for example, and be a complete foreigner. As long as the poetry of life here exists, I'd rather stay in my home."
The old "no man's land" between the Israeli and Jordanian lines of control was de-mined long ago, and much of it was paved over and turned into a busy thoroughfare known as Road 1. For most of its length, Arabs live on one side, Jews on the other.
On the Israeli side of Road 1 is a grocery store run by Shmuel Saadon.
Saadon was born in 1955 at a hospital just up the street and grew up in a stone house near the store. As a child, his world extended only a few steps to the east, stopping abruptly at the edge of no man's land.
Just outside the house was an emplacement where Israeli soldiers pointed their rifles at the soldiers a hundred yards away on the Jordanian side now a modest, white-shuttered building with a sign identifying it as the Ramsis Hotel.
"I never want to see a fence in the middle of my city again," Saadon said. He's prepared to turn over control of Arab neighborhoods to the Palestinians, with special arrangements made for the Old City and its Jewish holy sites, if that will bring peace.
Will it?
Saadon said he's not sure but he's willing to try.
"I don't want to raise my children near mines, fences and walls," he said.
Yehi Zaken thinks ceding east Jerusalem to the Palestinians would mean "the final bankruptcy of the state of Israel."
Born and raised in Jerusalem, the 31-year-old Zaken is the lead singer of ShworchtseChaye, the city's leading and only thrash metal combo. (The band's name translates as "Black Animal" in Yiddish.) Zaken delivers the band's ferocious English lyrics in an unsettling voice that is equal parts scream and growl.
"I think Jerusalem affected our music more than any other factor," Zaken said. "I would make calmer music if I lived in a calmer place."
During the height of Israeli-Palestinian violence between 2000 and 2004, Jewish Jerusalem was hit by dozens of suicide bombings and shooting attacks. One of the band's songs, "Nowhere Land," includes these lyrics: "What will you do if terror and horror knock on your bedroom door? Won't you feel like there's no tomorrow if you don't need TV to see war?"
Israel must not give up east Jerusalem, Zaken believes, both for reasons of national pride and security.
"I've never heard of another country prepared to give up parts of its capital," he said.
When Israel pulled out of the Gaza Strip in 2005, Palestinian militants continued firing rockets at Israeli towns. Zaken sees this is as a lesson Israel must learn: If Israel leaves east Jerusalem, it could put Palestinian gunmen just a crosswalk away from Israeli homes.
"We've been here before," he said. "Every time we pulled out of somewhere it blew up in our face, and I don't want that next to my house."
In an apartment off one of the ancient alleyways of the Old City's Muslim Quarter, just steps away from the Al-Aqsa mosque, lives Yasmin Wazwaz.
For Wazwaz, Al-Aqsa is the heart of Jerusalem and the center of her life.
In Muslim tradition, the white-veiled, 47-year-old housewife said, the prophet Mohammed decreed that those who live near Al-Aqsa, Islam's third-holiest site, "will have a special standing on the day of judgment."
"If you stay close to Al-Aqsa, you are ensuring that it will remain for Muslims," she said. "We love it so much, and no matter what happens, we'll never leave."
The rectangular compound that today is home to Al-Aqsa is perhaps the world's most divisive religious site. It was once the location of two biblical Jewish temples the second was destroyed by Rome in 70 A.D. and is revered by Jews as the Temple Mount. Jews gather outside to pray beside the massive stones of the Western Wall the last remnant of the second temple.
Muslims believe Mohammed ascended to heaven from the site in a mystical nighttime journey recounted in the Quran.
Wazwaz said east Jerusalem must be in Palestinian hands all of it, including the disputed holy site.
"It should be under the rule of Muslims, Palestinians. Because nobody will take care of this country more than the Palestinians. Nobody from outside will protect this community as much as people who come from us and are for us," she said.
"This is our country, this is our city, and we can't be without it."
In 1885, Esti Sternberg's great-great-grandfather walked from his home in Germany to Jerusalem, fulfilling an age-old Jewish dream of coming to the city at Judaism's heart.
Her family lived in the Old City until 1948, when it fell to Jordanian forces in the fighting surrounding Israel's independence. She was born two years later on the Israeli side of the divided city.
The Jewish Quarter was rebuilt after Israel captured it in 1967, but for the past 18 years Sternberg has lived in the Muslim Quarter, near the holy compound her neighbors call the Noble Sanctuary and she calls the Temple Mount.
She is one of about 800 Jews who live scattered in the Old City's Christian and Muslim areas, guarded by armed patrolmen and surveillance cameras. Palestinians and many Israelis see their presence as a provocation and a violation of the city's hair-trigger equilibrium.
For Sternberg, who recently completed a book on her family's history in the city, living here is a way of making the point that Jerusalem all of it belongs to the Jewish people.
"Jerusalem is not just another city with hotels and stores. Jerusalem is the root of it all. It was our capital, and it sustained us through generations in exile," Sternberg said.
No Israeli leader has the right to give up any part of it, she said.
"Who owns Jerusalem, that he has the right to give it away?" she asked, holding a brown, leather-bound Old Testament. "I have the Bible, and it decides."
Jerusalem, said Shaanan Streett, is a "missed opportunity."
"Nowhere else in the Middle East, or maybe in the whole world, do so many people so different from each other live together every day," said Streett, 36, who lives near west Jerusalem's lively open-air market and is one of Israel's best-known rappers. "There's so much potential here it should be the greatest city in the world."
Instead, he said, "charlatans, politicians from all peoples and religions" have played on people's fears and hatred and forced residents of the city apart.
One of the biggest recent hits from Streett's hip-hop group, Hadag Nahash in English, that literally means "the fish is a snake" recounts the deliberations of a young Jewish Jerusalemite torn between the secular seductions of Tel Aviv and the peculiarities of his hometown, a city with no beach where there are "a thousand cultures" and "everyone is tuned in to God's frequency."
In the end, Jerusalem wins.
Against all odds, the city's sects have achieved a kind of "imperfect coexistence," Streett said: "More people go to do their shopping in the Arab grocery store than go out and kill each other."
Streett's views on a division of Jerusalem are encapsulated in a song he released recently in English: "Share the city, don't tear the city."
"Building a fence is the stupidest thing I've ever heard, and no one here should let it happen," he said. "It would be a lie Jerusalem is one city."
Until he was 15, Muhammad Mughrabi rarely left the Shuafat refugee camp, one of Jerusalem's poorest areas, and the only Israelis he saw were soldiers.
Mughrabi, now a 20-year-old student at an Israeli college, came of age in a violent time when Israel began throwing up its separation barrier a vast network of concrete and wire meant to prevent suicide bombers from reaching Israeli population centers.
The barrier's immense stone slabs pass steps away from the camp's homes, and when it is completed the wall will cut the neighborhood off from the rest of Jerusalem.
The camp is largely a no-go zone for Israeli authorities. The blue-shirted Israeli police who enforce order in the rest of the city never come inside, and litter lines the sides of the cracked-asphalt streets.
Listening to American hip-hop artists like Tupac Shakur and Eminem, Mughrabi could identify: "The Shuafat camp is like a ghetto in the U.S. there's violence and drugs, and there's a roadblock and the wall."
He gathered a few friends, named the group Ghetto Town G-Town for short and started recording raw hip-hop about politics and life in Shuafat.
Jerusalem must be split in two to allow a Palestinian capital in the eastern part, Mughrabi said. "I think it has to happen. None of us is going to leave. We're all here, and we have to share."
But having seen the damage wrought by Israel's separation barrier, Mughrabi can't imagine a physical divider between the city's Jewish and Arab sides.
"One wall is enough," he said.
 Load-Date: November 26, 2007

 

End of Document
