

From the war zone
The Associated Press
March 28, 2008 Friday 3:27 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1019 words
Byline: By NANCY DEWOLF SMITH, The Wall Street Journal
Body




No one who has not experienced it can fully understand the bond between people who have faced death together. A bond so profound, in fact, that the two soldiers who narrate much of "Bad Voodoo's War" say that they have returned to Iraq again and again motivated primarily by a desire to be among their brothers-in-arms (Tuesday, 9-10 p.m. EDT, on PBS).
The title of this documentary in the "Frontline" series refers to a crack platoon of California-based infantrymen in the National Guard, most of whom also have served multiple tours of duty in Iraq. Their latest deployment began last summer. The platoon will not be out of present danger until May.
What we see here is the result of a "virtual embed," in which director Deborah Scranton visited the soldiers during training before their deployment and taught some of them how to install cameras and send back tapes documenting their experience in Iraq. The platoon was returning as part of the surge, but for them the door-to-door fighting and regular combat was over. Their assignment, at least for ordinary Americans who have been following the course of the war, may be even more chilling: Bad Voodoo Platoon is assigned to escort convoys along some of the most dangerous roads in the world.
Over and over, we watch often in the eerie night light as the platoon travels a sinister ribbon of road, accompanying a long convoy of trucks. The tension is sickening and unrelenting; at any minute the worst could happen. The radios crackle as the soldiers alert each other to suspicious vehicles: a Mercedes that seems to be following them, a white truck traveling in the white lane. Which one is carrying insurgents with machine guns or explosives?
At Iraqi military checkpoints, uniformed Iraqis take notes, we are told, as the convoy passes. If only one of them is working for the other side, they will know exactly what to tell enemies lying in wait down the road. When one explosive device does go off, the men of Bad Voodoo calculate that since the road had been clear only minutes earlier, the people who planted IEDs had to come from the only building nearby, an Iraqi police facility.
Surviving one trip does not increase anyone's chances of surviving the next. On one occasion, we see the soldiers being reminded to keep a tourniquet loosely tied on their leg, ready to tighten in an instant if the constant threat an explosion under their vehicle becomes reality.
What kind of person can face months of such danger, day in and day out? Only the brave, undoubtedly. Beyond that, it is difficult to say much more specific about the men of Bad Voodoo Platoon. Of its 30-some members, only two have been chosen to speak at length here. What they have to say is disturbing on many levels.
Bad Voodoo Platoon named itself after its acting leader, Sgt. 1st Class Toby Nunn, who got the nickname "Voodoo" while serving in the Balkans. After several tours in Iraq, he is more than a father figure to his men he clearly functions as a guardian angel, using his bright mind and experience to keep them from getting killed. After a recent leave for the birth of his third child, he went back to Iraq with a heavy heart about abandoning that family, but knowing that that the men he is responsible for need him more.
That commitment makes it even more painful to sense how cynical and disillusioned Sgt. Nunn is about his platoon's current assignment and the military authorities above him. Some of it will be familiar to anyone who has served in the military, including the fact that for experienced combat soldiers, escorting convoys feels like passive drudgery. And then there are what he calls the "lettuce and tomato runs," where the platoon is not escorting material for other soldiers, but is "just doing it to hook up some private contractor." It is all more exhausting for his team of highly trained fighters than anyone knows, he says. "It's frustrating at times do be constantly doing this stuff. The leadership above us, they don't grasp ... the big picture."
Sgt. Nunn seems most troubled by the way the war has changed since Iraq got its own government and the rules of engagement changed. Instead of taking the fight to the enemy, his men now function more like sitting ducks, in a country where he cannot be sure that all Iraqi authorities want the insurgency to fail.
The other soldier we get to know, Spc. Jason Shaw, is a sad figure in a different way. After other tours in Iraq, he was not called up for the platoon's current mission. He volunteered to go back so he could support his Bad Voodoo brothers. That's the only reason, because Spc. Shaw, who says he has lost his religious faith in Iraq and has been diagnosed with post-traumatic-stress disorder, thinks the war is "ridiculous." So, he adds, "I do it for the guys I'm with, not for anybody else. ... I don't like the whole reason we're over here. ... I think it's totally pointless."
It is impossible to know whether this episode of "Frontline" was deliberately crafted to make the same point. One wonders whether the other members of Bad Voodoo are as grim as their two comrades featured here. On the other hand, history suggests that those who serve on the front lines of any war never spend much time in peppy talk about the big picture. They get tired, bored and scared, and stay sane only by focusing on the small picture: getting the next job done and keeping themselves alive.
Just a reminder: A very appealing new adaptation of Jane Austen's "Sense and Sensibility" begins Sunday, 9-10:30 p.m. on PBS's "Masterpiece" (sans "Theater" these days), check your local listings.
On the wilder, wackier side is Showtimes's new series "Tracey Ullman's State of the Union" (Sundays 10-10:30 p.m.). The fantastic Ms. Ullman is as funny as ever, depicting a new slew of characters in sketches that mock the way we are. While many personas are invented, Ms. Ullman pokes some of the very best fun at real people. Her transformations include a stupid, blogaholic Arianna Huffington; Tony "Paulie Walnuts" Sirico as a foul-mouthed Inuit, and Suzanne Somers selling the "Vagisizer" on TV to home shoppers.
 Load-Date: March 29, 2008

 

End of Document
