

Hamas, Egyptians guards work together to reclose the border
The Associated Press
January 28, 2008 Monday 3:22 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 806 words
Byline: By OMAR SINAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RAFAH Egypt
Body




Egyptian security forces and Hamas militants built a chain-link fence reinforced with barbed wire across one of the openings in the Egypt-Gaza border Monday a sign that a dayslong breaching of the frontier may be near an end.
Six days after Hamas blew holes in the border wall to end a two-year blockade and sent hundreds of thousands of Palestinians across the border in a shopping frenzy, authorities are still struggling to come up with a new system to administer the border.
Cooperation between Egypt and Hamas was absent in Cairo, however, where Arab foreign ministers put forward a united front against any role on the border for the Islamist organization. Egypt wants to restore shared control of the border among the Palestinian Authority, Israel, and European Union monitors. Hamas rejects the old system and is pushing for a new one.
With much of the Arab world expressing deep sympathy for the plight of the Palestinians, Egyptian forces have moved very gingerly in stemming the flow of Gazans seeking food and supplies.
The fence is the first attempt to close one of the main crossing points.
In Cairo, Arab foreign ministers backed a 2005 international agreement that stipulated the Palestinian Authority would run the crossing with Israeli and EU monitors, a system that does not recognize Hamas' total control over the Gaza Strip and the border with Egypt since last summer.
"The only way to reopen the (divided border town of) Rafah crossing is going back to that agreement," said Palestinian Foreign Minister Riad Malki upon returning from Cairo. "We will run the crossings as if Hamas was not there."
Hamas, however, was very much in evidence in Rafah on Monday, as its security personnel helped Egyptian border guards put up the fence across the "Brazil" crossing point.
"No one can exclude the government here from the crossing arrangements or any other issue. This is the legitimate government," Taher Nunu, the Hamas government spokesman, said in response to Malki's comments.
A handful of Hamas officials came to the crossing Monday and gave presents to the Egyptian border police, including copies of the Quran, in gratitude for keeping the border open.
The two security services worked side by side to control traffic at the main Salah Eddin crossing point, where hundreds of Egyptian riot police formed up around the gates in what could be a prelude the reclosing of the border.
The security forces stopped civilian cars and let trucks through, while pedestrians scoured the nearly empty stores for food and consumer products to take back to the Gaza Strip.
"I said no Gazan cars with civilian plates can go through, only cars with truck plates are allowed. Do not argue with me. The orders have changed from above," one security guard told a man trying to ferry his Egyptian mother back across the border.
Many local shopkeepers were worried about the future.
"Since I opened this shop more than 20 years ago, I haven't seen such a chaotic situation, if this keeps up, the Egyptians in Rafah will be starving to death," said Mohammed Barahmah, 60, who owns one of the biggest grocery shops in downtown Rafah.
Outside Rafah, lines of trucks with Cairo plates could be seen stopped at checkpoints and being sent back to the capital. But security officials in Cairo, speaking on customary condition of anonymity, denied any shipments to Rafah were being blocked.
The border cannot ultimately be reclosed, however, until a new system to replace the sharing arrangement brokered by Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice in 2005.
Hamas wants a new Rafah security scheme, calling the old one a piece of "history."
"This agreement has become part of past history, and the Palestinian people will not accept turning back to the old procedure," said Sami Abu Zuhri, a Hamas spokesman in Gaza City.
Hamas says its main objection to the old system is that Israel uses cameras and computers to track everyone who passes in and out of Gaza, even though the Jewish state pulled its citizens out of the strip in summer 2005.
But while it does not say so publicly, the militant group could also be seeking to wrest the Palestinian Authority's share of responsibility for Rafah.
Hamas is dispatching a delegation to Egypt to discuss Rafah security Wednesday the same day Abbas meets in Cairo with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak.
But the rival Palestinian factions will likely meet separately with Egyptian officials. Abbas refuses to talk to Hamas until the group gives up control of Gaza.
In Gaza City, meanwhile, about 150 children dressed in white death shrouds marked with the flags of Arab countries marched through the streets calling on the Arab League to lift the blockade on the strip. "Siegedeath, help Gaza children live a normal life," their banners said.
Associated Press Writer Mohammed Daraghmeh contributed to this report from Ramallah.
 Load-Date: January 29, 2008

 

End of Document
