

Highlights from the Bush administration's annual report on human rights
The Associated Press
March 11, 2008 Tuesday 11:09 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON DATELINE
Length: 1356 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Highlights from the Bush administration's annual report on human rights conditions around the world.
Afghanistan The human rights situation in Afghanistan continued to be problematic in 2007, due to an insurgency that killed more than 6,500 people. These deaths included assassinations, roadside bombs and suicide attacks. Corruption and drug trafficking also contributed to violations. Other problems included torture, poor prison conditions, long pretrial detentions, restrictions on press and religious freedoms, discrimination against women, human trafficking and child labor.
Burma Human rights conditions in Burma declined in 2007. At least 30 activists were killed by government security forces during protests in the autumn. The leader of the National League for Democracy, Aung San Suu Kyi, remained under house arrest. More than 3,000 people, including at least 300 members of her group, were detained indefinitely without charges. The nation's army used force to remove ethnic minorities from their land. The Bush administration also criticized the Burmese regime's restrictions on the press, assembly, religion and movement, as well as privacy infringements.
China The country remained poor on human rights issues, with continued repression of freedoms of speech, religion and the press. In some regions, these controls were made more stringent in 2007. Minorities face particular cultural and religious persecution. The government also mistreats journalists, writers, activists and defense lawyers by monitoring, harassing, detaining, arresting and imprisoning them. Other problems include prison torture and coerced confessions, forced labor, closed trials and a lack of due process.
Cuba Under acting President Raul Castro, Cuba continued its history of human rights problems, including prisoner abuse, life-threatening prison conditions, arbitrary arrests and denial of fair trials. By the end of the year, 240 political prisoners and detainees were held and up to 5,000 had served time for being labeled as dangerous. The government also restricts freedom of speech, press, assembly and movement.
Haiti It did not hold required Senate elections in 2007. Other problems included national police involvement in illegal killings and kidnapping, ineffective responses to gang killings, poor prison conditions, corruption in all government branches and child labor.
Iraq Human rights abuses in Iraq stemmed from a combination of government weakness and violence from sectarian, ethnic and other extremist groups. Reported problems reported included criminal and extremist groups usurping authority, arbitrary killing, disappearance, torture, poor conditions in prisons and detention facilities, denial of fair trials, and arbitrary arrests and detentions. New military efforts coupled with citizen groups standing up to extremists helped decrease violence in the second half of the year.
Iran The human rights situation in Iran declined. The government ramped up its opposition of journalists, dissidents, women's rights activists and labor activists. Mistreatment of religious and ethnic minorities continued. Security forces were reported to abduct, arbitrarily arrest or detain suspects and torture and kill those being punished. Stoning was used to execute those sentenced for adultery in spite of a 2002 moratorium on the practice. The government also continued support of terrorist groups in Syria, Iraq and Lebanon.
Kenya The election in December featured irregularities in vote tallying and resulted in an explosion of violence, illustrating the need for reform in Kenya. Reported human rights abuses include: torture, excessive force and illegal killing by police; life-threatening prison conditions; arbitrary arrests and detention, and prolonged periods of detention before a trial. The government has internal corruption and does not properly respect freedoms of press and speech. Female genital mutilation is another human rights issue Kenya faces.
Lebanon Foreign-supported opposition groups in Lebanon continue to hold back progress in the human rights arena. Car bombings and assassinations threaten public and political figures. The country hosts a large number of Palestinian refugees, who face discrimination. There were also reports of security forces arbitrarily arresting and detaining people, poor prison conditions and long court delays.
North Korea The government continued to place rigid controls over many aspects of citizens' lives. Reports emerged of extra-judicial killings, disappearances, arbitrary detentions, public executions and severe punishment of repatriated refugees, as well as trafficking in women and girls among refugees and workers crossing the border into China. Citizens were denied freedom of speech, press, assembly and association. Pregnant prisoners underwent forced abortions in some cases, and babies were sometimes killed upon birth in prisons. July's local elections were not free or fair.
Pakistan Human rights problems escalated in Pakistan in 2007. Early in the year, President Pervez Musharraf suspended the chief justice and instigated mass detentions of those protesting the decision. Months later he declared a state of emergency, suspending the constitution and arresting many members of the judiciary as well as thousands of those in opposition to the decision. The state of emergency lasted for 42 days. However, Musharraf later resigned as chief of the army and lifted the state of emergency. Parliamentary elections were scheduled, although later postponed after Benazir Bhutto's assassination.
Russia Human rights problems in Russia included law enforcement corruption, selectively enforcing laws, overly difficult registration requirements for non-governmental organizations, a restricted media and problematic elections. Violence and human rights abuses in the Chechen Republic were also noted by the Bush administration.
Rwanda Serious human rights abuses occurred, although the country made concrete steps to improve some areas. Press freedom declined, and authorities increasingly harassed, convicted, fined and intimidated independent journalists critical of the government. Extra-judicial killings increased, and security officials made arbitrarily arrests and detentions. Other problems included prolonged pretrial detention and attempts by government officials to influence judicial outcomes. The country also made steps to advance human rights, including a law in June that abolished restrictions on political party efforts at the local level. There were fewer reports of torture and abuse of suspects.
Sudan Violence increased in 2007 and horrific human rights abuses remained, including torture, beatings, extra-judicial killings and rape by government security forces and their proxy militia in Darfur, the janjaweed. In Darfur, the region of continued ethnic conflict, government forces, the janjaweed, the region's rebel groups and tribal factions committed significant abuses during the year, including the reported killing of about 1,600 people. By the year's end, more than 2 million people were internally displaced and another 231,000 people fled across the border in Chad. The government obstructed international efforts to deploy a peacekeeping force to the region and humanitarian aid. Many human rights workers were assaulted, killed, arrested or kidnapped.
Syria The country's human rights record worsened, and members of the security forces committed serious human rights abuses. The government sentenced to prison several high-profile human rights activists, including leaders of the National Council for the Damascus Declaration for Democratic Change in December. Security forces tortured and physically abused prisoners and detainees. The government increasingly violated citizen's privacy rights and raised restrictions on freedoms of speech, press, assembly and association. The government discriminated against women and minorities, particularly the Kurds, and restricted workers' rights. It continues to support international terrorist groups and violent extremists.
Source: State Department
On the Net:
State Department: http://www.state.gov
 Load-Date: March 12, 2008

 

End of Document
