

Iraq's Shiite, Sunni parties feuding; each side accuses the other of killings
The Associated Press
October 10, 2006 Tuesday 8:15 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 954 words
Byline: By
Dateline: BAGHDAD Iraq
Body




Gatherings of Iraq's top politicians start with polite greetings and dinner. But once tea is poured after the meal, the tone changes: Sunnis and Shiites lash out, accusing each other of supporting death squads.
Mistrust is deep in what was once lauded as Iraq's national unity government. The tensions between them mount with each new tragedy and it is even worse when the bloodshed becomes personal, as it did this week with the slaying of a brother of Iraq's most prominent Sunni Arab politician, Vice President Tariq al-Hashimi.
Sunnis blamed Shiite militias for the killing the third sibling of al-Hashimi to be gunned down. The political leaders had been planning to meet to flesh out a plan to stop the sectarian violence, but now it will likely have to be put off a few days until tempers cool, Shiite lawmaker Bassem Sherif said Tuesday.
U.S. officials have said Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki has a matter of only two or three months to show he can stop the violence that has left thousands dead and threatens to tip Iraq into civil war. Secretary of State Condoleeza Rice met last week with most of the party heads and gave them a blunt warning that the American public won't support a government torn by internal feuds.
But al-Maliki has to find a solution at the head of a government which, many say, includes the killers themselves.
"The trust between them is destroyed," Hassan al-Shimari, a lawmaker from the Shiite Fadila party, said of the government's coalition of Sunni and Shiite parties. "Each side is afraid of the other, and in these meetings, the fear is increasing."
Still, none of the parties is threatening to leave the administration. Instead, they are locked in an embrace of hatred.
Several of the Shiite parties on which al-Maliki relies for power head militias particularly the Sadr Movement, which runs the Mahdi Army, the militia Sunnis fear most and say regularly kidnaps Sunnis and dumps their bound and tortured corpses on the streets of Baghdad.
Entwined in the political process, the militias are in plain sight. At a lavish dinner last week for members of parliament, the Cabinet and other leaders, al-Maliki spoke about the need for parties to give up their militias.
But outside, hundreds of gunmen guarding the affair were not police: They were fighters loyal to the host, Abdul-Aziz al-Hakim, head of the Shiite coalition that dominates parliament. His party says its militia, the Badr Brigade, has been dissolved but Sunnis say it still exists and is quietly involved in killings.
Shiites, in turn, say the Sunni parties are linked to the Sunni insurgents who for the past three years have been blowing up Shiites with car bombs and gunning them down in shooting attacks.
Yet al-Maliki often has to call the heads of these parties together for meetings to make the tough decisions that parliament and his Cabinet can't resolve and in recent weeks the gatherings have become increasingly stormy.
Often the gatherings are held over dinner, said Khalaf al-Alayan, leader of the Sunni National Dialogue Council.
"We eat without anyone talking about what's going on, because we'd be too angry to eat. Then after the tea, the accusations start," he said.
Each side throws out specific examples of kidnappings, murders, bombings and blames the other for them, prompting the other to bring out his own list of atrocities, al-Alayan and other participants in the meetings said.
"The Shiites sit and complain, and if you listened to them you'd want to reach for a handkerchief. So then we start raising our own complaints," he said.
At one weekend session, al-Maliki was lecturing the party heads on the need to end the bloodshed, al-Hashimi slipped him a note saying a new kidnapping of Sunnis had been reported.
The prime minister handed the note to the representative of the Sadr Movement, who protested the abduction was no doubt in response to a July attack in which Sunni militants kidnapped 85 Shiites from a factory north of Baghdad and killed 50 of them, said a participant in the meeting, who gave the details on the condition of anonymity.
"It starts with polite handshakes, but then it turns into each side shouting, 'You're the ones killing us,'" said Sherif, the head of the Fadila party.
He and al-Shimari, however, said the brutal frankness could be a good sign, showing that both sides realize they must find a solution.
"There is seriousness now because everyone fears the situation is going to eat them alive," al-Shimari said. "Before you would have political enemies greeting each other with kisses even when behind the scenes they were working against each other," he said.
But it could also be a recipe for paralysis as both sides dig in and the country tears itself apart.
"The sectarian killings in the street are not the responsibility of the Sadr Movement or the Mahdi Army," insisted Nasser al-Saedi, a lawmaker from the party. "They come from young Shiites reacting to the terrorists, who are present in the government and in the parliament," he said, referring to the Sunni parties.
In turn, the Sunni leaders, who deny any links to the insurgency, are becoming more desperate.
During Rice's visit, al-Hashimi and the leader of the Sunni coalition in parliament, Adnan al-Dulaimi, handed her a detailed list of slayings of Sunnis, said al-Alayan. They told her the killings were done by the Mahdi Army and Badr Brigade and that the militias had the support of the government.
They also gave her a stark warning: Either the Americans protect Sunnis or they will take up weapons to protect themselves, al-Alayan said.
"If we (Sunnis) remain in the condition we're in now, we'll be finished," al-Alayan said. "If the zero hour is coming, we will take the decisions needed to defend ourselves."
 Load-Date: October 11, 2006

 

End of Document
