

Iraq's latest man of the hour is figure the Shiites once thought they could not sell
The Associated Press
May 20, 2006 Saturday 7:10 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 629 words
Byline: By ROBERT H. REID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAGHDAD Iraq
Body




The new prime minister carrying U.S. hopes for bringing stability to Iraq is a Shiite Muslim hard-liner whom fellow Shiites once thought they could never sell to the Americans.
Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki and his Cabinet took office Saturday, promising to combat terrorism, promote national dialogue among Shiites, Sunnis and Kurds, and build a country free of sectarian and ethnic discrimination.
If he succeeds, that will hasten the day when 132,000 American soldiers can begin heading home.
"Prime Minister Maliki realizes the new government must forge unity and reconciliation amongst the Iraqi people," U.S. Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad said after the swearing-in ceremony.
The balding, stern-faced al-Maliki appears eager to heal the sectarian divisions that have raised fears of civil war in Iraq.
Although he was unable to get agreement from his governing partners on naming ministers of interior and defense, he repeated assurances that he will choose figures who have no ties to sectarian militias and death squads a key U.S. demand.
"This government was formed through intensified dialogues and it did not come from a sectarian background as some have said," al-Maliki said Saturday. "Efforts were exerted to come up with a most coherent government."
Only a few weeks ago al-Maliki was not considered a unifying figure. He had a reputation as a Shiite hard-liner dating back to the years when he supervised Shiite guerrillas fighting Saddam Hussein's Sunni Arab-dominated regime from his exile in Syria.
Still, he got his shot at forming a government due to sectarian political squabbles.
The Shiites got to pick the prime minister because they won the biggest number of parliament seats in the Dec. 15 elections. But they also needed Sunni and Kurd votes to install a Cabinet, and those blocs refused to accept Shiite Ibrahim al-Jaafari for a second term as prime minister.
Al-Maliki's name was among several floated as an alternative, although several Shiite officials said at the time that they considered the 55-year-old politician a hard sell because of his reputation as a tough Shiite stalwart.
That image had been reinforced by al-Maliki's aggressive stand on behalf of Shiite interests during the contentious negotiations last year over the new constitution, which many Sunnis opposed and still want amended.
He was among those who strongly resisted Sunni demands for more seats on the committee that drafted the charter, prompting Sunnis to accuse Shiites of trying to exclude their minority from the political process.
Al-Maliki also served as vice chairman of a government committee established to purge former members of Saddam's Sunni-dominated Baath party from public life, and many Sunnis viewed the panel as an instrument to deny them civil rights.
Shiite officials assumed Washington wouldn't accept al-Maliki at a time of rising sectarian violence, particularly since in rejecting al-Jaafari, Sunnis and Kurds had accused him of failing to heal the breach among ethnic and religious groups. Al-Maliki also was politically close to al-Jaafari.
With the doubts about al-Maliki, Shiite leaders considered others for the prime minister's post, among them Ali al-Adeeb, who was thought acceptable to Iraq's top Shiite cleric, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani.
But the 52-year-old al-Adeeb had his own baggage many years spent in exile in Iran, a neighboring state viewed with suspicion by the United States.
The Americans, meanwhile, were anxious to end the political bickering and raised no objections to al-Maliki, said several Shiite officials, who agreed to discuss the dealings only if not quoted by name because of the subject's sensitivity.
Al-Adeeb's name was quickly dropped, the officials said, and Al-Maliki was tapped on April 22 to form a new government.
 Load-Date: May 21, 2006

 

End of Document
