

Is terrorism the real issue for the Beijing Olympics or just a smokescreen? 
The Associated Press
March 11, 2008 Tuesday 8:06 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 806 words
Byline: By TIM DAHLBERG, AP Sports Columnist
Body




The facilities were never going to be a problem. We knew all along China would build spectacular structures, and deliver them in plenty of time.
The buses were always going to run on time, too, never a question about that. For all we know, the Chinese may have even found a way to scrub the skies clean above Beijing just in time for the Olympics.
Not only that, for the first time in years we weren't going to have to worry about security. Any country that can make sure its citizens stick to having only one child shouldn't have trouble keeping tight control over a sporting event, even one as big as the Summer Games.
Or so we thought.
News coming out of Beijing that authorities broke up a plot to "sabotage the staging of the Beijing Olympics" had to be more than just a little startling to those in the Olympic movement. Until now they seemed more concerned with keeping athletes from making noise in China than they were with any possible attacks on the games.
If the reports are taken at face value, there are groups active in Pakistan and Afghanistan who would like nothing better than to make a name for themselves by blowing things up and killing people in Beijing just when the world is tuned in to watch.
Figure the odds of that actually happening are remote at best, since China's security forces exercise tight and complete control over the country and will bring all resources into play for the Olympics.
Still, the mere announcement of the alleged plot brings the threat of terrorism back into play to a sporting event which will always be scarred by the attacks in Munich in 1972.
That may be why we're hearing about it now. Nothing like a little terrorism scare to get people to stop talking about pesky human rights issues in Tibet and Darfur, or the threat that pollution poses to the lungs of the world's top athletes come August.
Amazing how all concerns seem so trivial when put up against the Big T.
The 2002 Winter Olympics had some issues, too, most stemming from the bribery scandal that helped Salt Lake City get the games in the first place.
However, no one was talking about them because the overriding aspect of those games was the immense security operation involving the military, the FBI and every other agency imaginable in the wake of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
The Chinese have been warning about terrorism all along, with the country's top cop saying in September it was the biggest threat to the Olympics. It wasn't until Sunday, though, when a top Communist party official said plans to disrupt the Olympics were uncovered in a deadly raid in January that many people started paying attention.
The raid occurred in the western region of Xinjiang, and the plotters were allegedly following the orders of a separatist group based in Pakistan and Afghanistan called the East Turkestan Islamic Movement, or ETIM. That's about all we know, because in addition to controlling security in the country, the government also has a lock on the media.
"When China has made allegations of terrorist activity, it doesn't back it up with evidence and restrictions make it impossible for independent investigators to verify," said Mark Allison, a Hong Kong-based researcher for Amnesty International
So what would China have to gain by publicizing terror threats just five months before the start of the Olympics? Threats that we have no way of knowing are genuine or not, and which easily could have been kept quiet even if they were?
Quite a bit, actually.
China has a lot riding on the Olympics. The games will not only be a declaration the country is an athletic superpower, but a chance to project a lasting image to the world of a happy, progressive country that works.
Things that could conflict with that agenda include the issues with Darfur and Tibet, both of which have been getting more attention as the games draw near. On Monday alone, hundreds of Tibetan exiles tried to begin a march from northern India to Tibet to protest China hosting the Olympics, Tibetan activists held a mock torch lighting in Ancient Olympia, and Tibetan immigrants in San Francisco vowed to make a big scene when the Olympic torch comes to that city.
Chinese police have already said they will deal harshly with any social or political demonstrations at the Olympics. Any crackdowns will be easier to justify if they're linked with the fight against terrorism, something officials have already attempted to do.
In the end, the Chinese are the only ones who know just how real the terror threat is. But with just one announcement they have undoubtedly jangled some nerves among the tens of thousands of athletes, visitors and officials who will be in Beijing in August.
Because no matter what the issues, talk of terrorism trumps them all.
Tim Dahlberg is a national sports columnist for The Associated Press. Write to him at tdahlberg@ap.org
 Load-Date: March 12, 2008

 

End of Document
