

Israel's borders, fears of Hamas and the economy are key campaign issues in the election
The Associated Press
March 28, 2006 Tuesday 9:46 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 420 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Key campaign issues and positions of the three main parties for Israel's March 28 election.
BORDERS
 The centrist Kadima Party of Acting Prime Minister Ehud Olmert wants to draw Israel's final borders based on the U.S.-backed road map peace plan, which calls for a negotiated peace deal with the Palestinians. However, Olmert has said he will withdraw unilaterally from parts of the West Bank if peace efforts are deadlocked, which seems increasingly likely after the Hamas victory in Jan. 25 Palestinian parliament elections. Olmert has said Israel would retain large Jewish settlement blocs in the West Bank and parts of east Jerusalem, areas Palestinians claim for their future state.
 The center-left Labor Party of populist ex-union leader Amir Peretz supports an immediate renewal of peace talks. In failed talks in 2000, former Labor Prime Minister Ehud Barak offered Palestinians virtually all the West Bank and Gaza. Labor is also willing to give up Arab neighborhoods of east Jerusalem in a peace deal.
 The hard-line party of former Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said it was willing to make some territorial concessions, but only after Palestinians halt violence and militant groups are disarmed. Netanyahu opposes unilateral moves, including Israel's pullout from Gaza. Netanyahu wants to keep large chunks of the West Bank under any peace deal.
HAMAS
 Disagreements have emerged among Kadima leaders over how to deal with moderate Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas after the Hamas victory. Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni says Abbas has become irrelevant, while Olmert takes a softer line. After the Hamas victory, Israel froze the transfer of tax rebates to the Palestinian Authority. However, the government held off on more drastic measures.
 Labor supports the economic sanctions, but warns Israel must be careful not to plunge Palestinians into poverty. Some Labor lawmakers say Israel could resume peace talks with Abbas, despite Hamas' rise to power.
 Netanyahu calls for stiffer sanctions against Hamas and says Olmert's response so far has been weak.
ECONOMY
 Kadima supports a market economy, but pledges to narrow social and economic gaps.
 Peretz has campaigned on narrowing the gap between rich and poor in Israel, and wants to increase the minimum wage and restore some welfare payments cut by the outgoing government.
 As a former finance minister, Likud's Netanyahu supports a free-market economy and competition. In an attempt to revive a sluggish market, Netanyahu cut budgets and stipends to the poor.
 Load-Date: March 29, 2006

 

End of Document
