

Knowing Afghan neighbors is half the battle
Associated Press
July 18, 2008 Friday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 1344 words
Byline: By MICHAEL M. PHILLIPS, The Wall Street Journal
Body




NARAY, Afghanistan After 15 months in the mountains of eastern Afghanistan, Lt. Col. Chris Kolenda figures he knows hundreds of village elders and leaders. He knows their names, their faces, their tribes, subtribes and clans. In many cases, he knows who stole whose water, who killed whose father, and who hates whom.
A lengthy combat tour has left Lt. Col. Kolenda as much sociologist as soldier. That will make him a tough act to follow when he and his men, the First Squadron of the 91st Cavalry Regiment, pack their duffels and turn over their battlefield to another Army unit over the next week or so.
"You are looking through a glass darkly trying to understand the people here," says the colonel, a 42-year-old from Omaha who taught history at West Point and uses flashcards to quiz himself on local personages. "It takes an extraordinarily long time to get the people to open up to you."
If this were a conventional war if Lt. Col. Kolenda's armored cavalry were rolling across the Kuwaiti desert, for instance a handover would be more straightforward. The outgoing commander would give the incoming commander an intelligence report, a map and a plan, and be on his way.
But like other guerrilla conflicts from Vietnam to Iraq, Afghanistan's war is an armed popularity contest. To win, soldiers especially commanders need skills that go well beyond good tactics and good aim; they must also blend the street smarts of a beat cop with the sensitivity of a social worker, the cultural awareness of an anthropologist and the deal-making abilities of a big-city mayor.
As a result, one of the most dangerous moments in this conflict is when Afghanistan veterans go home and Afghanistan novices arrive.
"There's no easy way around it," says Maj. Erik Berdy, the squadron's operations officer. "It's going to s . Balls will be dropped. Mistakes will be made."
The Afghan war, begun as an effort to oust the Taliban regime and destroy its al Qaeda allies, has become a lengthy insurgency that senior coalition commanders say has taken a turn for the worse in many parts of the country. In recent months, more U.S. forces have been killed in Afghanistan than in Iraq, where the overall level of violence has slowed. On Sunday, insurgents killed nine U.S. soldiers and injured 15 more at a U.S. base in Kunar, one of the provinces where Lt. Col. Kolenda's men are fighting. A few days later, U.S. troops pulled out of the base.
Senior Pentagon officers are pushing for more troop reductions in Iraq to free up forces for Afghanistan, potentially bringing more novices into the field.
The trick for a successful handover from one unit to another, say U.S. officers here, is for the outgoing commanders to pass on an anthropologist's guide to the local power structure, economy, rivalries, kinship, ambitions and fears.
Well ahead of the transition from Lt. Col. Kolenda's squadron to the Sixth Squadron, Fourth Cavalry Regiment, out of Fort Hood, Texas, the outgoing team emailed all of their records and papers to the new unit. Lt. Col. Kolenda and his men plan to squire the new commanders about the battlefield, introducing them to the people who will help them and to those who will get in their way.
The Army also offers the troops an online reference source, Wiki-Afghan. It looks just like Wikipedia, except it's all about Afghanistan and much of it is classified. There are upwards of 10,000 articles, and any authorized soldier can click on an entry and add new information.
The site has photos and write-ups of provincial and district officials. Mohammad Tamim Nuristani, who was removed this month from his post as governor of Nuristan Province, is "charming and well-spoken," Wiki-Afghan says. But his leadership is only "marginally effective," it says. The Afghan government removed Gov. Nuristani after he criticized a U.S. airstrike that allegedly killed civilians.
One of the first officers from the new squadron to arrive at the main base in Naray was Capt. Kevin Sopuch, the intelligence officer. Capt. Sopuch, 35, from Cape May, N.J., says he has been reading up on the country since he learned in April that he'd be spending 12 to 15 months here. He predicts that coming to Naray will be "like moving to a new city. ... I've moved enough times in America that it's just the same. After three months you know what restaurants not to eat at."
Lt. Col. Kolenda, however, worries that progress will slow during the transition to the new squadron. "We've got an obligation to set them up for success," he says. "We've got so much blood, sweat and tears invested in this region."
The blood includes four men killed in action out of the 600-man squadron, with 36 others wounded, since May 2007. The sweat includes building an encyclopedic knowledge of the inner workings of Afghan mountain societies.
In Kamdesh, for example, one of the most violent districts in the squadron's turf, Lt. Col. Kolenda and his men noticed that whenever a certain businessman bid on a construction contract, a senior member of the Gujar tribe would object. The Americans discovered that the businessman's father, a mujahedeen fighter against the Soviets two decades ago, had killed a Gujar leader, and the Gujar has neither forgiven nor forgotten.
"They're both decent chaps," says Lt. Col. Kolenda, "but they've got a history that is to them irreconcilable."
The colonel has also mastered the intricacies of the Nuristani tribe. At least two of its five subtribes, the Kom and the Kata, practice different variations of Islam and don't get along. During the Soviet war, they backed different mujahedeen factions. The Kom have four primary clans, and Lt. Col. Kolenda says they bicker among themselves as well.
The Kom and the Kushtowz, another Nuristani subtribe, have been fighting over water rights for a century, says Lt. Col. Kolenda. The Kushtowz say the Kom use their springs; the Kom say the Kushtowz stole their land and cattle. A decade ago the Kom pushed the Kushtowz out of Kamdesh District. The Kushtowz want to move back, but their rivals seeded the land with mines.
The colonel says it's critical the U.S. not take sides, intentionally or accidentally. Doing so could push the aggrieved party into the embrace of the Taliban, al Qaeda or some other insurgent group.
The insurgents are not monolithic either. There are hard-line Taliban, al Qaeda and Hizb-I Islami Gulbuddin fighters, a pro-al Qaeda insurgent group loyal to a particular warlord. But there are also poor people who fight for the $20 that the Americans say the Taliban offer per attack, and there are locals who have some grievance against the U.S. or Afghan authorities.
One of the squadron's great successes over the past year, says Lt. Col. Kolenda, has been weaning less-committed local boys away from the hard-liners through jobs, schooling and support for the elders. He says the young men of Mirdish village, for instance, joined the insurgency because a couple of years ago American troops kicked down some doors and searched some homes.
The colonel says these days the village elders are less interested in revenge than they are in bridges, small hydroelectric generators and other projects the American and Afghan governments offer in the area.
Altogether, the U.S.-led coalition is spending about $85 million for economic development in First Squadron's area.
U.S. intelligence reports suggest that foreign fighters Chechens, Pakistanis and others have come to the area to make up for locals who have defected from the insurgency. By splitting the fighters from the locals, U.S. troops say they are more likely to get tipped off before an attack.
In late June, insurgents prepared coordinated attacks on several U.S. outposts in the Hindu Kush mountains. Locals warned U.S. soldiers of the impending offensive. American troops hit most of the insurgents with artillery or airstrikes before they were in position to attack the outposts, according to Lt. Col. Kolenda.
"It takes a long time to build that level of trust with the people," he says. "They've got 2,000 years of negative baggage with foreign armies."
 Load-Date: July 19, 2008

 

End of Document
