

Lebanese refugees in northern Israel fear for their relatives on the other side of the border
The Associated Press
July 27, 2006 Thursday 8:20 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 633 words
Byline: By MATTI FRIEDMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NAHARIYA Israel
Body




Afraid of Hezbollah's rockets, Fuad and Diana Elias have rarely left their apartment in this Israeli border town. But they worry just as much that their relatives in Lebanon will get hit by Israeli air strikes.
The Eliases are members of a small Lebanese community in Israel. The couple, along with 6,000 other Lebanese who had allied themselves with Israel during its 18-year occupation of south Lebanon, escaped to Israel when the Israeli army pulled out in 2000.
Two weeks into Israel's war against Hezbollah guerrillas, Diana Elias nervously flipped between Israeli and Lebanese TV stations, eager for news. Her mother and two sisters are in Beirut, her husband's parents are in the south Lebanese town of Jezzine.
Diana received an e-mail from her sisters just after the fighting started, but has not heard from them since.
"They are worried about us here, and we are worried about them there," she said in her living room decorated with a pastel picture of Jesus and the Virgin Mary. "We are all watching television to see what's happening on the other side."
Diana and her husband have not seen their relatives since they fled their home in the south Lebanese town of el-Kleya when the Israeli army pulled out six years ago. Tainted by their association with Israel, neither expect to return home to Lebanon.
The Lebanese families are concentrated in Nahariya, which has been hit by more Hezbollah rockets than any other Israeli town. They are weathering the daily barrages from north of the border just as, a few miles to the north, their families in Lebanon are weathering Israel's fierce 2-week-old war against the Shiite guerrilla group.
Fuad Elias, 44, spent nearly 20 years fighting Hezbollah as a soldier in the South Lebanon Army, or SLA, a Christian-led militia funded by Israel. His brother, then 14, was killed by a car bomb planted by Hezbollah in 1985.
With the Israeli pullout, the SLA collapsed. Its soldiers and their families fled to Israel, fearing Hezbollah retribution.
Elias believes Israel abandoned south Lebanon and its Christian population by unilaterally withdrawing. He said the pullout was a sign of weakness and that further violence was inevitable.
"None of us was surprised," he said of the current fighting. "We knew this would come."
The members of his family, including sons Peter, 9, and Paul, 7, have rarely left their three-room apartment since the fighting began. One Hezbollah rocket hit 500 yards from their home, lighting an avocado orchard on fire, but causing no casualties.
Still, Elias wants Israel to continue its assault until Hezbollah's power is broken.
"If Israel stops now, (Hezbollah leader Hassan) Nasrallah will be the new Saladin, the redeemer of the Muslims," he said.
Of the 6,000 Lebanese who fled to Israel, only 2,000 now remain.
Most of the rest returned to Lebanon, where some of the men were tried and imprisoned for collaboration with Israel. Their families were allowed to return to their villages.
Those who still live in Israel are mostly officers who face death sentences if they return to Lebanon and lower-ranking soldiers like Fuad Elias who fear that they will be unable to rebuild their lives there.
On Tuesday, the streets around the Elias home in a working-class neighborhood of Nahariya were largely deserted, with many residents having fled to safer points to the south. According to official estimates, fewer than a quarter of Nahariya's residents are still in town.
"Nasrallah is watching, and he sees that Israelis are afraid," Elias said.
In contrast, he says, perhaps 80 percent of the 300 Lebanese families who live in Nahariya are still here.
This is partly because they don't have family elsewhere, Elias said, and partly because of their past. "I ran away six years ago, and I will never run from these people again," he said.
 Load-Date: July 28, 2006

 

End of Document
