

National Guard not expected to patrol the border but play behind-the-scenes role
The Associated Press
May 16, 2006 Tuesday 12:35 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON DATELINE
Length: 847 words
Byline: By ROBERT BURNS, AP Military Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




The National Guard troops tapped for duty on the border with Mexico will not chase down illegal immigrants but instead will play behind-the-scenes roles in support of border guards.
The tasks they will perform over the coming year include training federal Border Patrol guards, building vehicle barriers near the border, improving roadways, providing support for aerial and ground surveillance and analyzing intelligence, President Bush said Monday in a nationally broadcast speech on immigration reform.
The intent is to deepen the Guard's existing support for law enforcement agencies but only temporarily.
Initially, about 6,000 Guard troops will be used in this mission, beginning early next month. The intention is to have individual Guardsmen involved for only their normal two- or three-week training time, so if none ever returned for a second tour then the cumulative total of Guardsmen used in the mission over a one-year period would reach 156,000, White House homeland security adviser Fran Townsend told reporters.
The number on duty at any given time would decline from 6,000 to some lower figure after the first year, Townsend said.
The total number of Army National Guard and Air National Guard in the United States is 444,000, of which 337,000 is the Army Guard.
Bush said the mission on the border will not put an undue burden on the military.
"It's important for Americans to know that we have enough Guard forces to win the war on terror, to respond to natural disasters and to help secure our border," the president said.
Those tapped for border-related duty will come from the four border states California, Arizona, New Mexico and Texas but those states' governors may also use Emergency Management Assistance Compacts to get Guard troops from other states. Any such cross-border arrangements would be coordinated by Lt. Gen. Steven Blum, chief of the National Guard Bureau at the Pentagon.
The troops will not be put on federal status. Instead they will remain under the control of each state governor's office, with the federal government paying the cost, Townsend said.
Any apprehension and detention of illegal immigrants would be handled by the Border Patrol not the Guardsmen. But the Guardsmen will be armed and authorized to use force if necessary to protect themselves, Townsend added.
The National Guard already provides support to law enforcement agencies on the border, although in small numbers. Sending several thousand more will add yet another mission to a part-time force already stretched by the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
"The idea that the Guard is overstretched is correct," retired Army Gen. George Joulwan said in an interview Monday. But he said its use in a supporting role can be justified, given the seriousness of the border problem.
"In a supporting role to law enforcement, I would agree that this is something they need to do," so long as the Pentagon is able to balance this with the Guard's commitments in Iraq, Afghanistan and elsewhere, Joulwan said.
John Goheen, spokesman for the National Guard Association, an advocacy group for Guard officers, noted that the Army Guard and Air Guard combined have about 444,000 personnel across the United States.
"It would seem this mission is doable," Goheen said. "The numbers would not seem to make it that difficult."
Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., said it was vital that Bush spell out the details of how the Guard will be used, and why.
"Unfortunately, President Bush has overtaxed, overused and underfunded this critical national security resource," Reid said.
"Now, if it's true the president is going to order them on another mission, he must tell us how he's going to help them succeed, and ensure they are ready and prepared should they be called to another mission while stationed at our border," Reid added.
At one point last year National Guard troops represented about 50 percent of all U.S. combat forces in Iraq, but that has dropped sharply in recent months and is now below 20 percent. It is not expected to rise significantly this year or next.
Hurricanes Katrina and Rita also put an extra burden on the Guard last year, requiring the use of 50,000 troops.
About 71,000 National Guard troops are on active duty for the war on terror. That's 16 percent of the total Guard force. Of the four border states affected, California and Texas both have about 20,000 Guard members; Arizona has about 7,400 and New Mexico has about 4,000. According to figures provided by the Pentagon, California, Arizona and New Mexico each have roughly 10 percent of their Guard force already mobilized for Iraq or Afghanistan; Texas has about 18 percent.
The White House press secretary, Tony Snow, said Bush would ensure that the border missions not conflict with the Guard's wartime duties.
"No. 1 is, he's not going to do anything to compromise the two key duties of the National Guard," Snow said. "One is to continue to fight the war on terror, and No. 2 is to respond quickly and effectively to natural disasters. ... You're talking about a very small percentage of the Guard at any one time."
 Load-Date: May 16, 2006

 

End of Document
