

Obituaries in the news
The Associated Press
January 25, 2007 Thursday 2:18 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 1527 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Ismail Cem
ANKARA, Turkey (AP) Ismail Cem, a former Turkish foreign minister who together with his Greek counterpart was the driving force behind the thawing relations between the two archrivals, died of lung cancer Wednesday, an Istanbul hospital and his family said. He was 67.
Cem served as foreign minister under three successive governments between 1997 and 2003, becoming one of the longest-serving Turkish foreign minister in recent years. His greatest achievement was forging close ties with Greece, largely due to his friendship with Greece's former Foreign Minister George Papandreou.
The thaw had followed a mutual outpouring of aid and sympathy in the wake of deadly earthquakes that struck both countries in 1999.
"Ismail was a man with whom I shared a vision, we worked hard together for this vision of peace," said Papandreou, who is now leader of Greece's main opposition Socialist party.
Cem was born Ismail Cem Ipekci, but dropped his last name in the 1970s to distance himself from his relative, Abdi Ipekci, who was editor of the newspaper Milliyet, and avoid accusations of favoritism. Ipekci was shot and killed in 1979 by Mehmet Ali Agca, the Turk who attempted to assassinate Pope John Paul II.
Cem began his career as a journalist, quickly earning a column in Milliyet newspaper and catching the eye of then-Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit, who appointed him director of state-run radio and television in 1972. At 34, he was the youngest person ever to hold the post.
His brief spell as culture minister in 1995 ended before he could achieve his dream of organizing a mass pop concert to benefit survivors of the Bosnian conflict. He was elected to parliament in 1995 and re-elected four years later.
Jean-Francois Deniau
PARIS (AP) Jean-Francois Deniau, a former French government minister, diplomat, sailor and novelist, died Wednesday. He was 78.
Deniau died at his Paris home, fellow writer Jean d'Ormesson said.
Deniau was truly a Renaissance man. As an envoy, he specialized in dangerous missions. An avid sailor, he crossed the Atlantic in a catamaran in 1995 just eight weeks after undergoing triple heart bypass surgery.
He titled his autobiography "Memoirs of Seven Lives," a reference to his many careers.
Deniau was a member of the Academie Francaise, the gathering of France's literary heavyweights. His novel "Un Hero Tres Discret" (A Very Discreet Hero) told of an ordinary man who reinvented himself as a hero of the World War II Resistance. The book was adapted into a movie by director Jacques Audiard and given the English-language title "A Self Made Hero."
Born in 1928 in Paris, Deniau grew up with dreams of being an explorer. He was a graduate of the prestigious Ecole Nationale d'Administration, took an active role in European affairs and helped write the European Union's founding Treaty of Rome of 1957.
He went on to be an ambassador, notably in Spain. He was sent there soon after the 1975 death of the dictator Gen. Francisco Franco and was close to King Juan Carlos.
When Deniau visited Lebanon in 1986 as a member of the French National Assembly, the U.N. helicopter he was flying in was assaulted with machine-gun and anti-aircraft fire. No one was hurt, but fire tore through the fuel tank, forcing the aircraft to make an emergency landing at a soccer stadium.
As a politician with the centrist UDF party, Deniau served in six ministerial posts, from agriculture to foreign minister. He was the founder of the annual Sakharov human rights prize, named after the Soviet dissident scientist Andrei Sakharov and awarded by the European Parliament.
Adolf Frohner
VIENNA, Austria (AP) Adolf Frohner, a leading Austrian abstract painter and graphic artist who helped found Vienna's "Actionism" movement in the 1960s and gained an international following, died Wednesday. He was 72.
Frohner, who once walled himself in behind brick and mortar for three days to explore what it meant to be an isolated observer, died suddenly of natural causes, public broadcaster ORF said. Details of his illness were not disclosed.
His death came just five days after he ceremoniously broke ground on the Frohner Forum, a new museum being built in his name in the Danube River town of Krems, 40 miles west of Vienna, ORF said. It said the gallery would open later in the year as planned.
Born March 12, 1934, in the province of Lower Austria, Frohner moved to Vienna in 1952, and two years later was analyzing contemporary works at the Academy of Fine Art.
In the early 1960s, Frohner turned to Actionism, a movement best known for his friend and colleague, Hermann Nitsch, who gained notoriety by painting with animal blood and entrails. The group was criticized at the time for its violent images of bound and raped women.
"But from this provocation emerged one of the most productive art movements of postwar Austria," Chancellor Alfred Gusenbauer said Wednesday evening in a statement, hailing Frohner for daring to use art "as an argument against social realities."
Frohner became a professor at Vienna's prestigious School for Applied Art in 1975.
Drawing inspiration from Cezanne and Picasso, he earned a reputation for the images of fleshy female figures he produced in his quest to explore the human body.
Frohner's works are publicly displayed in Vienna's Museum of Modern Art, the Albertina Museum, the Belvedere Gallery, and the Essl Collection on the outskirts of the Austrian capital.
Brent Liles
PLACENTIA, Calif. (AP) Brent Liles, a former bassist for the 1980s punk rock group Social Distortion, was struck and killed by a truck while riding a bicycle, authorities said Wednesday. He was 43.
Liles was hit on Jan. 18. No immediate charges were brought against the driver.
Liles, who was from Fullerton, joined Social Distortion in 1981 and played bass on the band's "Mommy's Little Monster" recording two years later.
Fed up with turmoil inside the group, he and drummer Derek O'Brien quit the band during a New Year's Eve performance in 1983.
Liles went on to play with other punk groups such as Agent Orange.
Emiliano Mercado del Toro
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) Emiliano Mercado del Toro died Wednesday at his home on the northern coast of Puerto Rico, just a month after becoming the world's oldest person, his grandniece told The Associated Press. He was 115.
"He died like a little angel," said his grandniece, Dolores Martinez.
Mercado del Toro was born when Puerto Rico was still a Spanish colony and trained as a soldier the year World War I ended. He never married and had no children.
In the seaside town of Isabela, he became a local celebrity after he was recognized by the Guinness Book of World Records for his longevity.
"We're all crying, but we knew this day would come," town spokeswoman Rosa Luciano said.
Mercado del Toro, born on Aug. 21, 1891, became the oldest known person in the world when 116-year-old Elizabeth "Lizzie" Bolden died in December in a nursing home in Tennessee.
A 114-year-old Connecticut woman, Emma Faust Tillman, is now believed to be the oldest living person. She was born Nov. 22, 1892.
Klara Palankay
BUDAPEST, Hungary (AP) Hungarian mezzo soprano Klara Palankay, acclaimed for her role as Judith in Bela Bartok's opera "Bluebeard's Castle," died Wednesday. She was 85.
Palankay died in a Budapest hospital where she was being treated for a cold that had weakened her, said Hungarian State Opera press officer Judit Varkonyi.
Palankay studied at Budapest's Ferenc Liszt Academy of Music and later in Rome between 1938 and 1944, the year she began her career at the Hungarian State Opera.
Paired with bass Mihaly Szekely as Bluebeard, Palankay was considered the greatest Judith in Bartok's one-hour, one-act opera in which theirs are the only singing roles on stage.
Critics also view the pair's 1956 recording of "Bluebeard," with Janos Ferencsik directing the Budapest Philharmonic Orchestra, as one of the best performances of the work.
During her career, Palankay also performed key roles in several other operas, including Verdi's "Aida" (Amneris) and "Rigoletto" (Maddalena), Wagner's "Tannhauser" (Venus) and the lead in Bizet's "Carmen."
She retired in 1970 and was the recipient of several awards, including the Bela Bartok Memorial Medal in 1982.
Peter Tompkins
SHEPHERDSTOWN, W.Va. (AP) Peter Tompkins, a former journalist, World War II spy and best-selling author, died Wednesday morning at his home in Shepherdstown, according to the Melvin T. Strider Colonial Funeral Home. He was 87.
Tompkins served as a war correspondent for the New York Herald Tribune and NBC before he joined the U.S. Office of Strategic Services, the precursor to the CIA, in 1941.
Because he grew up in Italy, Tompkins was sent to Rome prior to the invasion of Italy in 1944. He wrote about his experiences in the 1962 book "A Spy in Rome."
The book was among more than a dozen he wrote or co-authored including "The Secret Life of Plants" and "Secrets of the Great Pyramid."
He studied filmmaking with the Italian production company Ponti-de Laurentiis and wrote for The New Yorker, Esquire, Look, Life, The New Republic and a dozen foreign journals.
Tompkins also covered the 1948 elections in Italy for CBS newsman Edward R. Murrow.
 Load-Date: January 25, 2007

 

End of Document
