

Path is murky in Iraq, but it's certain that conflict will be along for the ride
The Associated Press
December 30, 2006 Saturday 6:09 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 2816 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Iraqis enter another year with little hope of seeing peace soon, and violent conflict is a looming threat in the political squabbling that snarls two other Middle Eastern arenas Lebanon and the Palestinian territories.
Diplomats will again channel their efforts into trying to persuade Iran and North Korea to shelve their nuclear programs, but despite the lack of progress over the past year the parties are striving to keep the disputes peaceful.
Newly elected presidents in Latin America, most of them on the left, are now getting their chance to try a hand at solving the region's endemic poverty. Cubans, meanwhile, are wondering if they have seen the last of a venerable leader.
The Associated Press asked some of its correspondents around the world to assess the prospects for 2007. Here are their reports:
Iraq
By ROBERT H. REID
BAGHDAD, Iraq Iraq begins the new year uncertain about the direction of U.S. military strategy and unclear about prospects for national reconciliation. The only thing clear is that violence will likely continue and perhaps worsen.
At no time since the war began in 2003 has the situation in Iraq looked more uncertain. Both the Americans and their Iraqi allies are deeply divided over how to reverse the country's slide into civil war.
Saddam Hussein's execution is likely to worsen fears among his fellow Sunni Arabs that the rival Shiites and Kurds have little interest in granting them a meaningful role in the new Iraq.
Neither elections nor a new constitution nor a government of national unity has been enough to stem the bloodshed. U.S. casualties are rising. Iraqis are dying at an average of 100 a day, according to the United Nations.
And the Pentagon says attacks on U.S. and Iraqi troops and civilians have jumped to their highest levels since Iraq regained sovereignty in June 2004.
President Bush has delayed announcement of a new Iraq policy until January, reflecting divisions within the U.S. over a bipartisan report recommending significant changes in direction in an increasingly unpopular war.
The bipartisan Iraq Study Group recommended speeding the training and equipping of Iraqi forces and withdrawing a substantial number of combat troops by early 2008. The Shiite Muslim-led government is pressing for a greater role in security in Baghdad.
But military experts are telling Bush that the timetable is unrealistic. Some experts fear giving Iraqis a greater security role too soon will only worsen the Sunni-Shiite conflict.
In the meantime, U.S. and Iraqi government overtures to disaffected Sunni Arabs have faltered because of Sunni fears that the Shiite majority wants to dominate the country at the expense of Sunnis, who ran the country under Saddam Hussein.
As a result, it seems certain that substantial U.S. forces will remain in Iraq through 2007.
Middle East
By JOSEF FEDERMAN
JERUSALEM Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert and Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas are both looking for a breakthrough in long-stalled peacemaking. But domestic troubles for both pose formidable obstacles.
Abbas is in a sometimes violent political deadlock with the Islamic group Hamas, which defeated his Fatah party in legislative elections last January. Abbas has threatened to call early elections, but Hamas calls the plan illegal and warns it may boycott any new vote.
After Israel's inconclusive war with Hezbollah guerrillas in Lebanon, Olmert remains deeply unpopular at home, constraining his ability to launch diplomatic initiatives. Israeli security officials, meanwhile, predict a new round of fighting in Lebanon could come by summer.
Fallout from the war still roils Lebanon. Hezbollah, which is backed by Syria and Iran, is trying to grab more political power from the democratically elected, U.S.-backed and anti-Syrian government, raising worries about more sectarian violence.
Syria says it's willing to talk to the United States and Israel, but only if it gets something in return. The U.S. and Israel are unlikely to reach out to Syria, though, despite the recommendations of the Iraq Study Group.
Other Middle Eastern countries, especially moderate U.S. allies like Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Jordan, fear the troubles in Iraq will worsen rising sectarian tensions inside their borders.
Those countries also worry about Iran's rising regional influence, yet are more afraid of any strong U.S. or Israeli action against Iran, fearing it could hurt them worse.
Iran expresses confidence it will weather U.N. sanctions, but local elections that showed support for rivals of the hard-line president could indicate domestic problems are brewing.
Latin America
By MICHAEL WARREN
MEXICO CITY Latin America's mostly leftist leaders won't have long to make good on promises from election campaigns that exposed the region's deep inequalities. Even the few conservatives, like Felipe Calderon of Mexico, are under pressure to produce for the poor.
Polar opposites Daniel Ortega and Calderon could have short honeymoons, with Nicaraguans wary of a return to Ortega's revolutionary past and Mexicans desperate for security and jobs. It's unclear if Calderon has the stomach for breaking up Mexico's monopolies that many economists criticize.
A scandal linking President Alvaro Uribe's administration with Colombia's illegal far-right militias is likely to widen, distracting efforts to contain leftist rebels and boost social spending.
Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez wants to intensify his revolution and follow Fidel Castro's example as a regional powerbroker, but domestic pressures may restrain his handouts to other nations that have been financed with booming oil revenues.
Shaky Andean economies will need other partners once a U.S. trade deal expires in July, and leftist leaders Evo Morales of Bolivia and Rafael Correa of Ecuador will try to squeeze more oil and gas revenues out of multinational companies while trying to avoid street protests that toppled predecessors.
Scandal-weakened Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva of Brazil enters his second term determined to do more for the poor while boosting lagging economic growth. Paving a highway through the Amazon is on his to-do list, but he hasn't committed to Chavez's dream of a continental energy network.
Reducing the wealth gap is the goal of Chile's Michelle Bachelet, while Argentina's Nestor Kirchner and Peru's Alan Garcia hope to keep riding a wave of economic growth.
Caribbean
By ANITA SNOW
HAVANA Communist Cuba is puzzling its future, with ailing 80-year-old leader Fidel Castro on the sidelines after temporarily ceding power to his younger brother following intestinal surgery.
Defense Minister Raul Castro has twice offered to discuss differences with the U.S. since assuming power July 31. American officials have rejected the gestures, although he is seen as more pragmatic and more likely to favor modest economic reforms than his brother.
At the Guantanamo Bay detention center in Cuba's southeast, the U.S. military still holds about 430 men on suspicion of links to al-Qaida or the Taliban nearly five years after the first detainees arrived on Jan. 11, 2002.
The U.S. military says more than 100 are eligible for release or transfer to other countries after a review panel determined they don't pose a threat to the U.S. and have no intelligence value. The military says it wants to charge 60 to 80 detainees and bring them to trial.
Haitian President Rene Preval enters his first full year in power since overwhelmingly winning election to replace ousted former leader Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
While Preval has labored to restore security, rebuild battered infrastructure and attract investment, questions remain whether his government can subdue armed gangs blamed for a kidnapping wave. Political uncertainty increased when the 63-year-old leader revealed his prostate cancer may have returned.
In Jamaica, Prime Minister Portia Simpson Miller's popularity has plummeted after less than a year in office amid criticism she has not done enough to halt crime.
Across the Caribbean, officials look forward to the Cricket World Cup in hopes of visitors and cash to revitalize regional tourism.
Asia
By JOSEPH COLEMAN
TOKYO North Korea remains the focus of intense diplomatic attention over its weapons development illustrated starkly over the past year by its first nuclear test explosion and a barrage of missile launches.
At year's end, negotiators from the United States, China, the two Koreas, Japan and Russia failed to make progress in talks on weaning Pyongyang from its nuclear program before it builds a bomb or triggers an arms race in Northeast Asia.
Instability is expected to buffet another part of Asia in the coming year: Thailand.
A military coup in 2006 toppled the government, and the world will be watching closely to see how the coup-installed leaders will move ahead with elections in October amid concerns about restrictions on freedom of expression.
The threat of terrorism is never far below the surface in Asia.
Fighting in Afghanistan will figure prominently on the Asian security picture. Supporters of the former Taliban regime stepped up an insurgency in the south over the past year, despite NATO's taking command of some 32,800 soldiers.
The aftermath of natural disasters will also consume resources.
In Indonesia, some 800,000 survivors from a powerful earthquake on Java island last May still face a struggle for shelter. Recovery also is high on the agenda in the Philippines, where a string of typhoons hit late in the year, and the death toll of 1,400 people is still rising.
Despite those challenges, the Asian economy is expected to put in a strong performance in 2007, led by expanding China and India.
China's booming economy is expected to keep growing at more than 10 percent a year, while India has set an ambitious target of 9 percent annual growth over the next five years.
Europe
By WILLIAM J. KOLE
VIENNA, Austria The European Union celebrates a key birthday and welcomes two more members in 2007. But like any growing family, it can count on some drama and discord around the dinner table.
Ex-communist Bulgaria and Romania join on New Year's Day, swelling the bloc to 27 nations in a year marking the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome that laid the groundwork for the modern EU.
But the celebratory champagne will fast lose its fizz.
Leaders jaded by the effort it took to prepare two of Europe's poorest and most corrupt countries for membership will put any further enlargement on ice and try to revive the EU's divisive constitution. They'll also wrestle anew with Turkey, which wants to join but refuses to recognize EU member Cyprus.
Two major European powers Britain and France are gearing up for a changing of the guard.
Tony Blair, beset by bitter opposition to the Iraq war and a revolt within his Labour Party, plans to step down by September after a decade as British prime minister.
And with few expecting conservative Jacques Chirac to seek a third term as president, France could well veer to the left in spring presidential and parliamentary ballots, having overturned the government in power in every legislative election over the past quarter-century.
The coming year will see a slew of other elections, in Croatia, Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Serbia, Slovenia and Turkey. The Portuguese, who have one of the continent's most restrictive laws on abortion, will hold a referendum on legalizing it.
Early in the new year, Kosovo is expected to get a go-ahead from the United Nations to gain de-facto independence, which is bitterly opposed by Serbia and could trigger fresh unrest in the Balkans.
Russia and the CIS
By Jim Heintz
MOSCOW As the West looks with increasing concern at whether the Kremlin is backsliding on democracy, Russia's parliamentary elections in 2007 will be of key interest not just the results, but the process.
There's no question that Kremlin-allied parties will win a huge portion of the State Duma's seats in December. What's in question is whether the liberal opposition parties will be able to win any, or even mount an effective campaign.
Races between individuals, instead of parties, have been eliminated for the election, making it harder for small parties to win seats. Opposition leaders fear authorities will subject them to severe pressure: a December opposition rally of 2,500 people was watched over by some 8,500 police.
Neighboring Georgia is regarding Russia with special concern after the Kremlin imposed a travel ban to the West-leaning country. Russian officials show a growing inclination to work openly for the independence or absorption into Russia of two separatist Georgian regions, adding to tensions that could spark a renewal of fighting that wrecked those areas a decade ago.
But one of the former Soviet Union's most intractable "frozen conflicts" is showing signs of movement. After years of wrangling, officials in Azerbaijan and Armenia are talking with notable positivity about chances for settling the status of the disputed Nagorno-Karabakh region.
Ukraine is bogged down in economic troubles and quarreling between the president's and prime minister's supporters that shows no sign of abating.
Turkmenistan, long under the control and personality cult of Saparmuat Niyazov, will struggle to chart its course after the president of the petroleum-rich land died in late December.
Africa
By MICHELLE FAUL
JOHANNESBURG, South Africa Militias backed by Sudan's Arab-dominated government continue to slaughter blacks in the Darfur region as the United Nations struggles to bolster a peacekeeping mission while Arab nations and oil-importer China stand behind Sudan.
Neighboring Chad is threatened by rebellions, including a spillover from the humanitarian tragedy of the Darfur conflict, and its government is diverting oil income to the military from promised uses for economic development.
Conflict in nearby Somalia is adding to instability that has made the Horn of Africa vulnerable to inroads by Islamic extremists.
U.S. engagement is expected to increase with Pentagon approval of an Africa command to fight terrorism. That came after Islamic militants seized power in southern Somalia, defeating U.S.-backed warlords and threatening a U.N.-supported government defended by Ethiopian troops.
Somali and Ethiopian troops battled back, retaking the capital and giving the government a chance to reassert its control over the country.
Congo, the African nation richest in resources, opens the year under its first freely elected government in a half century, a boost for U.N. organizers though an uneven campaign field left voters to choose between two warlords.
Economic giants Nigeria and South Africa look to continuing high growth rates, but many of their people are disgruntled because the lives of most have not benefited.
High oil prices are inflating the pockets of elites in several nations suffering corruption.
One of those, Nigeria, is heading toward a presidential election in April with a list of candidates topped by figures from the military, which has long held sway. Violence bedevils its oil region, where militants demand a greater share of oil wealth.
Looming over all the problems, AIDS and other diseases still ravage Africa's population.
United Nations
By EDITH M. LEDERER
UNITED NATIONS A new secretary-general is taking the U.N. helm facing an overflow of old problems from conflicts in Africa and the Mideast to nuclear concerns in Iran and North Korea. But perhaps his biggest challenge will be to restore the world body's tarnished reputation.
Calling himself "a harmonizer and bridge-builder," Ban Ki-moon said his first priority as he takes over from Kofi Annan on New Year's Day is "to restore trust" in a United Nations that has been criticized for corruption and mismanagement.
The veteran diplomat, who was South Korea's foreign minister, said another priority will be to heal the deep division, especially over U.N. reforms, between the majority of U.N. members that are developing countries and the minority of rich industrial nations that pay most of the U.N.'s bills.
On the world stage, one of Ban's most immediate problems will be the escalating conflict in Darfur and strong opposition from Sudan's president to the deployment of U.N. peacekeepers to help beleaguered African Union troops stop the violence.
Ban says concerted action is also needed to promote Arab-Israeli peace, which he calls "the core" of Middle Eastern problems, and to resolve the political crisis in Lebanon, the deteriorating situation in Iraq and conflicts in Africa.
He also has committed to the two other pillars of the U.N. in addition to security promoting human rights and achieving the Millennium Development Goals by 2015, including cutting extreme poverty by half and ensuring universal primary school education for all children.
"The true measure of success for the U.N. is not how much we promise, but how much we deliver for those who need us most," Ban said after being appointed to the post Oct. 13.
 Load-Date: December 31, 2006

 

End of Document
