

People in Annapolis wonder what the Mideast peace talks will mean to the city's reputation
The Associated Press
November 24, 2007 Saturday 2:10 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: DOMESTIC NEWS
Length: 391 words
Byline: By KRISTEN WYATT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ANNAPOLIS Md.
Body




Doomed to failure. A terrible idea. Not even worth bothering with.
Annapolis is not accustomed to such harsh criticism. This bayside town is known for brick-lined streets and sailboats on the harbor, rather than the diplomatic stage that has some Annapolitans chuckling over foreign headlines that focus on Maryland's capital as the host of Mideast peace talks on Tuesday.
One blog groans, "Annapolis is doomed to failure." A poster in Israel says "Annapolis is not the answer."
While the references are to the meetings and not the city itself, it is not the first time Annapolis has been used as a synonym.
Some people refer to the U.S. Naval Academy simply as "Annapolis," in the way that "West Point" represents the U.S. Military Academy in West Point, N.Y. Midshipmen at the Naval Academy have another definition for "Annapolis," though, as wryly proscribed in the handbook all new students receive: "A small village on the banks of the Naval Academy."
In Maryland, "Annapolis" sometimes is used to refer to the state government.
The new meaning has some people a bit perplexed.
"To me, it always meant the Naval Academy," said Harriet Richardson, who works at The Pink Crab dress shop overlooking the water. "It's a magnificent place."
About the possibility Annapolis may follow cities such as Kyoto, Japan best known today for a global climate change treaty forged a decade ago Richardson was skeptical the Annapolis talks would elevate her town to such prominence.
"I don't think it's going to make any difference to anyone's vision of Annapolis," she said.
Tourists agreed. Taking a break at a table overlooking the city dock, retiree Harold Fisher of Lancaster, Pa., could not imagine Annapolis would become a synonym for diplomacy anywhere outside the Middle East.
"A lot of my friends that boat come here in the summer," Fisher said with a shrug, doubtful Annapolis' reputation would change because of the one-day peace conference.
A few in town hoped the name will be remembered for the conference, though. At St. Anne's Episcopal Church, parishioner Carol Leach said, "It's really exciting to know we can play a part in this peace process."
Richardson is skeptical.
"The world's a mess, and I don't think 24 hours here is going to change anything," she said.
On the Net:
U.S. Naval Academy: http://www.usna.edu
Annapolis, Md.: http://www.annapolis.gov/
 Load-Date: November 25, 2007

 

End of Document
