

Results of AP-AOL News poll on the biggest heroes and villains of the year
The Associated Press
December 28, 2006 Thursday 7:02 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON DATELINE
Length: 688 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




The Associated Press-AOL News poll on who people think were the villains and heroes of the last year was conducted Dec. 19-21 and is based on telephone interviews with 1,004 adults from all states except Alaska and Hawaii. The poll was conducted by Ipsos, an international polling firm.
Results were weighted to represent the population by demographic factors such as age, sex, region, race and income.
No more than one time in 20 should chance variations in the sample cause the results to vary by more than plus or minus 3 percentage points from the answers that would be obtained if all people in the U.S. were polled.
Names of celebrities that respondents volunteered were not on the list of possible answers in the poll question.
There are other sources of potential error in polls, including the wording and order of questions. Results may not total 100 percent because of rounding. An "X" signifies less than 1 percent.
1. If you were asked to name a famous person to be the biggest villain of the year, whom would you choose?
 George W. Bush, 25 percent
 Osama bin Laden, 8 percent
 Saddam Hussein, 6 percent
 President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad of Iran, 5 percent
 Kim Jong Il, North Korean leader, 2 percent
 Donald Rumsfeld, 2 percent
 John Kerry, 1 percent
 Rosie O'Donnell, 1 percent
 Dick Cheney, 1 percent
 Hillary Clinton, 1 percent
 Brad Pitt, 1 percent
 Tom Cruise, 1 percent
 Satan/The Devil, 1 percent
 Donald Trump, 1 percent
 O.J. Simpson, 1 percent
 Hugo Chavez, 1 percent
 George Clooney, 1 percent
 Nancy Pelosi, 1 percent
 Bill Clinton, 1 percent
 Colin Farrell, 1 percent
 Oprah Winfrey, 1 percent
 Mel Gibson, X percent
 Paris Hilton, X percent
 Terrell Owens, X percent
 Britney Spears, X percent
 Angelina Jolie, X percent
 Arnold Schwarzenegger, X percent
 Santa Claus, X percent
 Bill O'Reilly, X percent
 Martha Stewart, X percent
 Matt Damon, X percent
 Other, 15 percent
 None, X percent
 Not sure, 20 percent
2. If you were asked to name a famous person to be the biggest hero of the year, whom would you choose?
 George W. Bush, 13 percent
 Soldiers/troops in Iraq, 6 percent
 Oprah Winfrey, 3 percent
 Barack Obama, 3 percent
 Jesus Christ, 3 percent
 Bono, 2 percent
 Angelina Jolie, 1 percent
 Al Gore, 1 percent
 Arnold Schwarzenegger, 1 percent
 Colin Powell, 1 percent
 Mel Gibson, 1 percent
 George Clooney, 1 percent
 Bill Gates, 1 percent
 Donald Rumsfeld, 1 percent
 Bill Clinton, 1 percent
 Jimmy Carter, 1 percent
 Martin Luther King, 1 percent
 Condoleeza Rice, 1 percent
 Billy Graham, 1 percent
 Warren Buffett, 1 percent
 Pope Benedict, X percent
 Hillary Clinton, X percent
 Brad Pitt, X percent
 Paris Hilton, X percent
 Nancy Pelosi, X percent
 Tiger Woods, X percent
 John McCain, X percent
 Sylvester Stallone, X percent
 Tom Cruise, X percent
 Lance Armstrong, X percent
 Donald Trump, X percent
 Mother Teresa, X percent
 Ladainian Tomlinson, X percent
 Brett Favre, X percent
 Other, 25 percent
 None, 1 percent
 Not sure, 27 percent
3. If you had to choose, which of the following celebrities would you say was the best role model this year?
 Oprah Winfrey, 29 percent
 Michael J. Fox, 23 percent
 George Clooney, 12 percent
 Angelina Jolie, 8 percent
 Brad Pitt, 2 percent
 Tom Cruise, 2 percent
 Katie Holmes, 2 percent
 Mel Gibson (volunteered), 1 percent
 George W. Bush, 1 percent
 Bono, (volunteered), 1 percent
 Laura Bush (volunteered), X percent
 Sylvester Stallone (volunteered), X percent
 Paris Hilton (volunteered), X percent
 Bill O'Reilly (volunteered), X percent
 Other (volunteered), 11 percent
 None, 1 percent
 Not sure, 7 percent
4. And, if you had to choose, which of the following celebrities would you say was the worst role model this year?
 Britney Spears, 29 percent
 Paris Hilton, 18 percent
 Mel Gibson, 12 percent
 Tom Cruise, 9 percent
 Michael Richards, 6 percent
 Nicole Richie, 5 percent
 Kevin Federline, 4 percent
 Lindsay Lohan, 3 percent
 Angelina Jolie, 2 percent
 Katie Holmes, 1 percent
 Rosie O'Donnell (volunteered), 1 percent
 Sean Penn (volunteered), X percent
 George W. Bush (volunteered), X percent
 George Clooney (volunteered), X percent
 Miss USA (volunteered), X percent
 Other (volunteered), 2 percent
 None, X percent
 Not sure, 8 percent
 Load-Date: December 29, 2006

 

End of Document
