

Shrine bombing crisis shows the power of the clerics in post-Saddam Iraq
The Associated Press
February 24, 2006 Friday 7:02 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 744 words
Byline: By ROBERT H. REID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAGHDAD Iraq
Body




If Iraq steps back from the brink of civil war, much of the credit will go not to elected leaders but to powerful Shiite clerics who put the brakes on the wave of reprisal attacks after destruction of a Shiite shrine.
In the case of one cleric, Muqtada al-Sadr, influence cuts both ways. The anti-American leader's militiamen torched Sunni mosques in Baghdad and elsewhere then offered to protect others when the Shiite clergy moved to put a stop to the violence triggered by the attack on the Golden Mosque in Samarra.
The sectarian crisis illustrates not only the power of the religious leadership but the weakness of mainstream political figures on whom the U.S. must rely if it is to begin pulling troops out of Iraq this year.
Clerical power is a political reality in post-Saddam Hussein Iraq regardless of what the constitution has to say about religious freedom, women's rights and institutional democracy.
As reprisal attacks against Sunni mosques and clerics accelerated, Iraqi political leaders, holed up inside Baghdad's hermetically sealed Green Zone, issued appeals for calm over state television and through the media but with limited effect.
The politicians, many of whom owe their positions to the endorsement by the Shiite clergy in last year's elections, turned to the clerics to add their voice to appeals for order.
Iraqi state television Wednesday broadcast brief footage showing the country's four top Shiite clerics conferring on the crisis during a meeting in Najaf, the seat of Shiite religious authority.
The intent was to underscore the personal commitment of the top clerics, including Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, to restoring order.
But the contrast between Iraqi politicians in their Western business suits and the four ayatollahs down in dusty Najaf could not have been starker. The elderly, gray-bearded clerics were seen dressed in traditional robes and turbans, seated on the floor of an austere room with the future of the nation in their hands.
That scene recalled images of Iran's late Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, seated with his associates as they engineered the collapse of the U.S.-backed Iranian monarchy 25 years ago.
The four grand ayatollahs called for calm. Al-Sadr, who was outside the country, endorsed the call and sent instructions to his Mahdi Army militia to stand down and to abandon plans to march to Samarra to secure the shrine.
A march would have raised the dangerous specter of street fighting in Samarra between al-Sadr's militiamen and Sunni insurgents believed to operate in the city.
"Had it not been for the grand ayatollahs and al-Sadr's movement that worked on calming down the situation, there would have been no stone left standing in Iraq," said Reda Jawad Taqi, a senior member of Iraq's biggest Shiite party, the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution.
Even U.S. Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad, whose staff worked throughout the day Thursday to persuade Iraqi politicians to step back from the brink, acknowledged that the clerics "are very important."
The rise of clerical power has reversed a tradition of secular government in Iraq since the establishment of the modern Iraqi state after World War I. Since the fall of Saddam, the power of the mosques has increased because of the weakness of fledgling government institutions.
Many Iraqis view those institutions with suspicion as creations of the Americans and dominated by former exiles who returned to the country on the heels of the U.S.-led invasion. In these times of uncertainty, many Iraqis see the mosque as the legitimate source of authority.
That trend has benefited Shiite clerics more than the Sunnis, who have no formal clerical rank structure. Shiites, on the other hand, have a clerical hierarchy headed by the "marjaiyah," the four top ayatollahs led by al-Sistani.
Although U.S. officials have cultivated the Shiites since the beginning of the occupation, the Americans have also sought to promote secular politicians but with limited success. Washington's initial choice to replace Saddam, secular Shiite politician Ahmad Chalabi, failed to win a seat in the Dec. 15 parliamentary election.
The U.S. choice as interim prime minister in 2004, Ayad Allawi, has fared better, but his secular-minded party won only 25 seats of the 275 parliamentary seats in December compared to 130 captured by the religious Shiite parties.
Robert H. Reid is correspondent at large for The Associated Press and has frequently reported from Iraq since 2003.
 Load-Date: February 25, 2006

 

End of Document
