

Text of the annex to the draft Iran sanctions resolution
The Associated Press
March 15, 2007 Thursday 9:10 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 763 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Annex to the U.N. Security Council draft resolution naming Iranian companies, organizations and individuals subject to a possible international asset freeze:
Entities involved in nuclear or ballistic missile activities:
 Ammunition and Metallurgy Industries Group, also known as Ammunition Industries Group (AMIG): AMIG controls 7th of Tir (part of the Defense Industry Organization, the government body under which all state military industries are grouped), which is designated in SCR (Security Council Resolution) 1737 for its role in Iran's centrifuge program. AMIG is in turn owned and controlled by the Defense Industries Organization (DIO), which is designated under SCR 1737.
 Isfahan Nuclear Fuel Research and Production Center and Isfahan Nuclear Technology Center (ENTC): Part of the AEOI's (the Atomic Energy Organization of Iran's) Nuclear Fuel Production and Procurement Company, which is involved in enrichment-related activities.
 Kavoshyar Company: Front company of AEOI. It has sought glass fibers, vacuum chamber furnaces and laboratory equipment for Iran's nuclear program.
 Parchin Chemical Industries: Branch of DIO that produces ammunition, explosives, as well as solid propellants for rockets and missiles.
 Karaj Nuclear Research Center: Part of the AEOI's research division.
 Novin Energy Company: Operates within the AEOI and has transferred funds on behalf of AEOI to entities associated with Iran's nuclear program.
 Cruise Missile Industry Group: Production and development of cruise missiles. Also known as Naval Defense Missile Industry Group. Responsible for naval missiles including cruise missiles.
 Bank Sepah (and Bank Sepah International): Bank Sepah provides support for the Aerospace Industries Organization (AIO) and subordinates, including (Shahid Hemmat Industrial Group) and (Shahid Bagheri Industrial Group), both of which were designated by UNSCR 1737.
 Sanam Industrial Group: Subordinate to AIO, Sanam has purchased equipment on its behalf for the missile program.
 Ya Mahdi Industries Group: Subordinate to AIO, involved in international purchases of missile equipment.
Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps entities:
 Quds Aeronautics Industries (produces unmanned aerial vehicles), parachutes, para-gliders, para-motors, etc. IRGC has claimed it is using these products as part of its asymmetric warfare doctrine.
 Pars Aviation Services Company: Maintains various aircraft including MI-171 (helicopter), used by IRGC air force.
 Sho'a' Aviation: Produces micro-lights. The IRGC has claimed it is using these products as part of its asymmetric warfare doctrine.
People involved in nuclear or ballistic missile activities.
 Fereidoun Abbasi-Davani: Senior MODAFL (Ministry of Defense Air Force Logistics) scientist with links to the Institute of Applied Physics, working closely with Fakhrizadeh.
 Mohsen Fakhrizadeh-Mahabadi, Senior MODAFL scientist and former head of the Physics Research Center (PHRC): The (International Atomic Energy Agency) ... requested to interview him about the activities of the PHRC over this period but Iran has refused.
 Seyed Jaber Safdari, manager of the Natanz Enrichment Facilities.
 Amir Rahimi, head of Isfahan Nuclear Fuel Research and Production Center: Part of the AEOI's Nuclear Fuel Production and Procurement Company, which is involved in enrichment-related activities.
 Mohsen Hojati, head, Fajr Industrial Group: Fajr Industrial Group is designated under UNSC
1737 for its role in the ballistic missile program.
 Mehrdada Akhlaghi Ketabachi, head, Shahid Bagheri Industrial Group (SBIG). SBIG is designated under UNSCR 1737 for its role in the ballistic missile program.
 Naser Maleki, head, Shahid Hemmat Industrial Group (SHIG). SHIG is designated under SCR 1737 for its role in Iran's ballistic missile program. Maleki is also a MODAFL official overseeing work on the Shahab-3 ballistic missile program. The Shahab-3 is Iran's long range ballistic missile currently in service.
 Ahmad Derakhandeh, chairman and (managing director) of Bank Sepah: Bank Sepah provides support for the AIO and subordinates, including SHIG and SBIG, both of which were designated by UNSCR 1737.
Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps key personnel:
 Brig. Gen. Morteza Rezaie, deputy commander, IRGC.
 Vice Adm. Ali Akbar Ahmadian, chief, joint staff.
 Brig. Gen. Mohammad Reza Zahedi, commander, ground forces.
 Rear Adm. Morteza Safari, commander, navy.
 Brig. Gen. Mohammad Hejazi, commander, Basij resistance force.
 Brig. Gen. Qasem Soleimani, commander, Quds force.
 Gen. Zolqadr, IRGC officer, deputy interior minister for security affairs.
 Load-Date: March 16, 2007

 

End of Document
