

Text of President Bush opening the Mideast peace summit
The Associated Press
November 27, 2007 Tuesday 6:35 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON DATELINE
Length: 1173 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Text of President Bush at the Mideast peace summit on Tuesday, as transcribed by CQ Transcriptions.
Thank you for coming.
Prime Minister Olmert, President Abbas, Secretary General Ban, former Prime Minister Blair, distinguished guests, welcome to one of the finest institutes we have in America, the United States Naval Academy.
We appreciate you joining us in what I believe is an historic opportunity to encourage the expansion of freedom and peace in the holy land.
We meet to lay the foundation for the establishment of a new nation, a democratic Palestinian state that will live side by side with Israel in peace and security.
We meet to help bring an end to the violence that has been the true enemy of the aspirations of both the Israelis and Palestinians.
We're off to a strong start.
I'm about to read a statement that was agreed upon by our distinguished guests.
The representatives of the government of the state of Israel and the Palestinian Liberation Organization, represented respectively by Prime Minister Ehud Olmert and President Mahmoud Abbas, in his capacity as chairman of the PLO executive committee and president of the Palestinian Authority, have convened in Annapolis, Maryland, under the auspices of President George W. Bush of the United States of America, and with the support of the participants of this international conference having concluded the following joint understanding:
We express our determination to bring an end to bloodshed, suffering and decades of conflict between our peoples; to usher in a new era of peace, based on freedom, security, justice, dignity, respect and mutual recognition; to propagate a culture of peace and nonviolence; to confront terrorism and incitement, whether committed by Palestinians or Israelis.
In furtherance of the goal of two states, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and security, we agree to immediately launch good-faith bilateral negotiations in order to conclude a peace treaty resolving all outstanding issues, including all core issues without exception, as specified in previous agreements.
We agree to engage in vigorous, ongoing and continuous negotiations and shall make every effort to conclude an agreement before the end of 2008.
For this purpose, a steering committee led jointly by the head of the delegation of each party will meet continuously as agreed.
The steering committee will develop a joint work plan and establish and oversee the work of negotiations teams to address all issues, to be headed by one lead representative from each party.
The first session of the steering committee will be held on 12 December, 2007.
President Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert will continue to meet on a biweekly basis to follow up the negotiations in order to offer all necessary assistance for their advancement.
The parties also commit to immediately implement their respective obligations under the performance-based road map to a permanent two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict issued by the quartet on 30 April, 2003 this is called the road map and agree to form an American, Palestinian and Israeli mechanism led by the United States to follow up on the implementation of the road map.
The parties further commit to continue the implementation of the ongoing obligations of the road map until they reach a peace treaty. The United States will monitor and judge the fulfillment of the commitment of both sides of the road map.
Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, implementation of the future peace treaty will be subject to the implementation of the road map, as judged by the United States.
Congratulations for your strong leadership. Appreciate it.
The Palestinian people are blessed with many gifts and talents. They want the opportunity to use those gifts to better their own lives and build a future for their children.
They want the dignity that comes with sovereignty and independence. They want justice and equality under the rule of law. They want freedom from violence and fear.
The people of Israel have just aspirations as well.
They want their children to be able ride a bus or to go to school without fear of suicide bombers. They want an end to rocket attacks and constant threats of assault. They want their nation to be recognized and welcome in the region where they live.
Today Palestinians and Israelis each understand that helping the other to realize their aspirations is key to realizing their own aspirations. Both require an independent, democratic, viable Palestinian state.
Such a state will provide Palestinians with the chance to lead lives of freedom and purpose and dignity. Such a state will help provide the Israelis with something they have been seeking for generations, to live in peace with their neighbors.
Achieving this goal is not going to be easy. If it were easy, it would have happened a long time ago.
To achieve freedom and peace, both Israelis and Palestinians will have to make tough choices. Both sides are sober about the work ahead. But having spent time with their leaders, they are ready to take on the tough issues.
As Prime Minister Olmert recently put it, we will avoid none of the historic questions. We will not run from discussing any of them.
As President Abbas has said, I believe that there is an opportunity not only for us, but for the Israelis, too. We have an historic and important opportunity that we must benefit from.
It is with that spirit that we concluded that they concluded the statement I just read.
Our purpose here in Annapolis is not to conclude an agreement. Rather, it's to launch negotiations between the Israelis and the Palestinians.
For the rest of us, our job is to encourage the parties in this effort and to give them the support they need to succeed.
In light of recent developments, some have suggested that now is not the right time to pursue peace. I disagree. I believe now is precisely the right time to begin these negotiations, for a number of reasons.
First, the time is right because Palestinians and Israelis have leaders who are determined to achieve peace. President Abbas seeks to fulfill his people's aspirations for statehood, dignity and security. President Abbas understands that a Palestinian state will not be born of terror and that terrorism is the enemy standing in the way of a state.
He and Prime Minister Fayyad have both declared, without hesitation, that they are opposed to terrorism and committed to peace.
They're committed to turning these declarations into actions on the ground to combat terrorism.
The emergence of responsible Palestinian leaders has given Israeli leaders the confidence they need to reach to the Palestinians in true partnership.
Prime Minister Olmert has expressed his understanding of the suffering and indignities felt by the Palestinian people. He's made clear that the security of Israel will be enhanced by the establishment of a responsible democratic Palestinian state with leaders of courage and conviction on both sides. Now is the time to come together and seek the peace that both sides desire.
MORE
 Load-Date: November 28, 2007

 

End of Document
