

Text of President Bush's statement on the Mideast
The Associated Press
August 14, 2006 Monday 11:37 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON DATELINE
Length: 1296 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Text of President Bush's statement on the U.N.-brokered cease-fire between Israel and Hezbollah, as transcribed by CQ Transcriptions.
BUSH: Good afternoon. Today I met with members of my national security team, both here at the State Department and at the Pentagon. I want to, first of all, thank the leadership of Secretary Condi Rice and Secretary Don Rumsfeld.
During those discussions, we talked about the need to transform our military to meet the threats of the 21st century. We discussed the global war on terror. We discussed the situation on the ground in three fronts of the global war on terror: in Lebanon and Iraq and Afghanistan.
Friday's U.N. Security Council resolution on Lebanon is an important step forward that will help bring an end to the violence. The resolution calls for a robust international force to deploy to the southern part of the country to help Lebanon's legitimate armed forces restore the sovereignty of its democratic government all Lebanese territory.
As well, the resolution is intended to stop Hezbollah from acting as a state within the state.
We're now working with our international partners to turn the words of this resolution into action. We must help people in both Lebanon and Israel return to their homes and begin rebuilding their lives without fear of renewed violence and terror.
America recognizes that civilians in Lebanon and Israel have suffered from the current violence. And we recognize that responsibility for this suffering lies with Hezbollah. It was an unprovoked attack by Hezbollah on Israel that started this conflict.
Hezbollah terrorists targeted Israeli civilians with daily rocket attacks. Hezbollah terrorists used Lebanese civilians as human shields, sacrificing the innocent in an effort to protect themselves from Israeli response.
Responsibility for the suffering of the Lebanese people also lies with Hezbollah's state sponsors, Iran and Syria. The regime in Iran provides Hezbollah with financial support, weapons and training.
Iran has made clear that it seeks the destruction of Israel. We can only imagine how much more dangerous this conflict would be if Iran had the nuclear weapon it seeks.
Syria's another state sponsor of Hezbollah. Syria allows Iranian weapons to pass through its territory into Lebanon. Syria permits Hezbollah's leaders to operate out of Damascus and gives political support to Hezbollah's cause.
Syria supports Hezbollah because it wants to undermine Lebanon's democratic government and regain its position of dominance in the country. That would be a great tragedy for the Lebanese people and for the cause of peace in the Middle East.
Hezbollah and its foreign sponsors also seek to undermine the prospects for peace in the Middle East. Hezbollah terrorists kidnapped two Israeli soldiers. Hamas kidnapped another Israeli soldier for a reason: Hezbollah and Hamas reject a vision of two democratic states, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and security.
Both groups want to disrupt the progress being made toward that vision by Prime Minister Olmert and President Abbas and others in the region. We must not allow terrorists to prevent elected leaders from working together toward a comprehensive peace agreement in the Middle East.
The conflict in Lebanon is part of a broader struggle between freedom and terror that is unfolding across the region. For decades, American policy sought to achieve peace in the Middle East by promoting stability in the Middle East.
Yet, the lack of freedom in the region meant anger and resentment grew, radicalism thrived, and terrorists found willing recruits. We saw the consequences on Sept. 11, 2001, when terrorists brought death and destruction to our country, killing nearly 3,000 of our citizens.
So we launched a forward strategy of freedom in the broader Middle East. And that strategy has helped bring hope to millions and fostered the birth of young democracies from Baghdad to Beirut.
Forces of terror see the changes that are taking place in their midst. They understand that the advance of liberty, the freedom to worship, the freedom to dissent, the protection of human rights would be a defeat for their hateful ideology. But they also know that young democracies are fragile and that this may be their last and best opportunity to stop freedom's advance and steer newly free nations to the path of radical extremism.
So the terrorists are striking back with all the destructive power that they can muster. It's no coincidence that two nations that are building free societies in the heart of the Middle East Lebanon and Iraq are also the scenes of the most violent terrorist activity.
Some say that America caused the current instability in the Middle East by pursuing a forward strategy of freedom, yet history shows otherwise.
We didn't talk much about freedom or the freedom agenda in the Middle East before Sept. 11, 2001; or before al-Qaida first attacked the World Trade Center and blew up our embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in the 1990s; or before Hezbollah killed hundreds of Americans in Beirut and Islamic radicals held American hostages in Iran in the 1980s.
History's clear: The freedom agenda did not create the terrorists or their ideology, but the freedom agenda will help defeat them both.
Some say that the violence and instability we see today means that the people of this troubled region are not ready for democracy. I disagree. Over the past five years people across the Middle East have bravely defied the car bombers and assassins to show the world that they want to live in liberty.
We see the universal desire for liberty in the 12 million Iraqis who faced down the terrorists to cast their ballots and elected a free government under a democratic constitution.
We see the universal desire for liberty in 8 million Afghans who lined up to vote for the first democratic government in the long history of their country.
We see the universal desire for liberty in the Lebanese people, who took to the streets to demand their freedom and help drive Syrian forces out of their country.
The problem in the Middle East today is not that people lack the desire for freedom. The problem is that young democracies that they have established are still vulnerable to terrorists and their sponsors.
One vulnerability is that many of the new democratic governments in the region have not yet established effective control over all their territory. In both Lebanon and Iraq, elected governments are contending with rogue armed groups that are seeking to undermine and destabilize them.
In Lebanon, Hezbollah declared war on Lebanon's neighbor Israel without the knowledge of the elected government in Beirut. In Iraq, al-Qaida and death squads engage in brutal violence to undermine the unity government.
And in both these countries, Iran is backing armed groups in the hope of stopping democracy from taking hold.
The message of this administration is clear: America will stay on the offense against al-Qaida. Iran must stop its support for terror.
And the leaders of these armed groups must make a choice: If they want to participate in the political life of their countries, they must disarm. Elected leaders cannot have one foot in the camp of democracy and one foot in the camp of terror.
The Middle East is at a pivotal moment in its history. The death and destruction we see shows how determined the extremists are to stop just and modern societies from emerging in the region.
Yet millions of people in Lebanon, Iraq and Afghanistan and elsewhere are equally determined to live in peace and freedom. They have tired of the false promises and grand illusions of radical extremists. They reject the hateful vision of the terrorists, and they dream of a better future for their children and their grandchildren.
MORE
 Load-Date: August 15, 2006

 

End of Document
