

The newly minted author Thomas maintains his silence in the courtroom
The Associated Press
October 1, 2007 Monday 10:22 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 782 words
Byline: By PETE YOST
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




Newly minted author Clarence Thomas could be heard in several places Monday. The Supreme Court was not one of them.
The first day of the new court term coincided with the publication of Thomas' autobiography, accompanied by lengthy television and radio interviews about his life from childhood in Georgia to his bitter Senate confirmation battle.
But on the bench, Thomas was true to form, asking no questions during two hours of argument.
In contrast, some justices had much to say on their first day back after a three-month summer break.
Justice Antonin Scalia, for example, was his normally skeptical self.
A former CEO of Viacom is suing New York, trying to force the city to pay private schooling for his son with learning disabilities.
Affluent parents who have no intention of using public schools, said Scalia, might think "what the heck, if we can get $30,000 from the city, that's fine."
Justice David Souter drew laughter from the audience.
In a dispute over political primaries in Washington state, Souter observed that candidates are unlikely to identify themselves with a party unless they agree broadly with its principles.
On the contrary, argued Washington state Attorney General Robert McKenna. "There's the example of Sen. Lieberman," McKenna said referring to the former Connecticut Democrat who lost a party primary after siding with Republicans on waging war in Iraq. Lieberman later won the general election as an independent. He generally caucuses with Democrats in the Senate.
"There's always one," Souter replied, prompting laughter from the courtroom.
Chief Justice John Roberts, who suffered an unexplained seizure during the summer, was an active participant in questioning lawyers in both cases.
To start the day, the justices sidestepped two church-state disputes that social conservatives had hoped the court would use to chart a rightward course.
The court decided not to consider a challenge by religious groups to a New York law requiring health plans to cover birth control pills. Also rejected by the justices was a California case in which an evangelical group was denied use of a public library for religious services.
"We were hoping the Supreme Court would provide broader protections for religious liberties, and both these cases were excellent vehicles to do that," said Jordan Lorence, an attorney representing the evangelical group that was turned away from the library in Antioch, Calif.
New York is one of 23 states that require employers offering prescription benefits to employees to cover birth control pills as well. The state enacted the Women's Health and Wellness Act in 2002 to require health plans to cover contraception and other services aimed at women, including mammography, cervical cancer screenings and bone density exams.
Catholic Charities and other religious groups say that New York's law violates their First Amendment right to practice their religion because it forces them to violate religious teachings that regard contraception as sinful. Religious groups argue that the beliefs of the employer must dominate; their opponents counter that the ethical beliefs of employees must be respected.
"Every state court that has heard this case has affirmed that the law helps to provide access to basic health care. Today's decision by the Supreme Court not to consider the case protects the religious freedom of women and families," said JoAnn M. Smith, president and CEO of Family Planning Advocates of New York State.
The New York law has an exemption for churches, and the plaintiffs in the Catholic Charities lawsuit included two Baptist churches. In 2004 before the arrival of Roberts and Justice Samuel Alito, the court declined to hear a similar case brought by Catholic Charities of Sacramento, Calif., which did not include any churches as plaintiffs.
"We thought the addition of Roberts and Alito and the fact that we included churches would make a difference. It didn't. I think the battle has been fought and lost," said Dennis Poust, spokesman for the New York State Catholic Conference, the public policy arm of the state's Catholic bishops.
Lorence, the lawyer in the library case, disagreed.
"The Supreme Court likes to have issues percolate for a while at the lower courts. They also look for the best vehicle to address a specific issue. This very well could end up at the Supreme Court," Lorence said of the requirement that religious groups cover birth control pills.
Lorence is an attorney for the Alliance Defense Fund, which represented Faith Center Church Evangelistic Ministries in the dispute in Antioch, Calif., over conducting religious services in the public library.
On the Net:
Supreme Court: http://www.supremecourtus.gov/
 Load-Date: October 2, 2007

 

End of Document
