

The trial of a US soldier accused of murder in the death of an Iraqi civilian opens
The Associated Press
February 8, 2008 Friday 12:01 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 483 words
Byline: By BRADLEY BROOKS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAGHDAD 
Body




An Army sniper went on trial Friday on charges of killing an Iraqi civilian and planting an AK-47 on his body to make him look like an insurgent.
Two other soldiers have faced similar charges in the same killing and two others. Those men were acquitted of the murder charges but were convicted of planting evidence on the bodies of the dead Iraqis.
Sgt. Evan Vela of St. Anthony, Idaho, faced a court-martial on one count of premeditated murder, making a false official statement and of conduct prejudicial to good order and discipline.
Military prosecutors say the killings occurred on April 14, April 27 and May 11 near Iskandariyah, a mostly Sunni Arab city 30 miles south of Baghdad.
Vela, Staff Sgt. Michael A. Hensley, of Candler, N.C., and Spc. Jorge G. Sandoval, Jr., of Laredo, Texas, were assigned to Headquarters and Headquarters Company, 1st Battalion, 501st Infantry Regiment, 4th Brigade (Airborne), 25th Infantry Division, based at Fort Richardson, Alaska. Hensley and Sandoval have since had their ranks reduced as part of their sentences.
In late September, Vela testified at Hensley's court-martial under a deal that bars his account of events from being used against him when he goes to trial.
Vela said Hensley, his staff sergeant, told him to shoot a man who stumbled upon their snipers' hideout, although he was not armed and had his hands in the air as he approached the soldiers.
Vela's attorney has also said that Army snipers hunting insurgents in Iraq were under orders to "bait" their targets with suspicious materials, such as detonation cords, and then kill whoever picked up the items.
"We believe that our client has done nothing more than he was instructed to do by superiors," said Gary Myers, the attorney.
The Army has declined to confirm such a program exists.
"To prevent the enemy from learning about our tactics, techniques and training procedures, we don't discuss specific methods targeting enemy combatants," said Paul Boyce, an Army spokesman.
Boyce also said there are no classified programs that authorize the murder of Iraqi civilians or the use of "drop weapons" to make killings appear to be legally justified the practice Vela and the two other snipers were accused of carrying out.
In September, a military panel acquitted Sandoval on charges he killed two unarmed Iraqis in April and May, but it convicted him of planting evidence on one of the men in an attempt to justify the actions. He was sentenced to five months in prison, his rank was reduced to private and his pay was withheld.
In November, Hensley was acquitted of murder charges in the three deaths.
Hensley was convicted of planting evidence by placing a rifle with the body of an Iraqi man who died during the May 11 incident and of showing disrespect to a superior commissioned officer.
Hensley was sentenced to 135 days confinement, reduced in rank to sergeant and received a letter of reprimand.
 Load-Date: February 9, 2008

 

End of Document
