

The latest newspaper endorsements in 2008 race
The Associated Press
October 27, 2008 Monday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1486 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Excerpts from recent newspaper endorsements of presidential candidates John McCain, a Republican, and Barack Obama, a Democrat.
The (Winter Haven, Fla.) News Chief endorsed McCain on Oct. 27:
"Barack Obama is a man of great appeal, rhetorical flourishes, little political experience and left-leaning tendencies. In contrast, John McCain is far less eloquent, but he's experienced, he's proven in a fight and he's on target on important U.S. policies regarding taxes, spending, trade, energy and national security.
"Given the choice, we much prefer substance over style and experience over risky idealism. We prefer and recommend John McCain for president of the United States."
The (Lynchburg, Va.) News & Advance endorsed McCain on Oct. 26:
"With the economic and foreign policy crises looming in wait for the next occupant of the White House, it is McCain's bipartisan, common-sense approach to problem-solving that this nation needs. Challenges such as Iraq, the global financial crisis and the war on terror demand a leader who has the ability to reach across the ideological divide in Washington. Only John McCain has that track record as a national leader."
The (Harrisburg, Pa.) Patriot-News endorsed Obama on Oct. 26:
"Where McCain, the self-described 'maverick,' is inclined to go it alone when he believes he's right, Obama is much more likely to seek counsel from those offering a different perspective.
"It is such 'intellectual curiosity' and 'intellectual vigor,' to use Gen. Colin Powell's terms, that this nation clearly needs in its leaders in this troubled time.
"Most of all, if America is to successfully confront the great challenges we face at the moment, it will require a unity of purpose and spirit that only rarely manifests itself among our diverse population. There's no better example than his campaign to showcase Obama's ability to bring people from all stations in life together for a common purpose.
"Barack Obama has clearly demonstrated the judgment and the temperament to be a good president."
The (Scranton, Pa.) Times-Tribune endorsed Obama on Oct. 26:
"America's problems call for new leadership. In that regard, Mr. Obama has the potential to be a truly transformational figure.
"There has been much speculation about the potential impact of race on the election and an Obama presidency. But the truer transformation in his election would lie in a different demographic. He represents a generational shift and a view definitively rooted in the future rather than the past. He will strive to heal our wounds abroad and call Americans to common purpose at home.
"His time is now."
The Courier-Express and Tri-County Sunday in Dubois, Pa., endorsed Obama on Oct. 26:
"Since American voters must make this choice between flawed candidates, we take a deep breath, utter a silent prayer, and offer ours: Barack Obama.
"Why? Obama is not aligned with the Republican executive branch members who have shredded the Constitution, prolonged and mismanaged the war in Iraq, failed abjectly to find Osama bin Laden despite a seven-year search, and presided over the collapse of the nation's housing and banking systems. An Obama administration will get more incumbents out of executive branch positions than will a McCain administration.
"The Republicans blew it during the past eight years; they do not deserve re-election."
The La Crosse (Wis.) Tribune endorsed Obama on Oct. 26:
"The La Crosse Tribune endorses Sen. Barack Obama, the Democrat from Illinois, to provide the change in leadership, hope and vision we need to restore faith in our future and restore trust among our world partners.
"While we admire and respect the heroism and service of Sen. John McCain, the Republican nominee from Arizona, we don't have faith in his ability to be the maverick he wants us to believe he is."
The Lawrence (Kan.) Journal-World endorsed McCain on Oct. 27:
"McCain says if he is elected, he will crack down, demand performance and change the way elected officials carry out their responsibilities. He believes our system of government is the best in the world, and his call for "change" refers to preserving and strengthening this system, to clean and correct the abuses, not change our historic system of government. Free enterprise, capitalism, the limited role of government in the lives of Americans, the right for secret votes on matters such as union representation, a tax schedule that encourages growth and private ownership, all are important.
"He has made it clear that if he is elected, changes will be made in Washington."
The Fort Collins (Colo.) Coloradoan endorsed Obama on Oct. 26 but noted its editorial board, reflecting the electorate, had a "split vote with strong support also shown for John McCain:"
"The maneuver room for whoever is elected is zero. Trust in the federal government is at an all-time low; the nation is at war; no money or tolerance exists for new programs; and the United States' credibility and stance is too much at stake to fail any foreign policy 'tests.' Obama appears the most ready for this challenge."
The (Rochester, N.Y.) Democrat and Chronicle endorsed Obama on Oct. 27:
"America is in crisis, and it's not limited to the meltdown on Wall Street. A heavily burdened nation yearns for new direction. Democrats Barack Obama and Joe Biden are best suited to revive the indomitable spirit that made America great. They are the Democrat and Chronicle's choices for president and vice president."
The Fort Worth (Texas) Star-Telegram endorsed Obama on Oct. 27:
"For many of the same reasons that the Star-Telegram recommended Democrat Bill Clinton in 1992, it is recommending Democrat Barack Obama in 2008.
"Obama provides the prescription for America's ills at this moment: a fine, inquisitive intellect, paired with an eloquence that allows him to articulate a message with clarity and substance; an ability to inspire people of all ages, races and ethnicities who never before were engaged in the political process; and an unflappable temperament that allows him to weather a barrage of withering personal attacks."
The Cecil Whig of Elkton, Md., endorsed McCain on Oct. 27:
"At this crossroads to the future, we believe the choice is clear. In one direction lies inexperience, uncertainty, and bigger government as a 'solution' to our problems. The other road is just as difficult, but the man to take us down it has a proven record of leadership and good judgment, of a steady hand on the wheel. That man is John McCain."
The Lancaster (Pa.) New Era endorsed McCain on Oct. 20:
"There is little doubt that America, weary of Wall Street calamities and war, wants a break from the eight years of the Bush administration. So the question remains: Who will bring about meaningful change? Our view is that John McCain will, and he has the record to prove it. That's why we wholeheartedly endorse his candidacy for president. America is ready for a maverick in the White House."
The Pensacola (Fla.) News Journal endorsed Obama on Oct. 26:
"Both support strong climate change initiatives, but while both support expanded offshore drilling, Obama is much more aggressive about promoting the renewable energy needed to reduce our dependency on oil a dependency we can't sate through drilling.
Obama is even more aggressive than McCain about the need to pursue Osama bin Laden across the Pakistani border.
But our recommendation is more than just a vetting of policy and issues. We believe Obama is better prepared to take on the future. In a world that is increasingly 'flat,' it is Obama who understands it better: from the economy, to conflict, to technology, to holding American values dear so that our country can, once again, be the moral beacon for the world."
Florida Today in Melbourne, Fla., endorsed Obama on Oct. 26:
"Obama is what America is rapidly becoming in the 21st century multicultural, multiethnic and has used his background and the lessons learned to appeal to the best of Americans' nature in his historic quest to become the country's first African-American president.
Obama is not presenting himself as a messiah, as some opponents cynically claim. Rather, he's a person who has used his immense talents in that most American way to work hard, measure up and make a difference.
He's the right man at the right moment to become our next president."
On the Net:
The News Chief: http://www.newschief.com/
The News & Advance: http://www.newsadvance.com/
The Patriot-News: http://www.patriot-news.com/
The Times-Tribune: http://www.scrantontimes.com/
The Courier-Express: http://www.thecourierexpress.com/
La Crosse Tribune: http://www.lacrossetribune.com/
Lawrence Journal-World: http://www2.ljworld.com/
The Coloradoan: http://www.coloradoan.com/
Democrat and Chronicle: http://www.democratandchronicle.com/
The Star-Telegram: http://www.star-telegram.com/
Lancaster New Era: http://lancasteronline.com/
Pensacola News Journal: http://www.pnj.com
Florida Today: http://www.floridatoday.com
 Load-Date: October 28, 2008

 

End of Document
