

Today on the presidential campaign trail
The Associated Press
October 4, 2008 Saturday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1611 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
Obama says large job loss shows GOP policies not working; McCain says Obama's plan won't help ... Post debate, Palin hits the road with reinvigorated mission ... Obama, McCain help House pass contentious financial rescue plan ... Republican lawmakers appeal to Alaska Supreme Court to block Palin Troopergate investigation ... Alaska election laws won't allow Palin to donate tainted 2006 donations ... Though polls favor Biden over Palin, McCain lauds his running mate's performance in debate ... Biden sends his son's Delaware guard unit off for Iraq with 'love and pride'
Obama, McCain joust over economy as jobs plunge
ABINGTON, Pa. (AP) Democrat Barack Obama used word of the nation's worst monthly job loss in over five years Friday to argue the policies of his Republican opponents "are killing jobs in America every single day." Republican John McCain retorted that Obama's tax and spending plans won't solve the problem.
The government reported employers cut 159,000 jobs last month, the ninth straight month of job losses.
Obama encouraged voters to change the Republican leadership in the White House that he said hasn't worked. He disputed McCain running mate Sarah Palin's claim in a debate Thursday night that own spending plan would be a job killer.
"When Sen. McCain and his running mate talk about job killing, that's something they know a thing or two about," Obama said. "Because the policies they've supported and are supporting are killing jobs in America every single day."
Hours later at a town hall meeting in Pueblo, Colo., McCain himself said Obama's plans would hurt the economy.
"He wants higher taxes, more government, higher spending, and frankly that record is not something which has been good for America and we won't let it happen," McCain said. The McCain campaign launched a new national TV ad Friday repeating his criticisms of Obama's tax plans.
Palin questions McCain's concession of Michigan
DALLAS (AP) Sarah Palin questioned Republican John McCain's decision to abandon efforts to win Michigan, a campaign move she only learned about Friday morning when she read it in the newspapers.
In an interview with Fox News Channel Friday, McCain's running mate said she was disappointed the campaign decided to stop competing in Michigan. In an indication that Palin had not been part of the decision, the Alaska governor said she had "read that this morning and I fired off a quick e-mail" questioning the move.
Palin acknowledged the GOP ticket's lackluster poll ratings in the state, but said: "I want to get back to Michigan and I want to try."
Word of the McCain campaign's decision to move staff out of Michigan and stop advertising in the state broke around midday Thursday the same day as Palin's vice presidential debate against Democrat Joe Biden.
Also on Friday, the McCain campaign released the joint income tax return for Palin and her husband. The couple had a gross income of nearly $170,000 last year and paid nearly $25,000 in taxes.
The campaign also said the couple made nearly $130,000 and paid about $12,000 in taxes in 2006.
The couple donated more than $8,000 to charity over two years.
Obama, McCain help House pass financial bill
WASHINGTON (AP) Presidential contenders Barack Obama and John McCain helped House leaders round up votes for Friday's passage of a $700 billion financial rescue plan, and Obama's role seemed particularly energetic, Democrats said.
Several lawmakers described receiving calls from Obama, who told them that, if elected, he would help hard-pressed homeowners keep their houses.
For nearly two weeks, Obama had kept more distance from the costly and contentious plan than had McCain, the Republican nominee. But when House leaders began their all-out push to convert members who had voted "no" on Monday, Obama called several wavering Democrats who ended up voting "yes" on Friday.
Obama "made numerous calls" and "helped us gather the votes on the Democratic side to pass this legislation," said Rep. Rahm Emanuel, D-Ill., chairman of his party's House caucus.
McCain had played a more visible role in negotiations last week. He temporarily suspended his campaign to return to Washington and asked for a White House summit meeting, which turned into near chaos.
On Friday, the McCain campaign and House GOP leaders said McCain called several Republican lawmakers this week, urging them to back the legislative package after the Senate reworked it. But few House members publicly described such calls, and at least one said hers never came.
GOP lawmakers file appeal to halt Troopergate case
ANCHORAGE, Alaska (AP) Six Alaska lawmakers filed an emergency appeal Friday asking the state's Supreme Court to halt an investigation into abuse-of-power allegations against Gov. Sarah Palin before the findings are released next week.
The independent investigator conducting the probe plans to turn over his conclusions by next Friday to the Legislative Council, the body that authorized it. The six Republican lawmakers, who are not on the Legislative Council, claim the investigation is being manipulated to damage Palin before Election Day on Nov. 4.
Late Friday, the Supreme Court accepted the appeal and scheduled oral arguments for Wednesday in Anchorage.
The probe is looking into whether Palin, who is the Republican vice presidential candidate, and others pressured Public Safety Commissioner Walt Monegan to fire a state trooper who was involved in a contentious divorce from Palin's sister and then fired Monegan when he wouldn't dismiss the trooper. Palin says Monegan was ousted over budget disagreements.
Five Republican lawmakers sued to block the investigation or remove its overseers and were later joined in their lawsuit by a sixth legislator. But the lawsuit was dismissed on Thursday by an Anchorage judge.
Palin won't be able to donate tainted money
JUNEAU, Alaska (AP) Gov. Sarah Palin promised last week to give $2,100 in tainted donations to charity, but that will only happen this year if she and John McCain win the Nov. 4 election.
Otherwise, the donation will wait until after the general election in 2010, according to officials with the Alaska Public Offices Commission, the state's campaign oversight division.
State election laws prevent donations from active accounts held by lawmakers not running for a state office; Palin has two more years in her first term as governor.
So Palin can only use the money if the McCain-Palin ticket wins the election and she closes out the account. Otherwise, it will have to wait two years.
The campaign said the GOP vice presidential nominee, who disclosed Friday that she and her husband had a gross adjusted income of $166,080 last year, felt the donations should come from the gubernatorial campaign account and not her personal funds.
The money represents donations from two lawmakers indicted in a sweeping federal corruption probe and the wife of one of the men.
Palin says debate went well as polls favor Biden
Republicans John McCain and Sarah Palin on Friday played up her debate performance as polls showed voters judging her Democratic rival, Joe Biden, to be the winner of the only vice presidential face-off of the campaign.
"It was a lot of fun. It was a great opportunity to get to speak directly to Americans," Palin said in an interview with Fox News. McCain told supporters at a town-hall meeting in Pueblo, Colo.: "You know, I almost felt a little sorry last night for my old friend Joe Biden. She did a magnificent job."
Two quick polls indicated that Biden fared better in the debate. A CBS News/Knowledge Networks Poll found that 46 percent of uncommitted voters who watched the debate thought Biden won, while 21 percent sided with Palin. A CNN poll found respondents judging Biden the winner by a margin of 51 percent to 36 percent, but finding Palin more likable by 54 percent to Biden's 36 percent.
Biden sends son, Delaware troops off for Iraq
DOVER, Del. (AP) Democratic vice presidential candidate Joe Biden told his son and other Delaware National Guard troops on Friday that his heart was "full of love and pride" as they prepared to leave for an assignment in Iraq.
Biden's son Beau, Delaware's attorney general, serves as a captain and a lawyer in the 261st. The unit leaves Sunday for Fort Bliss, Texas, where it will train for about six weeks before heading to Iraq.
The normally loquacious senator spoke only briefly.
"As you serve and look out for your brothers and sisters in arms, your families here at home promise you that we'll look out for one another," Biden said.
Biden's Republican rival, Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin, gave a similar farewell talk in Alaska last month to the 1st Stryker Brigade Combat Team, which includes her oldest son, Track, a 19-year-old private.
DAILY TRACK
Democrat Barack Obama has a 7-percentage-point lead over Republican John McCain 49 percent to 42 percent among registered voters, according to the latest Gallup Poll daily tracking update.
THE DEMOCRATS
Barack Obama talked to voters in Abington, Pa.
Joe Biden attended a deployment ceremony in Delaware.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain held a town-hall style meeting in Pueblo, Colo.
Sarah Palin raised campaign cash in Texas.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"The Sarah Palin in those interviews is a little bit annoyed. Because it's like, no matter what you say, you're going to get clobbered." Sarah Palin, the Republican vice presidential candidate, on her recent interviews with CBS' News anchor Katie Couric.
STAT OF THE DAY:
Just 25 percent of likely voters believe Sarah Palin has the right experience to be president, a recent AP-Gfk poll found. That's down from 41 percent just after the GOP convention in early September.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: October 4, 2008

 

End of Document
