

Today on the presidential campaign trail
The Associated Press
September 2, 2008 Tuesday

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 1373 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




IN THE HEADLINES
GOP convention appeals for hurricane aid; Palins say unmarried daughter is pregnant ... Palin says daughter, 17, is pregnant; attorney hired in separate Alaska trooper probe ... Convention delegates attacked; More than dozen arrested by police using pepper spray ... Obama curtails campaign to watch Gustav, asks for Red Cross donations ... McCain says campaign raised $47 million in August ... Biden, in Pa., recalls blue-collar roots in Scranton
GOP convention opens with appeal for Gustav aid
ST. PAUL, Minn. (AP) Republicans, determined to propel John McCain to the White House, opened their storm-shortened national convention on Monday amid distractions involving running mate Sarah Palin. Police made more than 50 arrests in the surrounding streets as anti-war protests turned violent.
Delegates had scarcely settled into their seats when it was disclosed a lawyer had been hired to represent the Alaska governor in an investigation of her firing of the state's public safety commissioner. The other disclosure was personal, not political the pregnancy of her 17-year-old unmarried daughter.
The convention's opening session was abbreviated as Hurricane Gustav hit the Gulf Coast, sparing New Orleans the type of damage inflicted by Hurricane Katrina almost exactly three years ago.
President Bush skipped his planned speech to go to disaster and relief centers, determined to avoid a repeat of the mismanagement of Katrina.
McCain was in Waterville, Ohio, where he helped pack supplies to be sent to the Gulf.
Both men's wives sparked cheers when they appeared before the delegates, shunning politics to urge contributions to help storm victims.
Virtually the only political business of the convention's 2 1/2-hour session was approval of a platform that sidestepped the Iraq War, one of the key issues in the campaign between McCain and Democrat Barack Obama.
Day of stunning Palin disclosures
ST. PAUL, Minn. (AP) John McCain's running mate, Sarah Palin, said Monday her 17-year-old unmarried daughter was five months pregnant, the latest in a string of disclosures that left the McCain campaign defending the thoroughness of its background check of the little-known Alaska governor.
It was also revealed Monday that an attorney had been hired to represent Palin in a state ethics probe and that her husband, Todd, had been arrested for drunken driving two decades ago. The man who led McCain's vice presidential search team said he thought everything that came up as a possible red flag during the background check had now been made public.
"I think so," Arthur B. Culvahouse Jr. told The Associated Press. "Yes. I think so. Correct."
The revelations threatened to steal any remaining thunder from Day One of the Republican National Convention, which already was overshadowed by Hurricane Gustav and brought unwanted attention to the 44-year-old governor, a self-described "hockey mom" with little experience on the national stage.
The GOP convention had already been scaled back because of the hurricane, and just three days after McCain named Palin as his vice presidential running mate. Coming after the randomness of Gustav, the revelations added to the sense of unscriptedness hanging over the convention.
Some turn violent in march to GOP convention
ST. PAUL, Minn. (AP) Protesters attacked delegates, smashed windows, punctured car tires and threw bottles Monday, a violent counterpoint to an otherwise peaceful anti-war march at the Republican National Convention. Police wielding pepper spray arrested at least 56 people.
The trouble happened not far from the Xcel Energy Center convention site, and many of those involved in the more violent protest were clad in black and identified themselves to reporters as anarchists. They wrought havoc by damaging property and setting at least one fire. Most of the trouble was in pockets of a neighborhood near downtown, several blocks from where the convention was taking place.
Police estimates of the crowd shifted several times during the event, ranging from 2,000 to 10,000. The crowd was clearly in the thousands. Late Monday afternoon, long after the anti-war marchers had dispersed, police requested and got 150 Minnesota National Guard soldiers to help control splinter groups near downtown.
Obama curtails campaign to watch Gustav
DETROIT (AP) Barack Obama urged hundreds of thousands of supporters Monday to donate to the Red Cross to help victims of Hurricane Gustav. The Democratic presidential nominee scaled back Labor Day speeches to unions in an effort to keep the focus on the Gulf Coast.
Obama planned to finish his campaign schedule Monday with stops in Michigan and Wisconsin, two battleground states the campaign views as possible wins, before heading home to Chicago to monitor the situation and decide his schedule for the rest of the week.
"Instead of a speech, what I'd like to do is to ask all of us join in some silent prayer for all those Americans who are spending this Labor Day in a shelter waiting for another storm to pass," Obama said at an outdoor rally in the shadow of General Motors' headquarters.
McCain raises $47 million in August
ST. PAUL, Minn. (AP) Republican John McCain raised at least $47 million in August, his biggest haul of money so far and a sign that he is dispelling doubts about his campaign among conservative donors.
Two campaign officials discussed the fundraising Monday on the condition of anonymity because the numbers had not been officially tallied.
The amount was just shy of the $50 million that Democratic rival Barack Obama raised in July. Obama campaign officials would not comment on their August fundraising.
One official said the campaign had raised $10 million since McCain announced Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin as his running mate on Friday. Palin has emerged as a popular vice presidential candidate among social conservatives who have eyed McCain with suspicion.
Another official said that the Republican Party and the campaign will have between $224 million and $240 million available next week going into the fall campaign. That amount would include the $85 million in public funds that McCain will receive after he officially becomes the Republican nominee on Thursday.
Biden, in Pa., lauds blue-collar roots in Scranton
SCRANTON, Pa. (AP) Sen. Joe Biden, campaigning in his boyhood town of Scranton with his 91-year-old mother Monday, gave voters a short course on the political climate as he grew up, saying that "to be Irish was to be Catholic was to be Democrat."
"This is where my family values and my faith melded," Biden, the Democratic nominee for vice president, told about 75 hand-picked supporters. "The one thing you learned here is, a promise made is a promise kept."
Earlier in the day, Biden nixed plans to march in a Labor Day parade in Pittsburgh, saying he needed to focus instead on Hurricane Gustav's landfall on the Gulf Coast. Asked about the Bush administration's storm preparations, Biden said, "So far I've been impressed."
Biden lived in Scranton until 1953, when his father moved the 10-year-old and other family members to Delaware to search for a better job. His mother, Jean, and a brother, Jimmy, joined him at the three-story home as Democrats sought to shore up support in Pennsylvania, a perennial battleground.
DAILY TRACK
Democrat Barack Obama has an 6-percentage-point lead over Republican John McCain he has 49 percent to McCain's 43 percent among registered voters in the presidential race, according to the latest Gallup Poll daily tracking update.
THE DEMOCRATS
Barack Obama is scheduled to hold a rally in Detroit before attending a barbecue in Monroe, Mich., and a rally in Milwaukee.
Joe Biden planned to discuss the economy in Scranton, Pa.
THE REPUBLICANS
John McCain planned to stop in Ohio, and Philadelphia.
Sarah Palin is in St. Paul, Minn., with no public schedule.
QUOTE OF THE DAY:
"While we're here in Minneapolis-St. Paul, we can do things for people on the Gulf Coast." First lady Laura Bush, who met with volunteers who will help send care packages to those affected by Hurricane Gustav.
STAT OF THE DAY:
The Republican National Convention is expected to draw about 45,000 delegates, alternate delegates, volunteers, members of the press and other guests.
Compiled by Ann Sanner.
 Load-Date: September 2, 2008

 

End of Document
