

U.N. supports peace talks between the Afghan government and the Taliban, U.N. envoy says
The Associated Press
September 22, 2007 Saturday 2:59 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 293 words
Byline: By EDITH M. LEDERER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS 
Body




The United Nations would support peace talks between the Afghan government and the Taliban and is prepared to help mediate, a key U.N. envoy said Friday.
Tom Koenigs of Germany, ahead of a high-level meeting to support the government that will include the U.S. and Iran, said that negotiations won't produce "a quick result" but are essential.
"We from the United Nations will certainly support peace talks because the insurgency cannot be won over by military means only," he said. "We have to keep the door open for negotiations."
Afghan President Hamid Karzai has pressed for open talks with the Taliban and the group initially seemed willing. But Taliban leadership returned with conditions that would kill chances for talks that U.S. and NATO troops withdraw and Islamic law be re-imposed on Afghanistan.
The United Nations doesn't expect the "hard core" of the Taliban to negotiate, "but there are certainly tribes who are alienated, maybe even by misgovernance, who can be brought back," Koenigs told a news conference.
He said the U.N. can mediate, for instance, between tribes that are fighting for the government and tribes that are fighting for the Taliban.
Efforts to bring peace to Afghanistan will be high on the agenda at Sunday's meeting, chaired by Karzai and U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, that will bring together donor nations, contributors to the U.S. and NATO-led peacekeeping forces, Afghanistan's neighbors, the European Union and international lending institutions.
This week, the U.N. Security Council extended the mandate of the NATO-led alliance to almost 40,000 in the face of an emboldened insurgency led by the country's former Taliban rulers. The United States maintains about 13,000 troops in a separate counterinsurgency force.
 Load-Date: September 22, 2007

 

End of Document
