

With the dollar poised to weaken further, some companies will see benefit, others pain
The Associated Press
January 11, 2008 Friday 8:21 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 2740 words
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




The U.S. dollar slid nearly 11 percent against the euro in 2007, and given the precarious state of the economy, the decline may continue a boon for some companies but a difficult hurdle for others.
In early 2008, a slowing economy is expected to continue to make U.S. investments less appealing, keeping the dollar suppressed against many foreign currencies. Foreign purchases of U.S. debt has "collapsed," Credit Suisse wrote in a December report, while the appetite for foreign stocks remains high among U.S. investors. The dollar's decline against the euro has continued into 2008.
"We don't believe the U.S. dollar will continue to fall at a rapid pace in 2008, but with fundamentals as weak, or weaker than in the 2005-2006 era, we believe the dollar will continue to decline at a moderate pace," ABN AMRO currency strategists wrote in a December report.
It's not a new scenario for many companies the dollar's downtrend has been under way for six years. A strong dollar can help companies that sell goods overseas by boosting revenue when the foreign currency is translated into dollars. On the flipside, it can boost the cost of imports and doing business overseas. Sometimes a currency benefit is a salve that helps mitigate problems in other parts of the company.
Each industry and company has a different set of circumstances that determine if the weak dollar hurts or helps. The following is a look at how some sectors stack up against a weak greenback.
Cruise Lines
Both Miami-based Carnival Corp. and Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd. benefited in 2007 as foreign tourists booked vacations, enjoying more bang for their euros and British pounds when buying trips from the U.S. companies.
Savvy U.S. travelers looking to save on a European holiday are also helping cruise lines. Expenses such as tickets and onboard costs are priced in U.S. dollars for European voyages, giving Americans a more affordable option compared with land-based European vacations that rely on unfavorable currency conversion rates, Susquehanna Financial Group analyst Robert LaFleur said in a December research note.
But any benefit cruise lines may be getting from higher European bookings may be offset by rising fuel costs and could make traveling more expensive for cruisers in 2008. Both Carnival and Royal Caribbean recently said they will implement fuel surcharges in 2008 to help offset rising gas prices.
-- Michelle Chapman
Gaming
Tight credit markets have slowed the pace of merger and acquisition activity among U.S. companies, but the weak dollar has spurred some foreign buyers into action.
Dubai World, the investment arm of the Dubai government provided funding for MGM Mirage's $7.8 billion CityCenter in Las Vegas and bought a 5 percent stake in the casino operator. Australia-based Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd. also jumped in the mix. The company said in June it will team with developer Christopher Milam's Austin, Texas-based IDM Properties and private equity company York Capital Management to create the Crown Las Vegas hotel-casino.
Casino operators have also capitalized on growing interest among foreign customers, particularly in Macau, the Chinese enclave that allows gambling. MGM Mirage, Las Vegas Sands Corp. and Wynn Resorts Ltd. have all opened casinos in the former Portuguese colony with strong results.
Macau surpassed the Las Vegas Strip last in 2007 as the world's top gambling center, taking in $6.95 billion in revenue in 2006, compared with $6.69 billion, regulators in the cities said in December.
--Michelle Chapman
Pharmaceutical and Medical Device companies
International sales for pharmaceutical and medical device companies will likely continue to benefit from a weak U.S. dollar in 2008.
During the third quarter, Pfizer Inc., Deerfield, Ill.-based Baxter International Inc. and Indianapolis-based Eli Lilly & Co. said the weaker dollar either offset some of their losses, or pushed profit higher.
New York-based Pfizer said the weak dollar relative to other currencies, particularly the euro and British pound added $553 million to revenue in the first six months of 2007 and that while worldwide sales of cholesterol drug Lipitor have been declining, the impact of the weak dollar has actually translated into a rise in revenue from the drug internationally.
While a weaker dollar also makes overseas expenses higher, profit from international revenue more than offset any negative effect, said Morningstar pharmaceutical analyst Damien Conover.
"That's a reason that some of these major drug companies are doing well over the last few quarters," he said.
The benefit depends on the mix of domestic and international sales. Pfizer is about evenly split, Conover said, while Schering-Plough generates about 60 percent of its revenue from international sales, and Merck & Co. pulls in about 40 percent overseas.
Hip and knee implant maker Zimmer Holdings Inc. has benefited from the dollar's weakness against the yen and euro. The Warsaw, Ind.-based company operates facilities in over 20 countries and sells products globally.
In a recent note to investors, Wachovia Capital Markets analyst Michael Matson predicted the currency benefit will boost Zimmer's 2008 revenue by 2.8 percent to $4.15 billion, compared with his prior estimate of 1.4 percent.
--Jennifer Sterling and Damian Troise
Consumer Products makers
Consumer products companies including Colgate-Palmolive Co. and Procter & Gamble Co. have collected bigger profits due partly to the benefit of converting revenue from euros to U.S. dollars.
Colgate, which generates about 75 percent of its revenue abroad, should get a 7.5 percent benefit from the currency conversion in its fourth quarter, expected to result in a profit gain of 1 cent per share, said Banc of America Securities analyst April Scee in a note to investors.
Battery maker Spectrum Brands Inc., meanwhile, registered an 11 percent jump in revenue in its European battery segment in the fourth quarter, largely because of the strength of the euro. The higher revenue helped the company report a narrower loss.
Other companies have benefited from the influx of foreign tourists, eager to spend now that U.S. products seem much cheaper to them.
John Demsey, group president of cosmetic company Estee Lauder Cos., said demand from foreign shoppers was "a big driver of cosmetic sales" during the holiday shopping season, especially in major tourist destinations such as New York, Miami and San Francisco.
"Percentage growth in these stores was materially better than other parts of the country," Demsey said. "I would assume the dynamics will continue into the spring" as long as the dollar remains weak, he added.
--Lauren Shepherd
Retailers
U.S. retailers may be struggling as consumers are stretched by higher food and gas prices and a housing slump, but for stores with a large international presence, the weaker dollar can be a salve for slowing domestic sales.
For example, TJX Cos. said November sales at stores open at least one year, a key gauge of retailer performance, rose 7 percent, beating analysts' estimates. International sales helped results by 3 percentage points due to the weaker dollar. The Framingham, Mass.-based off-price retailer boosted its fourth-quarter outlook citing favorable currency exchange rates.
Wal-Mart Stores Inc. one of the few bright spots during the holiday season, reported December sales jumped 18.2 percent internationally, to $11.97 billion, helped by the weaker dollar. Total sales grew 8.4 percent.
Some U.S. retailers benefit from foreign tourists armed with stronger currencies seeking bargains, particularly if they have flagship stores in New York. Jewelry retailer Tiffany & Co. said that about half of its 25 percent same-store sales increase in the third quarter came from foreign shoppers and in January, the company said a 10 percent increase at its New York flagship store in the November-December holiday period was due to foreign tourist spending, while U.S. sales were otherwise lackluster.
But for most retailers, a benefit from the weaker dollar is not a cure-all for bigger problems.
Costco Wholesale Corp. said in December fiscal first-quarter profit rose 11 percent on increased sales, as international same-store sales surged 17 percent on favorable exchange rates. While results met analyst expectations, shares slipped as investors focused on operating margins, which are being pressured by higher gas prices.
However, as the U.S. consumer spending environment weakened further in December, the weaker dollar helped mitigate domestic softness at the warehouse retailer. Costco said December same-store sales rose 7 percent, including a 16 percent jump internationally, helped by the weaker dollar against Canadian and U.K. currencies.
--Mae Anderson
Airlines
The weak dollar has pushed oil futures higher as foreign investors flock to dollar-denominated crude, pinching U.S. airlines, which count fuel among their highest costs. Fierce competition has made it difficult for carriers to pass those rising costs onto consumers.
But the dollar's decline may also be having a positive effect on airlines - especially those with international operations. During the first nine months of 2007, 36.1 million international visitors arrived in the U.S., a 10 percent jump from the same period a year earlier, according to the Commerce Department's International Trade Administration.
"It's generally been an upside because of what it's done to stimulate visitation to the United States," said John Heimlich, chief economist for the Air Transport Association, the industry's main trade group.
Heimlich said some overseas operating costs, such as in-flight food and hotel rooms for crew members, may cost more because of the weaker dollar. But airlines also benefit from the currency's decline by making more in dollar terms on each ticket bought in euros or other foreign currencies.
"We've enjoyed an effective fare increase without raising fares," Heimlich said.
--Adam Schreck
Canadian Railroads
Canadian railroads have suffered a tough period as the weak U.S. dollar hurt revenue when translated back into stronger Canadian currency.
Canadian National Railway Co. said in late October its third-quarter profit fell 2 percent as a difficult Canadian/US dollar exchange rate cut into profits, especially in its forest product segment its largest commodity group. The Canadian dollar rose 16.8 percent against the euro in 2007.
Longbow Research analyst Lee Klaskow said about one third of the company's business is trans-border between the U.S. and Canada, which made the company vulnerable as the Canadian dollar strengthened.
Klaskow said for every penny the Canadian dollar gains on the U.S. dollar, it lowers Canadian National's earnings per share by about two Canadian cents per share. The effect is less obvious for Canada's second-largest rail, Canadian Pacific Railway Ltd., because it does less business in the U.S.
While the two railroads will continue to be hampered by an unfavorable exchange rate, the weak U.S. dollar is allowing them to make key acquisitions more cheaply, Klaskow noted. Canadian Pacific completed its purchase of Minnesota's Dakota, Minnesota and Eastern Railroad Corp. in October for $1.48 billion and Canadian National said in September it would by a major stake in Illinois-based Elgin, Joliet and Eastern Railway Co for $300 million.
--Samantha Bomkamp
U.S. Coal Producers
Surging demand and a weak dollar is helping U.S. coal producers increase sales internationally. The weak dollar allows it to sell the commodity for lower prices than other countries, increasing demand for U.S. coal.
Stifel Nicolaus analyst Paul Forward said that the slumping dollar has allowed U.S. coal producers to boost production and gain a bigger stake in a rich overseas business.
The weak U.S. currency and surging demand for coal in Europe and Asia, drove exports up 21 percent from July to October compared with the same period in 2006, Forward said. Total U.S. coal exports rose 12 percent in the first 10 months of 2007, he said. As demand surged, prices also rose. Coal delivered to Europe rose to about $127 per ton at year's end, compared with about $77 in the middle of the year.
As of early November, the U.S. exported about 55 million tons of coal year to date, compared with 39.6 million tons during all of 2002.
--Samantha Bomkamp
Pulp and Paper
The dollar's slide has created export opportunities for American pulp and paper companies, which have been looking abroad to offset declining paper consumption in the U.S.
International Paper Co., for example, has expanded into Brazil, Eastern Europe and China. Its Brazilian segment did well in the third quarter, with printing papers and market pulp volume rising from both the second quarter and the 2006 third period.
Morningstar analyst Daniel Rohr said International Paper, which has been reorganizing its operations, is poised to gain from its focus on foreign markets. It recently teamed up with Ilim Holding SA, Russia's largest forest products enterprise, to invest about $1.2 billion in four pulp and paper mills over a five-year period. Rohr said the venture will be helped by the mills' proximity to China.
Citi Investment Research analyst Chip Dillon also forecast gains for International Paper. In November, he lifted his rating on the stock to "Buy," expecting the falling dollar to also support pulp, paper and paperboard prices.
But while the weak dollar has helped U.S. producers, the strong Canadian dollar has hurt Canadian producers, such as AbitibiBowater Inc., the largest newsprint producer in North America. Rohr said Montreal-based AbitibiBowater has three factors against it: a strong Canadian dollar, falling newsprint demand and relatively low newsprint prices.
AbitibiBowater is looking to rising prices and capacity cuts to help, but Rohr said this may be difficult, especially if the Canadian dollar keeps rising.
--Betsy Vereckey
Automotive Industry
A weak dollar may benefit U.S.-based automakers amid a continued slump in domestic sales that is anticipated to stretch well into 2008. The dollar's lower value makes U.S. manufactured goods cheaper, and therefore, more attractive in Europe and neighboring Canada. Yet analysts caution that the automotive industry isn't as nimble as others, and any gains would be limited by hedging transactions used to mitigate losses because of currency or price fluctuations.
"If the U.S. dollar falls, you're not going to see them move production overnight," said Michael Robinet, vice president of global vehicle forecasts at CSM Worldwide, an auto industry consulting company based in Northville, Mich.
At the same time, the use of global platforms, which allow large automakers such as General Motors Corp. and Ford Motor Co. to produce certain models at a variety of locations around the world, may result in some shift in production away from Europe to the U.S. and Mexico, he said.
Meanwhile, the weak dollar will result in higher costs for foreign automakers, such as Volkswagen AG, which pay euros to build vehicles in Europe and then sell them in the United States.
--Bree J. Fowler
Technology
For e-commerce auction site eBay Inc., the weak dollar has been beneficial and may continue to aid its results.
"For eBay you're even seeing some people in Europe trying to buy some products on the U.S. eBay site, just (because of) the strength the increased power of the euro versus the dollar," said Piper Jaffray analyst Aaron Kessler.
The company had a $143 million foreign exchange benefit rate in the latest third quarter, compared to just $21.4 million in the same quarter a year earlier.
The world's largest chip maker, Intel Corp., has also benefited from a lower U.S. dollar, according to American Technology Research analyst Doug Freedman.
Computers sold by U.S.-based manufacturers used to be more expensive internationally. The exchange rate has allowed U.S. computer companies to sell at a cheaper rate, and European retailers are not taking advantage by adding on additional costs, which is allowing buyers to get better, faster computers, Freedman said.
The combination of declining chip prices and the weaker dollar allowed consumers in non-U.S. markets to buy "a lot of processing power in 2007 compared to 2006," Freedman said. He said the exchange rate benefit has shown up in Wall Street estimates, but it may be "slightly underappreciated" as the market worries about housing and the weak economy.
--Sean O'Driscoll and Rachel Metz
 Load-Date: January 12, 2008

 

End of Document
