

'FDR': A New Look at the Man With the New Deal
The Associated Press
October 10, 1994, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 745 words
Byline: By FRAZIER MOORE, AP Television Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




You say government can't get anything done. You say your leaders can't tear their eyes from the polls long enough to make a decision. You say throw the bums out, let some new bums share the wealth.
But as you glumly face yet another Election Day, calm your ballot-box bloodlust long enough to watch "The American Experience: FDR." It's more than a stirring portrait of the 32nd president and his remarkable partner Eleanor Roosevelt; it's an exhilarating flashback to a can-do time.
The first part, which covers Franklin Delano Roosevelt's life until he entered the White House in 1933, airs from 9 p.m. to 11 p.m. EDT Tuesday on PBS. The second follows Wednesday from 9 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. EDT, and tracks FDR's presidency as he took on the Depression and World War II - and, in so doing, supercharged the office he held.
"Thanks to Roosevelt, we expect the president to be a primary shaper of his times," says David Grubin, the Emmy-winning filmmaker who wrote and produced "FDR." "Indeed, most of us can hardly imagine that the presidency was ever otherwise.
"He was so much the president," Grubin marvels, "and he shows us what it takes to be a great president: He could appeal to the moral imagination of the people."
No wonder. Roosevelt never gave up on his country, any more than on himself. Here was a man who never stopped believing he would regain the use of his polio-crippled legs.
Meanwhile, he pretended. "FDR" presents the only existing four seconds of film that demonstrates how Roosevelt, on legs encased in braces, devised a way to simulate walking for public display. It did the trick.
"I don't believe five Americans in 100 knew he was paralyzed," says Alistair Cooke in "FDR." They had no interest in acknowledging his "handicap" any more than he did.
Another of many witnesses heard from in "FDR" is Curtis Roosevelt, the 64-year-old grandson of Franklin and Eleanor who as a child lived with them in the White House. Joining Grubin in a recent conversation with a reporter, he disputes the notion that his grandfather, in hiding that disability, was guilty of deception.
"FDR was a Victorian," Roosevelt explains. "You do not display your illness, and if somebody asks you how you are, you say, 'Fine.' Besides, he wanted a practical way to carry on with what he had to do and who he was."
Who FDR was was a doer, a finesser, a pragmatist with a charming streak as broad as his grin, a man of steadfast authority who, just for sport, could play the genial pushover.
"Mr. President, when are you coming back?" inquires a reporter in a film clip of Roosevelt preparing to leave Washington on the train.
To which FDR replies in a rich, amused baritone not unlike that of actor John Goodman: "Just as soon as Congress will let me!"
Then he and everyone within earshot share a hearty laugh at that one.
Of course, FDR wasn't universally beloved. An aristocratic man of the people, he was considered a traitor to his patrician class. One telling anecdote from the film recounts how a Marblehead, Mass., yachtsman habitually used FDR's name in vain whenever things went wrong on board: "It's blowing an absolute Roosevelt," read an entry in this blueblood's logbook; "the fog is thicker than a Roosevelt."
Good, says Curtis Roosevelt, a retired educator who now lives in Spain. "I've always thought that was the mark of a public person - not just how deeply he's loved, but how deeply he's hated."
Even so, the grandson the nation knew as "Buzzy" in those days hopes viewers will take from "FDR" some measure of the love his grandfather inspired in the larger citizenry.
"And I hope it gets people to ask themselves, who do you like TODAY in public life?
"Maybe I'm a jaundiced old man," he says, although he shows no such signs, "but I don't see anybody either in Europe or in America who appeals to people the way FDR did."
---
Elsewhere in television …
'NATIVE AMERICANS': Before the first Europeans sailed west across the Atlantic, every corner of North America was alive with indigenous peoples. The stories of these diverse nations - from their origins through the devastation from European contact - are told in "The Native Americans," a six-hour documentary premiering at 8:05 p.m. EDT tonight, then continuing Tuesday and Thursday on TBS. Each of six segments focuses on a different geographic section of the United States, the history of the American Indians who have lived in that area, and the regional problems they have faced in trying to keep their culture alive.
 Load-Date: October 10, 1994

 

End of Document
