

'GWTW' and the Sequel: Cracked Mirrors of the South?
The Associated Press
September 28, 1991, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1009 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER SULLIVAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ATLANTA
Body




Remember the sentimental epigram that scrolls on-screen after the opening credits of "Gone With the Wind"?
The lines, overlaid on views of a Technicolor Tara, go like this:
"There was a land of Cavaliers and cotton fields called the Old South … Here in this patrician world the Age of Chivalry took its last bow … Here was the last ever to be seen of Knights and their Ladies Fair, of Master and of Slave ..."
As readers take up "Scarlett," Alexandra Ripley's sequel to Margaret Mitchell's story, will the Lost Cause be found again? Will the continuing saga of Rhett and Scarlett and the plantation society knights and ladies breathe life again into the old myths?
"Gone With the Wind" may loom larger than any other creative work influencing how average people perceive the South. And the view they derive from it - especially from the movie's idealization of plantation society - shortchanges reality.
Among the planter-squires of the film, where are the far more typical Southerners - the yeoman farmers, the poor whites? In the novel, where are the whips and welts of slavery?
"People appropriate myths when they can't deal with reality," said Maceo Williams, a history professor at Atlanta's Spelman College, who said he could nonetheless imagine someday assigning "Gone With the Wind" as a text.
"In part because I'd like my students to understand the need for individuals to hold such erroneous views about themselves," he said. "What does that show about society?"
When asked what other creative work did as much to influence people's perception of the South in its time, another authority could only think of one - the book that helped start the Civil War. "Uncle Tom's Cabin," said Mitchell biographer Darden Asbury Pyron.
"Gone With the Wind" is "probably the most powerful single source of our image of the Old South. That and 'Roots,"' said University of Virginia history professor Edward Ayers, referring to Alex Haley's retracing of a black family's history.
"That gives you some sense of how confused our image of the South has been ..., how schizophrenic."
While no one publicly defends slavery now, there still remains a tendency to dissociate it from the planter society, seeing the latter instead as embodying graciousness, old-fashioned courage and other "virtues that are in short supply in contemporary America," Ayers said.
"People seem to have an insatiable desire for the romantic American past."
In 1989, half a century after the film epic came out, it won the People's Choice Award, based on a Gallup poll, as the favorite movie of Americans. Three years earlier, amid the hoopla of the semi-centennial of publication, the book startlingly resurfaced on The New York Times best-seller list. It still sells 250,000 paperback copies a year.
Its hold on readers is clear, too, in the silent eloquence of a red carnation left last week on Margaret Mitchell's grave in Atlanta's old Oakland Cemetery, where nearby rows of simple Confederate headstones picket a gentle slope.
A thousand or so people, typically representing half the states and seven countries, visit the cemetery each month. "Ninety-five percent of those, they always ask for Margaret Mitchell first," said the sexton, Allen Myers.
Why? "They don't say," he said. But many talk about her characters "as if they were real" and some are surprised to find skyscrapers here now.
"We just have to tell them," he said. "that Tara never existed."
If those who treasure "Gone With the Wind" do so because they share the emotional tension between unforgettable characters struggling to survive war and love and change, at the same time they can't help absorbing the saga's evocation of the Southern past.
But Margaret Mitchell's history lesson was faulted from the beginning by some. One early critic called her book "an encyclopedia of plantation legend."
Pyron, author of a new biography, "Southern Daughter: The Life of Margaret Mitchell," said such criticism "baffled and angered" the author.
"Even before the film came out people were attacking her novel as being racist, pro-mint julep," said Pyron, who teaches history at Florida International University in Miami. "What she thought was that she'd be attacked for the way she stood the old plantation romance on its head."
Indeed, he points out, many elements of Mitchell's assault on the "moonlight and magnolias" stereotype - such as the emphasis she put on the rise of Scarlett's Irish immigrant father through work and wit rather than planter connections - were stripped from the film version.
One of the movie's most blatant idealizations, the curtain-raising eulogy to the "Knights and their Ladies Fair," was not even written by Margaret Mitchell, but by playwright Ben Hecht (of Chicago and New York), one of 17 screenwriters who worked on David O. Selznick's creation.
"She took a fairly hard line in saying, 'I had nothing to do with the film,"' Pyron said, paraphrasing Mitchell.
True and false, as he explained with another example: the much criticized characterization of Prissy, the flighty, air-headed servant who didn't "know nothing 'bout birthin' babies."
In the Pulitzer Prize-winning novel, this character was set in contrast with the equally prominent character of Dilcey, her trusted, capable, long-suffering mother, who not incidentally is a midwife. Dilcey, Pyron noted, never appears in the Academy Award-winning movie.
Mitchell's biographer added: "She felt she was creating a noble character in Mammy. … At the same time, she does not deal with slavery in any significant way in the novel."
In the end, Mitchell's racial characterizations, like much else, reflect the time and place in which she lived.
"I don't know whether 'Gone With the Wind' is a true picture of the South in those days," wrote an early Southern reviewer, Mildred Seydell of the Atlanta Georgian.
"But I do know it is a true picture of the picture of those days that I got as a child from listening to aging, graying relations and friends of their youth."
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Christopher Sullivan is the AP's Southeast regional reporter, based in Atlanta.
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto

 

End of Document
