

'Live, From the Belly of the Beast!' It's Talk Radio
The Associated Press
January 25, 1995, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 786 words
Byline: By NITA LELYVELD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




One minute, conservative Rep. Robert K. Dornan was being told he could not speak again on the House floor because he had disparaged the president. The next, the former bomber pilot from California was accepting the congratulations of a talk show host, broadcasting live from the Capitol basement.
Conservative talk radio has a new status in Congress since the Republicans took power.
All the talk show hosts have to do is set up shop in basement space reserved for them: GOP lawmakers will happily fill their air time.
The House Republican Conference has a talk radio liaison to help make arrangements for the shows. And this week - with President Clinton on the scene and debate beginning over a balanced-budget amendment - talk show hosts are broadcasting from the building every day.
A former Los Angeles television talk show host who sometimes guest hosts "The Rush Limbaugh Show," Dornan made the radio show rounds Wednesday, the morning after Clinton's State of the Union address.
He arrived at the makeshift basement booths just minutes after being censured for saying Clinton "gave aid and comfort to the enemy" during the Vietnam War.
House rules dating to Thomas Jefferson prohibit "language personally offensive" to or that "ridicules" the president, vice president and members of Congress.
But such attacks occur sporadically. Just last week, for example, the House ordered the words of Rep. Carrie Meeks, D-Fla., stricken from the record after she questioned whether Speaker Newt Gingrich was working for "the American people or his New York publishing house."
Normally in such incidents, the chair will permit a lawmaker to continue if he or she withdraws the offensive statements. For example, Dornan's words were withdrawn or stricken following similar incidents in 1985, 1988 and 1992.
When he was asked to withdraw his words Wednesday, he replied "Hell, no." "I will not only not apologize, I will accept" the penalty of not being allowed to speak again for the rest of the day on the House floor, he said.
Three floors below the chamber, Baltimore talk show host Tom Marr of WCBM gave him an effusive welcome, calling his reprimand "the most honorary suspension from the floor in history."
"Why were you taken off the floor for saying the truth?" Marr asked.
The two spoke for about 10 minutes, on subjects ranging from gun control to the images of bodies being brought out the front doors of an abortion clinic in Brookline, Mass., after a recent shooting rampage.
Speaking of women lawmakers who support abortion rights, Marr asked Dornan: "I wonder if you could do me a favor next time you're in a debate with them: See if they can get their … ideological soulmates in the media to one day show the bodies going out the back door."
"Exactly!" Dornan replied.
Nearby, 35-year-old conservative talk show host Bob Lonsberry of Rochester, N.Y., who wore high-top sneakers and a denim shirt and described himself as "center right" in thinking, was welcoming Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, R-N.Y.
D'Amato said Republicans would spend government money more efficiently. For instance, he said, disabled people don't really need to have entire housing projects built to be accessible to them.
Instead, just "give them a voucher so that they can move into an affordable, decent, clean place."
Across the hall, Steve Brown of KKAR in Omaha, Neb., was booming into his microphone, "Live and local from the belly of the beast."
He pulled out a cigarette just before going on the air with his next guest, freshman Republican Rep. Ed Bryant of Tennessee.
"Dick Armey said I could smoke," the host said to the congressman, referring to the new House majority leader. "Does it offend you?"
"No, I'm from a tobacco state," Bryant replied.
Brown then launched into a lengthy introduction on the air.
"We have been telling our audience that Steve Brown is going to hell. Because many of our constituents regard the nation's capital as a hellish place," he said.
"We send our money here and then we wait and we wait. And people talk and people argue and they make laws and they change laws and then we wait and we wait."
Bryant, he said, was "the gentleman who has come to change all that."
For Republicans, the talk show hosts offer a respite from criticism, agreeing wholeheartedly with their policies, questioning little.
About Clinton and the Democrats they are not nearly so charitable.
Atlanta talk show host Neal Boortz of WSB didn't flinch when Dornan called the president's address "a loser from a loser" and referred to Clinton as "a flaming liberal Democrat."
Instead, he laughed and bantered with him.
"You're having the time of your life, aren't you?" Boortz asked Dornan on the air.
"Well, I've waited 40 years for this moment," Dornan replied.
 Load-Date: January 26, 1995

 

End of Document
