

'States Are No Longer the Only Actors on the Stage'
The Associated Press
May 9, 1995, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 683 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Armed with laptops, beepers and fax machines, a battalion of disarmament advocates has laid siege to the United Nations as diplomats debate the nuclear fate of the Earth.
Dan Ellsberg is fasting. Greenpeace is provoking. And hundreds of others - from Franciscans International to the International Network of Engineers and Scientists Against Proliferation - are nudging and proselytizing in the hallways for a "nuke-free" world.
"We're here because we saw this would be a very historic meeting," said Greenpeace's Stephanie Mills. "And diplomats don't have to be publicly accountable if no one is paying attention."
The diplomats, from more than 160 governments, are in the final week of a month-long conference to choose between indefinite and limited extension of the 25-year-old Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, designed to check the spread of nuclear weapons.
Activists fear it may be their last chance to lobby for attaching features to the treaty to make the big powers not only block proliferation, but move more rapidly toward reducing their own nuclear arsenals.
More than 700 activists from 198 "NGOs" - non-governmental organizations and research institutes - have registered as conference observers. They include such groups as Peace Action, International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War, the Gray Panthers and Pax Christi.
Their invasion of the United Nations and its environs is the latest demonstration of how international negotiations in recent years have become as much an event for lobbyists as for negotiators.
"It's happening globally on all issues," said Abdul Minty, a member of South Africa's official delegation. "NGOs have become very important. States are no longer the only actors on the international stage."
The advocates here have done more than pour out faxes, hand out buttons or serve up an occasional breakfast:
-One of their own, Ben Sanders, a retired U.N. disarmament specialist now with the Program for Promoting Nuclear Non-Proliferation, is working in a key position as secretary of the conference drafting committee.
-The "NPT Update," a conference news sheet produced by the advocacy groups, has become the daily gospel for delegates, especially those from smaller nations.
-Delegations with no nuclear expertise have turned to the outsiders for help. Anti-war activist Ellsberg, for example, had a big hand in drafting the position statement of one small Pacific state, a speech potent enough to draw subsequent protests from major powers.
But taking on the Pentagon, the British Foreign Office and the Quai d'Orsay over the nuclear future can be a daunting challenge.
"The Western democracies don't allow NGOs to influence defense and security policy the way they will domestic policy," noted Dan Plesch, of the British-American Security Information Center. "I think they have excluded us NGOs from this process as far as possible."
In fact, Western delegates managed to get the activists barred from the floor of conference meetings and confined to the balconies. At other such gatherings - the U.N. Social Summit in Denmark two months ago, for example - the activists had access to the floor, enabling them to quietly lobby delegates during sessions.
Some, like Greenpeace, never intended to be totally quiet anyway. On the conference's opening day, the ever-inventive eco-pacifist group dispatched anti-nuclear protesters to chain themselves to the nearby American U.N. mission building, while others, across the Atlantic, broke into a British nuclear site.
Whatever tactics they've used, the peace crusaders will parse the passages of the conference's final declarations for signs of their influence - possibly in calls for a new test ban treaty, or for deeper cuts in U.S. and Russian weapons.
The veterans are prepared for disappointment.
"But, you know, there's a personal integrity aspect at work, too," said the Rev. William Sloane Coffin, 70, a seasoned campaigner who with Ellsberg and others is on a conference-long fast for a nuclear-free future.
"If you can't change the world, you've got to be sure at least that the world hasn't changed you."
 Load-Date: May 9, 1995

 

End of Document
