

'The Book to Read' on the Debacle of Vietnam
The Associated Press
July 31, 1992, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 600 words
Body




FROM THE RIVERS TO THE SEA: The U.S. Navy in Vietnam.  By R.L. Schreadley. Naval Institute Press. 418 Pages. $ 29.95.
The U.S. Navy's involvement in the Vietnam War is the subject of R.L. Schreadley's excellent and comprehensive history.
And the author, a retired naval commander, is qualified to address the subject, having been director of a special history project for the Commander of Naval Forces in Vietnam in 1969-70. Following his retirement, he pursued a career in journalism, historical research and writing.
Schreadley introduces the reader briefly to the history of the region of Southeast Asia that was to become French Indochina in the 19th century and tells of the area's successive and sundry upheavals in the quest for independence from China, France and Japan in the 20th century.
He then tells of the small initial American naval presence that was there in an advisory capacity in 1954, and how it started to grow - and to grow. It grew for a quarter of a century until the final chaotic debacle and withdrawal of U.S. forces from South Vietnam in 1973. Along the way, he relates in highly readable fashion the varied coastal, riverine, surface and aeronaval operations carried out.
It is mind-chilling today to realize how, step by unseeing step, the United States became entangled in a conflict the memory of which will always rankle - not only because the war was lost, but because it was unnecessary and could have been won.
The Communist containment and falling-domino theories then in vogue prompted the United States to unwisely invest vast human and military resources to prop up regimes that were not always as democratic as they were said to be. These regimes often were friendly only in the measure of the aid - especially financial - they could extort from the United States as a price for their half-hearted, corrupt and self-serving cooperation.
Because of the naive American penchant for trying to be all things to all people, the United States expected that the help it provided would be rewarded, if not with gratitude at least with manifestations of a will to fight akin to that of the world's leading democracy. In this it was wrong. And while it persisted in its erroneous, quasi-childish belief, over 53.000 men went to their wasteful deaths.
Schreadley mentions a nefarious practice of then Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara and his immediate collaborators: the imposition of confusing and often contradictory strictures, for political reasons, on the Army, Air Force and Navy commandants in Vietnam.
It became a marathon of second-guessing them and depriving them of the means to accomplish their ultimate goal of winning a war over a weaker enemy; of trying to run the war from Washington with charts and graphs, slides and figures, through news leaks and press conferences; and of disrupting the chain of command with incompetent civilian input and no consideration whatsoever of the difference between the theory and the practice of war.
After making a thorough mess of things, McNamara conveniently resigned in November 1967 to become president of the World Bank. Schreadley's description of the events preceding his resignation drip with sarcasm.
Sadness seizes the reader when Schreadley sums it all up: "America's failed crusade in Vietnam was over. … Only the rivers and the memories remain."
Unpalatable though it may be, the past cannot be denied. Until the longer multivolume official history of the Vietnam War becomes available, "From the Rivers to the Sea" is the book to read on this pathetic episode of history.
 
 By Norman N. Brown
 
 ociated Press Writer

 

End of Document
