

'The West Didn't Have the Guts To Make the Sacrifice'
The Associated Press
July 10, 1993, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 576 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A sampling of the views of diplomats, scholars and others asked to identify decisive moments in the Yugoslavia tragedy:
 
 HELMUT HUBEL
The German foreign policy scholar reflects a widely held view that the bullying of Serbia's Albanian minority by Serbian strongman Slobodan Milosevic in the late 1980s foreshadowed the ethnic violence. The West, Yugoslavia's economic patron, should have firmly warned him to back off.
"The first mistake was in 1989 when Serbian action in (Albanian-populated) Kosovo was ignored. … The fact that the outside world did not pay attention sent a message to the Serbs."
STOJAN CEROVIC
The Serbian peace movement leader looks back to 1990 and the collapse of the Communist Party, the thread that held the Yugoslav patchwork together. World governments might then have rushed more aid to reformist Prime Minister Ante Markovic, to make free market competition - not ethnic competition - the anthem of a new Yugoslavia.
"If only the reforms could succeed. … There was a chance to save Yugoslavia. … The international community needed a very new, imaginative approach for this particular state. … I guess it's too much to expect of the international bureaucracy."
 
 GEORGE KENNEY
The former State Department specialist on Yugoslavia points to September 1991, when the United Nations imposed an embargo on arms shipments to all Yugoslavia. This locked the Bosnian Muslims into a severe military disadvantage against the better-armed Serbs.
"That's an absolutely critical turning point. The Yugoslav government at the United Nations argued they favored an arms embargo. … Why did Belgrade push it? It's pretty obvious: The embargo would affect the people they were fighting."
 
 ALEKSA DJILAS
The Serb-Croat sociologist and historian focuses on April 1992 and Western "hypocrisy" in recognizing the doomed independent state of Bosnia-Herzegovina without offering it a military umbrella.
"The West didn't have the guts to make the sacrifice, to stand up for ideals. But, if so, then be a realist, admit you have made a mistake in recognizing a country that can't exist. … Now after a year of disastrous diplomacy, of encouraging the Muslims to continue fighting, the West is accepting the need for partition."
 
 MILAN PANIC
The Serb-American businessman remains convinced that the West squandered an opportunity by not backing his candidacy more strongly against Serbian President Milosevic in elections last December. Milosevic won in what was widely seen as a fraud-filled vote.
"We had the potential of electing democratic opposition people in Serbia. … The Americans made no statements to help me. They all stood aside and watched me be slaughtered by what was worse than Communist propaganda. … When I asked for international election observers, they sent 150. But we had 15,000 election posts! The election was literally stolen."
 
 ZBIGNIEW BRZEZINSKI
The former U.S. national security adviser zeroes in on the Clinton administration's turnabout this May, when it bowed to European wishes and backed away from tougher steps against Bosnia's conquering Serbs.
"The United States finally geared itself up to do something, and the president seemed on the brink of supporting international lifting of the arms embargo on Bosnia and air bombardment of Serb artillery positions. The Serbs immediately started backing down .. . and the administration in one week backed off, changed gears and demonstrated that American and Western threats were hollow."

 

End of Document
