

--- Gee Whiz Test your reading comprehension by reading the story below and answering the questions that follow.
The Associated Press
November 21, 1994, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 633 words
Dateline: PASADENA, Calif.
Body



Comet Fragment Creates Fireball Hotter than Sun's Surface
 A fragment of a comet that smashed into Jupiter's surface last summer created a 5-mile-wide fireball hotter than the surface of the sun, according to space scientists.
Fragment G was one of 21 pieces from the Shoemaker-Levy 9 comet that exploded in Jupiter's atmosphere between July 16 and July 22.
It was detected by instruments aboard NASA's Galileo spacecraft on July 18. The fragment G fireball was 5 miles across and had a temperature of at least 14,000 degrees Fahrenheit. The sun's temperature is 9,927 degrees.
Minutes after it hit Jupiter, the fireball grew to hundreds of miles wide and dropped in temperature to 260 degrees Fahrenheit.
"Very simply, it looks to us like an expanding, cooling bubble of hot gas," said Robert Carlson, of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena.
The Galileo spacecraft was in the right place at the right time to record the fireball hitting Jupiter.
The spacecraft was 150 million miles from Jupiter and uniquely positioned at an angle to record information that could not be gathered from Earth.
"Having a spacecraft sitting out in front of Jupiter ready to do this was a big stroke of luck," said Robert T. Mitchell of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
Scientists also have images from the Hubble Space Telescope that they believe show a cloud rising after the fireball hit Jupiter.
Scientists expect that information from the comet fragment crashes will generate a treasure trove of new information about Jupiter and its atmosphere.
If a comet fragment the size of fragment G hit Earth, scientists say it would not burn up in the atmosphere, but would slam into the Earth's surface, leaving major destruction.
Scientists estimate that fragment G had the explosive power of 6 million megatons of TNT. The impact sent black plumes the size of Earth into the gaseous clouds that rise above Jupiter, a planet 11 times the diameter of Earth.
 
Use the facts from the story to complete each of the following statements below.
 
 1. In paragraphs one and two, the word fragment means:
a) a piece broken off
b) a kind of spaceship
c) a photograph
 
 2. The name of the comet fragment discussed in this story is:
a) Shoemaker-Levy 9
b) NASA
c) G
 
 3. A piece of the Shoemaker-Levy 9 comet:
a) exploded in Jupiter's atmosphere
b) crashed into Jupiter's surface
c) both a and b are correct
 
 4. Before fragment G smashed into Jupiter, its temperature was:
a) less than that of the sun
b) about 14,000 degrees Fahrenheit
c) exactly 260 degrees Fahrenheit
 
 5. NASA's Galileo spacecraft was able to record the explosions on Jupiter because:
a) it was positioned in front of the planet
b) the temperature of the fragment had dropped
c) the sun was still shining
 
 6. When fragment G hit Jupiter, it struck with the force of:
a) a hurricane
b) 6 million megatons of TNT
c) a Wayne Gretzky slap shot
 
 7. The Hubble Space Telescope:
a) is attached to the Galileo spacecraft
b) recorded pictures of the crash
c) could not be used by scientists
 
 8. Between July 16 and July 22 of this year:
a) the sun's temperature dropped 260 degrees
b) 21 comet fragments exploded in Jupiter's atmosphere
c) the Galileo spacecraft landed on Jupiter
 
 9. Scientists hope that information from the fragment crashes will help them to learn:
a) more about Jupiter's atmosphere
b) how clouds are formed
c) why the surface of the sun is so hot
 
 ----------------------------------------------------
 
 Answer Key: 1) a 2) c 3) c 4) b 5) a 6) b 7) b 8) b 9) a
 
 PART TWO
 
 It's A Matter Of Degrees:
Many people are interested in the daily weather forecast. Locate the weather report in your local newspaper. Check the highest and lowest temperatures in your area. Keep records for five days. Compare your town's temperature changes to the highs and lows with another area in the United States.
 Load-Date: November 21, 1994

 

End of Document
