

--- It's the Law!  Test your reading comprehension by reading the story below and answering the questions that follow.
The Associated Press
February 6, 1995, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 831 words
Dateline: WOODRIDGE, Ill.
Body




Thirteen-year-old Eric Lemons has tried a half-dozen times to buy cigarettes in his home town. No luck.
"They just won't sell them. They ask for your ID," he says.
In this middle-class Chicago suburb, youngsters under 18 have about as much chance of buying a pack of cigarettes as they do of buying a bottle of vodka.
It's a result of one of the nation's toughest tobacco-control ordinances.
It is enforced with undercover "sting" operations using teen-age decoys and $ 25 fines for minors caught with tobacco. The law is credited with cutting teen smoking rates to a fraction of national levels.
Outlawing the sale of tobacco products to teens isn't unusual; 44 states set a minimum age for purchasing the product. But actually keeping tobacco out of teens' hands is unusual. Federal experts estimate that by high school age, one youth in three smokes or uses smokeless tobacco.
The Woodridge ordinance has its roots in a junior high school principal's complaint in 1988 that a student had bought cigarettes at a store just half a block from school.
The complaint went to police Sgt. Bruce "Buzz" Talbot. He came up with the tough anti-tobacco provisions that were enacted in 1989.
Any Woodridge merchant who sells tobacco to the minor can be fined up to $ 500. Repeat offenders can have their city-issued tobacco sale licenses suspended or revoked.
Woodridge's law holds minors accountable, too. Anyone under 18 caught with tobacco gets a $ 25 ticket. If a minor is caught trying to buy tobacco, the ticket is $ 50.
"Most kids who try to buy (cigarettes) in convenience stores, they'll get told … 'Get out, or we'll call the cops,"' 13-year-old Lisa Uselis said.
Some youngsters who have been ticketed end up on the other side of the law, as undercover decoys. On a volunteer basis only, they are sent undercover to every licensed tobacco merchant in the city. Each of the city's 35 tobacco merchants gets an announced visit four times a year.
The first teen decoys were the children of police officers, then their friends and other volunteers.
"The kids really enjoy it," Talbot said. "To them it's a big adventure. They feel like they're James Bond, 007, going out there - police undercover agent.
"They're very popular at school when they do it. There was some concern that they would be ostracized. It's just the exact opposite. … We have more volunteers than we could possibly use."
Smoking rates among adolescents in Woodridge have dropped sharply since the law was enacted, according to psychology Professor Leonard A. Jason of DePaul University in Chicago, who surveyed local youngsters before and after the ordinance went into effect.
The percentage of seventh- and eighth-graders experimenting with cigarettes dropped by half. The rate of regular smoking among adolescents dropped by two-thirds, he found.
Merchants, too, have accepted the law well.
"I don't think it's that much of a hassle," said Joanne Duffy, manager of Doc's Drugs. "It takes two seconds to look at a license. I don't think it's really good for kids to be smoking."
 
Use information from the story to answer the following questions:
 
 1. Why is it almost impossible for teens in Woodridge to buy cigarettes?
2. How old must a person be to legally buy cigarettes in this town?
3. How many states have set minimum age limits for purchasing tobacco?
4. About how many teens of high school age smoke?
5. Why did Woodridge decide it needed a tobacco-control law, and when did it go into effect?
6. What undercover method do Woodridge police use to find out if store owners are selling cigarettes to minors?
7. Name two ways that a store owner can be punished for selling tobacco to underage teens.
8. Do you think the police should fine teens who try to buy cigarettes? Tell why or why not.
9. Is it a good idea to offer teens who break the law a chance to do undercover work for the police? Why or why not?
10. What facts from the article prove that this town's tough tobacco controls have succeeded in limiting teen-age smoking?
 
 -------------------------------------------
Answer key:
 
 1. It is very difficult for teens to buy cigarettes in Woodridge because store owners ask for ID.
2. To legally buy tobacco, a person must be 18.
3. Forty-four states have minimum age limits for purchasing tobacco.
4. Experts believe that about one out of three teens smoke.
5. Woodridge decided it needed a tobacco-control law when a school principal discovered that a student had bought cigarettes in a store near the school. The law went into effect in 1989.
6. Police sent undercover decoys to every licensed tobacco store to find out if cigarettes are being sold to minors.
7. Store owners can be fined up to $ 500, and they can have their licenses suspended or taken away.
8. Answers will vary.
9. Answers will vary.
10. Answers will vary.
 

 
 PART TWO
 
 Pretend that you write the advice column for your school newspaper. You receive a letter from a student who says that she is tempted to try cigarettes because it looks like fun. What would you tell her?
 Load-Date: February 6, 1995

 

End of Document
