

"Let's get this straight, Jim. Your mother is blind and your father is deaf. Or is it the other way around?" - A reporter interviewing Raiders quarterback Jim Plunkett the week before the 1981 Super Bowl.
The Associated Press
January 26, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 682 words
Byline: By JIM LITKE, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: TAMPA, Fla.
Body




After too many years on the outside looking in, perspective is an invited guest at the Super Bowl this year.
A man with a badge and the title of public-safety administrator has become the most talked-about man in town. A T-shirt vendor on Himes Avenue taped American flags to his crates to catch motorists' eyes, only to find more of them wanted his flags than his wares.
This might seem too fine a distinction to make, but it is a welcome one nonetheless: The war still raging half a world away has diminished its importance, even while leaving interest in the Super Bowl intact.
"I think it's because (newspapers) write editorials about us and not about the ballet going on," NFL commissioner Paul Tagliabue said Friday.
"Sports in America have become something special for a lot of people and the Super Bowl has become special, sometimes for people not even interested in sports.
"It's become a winter version of the Fourth of July for some, a television event without parallel. It gets attention from the media, the public, the Congress and others. It's quite unique in that way."
It's hard to fix the moment when pro football and its championship eclipsed all the other sports, but this antecdote culled from the commissioner's "State of the NFL" speech on Friday seems as good as any other.
"You will recall," Tagliabue said, "when President Nixon couldn't watch the Redskins games because they were being blacked out, he recommended that Congress pass a law requiring us to televise games when they were sold out at the gate.
"No other league has ever had to deal with such a law, recommended by a president who was a sports fan. … So I think there's a lot of history and many, many other complicated factors. We worked hard to get the public's interest and attention, so we're comfortable dealing with it."
At 6:18 p.m. EST Sunday, the same mind-numbing number of people as in recent years - somewhere between 120 million and 150 million - will be parked in front of television sets. But they will not be innundated with the same mind-numbing barrage of tasteless and useless information as it applies to this one game.
By adding a wild-card team to the playoffs and shortening the time between the final playoff games from one week to two, the NFL had already guaranteed that there would be less hype in the buildup to the game than in the recent past. There were fewer stupid questions and as a result fewer frivolous stories. The effect on the telecast of the game itself is likely to be even more beneficial.
There will be no calculation of how much the water level in sewerage systems across the nation falls because of simultaneous toilet-flushing at the first commercial break. No calculation of how many steaks, shrimps and other pricey delicacies were consumed at the ostentatious pre-Super Bowl party that, thankfully, was canceled this year. No plays sent in from the White House, maybe not so much as a post-game phone call to the winning locker room.
Yet, even though most of the excess will be pared away, the enjoyment of this Super Bowl figures to be considerably lower than ever before. That is the shame.
The usual number of commercials will be there - no matter how respectful the NFL tries to be, it will not pass up the $$1.7 million per minute they generate - and every other cutaway will be used to provide news on the Persian Gulf conflict. Fans will pass through portable concrete barriers, a 6-foot-high, chain-link fence and metal detectors before finding their seats.
Nerves already frayed by a week-and-a-half of war and the still-vague threat of terrorism will seem too worn to be dedicated fully to a struggle on the playing field, no matter how thrilling a game it turns out to be.
NFL planners know that in advance.
"We have tremendous respect for the achievements and bravery of our troops in the Middle East," the commissioner said. "In light of the situation, our objective is to focus on the game itself."
The hope is that this war is a short, sordid memory by this same time next year, but that the focus - the game itself - lingers. It has rarely been so in the past.

 

End of Document
