

A Clear Victory for the Majority Leader, But Not the Candidate
The Associated Press
May 26, 1995, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 662 words
Byline: By JOHN KING, AP Political Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




For Majority Leader Bob Dole, Senate passage of a balanced-budget outline after he'd spent years railing against deficit spending was a sweet victory. But for presidential candidate Dole it wasn't so simple.
Dole himself lamented that the budget blueprint passed by the Senate Thursday did not contain specific tax cuts. Because of that, he felt compelled to reaffirm his own commitment to cuts. "Make no mistake about it," he said.
Dole had pledged as recently as last weekend that the Senate budget resolution would include tax cuts, and thanks to some last-minute maneuvering he can say that it does. Sort of. An amendment requires that money the government reaps from balancing its books go to tax relief.
But the Senate tax cuts, estimated at about $ 170 billion, wouldn't come for some time, until it was clear the budget was on a path to being balanced by 2002. The House blueprint, on the other hand, includes $ 354 billion in tax cuts.
That House plan, which also cuts deeper into federal spending, is held in higher esteem by anti-tax groups active in GOP affairs, and by religious conservative organizations who favor its $ 500 per child tax credit.
Republican voters appear to want it all. A recent survey by GOP pollster Linda DiVall found that 61 percent of Republicans endorsed this statement: The GOP Congress should dramatically shrink the size and role of the federal government, balance the budget through spending cuts and also lower tax rates.
"This isn't just a debate about whether Dole is a tax cutter, but whether he is a budget cutter as well," said Grover Norquist, who heads Americans for Tax Reform.
There was an effort to bring the Senate package in line with the House tax cuts, an undertaking led by Texas Sen. Phil Gramm, a Dole rival for the 1996 GOP presidential nomination. Dole voted for the Gramm amendment, but Norquist and others who followed the maneuvering say he did so only after making sure it would fail. "So that is a bit of a black mark on Dole," Norquist said.
Not that there isn't time to erase it.
In the short term, Dole is likely to face sharp criticism from Gramm, who voices disdain for Dole's penchant for dealmaking. Gramm suggests he himself is more closely aligned with the Republican revolution as espoused by House Speaker Newt Gingrich.
"The fact that the House was able to get it through and the Senate wasn't able to muster the wherewithal plays into the question of whether Senator Dole falls under the status quo mantle or wants to follow through on the message of the last election," said DiVall, who is Gramm's campaign pollster. "It is an important issue and an important distinction between the two candidates."
Such barbs from Gramm would have been far more worrisome if they were echoed by Gingrich and other House GOP leaders, a major concern in the Dole campaign as the budget debate played out. Gingrich once called Dole the "tax collector for the welfare state," a reminder that Dole has long been suspect to supply siders and other tax-cut advocates.
But Gingrich visited the Senate floor near the end of debate Thursday, and said he was confident the tax-cut gap could be bridged to the satisfaction of both chambers. Not that House Republicans concede they will have to give ground.
"We don't enter the conference with the presumption we have to go their way," House Majority Leader Dick Armey said in an interview. "We enter with a resolve that we take certain pride in the quality of our product."
A sign of where Dole wants the debate to head will come when he appoints members of the Senate team that will try to reach agreement with the House. One safe bet: Gramm will not be on it.
"My bet is that Dole will appoint a conference committee that will pass a family tax cut and a capital gains tax cut," said Norquist. "It will be a tax cut that Dole gets credit for rather than Gramm. If it doesn't work out that way then he has a problem."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - John King covers politics for The Associated Press.
 Load-Date: May 26, 1995

 

End of Document
