

A Gay Soldier's Story: 15 Years Out of the Closet, in the Army
The Associated Press
January 29, 1993, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 966 words
Byline: By DAVID FOSTER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TACOMA, Wash.
Body




For 15 years, Perry Watkins was a soldier who was not supposed to exist: an openly gay man in an Army that banned homosexuals.
Now, as the nation's military and political leaders agonize over lifting that 50-year-old ban, Watkins sees no reason for all the fuss.
"I know it can work," he said. "I lived through what happens when this policy is removed. I had 15 years of exemplary service, and the Army did not crumble."
Watkins, drafted in 1968, spent the first days of his Army career trying to get kicked out because he is gay, then spent his last days trying to stay in.
For most of that time, he was a clerk and later a personnel records supervisor. He did not serve in Vietnam but saw border skirmishes in Korea.
Discharged in 1984 because of his homosexuality, Watkins began seven years of court battles that reached the U.S. Supreme Court. He was reinstated in 1991, immediately retiring with a promotion to sergeant first class, full pension and back pay of $ 135,000.
His experience offers a look at what can happen when homosexuals and heterosexuals are thrown together in the military.
"Most people would go, 'Oh, you're gay,' and be uncomfortable for a few days, then it was business as usual," Watkins said.
Not that it was easy for Watkins, or the Army, while he was a soldier.
Watkins was never shy about his sexual orientation. Indeed, he was a homophobe's nightmare - an unashamed, out-of-the-closet, sexually active gay man who enjoyed dressing as a drag queen named Simone.
Drafted at 18, Watkins went to his pre-induction physical and was handed a form asking if he suffered from maladies such as hay fever, bed-wetting - and homosexual tendencies. Watkins checked "yes" on the last item.
It didn't seem to matter; those were the days when the military was desperate for soldiers to send to Vietnam.
An Army psychiatrist asked Watkins a few questions about his sex life, then wrote on his form: "Qualified for induction."
During his first six months, Watkins asked three times for a discharge on the basis that his homosexuality violated Army policy. His third request came at Fort Belvoir, Va., after five men dragged him out of his bunk one night and attacked him.
Each time, officials cited the psychiatrist's report. After nine months, Watkins was still in the Army.
"I decided I was going to find a way to protect myself, because the system wasn't going to," he said.
As soon as he arrived in a new unit, he would tell his commanding officer that he was gay. Inevitably, the officer did not like it and would check with superiors to see if Watkins could be discharged. Inevitably, the officer was told to deal with it.
While there were no more violent attacks, other harassment continued: yells of "faggot," or soldiers who wouldn't speak to him.
But he also found allies, including the commanding officer who discovered Watkins was a female impersonator and had him perform for the troops. "Simone" was a hit, and Watkins later performed in drag at bases in Germany, Korea and stateside.
Watkins said acceptance came as people got to know him as a person, not a stereotype. "A lot of the opposition is fear, and a lot of that disappears the minute the mystique of someone being gay is removed," he said.
The military's ban on homosexuals reinforces that fear, Watkins said.
Critics of President Clinton's plan to lift the ban say morale would suffer and heterosexual soldiers would feel uncomfortable and threatened in the close quarters of barracks life. Some worry that the sight of naked men in the shower could arouse gay soldiers.
But Watkins said he's been showering with other men since childhood trips to the public swimming pool.
"We're not predators who go out and attack people," he said. He added, "Many heterosexual men may be attracted to women they work with, but they can't always have sex with them."
During his career, Watkins found support in unlikely places, such as the officer who initiated a discharge proceeding in 1975. The officer, supposedly testifying for the government, became Watkins' biggest defender.
"In my opinion Spc. 5 Watkins is the best clerk I have known," Capt. Albert J. Bast said, according to Army records. "Watkins does a fantastic job - excellent."
The board ruled unanimously not to discharge Watkins. But in 1979, his security clearance was revoked because of his homosexuality, just two years after it had been granted by officials who knew he was gay.
Watkins challenged the revocation, and in 1981, after the American Civil Liberties Union took his case, the Army tried to discharge him. Watkins remained in the service until 1984, when he was kicked out after an unfavorable appeals court ruling.
The legal battles continued while Watkins worked in Seattle as a civilian, and in 1989, the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals ordered Watkins reinstated.
The court avoided the question of homosexuals' constitutional rights, saying only that the Army could not discharge Watkins because it had re-enlisted him while knowing he was gay. The Army appealed, but lost when the U.S. Supreme Court let the ruling stand in 1990.
Retirement has not quieted Watkins, now 44. He lives in Tacoma, sharing a house with three cats when he's not traveling the country to speak to gay organizations.
Prominently hung on the living room wall, amid awards from gay-rights groups, is Watkins' certificate of retirement from the Army. While nobody ever accused him of being a typical soldier, he shares a veteran's pride for duty served.
"If there had been a problem, there would have been so many complaints that they'd have had to get rid of me," Watkins said. "Instead, my record shows I was an exemplary soldier."
But that, he added somewhat bitterly, is not always all that matters.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - David Foster is the AP's Northwest regional reporter, based in Seattle.

 

End of Document
