

A Legacy of Secrecy, Shortcuts and Pollution In The City The Bomb Built
The Associated Press
November 2, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 925 words
Byline: By SCOTT McCARTNEY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LOS ALAMOS, N.M.
Body




As children, Peggy Franklin and Shirley Walkup frolicked in the canyon near their homes in this town that created the world's first atomic bomb.
Most canyon stream beds here have water only after rains or snow melts. But in one near the western area of Los Alamos, which sits atop a flat mesa surrounded by steep, finger-like canyons, water ran most all the time. Children played in it, road crews reportedly filled their water buckets with it, families picnicked by it.
Unbeknownst to the townspeople, this stream was fed not by the fruit of the clouds, but by a pipe - the terminus of an elaborate sewer system quickly constructed during World War II to handle thousands of gallons daily of waste laced with raw plutonium, uranium and tritium from the nuclear weapons laboratories of the Manhattan Project.
Now, after nearly half a century of nuclear weapons research and development, concern is building that in the hurry of war and the secrecy that followed through the Cold War and beyond, shortcuts, lax standards, crude technology, miscommunications and poor record-keeping have left a deadly legacy.
Today, Ms. Franklin, 51, has recovered from successful brain tumor surgery. Mrs. Walkup died last month of a cancerous brain tumor at age 55.
They both blamed the stream.
"She really did die believing that her tumor was caused by living in Los Alamos," said Mrs. Walkup's husband, Robert.
"The coincidence is there," said Ms. Franklin, who also had a benign tumor removed from her knee when she was 15.
By one account, 80 people from Los Alamos have been victims of brain cancer, including 22 who in the last four years were found to have primary tumors in the brain. Eight of those people lived on one block. Their neighborhood, it was discovered this year, was built on top of a waste dump.
Detectable plutonium waste still exists downtown, despite two cleanups. Records also indicate plutonium-tainted effluent was used to water the county golf course for several years.
"They (Manhattan Project officials) took some shortcuts we couldn't take today. Now we've got to clean that up," Los Alamos National Laboratory Director Sig Hecker said in an interview.
Problems lasted long after the Manhattan Project, however, and even after the end of the Cold War. In an Aug. 30 self-assessment, the laboratory chastised itself for arrogance and complacency that led to 770 violations of state and federal rules and a preoccupation with science over the environment. The self-assessment said the lab has inadequate controls on radioactive waste.
Still, lab officials say current operations pose no public health threat and fall within safety standards. They also discount links between the brain tumors and past operations.
"We don't feel at this point there is any tie between brain cancer and old waste sites, but I'm not precluding that end result from becoming a matter of record," lab spokesman Bill Heimbach said.
The lab also doesn't know how much cleaning up it may have to do. For decades the Department of Energy said its weapons labs were exempt from the nation's environmental rules. But a federal court ruled in 1984 that the labs have to comply with Environmental Protection Agency regulations for chemical waste. DOE is still self-regulating on radioactive waste.
Now DOE must go back and test about 2,100 sites all over the 40 square miles of Los Alamos to see if they meet federal pollution standards, or if they must be cleaned up. About 300 property owners were recently notified they may be atop old waste sites. A cleanup could cost $ 1 billion, officials said.
"We don't suspect we'll find anything big. But if we do, all bets are off," said Martin Janowski, until recently a community relations specialist with the Los Alamos lab.
A review of documents, some only recently made available to the public, outlines a legacy of problems and nagging concerns over radioactive and chemical pollution within Los Alamos.
A 1948 report found Los Alamos had the "worst health and safety standards" of any of the seven government atomic bomb facilities. Radioactive laundry waste was dumped in drainage pits. Toxins were poured into the town's sewage system.
"The management is rapidly correcting the wartime psychology of 'Get the bomb out regardless of cost in money and lives,"' the report said.
Of the three primary areas of concern - the canyon, the western residential area and downtown - what is now dubbed "Acid Canyon" seems to have garnered the biggest suspicions of causing health problems.
Declassified reports now show that from 1946 until 1951 - the years Ms. Franklin and Mrs. Walkup both played there - the pipe spewed 10,000 gallons a day of water with raw plutonium, uranium and tritium. From 1951 until 1964, the waste was treated, but still exceeded today's standards.
No warnings were posted, no fences erected to keep children out. The pipe was so remote and so high on the canyon wall that it was hidden from view of the people playing down below.
"Secrecy caused it," said Tyler Mercier, a local sculptor who began listing brain tumor victims and came up with 80 names. "There were scientists' own children playing down there, and I don't think they knew. In the climate of secrecy, you didn't ask 'Where does this drain pipe go?"'
Mercier's growing list - a new diagnosis was added last month - has touched off pockets of community anxiety and a federally funded investigation to determine whether Los Alamos has a cluster of the rare form of cancer. The study will examine how many cases might normally be expected in the town of 18,000.
 Graphic



 
With LaserPhoto NY311 of Oct. 30, Graphic LOSALAMO

 

End of Document
