

A Look at the Men Who Chart Bush's Strategy in the Gulf
The Associated Press
January 24, 1991, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 967 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER CONNELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Through five futile months of diplomacy and the opening days of war, President Bush has relied on four trusted advisers to map his strategy for driving Saddam Hussein's army from Kuwait.
None of Bush's inner circle - Secretary of State James A. Baker III, National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen. Colin Powell - came to this crisis as a specialist on the powderkeg politics of the Middle East.
But each was a veteran of crisis planning from 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue.
And all boast close personal and professional ties with Bush dating back to the Reagan and Ford administrations and, in Baker's case, to a fast friendship formed in Texas back in the 1960s.
"They fit remarkably well," said Helmut Sonnenfeldt, a National Security Council veteran from the Nixon administration and State Department hand during the Berlin Wall crisis.
Before Bush's decision last week to launch "the liberation of Kuwait," there was criticism in Congress about the president's unwillingness to give the United Nations economic sanctions against Iraq more time to work.
But if any in Bush's inner circle had doubts about the wisdom of moving immediately to war after the Jan. 15 deadline, they never even hinted at it in public.
For 5 months after the Aug. 2 invasion, the Bush team operated smoothly on both the diplomatic and military fronts, orchestrating the international outcry against Iraq and mobilizing a force of more than 600,000 soldiers, sailors, airmen and marines to wage the desert battle.
Baker, fittingly enough, was in the Soviet Union with his Soviet counterpart, Eduard Shevardnadze, when Saddam's army overran the oil-rich emirate Aug. 2.
In all of Baker's diplomatic maneuvers in a score of capitals over subsequent months, none was more important than those to line up Soviet support in the U.N. Security Council for the anti-Iraq coalition, including the pivotal Nov. 29 vote authorizing force after Jan. 15.
For Baker, long recognized as a master of domestic political strategy, the crisis was a chance to prove his skill in the international arena.
The 60-year-old a pinstriped lawyer with a fondness for Red Man chewing tobacco has denied that he was reluctant early on to send American forces to the Saudi desert. And last month, the former Marine marksman warned that if and when the United States did resort to force, "it will be used suddenly, massively and decisively."
It was Baker who personally walked Bush's "last mile for peace," meeting in futile last-ditch talks in Geneva Jan. 9 with Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz after a meeting with Saddam himself in Baghdad didn't come off.
It was Scowcroft, the retired Air Force lieutenant general, who first brought Bush the news that Iraqi troops were massed on Kuwait's border, and who was at Bush's side in those first days in August, shaping the U.S. response to Saddam's "naked aggression."
Scowcroft, who speaks Russian and holds a Ph.D. in international relations from Columbia University, helped provide the intellectual framework for Bush's foreign policy and his vision of a "new world order."
Scowcroft, 65, helped craft the dramatic Bush proposals for deep troop cuts in Europe that won Bush plaudits at the 1989 NATO summit and silenced critics who accused Bush of reacting too timidly to the changes sweeping East Europe.
Scowcroft also was Bush's secret envoy to Beijing in July 1989 after the Tiananmen Square massacre and again on a public mission that December - trips that evoked considerable controversy.
Cheney and Powell, preoccupied for much of 1990 with the daunting task of preparing the Pentagon for post-Cold War cutbacks of 25 percent over the next five years, had to quickly regear for the biggest U.S. military operation since the Vietnam war.
Powell, 53, the youngest chairman of the Joint Chiefs and the first black, was only two months on the job in 1989 when ordered U.S. troops to overthrow Panama's dictator, Manuel Noriega.
Powell, a decorated veteran of two combat tours in the Vietnam war, displayed in that operation the same philosophy he brought to Operation Desert Shield: a determination not to be caught short-handed.
Powell, a four-star Army general and former Reagan national security adviser, put it succinctly in London in December. "If we have to use force … the United States intends to use overwhelming force to win decisively as quickly as possible with as few casualties as possible."
Powell, a son of Jamaican immigrants who was born in Harlem and raised in the South Bronx, pledged to troops on a recent trip to Saudi Arabia that, "The only acceptable outcome, if hostilities begin, is absolute, total victory."
Cheney, 49, never served in the military himself, and was not even regarded as a defense expert during his 11 years as a Wyoming congressman before Bush called him to join the Cabinet after John Tower's nomination was rejected in March 1989.
But the conservative lawmaker was widely respected on both sides of the aisle and had proved his managerial abilities as a 34-year-old whiz-kid chief of staff at the White House in the Ford administration.
Cheney has demonstrated no reluctance to exert his authority over the Pentagon brass, publicly chastising one Air Force chief of staff in 1989 for waging his own lobbying campaign for strategic missiles and firing another last September for loose talk about the coming air war against Iraq. Just two weeks ago, Cheney scrapped the A-12 Stealth warplane because of cost overruns.
But he also pledged his fighters in the field that they would not be asked to engage Iraq's army with "their hands tied behind their backs."
Cheney promised troops in Saudi Arabia a few days before Christmas "the freedom and flexibility to run a first-class military operation all the way."

 

End of Document
