

A New Weapon Against Crime: Suing the Provider of the Fatal Gun
The Associated Press
November 12, 1991, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 500 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Dismayed by the street violence that has killed 1,500 people here since 1987, Washingtonians are trying a novel solution: making gun makers and dealers responsible for the destruction caused by assault weapons.
But no one can yet tell whether the citizenry has struck an effective blow or made a symbolic but empty gesture.
Ownership of handguns here is illegal. In last week's election, the voters went further, passing a referendum allowing victims of gunplay or their survivors to collect damages from the manufacturers or sellers of 14 types of assault weapons. The law, approved by a 77 percent majority, will take effect at the end of the year.
Liability law usually provides that manufacturers can be sued when their products are defective; under this law providers could be sued when their products perform exactly as intended.
"It is only fair that those making a profit from the gun trade should bear some of the costs," said a supporting organization, the Coalition to Stop Gun Violence. Supporters hope the cost of liability insurance will discourage the sale of the weapons to anyone likely to bring them into the District of Columbia.
Opponents say the law is probably unconstitutional, may be overturned by Congress and is likely to be ineffective, anyway, since the weapons listed are rarely used in street crime. They include the Tec-9,, AK-47 and Uzi.
"It's an absurd theory of law," said Richard Gardiner, lawyer for the National Rifle Association, which stands ready to help defend the first gun dealer sued. "The overall effect will be to make the District of Columbia look very foolish in the eyes of most people."
But Sherman Cohn, a specialist on liability law at the Georgetown University Law Center, said the measure might pass constitutional muster. He compared it to laws holding manufacturers of highly dangerous substances responsible for damages, even when the substances are not defective.
The city's black clergy took the lead in putting the measure on the ballot, frustrated by a murder rate approaching last year's record of 483.
The city council enacted the law last year, but quickly repealed it at the behest of newly elected Mayor Sharon Pratt Dixon. She did not want to antagonize the anti-gun control majority in the House. At the time, she was seeking an increase in the annual federal payment to Washington.
The Maryland Court of Appeals in 1985 upheld a liability for makers of "Saturday Night Specials," but the decision was overruled by the state legislature when it banned that type of cheap handgun.
Rep. Dana Rohrabacher, R-Calif., has introduced legislation to nullify the referendum.
He said the measure violates the Constitution "by purporting to subject to District of Columbia law the activities of businesses in the 50 states that are outside the city and do not conduct any business in this city."
Last month, a day after a shooting rampage in Texas left 24 people dead, the House refused to go along with the Senate in banning 13 semiautomatic assault weapons.

 

End of Document
