

A Realignment In the Making?: The Stunning Scope of a Republican Rout
The Associated Press
November 9, 1994, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 832 words
Byline: By JOHN KING, AP Political Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




In one historic day, voters transformed the face of American politics, making Republicans the majority party in Congress for the first time in more than a generation and leaving the Democratic coalition in shambles.
The remarkable Republican rout was powered by middle-class anxiety over the size, cost and reach of government - and extended well beyond the headline-grabbing gains in the House, Senate and governorships and deep into state and local politics.
It was a blunt repudiation of President Clinton and Democratic leadership - and of the Democratic Party's midterm campaign strategy. And while more a rejection of Democrats than an embrace of Republicans, there was compelling evidence of the GOP's prospects for realignment in the South and major inroads elsewhere.
"The American people's revolution," was how Georgia Rep. Newt Gingrich - the next House speaker - put it, and at least in the short term it was hard to argue with him.
"The American people just closed the book on the 1960s view of government," said Paul Goldman, the former Virginia Democratic chairman. "The economy is improving but their incomes keep going down. Crime is out of control. Families are breaking. People are groping for change and want answers, and decided to look to someone else to give them to them."
In the months ahead, this change will place enormous burdens on Republicans, particularly in the House, where the GOP last held a majority in the Eisenhower administration.
"We have to live up to our newfound responsibilities, and that is nothing that we can take lightly," said GOP Rep. Henry Hyde of Illinois.
Whether Republicans meet that test will determine whether voters will swing back to Democrats in 1996. But while worrying about that, Republicans had plenty to celebrate Wednesday:
- Republicans gained eight Senate seats and more than 50 in the House. And in making these choices, particularly in seats without incumbents running, voters overwhelmingly sided with conservatives who ran against Clinton and his agenda and for lower taxes, less government and GOP staples like the balanced budget amendment. "I think the votes were primarily a rejection of the Clinton philosophy and personnel," Hyde said.
And it was a rejection of Clinton's strategy.
"You can't do what Clinton did and tell people you're too stupid to know what I've done for you but vote for me anyway," said Goldman.
- Every Republican governor on the ballot was re-elected, and the GOP captured a dozen new governorships - and with them an enormous opportunity to set policy and build a broader national base.
"They are showing the way for Republicans to govern at the federal level and showing the American people that Republicans deserve the chance to govern at every level," said national GOP Chairman Haley Barbour.
- The nation's middle class, once the bulwark of the Democratic Party, switched allegiances in substantial numbers.
Fifty-four percent of voters in the $ 30,000-$ 55,000 income bracket picked Republicans - up from 43 percent in the 1990 midterm elections. And exit polls showed the percentage of women voting Republican was 47 percent, up from 40 percent four years ago. Most of that increase was among baby boomers, as economic and family concerns supplanted abortion rights as a defining issue.
- Two-thirds of Perot voters sided with Republicans. "It will be very difficult for Clinton to win in 1996 if he can't win these people back," said GOP pollster Frank Luntz.
- Republicans made enormous strides in state legislative and other local races. For years, the party's biggest liability has been a weak bench because Democrats dominated those offices. "We have pulled off one revolution and planted the seeds to sustain it," said Luntz.
A state-by-state look at local GOP gains showed substantial inroads. En route to its best statehouse showing in nearly three decades, Republicans captured the Florida Senate and the North Carolina House, the first Deep South chambers in GOP hands since Reconstruction.
In addition to the governor's office in Alabama, Republicans knocked off the Democratic attorney general and were leading in several other statewide races. And they gained 10 seats in the Legislature. So it was perhaps little wonder that Alabama Sen. Richard Shelby decided to switch parties and join the GOP ranks, usually a risky proposition.
"The South and the Sun Belt are growing by the day and that culture and those politics are starting to dominate," said Goldman.
And there was more - and hardly limited to the South. Legislative chambers in every region tipped toward Republicans, and the GOP posted major gains in elected judgeships, another springboard to higher office. Phil Batt's election as Idaho's governor ended 24 years of Democratic dominance. More than 40 percent of Texas voters punched a straight GOP ticket.
"An absolutely unbelievable year," said GOP pollster Ed Goeas.
Or, in the words of Utah GOP Chairman Bruce Hough: "Marvelous! Wonderful! What next? I'm going to Disneyland!"
 Load-Date: November 9, 1994

 

End of Document
