

A Sampling of the Land 'Down Under' - in the Midwest
The Associated Press
July 8, 1994, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 513 words
Byline: By MICHELLE KOIDIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MUNCIE, Ind.
Body




Who would expect to find an Australian museum in the center of a city that calls itself America's Hometown?
The museum was the dream of Brisbane-born Allen Johnstone, who says he wanted to bring a taste of the land "down under" to Americans who can't make the journey to the other side of the globe.
Johnstone says Muncie, which he picked after studying cities around the country, is an ideal location for the Fair Dinkum (authentic) Australian Exhibition. He said people in the town were friendly and local officials helped get the project under way.
An important advantage, he said, is that Muncie is less than a day's drive for 63 million people in the Midwest.
"If you look at Muncie, on the rim of the wheel are all the major cities of the Midwest," says Johnstone, who spent three years researching locations and planning displays for the museum.
Research done by the Australian government indicates most Americans have a favorable attitude toward Australia, Johnstone says. Many Americans interviewed by the government said going to Australia was one of five things they'd like to do before they died.
"The simple facts of the matter are we are a long way away," said Johnstone, who lives with his family in the penthouse of the five-story, 45,000-square-foot building that houses the museum.
It costs a lot of money and vacation periods are short, so many Americans will never get the opportunity to go to Australia, Johnstone said. "That's why I got the idea of well, why don't we bring as much of Australia as we can to the Midwest?"
The three-story museum is now just over a year old. It features displays on Aboriginal art, the Great Barrier Reef and Sovereign Hill, an 1850s gold minig town, among many others. All the fish and other living organisms in the aquariums actually came from the coral reef.
When they arrive at the museum, visitors receive "visas" to enter Australia. A personal guide takes them through the exhibits and provides information on native customs, history, inventions and wildlife.
Even the clocks are set to Australian time.
In the center of the displays on the second floor are about 30 thin, flaky Melaleuca trees, or tea trees, whose leaves produce an oil used to make lotion.
"It's to try to give you the impression of being down there," he said.
Johnstone says the displays will constantly change so visitors will have new experiences with each trip.
Fair Dinkum guests also may sample Australian cuisine at a restaurant on the first floor. The museum's gift shop sells opals mined and crafted in the Australian "outback," which is the world's largest opal producer. But the shop's most popular item is the Aussie slouch hat, Johnstone said.
There's a theater and convention center on the building's third floor, where twice monthly the museum hosts a dinner theater and Aussie buffet.
---
Fair Dinkum, at 301 S. Walnut St., is open Tuesday through Saturday from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., and on Sunday from noon to 5 p.m. The museum is closed on Mondays.
Admission to the museum is $ 5 for adults and $ 1.50 for children 4 to 12. Children under 3 may enter free.
 Load-Date: July 8, 1994

 

End of Document
