

A Tale of Two Films: Which Is the Flop, Which the Hit?
The Associated Press
November 26, 1993, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 920 words
Byline: By JOHN HORN, AP Entertainment Writer
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




Two movies feature Hollywood's top action stars. Both cost around $ 70 million. Neither makes more than $ 55 million at the box office. So why's one the bomb of the decade and the other a hit?
The similarities between Arnold Schwarzenegger's "The Last Action Hero" and Sylvester Stallone's "Demolition Man" are many. From the opening weekend to the fourth week of release, ticket sales for the two films were virtually identical.
When "Last Action Hero" debuted in June, it made $ 15.3 million in its first three days. "Demolition Man" brought in $ 14.3 million after its first October weekend.
Hollywood's trade newspapers (and the national media) cast those grosses in wholly different lights.
"'Demolition' Blows Up Record" was The Hollywood Reporter's headline for Stallone's debut. The usually enthusiastic Los Angeles Times said of Schwarzenegger's premiere: "The gross for 'Action Hero' was widely regarded by the film industry as a disappointment."
The consequences of the different perceptions are considerable. The "Last Action Hero" fallout appeared to seep into Columbia Pictures like a virus, and many of the studio's next films bombed. Chairman Mark Canton stopped granting interviews, and Columbia had to yank its high-profile, would-be musical "I'll Do Anything" from a planned Christmas release.
Warner Bros., meanwhile, is reporting film profits second only to the Walt Disney Co. Although the studio's recent release, "Fearless," didn't connect, the upcoming "Pelican Brief" is expected to be a big smash.
The appraisals of "Last Action Hero" and "Demolition Man" were largely a reflection of expectations, according to a variety of show business executives. Columbia said "Last Action Hero" would be the movie event of the summer. When the film about a kid and his movie hero didn't deliver, the gap between promise and reality was cavernous.
Warner Bros., on the other hand, couldn't help but learn a lesson from "Last Action Hero" - it released its film in the fall with far less fanfare.
Even though "Demolition Man" went significantly over budget, its production delays largely were ignored. It was considered a stale story since so much had been written about delays in filming of "Last Action Hero."
Furthermore, the media was anxious to take Schwarzenegger down a peg or two: the cocky, cigar-chomping bodybuilder had never flown higher and was ripe for a fall. Columbia now acknowledges they should have seen him as an easy target.
Stallone survived a pair of bombs before making a recent comeback in "Cliffhanger." Following the flops - the comedies "Oscar" and "Stop! Or My Mom Will Shoot" - Stallone suddenly discovered humility. "Cliffhanger," consequently, was greeted enthusiastically by the press.
If there's any one party most at fault for the vicious "Last Action Hero" press, it's Columbia itself, and the studio privately concedes now it oversold the film.
From the start, the studio set unreasonably high expectations for the film and spent many millions promoting it.
Peter Guber, chairman of Columbia parent Sony Pictures Entertainment, said "Last Action Hero" was more than a simple movie. Instead, he proclaimed, it is a "film for the entire global marketplace." Columbia Chairman Canton boasted that if the special effects-laden film clicked, the studio would "win big. … This is not a movie for people who like to sleep."
The studio launched a major sales pitch at a movie exhibitors' convention in March, promoting the film with a personal appearance by Schwarzenegger and an expensive luncheon. Producer Steve Roth called it "The juggernaut movie of 1993."
In May, Columbia stepped up the "Last Action Hero" campaign another notch. The public-relations blitz at the Cannes Film Festival (complete with a giant inflatable Schwarzenegger doll) was to be followed with an advertisement for the film on the side of a space rocket.
Schwarzenegger's last four films - "Twins," "Total Recall," "Kindergarten Cop" and "Terminator 2: Judgment Day" - all scored huge numbers at the box office. There was little reason to think "Last Action Hero" would make less than $ 100 million at domestic theaters. Columbia brazenly predicted it would make $ 20 million in its first weekend.
A top producer on the lot says that at one "Last Action Hero" test screening an audience member stood up and yelled, "This movie has cancer!" But Sony was so confident in the film they plowed ahead.
The rocket - like the movie - never took off. "Last Action Hero" would barely make $ 50 million.
Warner Bros. naturally wishes "Demolition Man" had made more money. The studio says its expectations were in the $ 75 million to $ 100 million range. Through Tuesday, the movie had collected a modest $ 53.7 million.
In trying to rush the film for an October release, the makers of "Demolition Man" racked up hundreds of thousands of dollars in overtime. Thanks to lower marketing costs and the expectation of better foreign and home video receipts, "Demolition Man" will end up turning a profit.
Columbia maintains that the strong overseas grosses of "Last Action Hero" may narrow the film's final loss to $ 10 million. It could even break even, the studio says.
It won't make that much difference, though. "Last Action Hero" will forever be remembered as a loser.
---
TRAILERS: On the heels of the film adaptations of the literary classics "The Age of Innocence" and "Ethan Fromme," plans are under way to adapt Willa Cather's "My Antonia" for the screen. The novel of American immigrants is being adapted by screenwriter Vicki Riskin.
 Load-Date: November 26, 1993

 

End of Document
