

A Two-Ring Capitol Circus: One Under the Dome, One in the Parking Lot
The Associated Press
April 5, 1995, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 633 words
Byline: By SANDRA SOBIERAJ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Three months after the GOP swept into control, 130,000 pounds of pachyderm - the Republicans' beloved symbol - came lumbering to Capitol Hill Wednesday.
But bringing the circus to Congress seemed almost redundant as House members debated which party claims the bigger clowns.
Why bother with the performing elephants and dancing girls on the Capitol plaza when you can watch professional politicians defy logic, asked Rep. Luis Gutierrez, D-Ill.
"Step right up and you'll see Republicans juggle numbers," he promised visitors to the House gallery, bracing for at least six hours of debate on the GOP tax bill.
Rep. Jack Kingston, R-Ga., who followed Gutierrez to the House floor, said Democrats were simply afraid of being trampled by charging elephants.
"They already had that experience in November," Kingston said.
One by one, House members trooped to the microphone and loaded tons of circus jargon into the partisan speeches that opened the day's session.
In a Capitol basement conference room, Democrats calling themselves the "GOP Prize Patrol" staged a mock TV show awarding pretend $ 1 million cash prizes to the "billionaire Benedict Arnolds" and wealthy corporations they said would benefit from Republican legislation.
Outside the Capitol - home to at least 23 tons of GOP lawmakers - 13 five-ton elephants balanced on their hind legs and formed what circus people call a long mount.
"We have the outer circus and the inner circus," said House Speaker Newt Gingrich, R-Ga., as he went to greet Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey president Kenneth Feld.
Earlier Wednesday, Columbus (Ohio) Zoo director Jack Hanna turned the animal-loving speaker's office into a petting zoo - complete with hissing cockroaches and a fire-belly newt.
Gingrich, cuddling a North African fennec fox, confessed that his first boyhood dream was to be a zoo director.
It took a House-Senate resolution to authorize the circus' 125th-anniversary performance in the Capitol parking lot.
Gingrich, who watched from a folding chair placed on a small slice of red carpet, reveled in the performing elephants' symbolism.
Asked about the absence of donkeys - mascot for the Democrats - Gingrich said, "That was an independent, private-enterprise circus decision about what works."
For Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole, a GOP presidential contender, it was a picture-perfect photo opportunity.
The 71-year-old Kansan posed beside the 48-year-old King Tusk ("a young Republican," Dole quipped) and flashed reporters a "thumbs-up."
As if on cue, the 14,762-pound pachyderm curled his trunk up to his forehead and winked.
Accompanied by a police motorcade of presidential proportions, the elephants had lumbered trunk-to-tail the nearly two miles from the D.C. Armory, where the circus opens a two-week run on Thursday, to the Capitol.
Sen. Bob Smith, R-N.H., the only senator to oppose the performance, said the sergeant-at-arms told him security for the two-hour circus act would rival that used for the president's State of the Union address - a cost to taxpayers of about $ 52,000.
The plaza was roped off to the uninvited public but about 300 local schoolchildren packed the Capitol steps at Gingrich's invitation. They waved small American flags, marveled at the jump-roping dogs and giggled at the clowning clowns.
But not everyone was laughing.
Eighteen animal-rights advocates - dressed in prison garb and elephant masks, and protesting what they called the circus' maltreatment of elephants - were arrested at the Senate steps and charged with unlawful entry and obstructing passage on Capitol grounds, police said.
Ringling Bros. spokeswoman Barbara Pflughaupt dismissed the protesters' claims and said, "For 125 years, we have set the standard for the care and welfare of domestic and exotic animals and we're very proud of our record."
 Load-Date: April 5, 1995

 

End of Document
