

A Wail of a Problem!  Test your reading comprehension by reading the story below and answering the questions that follow.
The Associated Press
August 26, 1994, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 513 words
Dateline: RANDALLSTOWN, Md.
Body



Burglar Alarm That Jangled Neighbors Shut Off After Six Days
 For six excruciating days - and five nights - the burglar alarm wailed. And then there was silence.
"Thank God! Hallelujah! Hallelujah! Hallelujah!" said Joan Sheppard, who had barely been able to sleep through the piercing wail of her vacationing next-door neighbor's alarm.
On Thursday, with permission from the homeowner's friend, an officer climbed a ladder to the townhouse's second floor, pried open an aluminum cover underneath the eaves and yanked free a wire. And the alarm shut up.
"It feels great," said Diana Johnson, another neighbor.
As the racket subsided, a cheer erupted from a small group of neighbors gathered under umbrellas in a driving rain in front of the offending townhouse.
But Johnson wondered why it had taken police so long to stop the continuous, pulsing screech after the alarm was triggered by a power outage last Saturday.
Police and utility officials said there was nothing the law would allow them to do until the homeowner returned. And the homeowner, a psychologist, wasn't due back from an Indonesian vacation until Saturday.
But a friend and former employee, Ernestine Cosby, got in touch with him and gave police permission to act.
The homeowner could face charges of disturbing the peace when he gets back, said Maj. Kevin Sanzenbacher of the Baltimore County police. He also apparently violated a county ordinance requiring burglar alarms to shut off automatically after 20 minutes.
As neighbors waited for the alarm to be turned off, media from the Baltimore-Washington area clustered outside the house.
In the block party atmosphere that prevailed, another neighbor, Richard Smith, introduced himself to Mrs. Sheppard, who had spoken to reporters about the noise.
"You're an instant celebrity," he said.
"All I want is instant peace," she replied.
 
A Wail of a Problem!
 
 Using the newspaper story, find the vocabulary words listed below, and circle them in the article. Use the context of the story to help you figure out the meaning of each vocabulary word. Then, draw a line from the word to its correct meaning. Use a dictionary to check your answers.
 
 1. excruciating a. the act of allowing
 
 2. wail b. pulled sharply
 
 3. permission c. burst forth
 
 4. eaves d. a long, high sound
 
 5. yanked e. began (some action)
 
 6. erupted f. painfully uncomfortable
 
 7. continuous g. going on without stopping
 
 8. triggered h. lower edge of a roof that hangs
over a building
 
 Answer Key: 1)f 2)d 3)a 4)h 5)b 6)c 7)g 8)e
 
 ---
PART TWO
 
 racket - a loud noise
screech - a high, harsh sound
wail - a long, high sound
 
 Below are three "noisy" story starters. Pick one and use your imagination to write a short story. See if you can include words from the vocabulary list at the top of the page.
 
 1. What a RACKET the dogs made when the well-dressed stranger approached the house and rang the doorbell!
 
 2. It was about ten minutes past midnight when we heard the SCREECH of tires and the breaking of glass.
 
 3. We thought we were safe, but suddenly the piercing WAIL of a siren made us freeze in our tracks.
 Load-Date: August 26, 1994

 

End of Document
