

A Week in the War with Soldiers Fighting the Republican Guard
The Associated Press
March 1, 1991, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1071 words
Byline: By FRED BAYLES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WITH THE 3RD ARMORED DIVISION IN SOUTHERN IRAQ
Body




Last weekend, at a stage rehearsal for the upcoming fight, Lt. Don Murray stood in front of his fellow officers, M-16 in one hand, notebook in the other, and announced an alternative to the battle plans.
"In the event of my untimely death, Joe Griffin will take over my role," he shouted in self-conscious recitation. He paused and then added: "But that ain't gonna happen."
Murray, a small, fiesty 30-year-old cavalry officer from Tampa, Fla., was nearly wrong. Three days later, a Republican Guard T-72 tank fired a 120mm sabot shell at his Bradley fighting vehicle while he scouted the Iraqi desert ahead of his column.
The shot could have turned the Bradley's turret into fiery shrapnel. Instead it went low, punching a hole in a road wheel. Murray kept his head and broadcast information that led to the deadly rout of the vaunted Republican Guard's Tawakana Division.
"Don was a real hero," said Col. John Brown, commander of the 3rd Armored Division's Black Knights cavalry battalion. "He saved a lot of lives."
Bravery was a common commodity on the long march of U.S. forces through Iraq and Kuwait last week.
The largest military manuever since World War II sent hundreds of thousands of troops, trucks and tanks cutting dusty highways through Iraq's trackless eastern desert on their way to surprise and destroy the best of Saddam Hussein's divisions.
Among the scores of units assaulting Iraqi positions was the the "Ready" 1st Brigade of the 3rd Armored Division, a unit that spearheaded the attack against Iraqi armor. The 5,000-man brigade destroyed more than 100 vehicles and captured hundreds of prisoners. Two of its soldiers were killed, six others wounded.
"They were great soldiers doing great things," said Col. Bill Nash, the commander of the Ready First.
One of those soldiers was Frank Bradish of Pocatello, Idaho, a young private riding a Bradley that was surprised and destroyed by an Iraqi T-72 at 200 yards.
According to battalion commander Lt. Col. John Kalb of Bay Village, Ohio, two crew members were killed, the others seriously wounded. Bradish lost several fingers on one hand and suffered a severe thigh wound.
"He dragged everyone out of the vehicle, fired off a flare by holding it with his arm and then he dragged out the radio to call for help," said Kalb, his voice thick with pride.
Bradish got a first-aid kit from the smoldering personnel carrier and treated the three survivors.
"When they got to them, he was on the Bradley trying to save the machine guns," Kalb said.
The initial battle came after a two-day dash through the Iraqi wastelands that began early Sunday. The long march was largely uneventful for the 1st Brigade, which covered more than 200 miles, through sandstorms, heavy rains and minefields.
Columns of tanks and trucks drove through the dark with the help of night vision glasses. Narrow lanes through minefields were marked with the eerie green glow of chemical lights.
The maneuver through the desert worked. Iraqi forces and fortifications were pointed south for an expected attack from Kuwait. Instead, they were hit from the north west by the strong armored force.
As the column wheeled toward reported Iraqi positions Tuesday afternoon, Murray and his scouts made their inital contact, destroying a T-72 with a TOW missile. Artillery and A-10s destroyed more tanks as more Iraqi troops rushed to the scene from the south and north. A major battle developed, and continued for the next two days.
Through it all, Nash was on the radio, calmly moving his forces and choosing from a deadly menu of air and artillery power.
Known affectionately as "Wild Bill" by his troops, Nash is an affable but firm leader, who read T.E. Lawrence's "The Seven Pillars of Wisdom," along with books on German Gen. Erwin Rommel and other desert generals, in the weeks before the ground offensive.
The West Point graduate and Vietnam veteran constantly checked and rechecked his men's positions before calling in A-10 or Apache helicopter strikes.
At an early point in the battle, he held off Deathdealer, an Apache force waiting to attack three vehicles in the dark. Once assured his men were out of the area, Nash came back on the network.
"Roger, Deathdealer," he said. "You may kill them."
At another point, a battalion commander reported his men were trying "to persuade the people in the bunker to surrender."
"Don't try to persuade them," Nash snapped. "Get a company in there to shoot them up and give them the ... choice of surrendering or dying."
The battle continued through a sandstorm and into the dusk as artillery, MLRS (Multiple Launch Rocket System) and rockets from Apaches and A-10s painted the sky. The Iraqis answered with some artillery and mortars.
By midday Wednesday, Nash was ordered to move into Kuwait with all haste to remove the ticklish military and political problem of U.S. troops in Iraq if and when a cease-fire was announced.
With the order, the strategy changed. Nash used a "marching fire" formation, a term first used by Rommel to describe a rapid thrust of tanks, troops and artillery moving as one, constantly firing and advancing.
The 1st Brigade kept pressing the enemy, pounding it with artillery and MLRS throughout the day as the skies darkened and rains began. The advance slowed as more and more prisoners appeared. Among the surrendering Iraqis was a battalion commander whose armored column had been destroyed.
He was hustled to the rear for interrogation. Other prisoners were bypassed.
"We were going so fast that we just disarmed them and left them for units in the rear," said Brown, commander of the Black Knights cavalry division.
As the rain-filled night fell Wednesday, Brown led his troops into an area they called "The Valley," actually an equally flat piece of landscape with lighter patches of sand on the fringes. Within its boundaries lay a series of berms and minefields.
The corridor became a killing lane. One company of Bradleys and M-1s destroyed at least 50 armored vehicles that night, including a dozen T-62s that came out fighting from behind berms and dunes.
After inital resistance to each assault, the Iraqis abandoned their vehicles. There was chaos in the darkness as some of the Guard tried to surrender and others fired back. The Black Knights turned their machine guns on the swirling confusion of figures.
"I couldn't think of them as people," one young sergeant said. "They were just shadows in the night."
 
 In the, 1st Add, a0705
 Graphic



 
With LaserPhotos

 

End of Document
