

A Week's Reflection on the Meaning of the War
The Associated Press
December 15, 1991, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 471 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




What could get hawks and doves together in a weeklong reconciliation over Vietnam?
Jan Scruggs, the ex-infantryman who spearheaded construction of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, hopes that he can.
He's already gotten the backing of supporters like Lewis Puller, Jr., who lost both legs to a Vietnamese booby trap and told his life story in the bestseller "Fortunate Son," and musician Country Joe McDonald, whose "Fixin' to Die Rag" became an anthem of the antiwar movement.
Scruggs said he also has President Bush's blessing and will meet with him this week. Scruggs wants to bring a million Vietnam veterans to Washington next November, 10 years after the memorial was dedicated.
The memorial is the most visited site in Washington. Its walls bear the names of 58,183 Americans killed in the Vietnam war.
"When you look at the entire Vietnam war, there is really nothing to celebrate," Scruggs said. "You cannot celebrate the Tet offensive, or the fall of Saigon. The only good that came out of the war, I think, is the memorial."
The monument was Scruggs' idea. He raised the money and persuaded the government to provide the land, near the Lincoln Memorial, and overcame resistance by conservatives who called the memorial's black granite walls "a black gash of shame."
Bush, then vice president, helped Scruggs convince then-Interior Secretary James Watts, who was in a position to block construction of the monument.
For next year, Scruggs envisions a week of reflection by those who fought the war and those who fought against it.
In the months leading up to that week, he plans workshops on such matters as the impact of the war on the military, blacks, Asian-Americans, Hispanics and the history on the antiwar movement.
McDonald, whose song ("One, two, three, four/ What are we fighting for?/ Don't ask me, I don't give a damn/ Next stop is Vietnam") was sung at Woodstock, has agreed to lead a seminar on the music of the war era and why it is still being played, Scruggs said.
Scruggs, who went to law school after building the memorial and is now a motivational lecturer, said he hoped to attract such figures as former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger and retired Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, leader of coalition forces in the Persian Gulf War and a veteran of combat in Vietnam.
"There are people with lingering enmity, people who were on the extreme left and extreme right," he said. "There's not a lot you can do to get them in the same room with one another. But the memorial is something that has brought former veterans and peace activists together. They all feel they are part of it."
Scruggs hopes to raise up to $ 2 million for the event, and has already gotten pledges from two corporations. He said one goal of the commemoration will be to bring to Washington Vietnam veterans who have not yet visited the memorial.

 

End of Document
