

Across America, a Glum Assessment of the State of the Union
The Associated Press
January 28, 1992, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 818 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




On this State of the Union day, Americans seem down.
They worry about the future. They worry about the high and rising cost of health insurance. They worry that getting an education is no longer enough, that even educated kids can't be sure of a job.
They don't think a tax cut for the middle class is going to do much for anyone.
They're openly, honestly concerned.
Interviewed across the country, at work places, at breakfast tables, at unemployment lines, as President Bush prepared tonight's address to Congress and the nation, people talked of their unease, a perception that something is seriously off track.
It's not just the recession. It seems deeper than that.
"What's the 20-year plan?" asks Cass Rankin, 37, of Phoenix, contemplating what Bush will say. "Where does he see our economy, our lifestyle, our country, our power, the whole shebang - where does he see it
in 20 years?"
"All the hope has been taken," said Harold Solomon, 23, working as a security guard in a Detroit office building, earning half what he once made working for a steel company. "You can't trust the government or look to it to even give you that little push anymore."
"I'm very concerned about every item you can think of across this country. There is not an issue that I can say to my children, 'This is a bright part of our future,"' said Jim Roti of Albany, N.Y., chief of disaster preparedness for the New York State Department of Labor.
Martha Ball, 77, of Kansas City, Mo., would like to see another Franklin D. Roosevelt. "He made a lot of mistakes that we wish he hadn't, but he built confidence," she said. "Bush isn't doing that."
In Grand Rapids, Mich., Cheryl Wilkerson, laid off recently - just as her father has been - by Steelcase Inc., the world's largest manufacturer of office furniture, also recalled what she knew of FDR's time.
"President Roosevelt started state-funded programs just to put people back to work," she said. "Why doesn't the president do something like that?"
The Persian Gulf War, which so riveted America's attention a year ago and ended in a wave of patriotic zeal, barely gets mentioned. Nor does the end of the Cold War.
When foreign affairs come up at all, the sentiment is for fixing America first and a sense that catching up with the quality of Japanese products will not be done soon or easily.
"I don't think we should necessarily try to feed the world when there are people starving in this country," said Lex Cleary of Plattsburgh, N.Y., a fishing guide on Lake Champlain.
"We're getting so badly beaten by the Japanese that people just don't have any pride any more," said Edie Chan, 21, a pharmacy student at Creighton University in Omaha, Neb.
"He's got to tell the people that it's about time you make a better product," said Douglas Blesi, 69, a retired Minneapolis dentist visiting Miami.
Businessmen rally around the capital gains tax and a relaxation of government regulation.
"The only thing I can do on my own ranch without a permit from a state agency is go for a walk," said cattle rancher Rick Page, 36, of Mount Vernon, Ore. "Though more than likely I'd step on an endangered plant along the way."
A tax cut for the middle class? Rarely mentioned.
"Tax cuts are not going to impact people who are unemployed," scoffed Dorothy DeWitty, a city council member in Tulsa, Okla.
To be sure, everyone isn't gloomy. Americans haven't lost their characteristic optimism.
"Times are tough," said Dianne Gray, 36, of Sutton, Vt., "but you just grit your teeth. If you're really willing to work, there's jobs out there to be found - I've got three of them."
Mrs. Gray works in a florist shop, part-time, cleans a woman's house, sweeps the post office. Her husband is out of work.
"We're not living high on the hog," she said. "But the bills are paid."
Retiree Lulu Kemmerer, 79, of Fleetwood, Pa., who suffers from throat cancer, offered the observation that retirees can be counted upon to always complain. She gets by, she said, and so can they. "Every year the Social Security goes up. They can take care of themselves.'
What does come across, over and over, is a fear about health insurance bills and a concern about the state of schooling in this country.
Kathy Cushing, 61, of Cedar Crest, N.M., who with her husband owns a hamburger restaurant, is typical in her concern about health insurance. "Our premiums have gone so high nobody can afford them," she said. "I don't particularly like socialized medicine … (but) the health care is out of balance."
"It used to be you could tell your kids to go to school, get a degree and you'd have a job. No more." said Shirley Carnazzo, 56, secretary-clerk for the U.S. Agriculture Department's market news agency in Omaha, Neb.
Anna Hoffman, 48, a nursery school teacher for 14 years in New York City, said she would like "to pound into Bush's head that the future of the country lies in the young. … How have they the audacity to cut back on education!"

 

End of Document
