

Advice for the Bushes - from the Men in the Field
The Associated Press
February 20, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 637 words
Byline: By HARRY F. ROSENTHAL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




"Dear Mrs. Barbara Bush," began the letter from an infantryman in the Persian Gulf. "I wish to discuss something myself and my men have discussed."
In a handwritten note, he told the president's wife that Bush "will probably get grouchy from time to time because he's worried about us. …
"Take a deep breath and count to 10. He needs you now more than ever."
Letters like that have been flooding the White House mail room since the Persian Gulf crisis began in August. They reflect the diversity of feelings about the war.
"Your actions in public and with your family are what a first lady should be," an admirer in a small Georgia town wrote to Mrs. Bush. "When you broke your leg sledding, I thought, what other president's wife would do that?"
The writer told Mrs. Bush that her only son has been in Saudi Arabia with the Air Force since August.
"He volunteered to go. And told us if our country was worth living in, ti should be worth dying for."
The White House says it has received 215,000 letters about the Gulf War. The official policy is not to categorize them.
A sampling was made available to the Associated Press, with the writers identified only by state and the size of their community.
"The reason for this letter is not even quite clear to me," a woman in a small Ohio town wrote Mrs. Bush. She praised the president's leadership and added, "Tonight when you hug your husband, please give him a little extra squeeze for me."
A minister whose flock is mostly service people from Camp Lejeune, N.C., said he was distressed by seeing war protesters on television..
"By giving air time to their drivel, it somehow legitimizes their claims in many people's minds," he wrote. "Evil men, like Saddam Hussein, must be stopped."
About the same time, the White House received a letter of dissent from the mother of a Marine. "I hate this war and your decision to persuade the U.N. Security Council to demand it and declare it," she said. "What are we keeping the world safe from this time - Islam?"
On the other side of the scale, a World War II veteran from El Paso told the president "do to Iraq what Truman did to Japan."
The White House correspondence section has 138 employees and can call on 450 volunteers to help with mail. Most correspondence is answered and the staff chooses some letters each day to send to the president for personal answers.
An Israeli whose family was hurt by an Iraqi Scud missile sent a note of appreciation for American help. It was acknowledged by the president, who wrote "B'Shalom," - In peace.
The father of a Marine suggested Bush might want to show his support for the man's son "by sending him a personal letter of your own."
One man wrote Bush that during the evening news, his 3 -year-old grandson saw a picture of Saddam Hussein and said, "He's the bad man, Sadly Insane." At the end of a typed response, Bush scrawled, "Sadly Insane? - I Love it."
As usual, the most poignant letters come from children.
"Can you tell Presidint Bush to let my Dad come home or Presidint Bush will have to eat Brokley for a year," an eight-year-old wrote to Mrs. Bush. "One more thing," the youngster said. "President Bush can't eat gunkfood until you let my dad come home."
In inch-high letters, another wrote:
"May I please go with my dad to Saudi Arabia. I am not afraid of dying because I know God is on my side."
And a fifth-grader commented, "I don't think war was a good decision, because a lot of people get killed."
A second-grade teacher from a small town in Minnesota said during a discussion of the war that a child suggested they "tell Saddam's mom what her son is doing."
The children did.
"Tell your son to shut his mouth up and forget about Kuwait," said one child. "We sent about 500,000 people," said another. "If that isn't helping, does he want us to send 500,000 more? Then he's pushing his luck."

 

End of Document
