

After the Wait, the Maelstrom Begins
The Associated Press
February 23, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 891 words
Byline: By MORT ROSENBLUM, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: IN EASTERN SAUDI ARABIA
Body




Desert Storm clouds hovered black and heavy over oil-fouled gulf waters and Arabian sands alive with a million men. Early on Sunday, lightning and thunder struck.
Troops who for weeks had been whipsawed between peace and war were beyond prepared. Most waited quietly, fingering pictures from home, amulets, Bibles or the sweat-shined stocks of their M-16s.
Suddenly, only hours after President Bush's last offer to Saddam Hussein expired, they were at war on the ground.
Already, the Kuwait battlefield was a circle of Dante's hell, a vast expanse of rubble and carnage from five weeks of air strikes under a greasy black veil from nearly 200 oil-well fires.
With the first blood spilled, much of the fear had dissolved in adrenaline. Allied troops want to go home, and also to punish Saddam. To do both, most were ready to let loose the dogs of war.
Peace disappointed only a few, and many had prayed for what one called a 12th-hour resolution. But, when the radio relayed Iraqi defiance, a young soldier summed up the mood simply:
"Well, then, let's get on with it."
Saddam seized Kuwait on Aug. 2, and some U.S. units have been in Saudi Arabia for six months. As the last hours ticked away, the result was evident.
Raw nerves and sleepless nights pushed troops to emotional states few have known before. During fitful naps, nightmares were graphic: watching a friend blow apart; twitching to death in a mist of gas.
Female soldiers are excluded from direct combat, but some are at the front in range of Iraq's seasoned gunners. Women pull equal weight.
Males and females alike felt the pressure, and most worry as much about families left behind as what they face ahead.
On a recent morning, a young woman was so distressed by a premonition of something amiss back home that she burst into loud sobs.
"I want to go home," she wailed repeatedly.
"We'll all be going home soon," said a friend, as awakened tentmates sought to calm her. "It'll all be over soon."
Among the first of simultaneous steps was a knife thrust by combat engineers to slam down movable bridge sections across Iraqi's dreaded moats, through berms breached by heavy bombs.
Separate armored columns would follow at stunning speed, forcing defenders to move their heavy guns in pursuit. As the Iraqis struggle to reset sights, they are sitting ducks to air power.
Hardened British divisions would link with American tankers, Marines and infantrymen to storm the softened Saddam line.
U.S. airborne troops in helicopters can select their time and targets, dropping in fast to strike from the rear. For this, and the rest of Desert Storm, the coalition's air supremacy is crucial.
A-10 Warthogs, ugly and mean, can join other jets in picking off tanks. Apache and Cobra helicopters can spew missiles and withering fire from Gatling guns.
A 17,000-man U.S. Marine force on ships is a wild card, holding six Iraqi divisions to the Kuwaiti coast. Marines would wade in, as they did on the shores of Tripoli, but also come by helicopter.
Still, seasoned commanders warn that the grand plan may go horribly wrong, and the ground war might drag on.
Generals who measured success in the air by totaling what they hit know that success on the ground depends more on what they missed. After nearly 90,000 sorties, key elements survive.
Saddam moved strategic command posts and anti-aircraft batteries into Kuwait City neighborhoods safe from allied bombing. His coastal defense force is partly shielded by civilians.
Even if more than a third of Iraqi artillery pieces were destroyed, that would leave several thousand intact, with stocks of conventional and chemical shells safely in tunnels.
The warplanes which fled to Iran were largely ship-killing fighters with Exocet missiles. Combat support airport and attack helicopters remain somewhere in reserve.
Technology tips the balance heavily toward the allies but its blessings are mixed. So far, U.S. pilots in attack helicopters have killed more Americans than Iraqi gunners.
With smoke obscuring the killing fields, the traditional "fog of war" will be, in places, a dense black veil.
At sea, a space-age U.S. Navy controls the air and waters. But the USS Princeton, a billion-dollar Aegis cruiser, was sidelined with what might have been a $$500 mine, designed in 1907.
To most troops expected to fight a ground war, the big picture was for the generals. After so many months in the desert, this war was personal, and they had scores to settle.
In recent days, Marine jets began dropping napalm, the notorious jellied petroleum used in Vietnam. Though military officials say it is not being used on Iraqi soldiers or civilians, pilots disagreed. Someone wrote on one canister, "Surgeon General Warning: May cause skin irritation with short-handled usage."
Soldiers often express sympathy for the Iraqis they pound so heavily. For them, the villain is Saddam Hussein. Most hold out hope that the enemy would surrender en masse if given the chance.
Hope, along with luck, is a watchword of the gathering Desert Storm.
Lance Cpl. Robert Grady, for example, knows about both. His humvee truck took a direct hit from an enemy mortar on his first day of combat. He happened to be a few feet away, and he survived.
The 21-year-old Marine from Madison, N.C., borrowed a pen and emblazoned his helmet: "Lucky as Hell." Now that a ground war began, he is hoping his luck holds.

 

End of Document
