

After the Deadline, the Momentous Decision to Fight Came Swiftly
The Associated Press
January 16, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 577 words
Byline: By TERENCE HUNT, AP White House Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The wait for war was short lived.
The momentous decision to begin fighting with Iraq was announced with a six-word statement by President Bush:
"The liberation of Kuwait has begun."
After the passing of the deadline for Iraq to leave Kuwait, the question in everyone's mind had not been if the United States would go to war but when.
Barely 19 hours after the deadline expired, the war exploded.
The swiftness of the attack caught Washington by surprise, even though Bush had warned that the United States would act sooner rather than later.
Privately, some administration officials had believed Bush would allow a grace period, perhaps 48 hours long, to make a clear delineation between the deadline and the start of conflict.
Such a grace period would have given Saddam Hussein a narrow window in which he could claim he had ignored the U.N. deadline - and then was making an 11th hour decision on his own to begin pulling out his troops. However, that had been considered a remote scenario.
Publicly and privately, officials never doubted Bush's resolve to expel Iraq from Kuwait with force.
In making the decision for war, the administration concluded there was no hope that further delay would produce a diplomatic settlement.
Indeed, a defiant Saddam Hussein marked the expiration of the withdrawal deadline by taking command of the Iraqi army and telling his troops they were ready to fight.
More than 425,000 American troops were on full alert in the Persian Gulf, poised for an order from the White House. Military planners had worried they might lose their edge if the wait were prolonged.
Even before the United States struck, it appeared war was inevitable.
"Most of the pressure on him (Bush) has to be to go quickly, to go as soon as possible, because you never know what's going to happen tomorrow," said University of Virginia political scientist Larry Sabato.
After all, each day that passed put more strain on the coalition of nations arrayed against Iraq.
U.S. planners also had worried that Iraq might seize the initiative and fire missiles at Israel to transform the showdown with Baghdad into an Arab-Israeli war that could shatter the U.S.-led coalition.
The Soviet crackdown in the Baltics was another worrisome factor that could distract the world focus and change the momentum by prompting questions about which hotspot the United States should be worried about most.
For the time being, Bush appears to have the support of the public for taking on Saddam. Surveys show that two out of three Americans support an attack on Iraq. Yet, pollsters believe those numbers would evaporate if fighting is prolonged and many Americans are killed.
"I think it's fair to say we've been trying to prepare the American people since Aug. 2 (when Iraq invaded Kuwait) for the possible use of force," White House press secretary Marlin Fitzwater said.
For Bush, the decision was the biggest one of his presidency.
It could change the map of the Middle East, rock the world economy and shape Bush's place in history.
"It's a decision that if it goes badly would probably destroy his presidency or certainly make him a one-term president," said Sabato. "If it goes well, it puts him in a stronger position (politically) but does not reelect him. It would create a honeymoon glow but then the focus would come back to the critical issue, the health of the economy."
---
 
 TOR'S NOTE - Terence Hunt has covered the presidency since 1981 and is the AP's chief White House correspondent

 

End of Document
