

All the 'Evidence' the Jury Will Not Take Into Deliberations
 The Associated Press
September 26, 1995, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 963 words
Byline: By MICHAEL FLEEMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




Remember the testimony of Rosa Lopez? The O.J. Simpson jury surely won't.
The woman billed in Johnnie Cochran Jr.'s opening statement as the Maid With the Alibi came to court in February, testified under protest, hopped on a plane to El Salvador and hasn't been heard from since.
Her testimony, preserved on videotape, was never shown to the jury. Lopez joins legions of people, things and events that became part of American pop culture but will never be considered by panelists who will soon deliberate Simpson's fate on murder charges.
The attorneys dropped much of the evidence by choice, often after witnesses imploded, but usually just to keep the case focused. Other evidence was barred by the judge at the request of the opposing side.
Either way, there's enough Simpson evidence sitting out there to feed another trial - maybe two.
Peter Arenella, law professor at UCLA, said it's not unusual to have so much leftover evidence in a case, or even evidence promised and never delivered, because attorneys always adjust the flow of the case as the trial progresses.
"Both the prosecution and the defense are making strategic choices about what best story to sell," he said. "If they have hard evidence that doesn't fit their story line, they're not going to present it, even if that evidence might be true."
Everyone knows why most of the Mark Fuhrman tapes didn't get in (the judge ruled them out). But what about The Chase? A nation was riveted by the surreal slowspeed pursuit of Simpson in a Ford Bronco driven by friend Al "A.C." Cowlings.
But all the jurors will ever know is what they saw on TV more than 15 months ago; prosecutors dropped a chance to introduce the chase to prove consciousness of guilt. That decision meant the jury was never presented with testimony by wheel-man Cowlings or any of the people present at the home of Simpson lawyer Robert Kardashian when Simpson fled.
Also unintroduced: Simpson's famous goodbye note read by Kardashian and evidence Simpson carried a disguise, a passport and a bundle of cash. Prosecutors flirted with calling Kardashian, mounting a legal fight before two judges, but he never took the stand
And what about the promised blockbuster witnesses for both sides? Mary Anne Gerchas, she of the tale of four men in knit caps near the crime scene, has made numerous court appearances. Unfortunately for Gerchas, all came in her own legal tangles.
She was sentenced in July to a year in jail for defrauding a hotel, stealing a diamond and writing a bad check. She was never called to testify for Simpson, even though defense attorney Cochran gave her and Lopez star billing in his opening statement.
Kary Mullis, incorrectly described by Cochran as a Nobel Peace Prize winner (he won the prize for chemistry), did make it to the Simpson court. The renowned DNA scientist and admitted LSD consumer sat on a court bench and grinned at the jury but was never called to the stand.
On the prosecution side, the famous-for-a-moment Jill Shively got the boot long ago, after she sold her story of seeing a Bronco with its headlights off speeding near the crime scene the night of the murders, with an angry driver who could have been Simpson.
At least prosecutors didn't promise Shively in opening statements eight months ago, the way Cochran did with his two absentee witnesses. But prosecutors did mention Keith Zlomsowitch.
The former boyfriend of victim Nicole Brown Simpson was allegedly spied upon by Simpson through a window as Zlomsowitch and Ms. Simpson had sex on her couch. Zlomsowitch was to testify about Simpson's apparent stalking habits.
The jury did hear from Brian "Kato" Kaelin, whose testimony about wall thumps elevated the former Simpson houseguest to pseudo-celebrity. But the prosecution resisted trying to show the jury the Other Kato, the one who presented a darker portrait of a pre-murders Simpson to a book author.
Speaking of authors, Ms. Simpson's friend Faye Resnick had something to offer both sides - dirt on Simpson for the prosecution, evidence to support the drug-hit theory for the defense. Neither side called her, presumably because she was considered too risky.
Superior Court Judge Lance Ito blocked some evidence, most notably dozens of examples of Fuhrman, now a retired detective, using the word "nigger" in tape-recorded interviews and boasting about police brutality and misconduct.
The judge allowed jurors to hear just one excerpt on tape and another read from a transcript.
Ito also prevented the defense from capping its case with an assault on the FBI, barring the testimony of a whistleblower FBI agent who would have criticized a colleague who testified in the Simpson case.
The judge did let the defense call back a state crime lab criminalist to talk about a blood stain that soaked through one of the socks found at the foot of Simpson's bed, a kind of soaking the defense claimed signaled the blood was planted. But jurors already got similar testimony about the other sock, and the defense, watching the jury wilt, decided not to prolong the testimony.
Ito didn't rule much against prosecutors, who declined to use even much of what he let them use, including a good deal of domestic violence evidence. The judge, however, did thwart prosecutors' efforts to tell the jury about how very rare the fibers in Simpson's Bronco were - the same kind of fibers found on a bloody glove at Simpson's house.
Then there is the Mystery Envelope, that manila package that the judge at the preliminary hearing almost opened, then didn't, creating the biggest cliffhanger since the Who Shot J.R.? episode on "Dallas."
The envelope was never opened in open court - though its contents were revealed through news leaks and sidebar transcripts: a clean knife that police somehow missed while searching Simpson's home.
 Load-Date: September 26, 1995

 

End of Document
