

All-Star Voting: The Click of the Mouse Joins the Crack of the Bat
The Associated Press
July 9, 1995, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 764 words
Byline: By HOWARD ULMAN, AP Sports Writer
Body




Still steaming about greedy owners and striking players? Still boycotting the ballparks? You could have taken your bat and ball and gone home … or into cyberspace.
All-Star game balloting went on line this year. No need to grumble all the way to the stadium to get your ballot and punch those little holes. Just log on and pick your players in private.
No one has to know that you still care about baseball.
"There are a number of people who are reluctant to give their full heart and soul to baseball and this is a way to get them back into the game," says Eric Schoenfeld, senior coordinating producer for ESPNET.
Computer users were able to vote for all-stars on two Internet sites - ESPNET's SportsZone and another operated by major league baseball - and on the America Online service.
Of the 5.8 million total ballots, about 200,000 were cast in three weeks of on-line voting. About 114,000 of those came through ESPNET, and Schoenfeld says the first-place finishers were the same as the overall winners for Tuesday's All-Star game.
Because of the late start of the season and diminished attendance, voting dropped from the more than 14 million ballots in 1994. Unlike last year, they weren't distributed at minor-league parks or at 12,000 retail outlets of Texaco, which sponsored the voting.
The decision for on-line voting "wasn't so much to get more people to vote but to allow more people an interesting way to do this," says Michael Bernstein, vice president of business development and new ventures for Major League Baseball Properties. "There are people in this country who can't get to major-league ballparks to vote and this, in a sense, is open to the world because the Internet is open to the world."
Any votes from Tibet for Cal Ripken? Bernstein says an analysis is planned of the information generated by the voting.
Traditionalists may snarl about the designated hitter, artificial turf and nachos at concession stands, but the game can't escape the computer.
The click of the mouse has joined the crack of the bat.
Fans can go on line to find statistics, inning-by-inning updates and trivia contests and order baseball merchandise. They can ask questions of sports figures and get immediate responses.
Subscribers to America Online have tripled to more than 3 million in the past year, says Randy Dean, its general manager for sports.
Bernstein says, "People in general are more used to getting information on line and participating interactively this year than they were in 1994. I think they'll be even more interested in 1996.
"Overall, we think it was a terrific first effort."
A whole new lexicon has entered the game that gave you such household terms as E-7, 6-3 and LOB. Now there's AOL, www.majorleaguebaseball.com/mlb, andhttp://espnet.sportszone.com. 
There are also the wiseguys who try to beat the system.
One instructed his computer to send in the same ballot 3,000 times on ESPNET. It chose the first player listed alphabetically at each position. Sorry, Luis Alicea, the computer threw out all those votes for you.
America Online allowed only one ballot per screen name.
"One of the great All-Star traditions is stuffing the ballot box. This definitely eliminates that," Dean said.
A few oddball ballots did slip through - ESPN's Chris Berman and Peter Gammons got one write-in vote each.
Some voters voiced their lingering animosity to baseball.
"There were actually a number of write-in votes that said, 'none of the above,' " Schoenfeld said.
Voting was fairly simple.
America Online subscribers could find the ballot in the sports area - complete with a multicolored picture of a baseball field in the background and biographies and statistics of the candidates. ESPNET responded on line to questions about how to find its ballot.
Fans voted for players in the first All-Star game in 1933 - the one in which Babe Ruth's two-run homer helped the American League win, 4-2. They've had the ballot taken away from them and given back since then.
It was technologically possible to vote on line several years ago, but access was far more limited and there were fewer computers in the home, Dean said.
But now the time has come. Schoenfeld said ESPNET proposed on-line voting at the beginning of the season. It began June 5. It could be even bigger next year.
"It was such an obvious idea," Bernstein said. "I can't take credit because I can't remember" who thought of it first.
And while baseball and its fans move deeper and deeper into cyberspace, the journey stretches far beyond sports.
"It's not inconceivable that you could vote on line for politicians some day," Dean said.
 Load-Date: July 9, 1995

 

End of Document
