

Allied Force Awaited 'Maddest Minute in the History of the World'
The Associated Press
January 16, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 757 words
Byline: By MORT ROSENBLUM, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: IN EASTERN SAUDI ARABIA
Body




At 3 a.m. Thursday Baghdad time, the waiting ended for the allied force of more than a half-million for what one colonel called "the maddest minute in the history of the world."
Ground troops scrambled to finish preparations, but officers shrugged off concern. If war with Iraq comes, most predicted it would fall first from the skies in a deadly hail.
The predictions were right. U.S. officials here announced that air raids on Iraq started before dawn Thursday, and President Bush said in Washington that "the liberation of Kuwait" had started.
Television reporters reported from Baghdad that bombs were falling in and around the Iraqi capital.
On Wednesday, as ground preparations accelerated, Capt. Dana Patterson of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, commented, "There's no hurry" - knowing what B-52 bombers can do to Iraqi fortifications in the sand."
With a severe enough pounding during the "maddest minute" and the hours and days to follow, commanders are confident they can send in troops to speedily finish the job.
To a reporter driving north toward the Iraqi border Wednesday, it looked as though war had begun a day early.
Milelong convoys rolled past abandoned vehicles. A truck jackknifed across the two-lane road, stopping traffic. It was pushed off into the sand to join other crumpled hulks along the highway.
Empty "low-boy" transports headed south as the tanks they carried churned across the desert toward Iraq. Twin-rotor Chinook helicopters, the lumbering workhorses of Vietnam, swooped low overhead.
The only women drivers in Saudi Arabia handled U.S. Army trucks. Though unveiled, helmets and metal jackets all but concealed their gender.
A British driver grinned from the wheel of a truck painted with a red rodent, symbol of the Desert Rats.
"You ready to go?" the reporter asked.
"You bet," yelled back the driver, Tim Hill of Birmingham. "The sooner we go in, the sooner we get home."
Ragtag lines of vehicles were sprinkled with pickup trucks displaying American flags and powerful portable cassette players in the rear windows. Yellow school buses carried platoons in combat gear.
But a string of 19 armored vans made clear this was deadly serious business. Each was painted with a large red cross and a smaller Islamic red crescent below it.
M.A.S.H. units - mobile Army surgical hospitals - are deployed near Iraq, just as they were in Korea. Early Wednesday, a larger "CASH" unit, the 28th Combat Support Hospital from Fort Bragg, N.C., also flew north.
"Saddam has had enough fun, his time is up," said Sgt. Desery Harris, 38, of Dorchester, Mass., a nurse. She said she was anxious to do the job and get home to her kids.
Harris was more eager than most to head north. Her husband, Ricky, is a M.A.S.H. sergeant up there.
Few soldiers showed anxiety about impending battle. Instead, they displayed confident bravado.
"Hey," snorted one officer who travels widely among the troops. "You just gotta tell them all the cold beer and hot women are in Turkey, and they'll go through Iraq like a dose of salts."
One Army colonel who asked not to be named said heavy bombers and lighter aircraft would engulf Iraq in flames: "Youre gonna see the maddest minute in the history of the world."
Many went about their work, seemingly oblivious to the clock that began ticking at 8 a.m. their time. That moment was midnight at the United Nations and in Washington - the end of Tuesday and the U.N.-set deadline for Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait or face military force.
As the 28th CASH waited for a ride north, one woman dozed against her combat pack, the barrel of an M-16 rifle nestled on her shoulder and her head resting on a non-regulation pillow: a fuzzy white teddy bear.
Private fears were evident over the past few days.
In scattered units, groups of young Americans followed a ritual similar to that of young Iraqis across the border: They sat on the sand and heard spiritual guidance from a man with a book.
Many worried less about the Iraqis than about the state of mind of their families back home. The prospect of war at a time of anticipated peace caught even seasoned military people off guard.
Capt. Rob Philon, of Columbia, S.C., a company commander in the 8th Marine Tank Battalion, is a reservist who normally works as a security officer at a nuclear plant.
"My four-year-old daughter is too young to know what all this means, so she was dancing around the house singing, 'You're gonna get killed, you're gonna get killed,"' Philon said, with a nervous laugh.
He added: "My wife, well, she knows exactly what might happen over here."

 

End of Document
