

American, The Biggest U.S. Airline, Also The Most Boisterous
The Associated Press
June 18, 1991, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 792 words
Byline: By DIRK BEVERIDGE, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




American Airlines, the nation's biggest air carrier, is on the offensive again and mincing no words.
After months of fighting battles, big and small, to preserve its industry dominance, American waded back into the fray Monday saying it wanted to stop rival United Airlines from flying nonstop from Chicago to London, a route where American now has a monopoly among U.S. carriers.
The latest episode, aimed at denying its main competitor a key route to London from United's home base, stepped up the rhetoric that has characterized American's recent assaults.
American issued a statement that quoted Donald J. Carty, executive vice president for finance and planning, as saying United was trying "to mislead the traveling and shipping public."
To further drive home the point, Carty went on to accuse United of staging "a poorly conceived maneuver to confuse travel agents and consumers ..."
United declined comment, in keeping with a trend among other big airlines to shy away from American's combative style.
United hopes to persuade the Transportation Department to let it serve London's Stansted Airport out of Chicago O'Hare International Airport, but American's objection contends that an aviation treaty between the United States and the United Kingdom would not permit such service.
American has vowed to "vigorously oppose" United's filing with the government.
American's quieter competitors won't publicly discuss American's boisterous approach, which also has included threats of lawsuits against those who get in its way. But some said privately Tuesday that they are happy enough to let American, based in Fort Worth, Texas, go its own way.
For American, "it's always, 'Do it this way, or we'll sue you,"' said an official at a major airline who asked not to be identified.
Other industry observers said the tough talk was just part of Chairman Robert Crandall's effective business strategy.
"He doesn't ever try political double-talk and therefore appears aggressive when you compare it to others who may hold back or be softer in their tone or may decide that silence is sometimes the better path," said George James, chairman of Airline Economics Inc., an aviation consulting firm based in Washington.
An American spokesman largely agreed with those assessments of his company's outspoken nature. He also pointed out that American executives are in a position to speak their minds after making the carrier the leader of the U.S. air travel industry.
"On something that they think is outrageous, they will mince no words," spokesman John Hotard said. "Basically, we are just very outspoken."
American's blunt comments often rub politicians the wrong way.
"We are down here in Dallas-Fort Worth, trying to run an extremely complicated business," Hotard said. "All of our executives are busy. Perhaps we are not showing the flag as often as we should in Washington, just going by and chatting with the various political leaders and having a cup of coffee with them. You know, the good-old-boy network."
American was frustrated last year when United won the battle to fly from Chicago to Tokyo.
"We are still at a loss as to why it happened," Hotard said. "American still feels that it should have gotten the Chicago-Tokyo route, by the criteria laid down. One must ask, 'Did they play the political game better than we did?"'
Again, United had no comment.
American took another turbulent trip through the bureaucracy this year, when it tried to buy six London routes from Trans World Airlines. Objections from Missouri politicians and TWA unions slowed down and gutted part of the deal, which they feared would kill TWA and eliminate thousands of jobs.
American ended up buying just three routes, although the purchase still faces a last-ditch legal challenge.
In the TWA case, the Missouri politicans and the TWA unions accused American of trying to intimidate them with the threat of lawsuits over their input into the route sales.
Asked about the threats, Hotard said:
"There, they were not aiming the remarks at the politicans per se. It was aimed at anyone, really, very clearly stating if you interfere, we would regard this as tortious interference."
American often follows through with threatened lawsuits.
The big carrier recently went to federal court in New York seeking to stop a tiny newsletter, Travel Confidential, from publishing code numbers that people can use to get discounts when flying to the sites of major conventions. American thinks that encourages fraud by those who won't attend the conventions.
Travel Confidential's lawyer, Edward L. Smith, credits American with launching a full-scale legal offensive as it bombarded him with paper work before he even responded to the suit.
"This is an unusually aggressive litigation," Smith said Tuesday.

 

End of Document
