

Amid The Spanish Moss And Historic Homes, The Issue Is Crime
The Associated Press
June 23, 1992, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 862 words
Byline: By ROBERT BYRD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAVANNAH, Ga.
Body




Spanish moss drips from the trees in this historic coastal city, where splendid old homes evoke a time of Southern gentility.
But lately, things haven't been so gentle in Savannah.
Last year, Savannah set a grim new record for homicide, with 59 slayings - up 69 percent in a year. The city's murder rate approached that of larger cities with better-known crime problems, such as Oakland or Houston.
Among the city's 137,560 people, roughly one in 10 was a victim of serious crime last year. There were 1,018 robberies, up 28 percent in a year; 1,430 cars were stolen, up 53 percent. The fear helped produce political upheaval; a Republican from New York used it to dislodge the six-term Democratic mayor.
A new anti-crime plan emphasizing community patrols started last fall, and in the first three months of 1992, serious crime dropped 21 percent.
But as the cool winter wind off Tybee Island gives way to the heat, Savannah hopes its long summer isn't going to be a violent one.
"When the weather gets warmer and tempers flare, things are going to pick up," warns Prince Jackson, president of the Ad Hoc Committee to Prevent Crime.
"We still have drugs. We still have young people who are walking dead," says Willie Brown, a former Savannah alderman.
Brown knows about crime. Three years ago, his brother Toysy Smith was slain - by gang members, Brown assumes.
"When my son graduates from Tuskegee," he said, "I'm going to tell him, 'Get the hell out of here. I don't want you to die on the streets of Savannah."'
Savannah sits on the south bank just above where the Savannah River empties into the Atlantic. Blocks of reclaimed waterfront storefronts and warehouses have made River Street a tourist haven.
Just a few blocks south, on the other side of downtown, the city boasts the nation's largest urban historic district, with narrow streets and public squares left the way James Oglethorpe, Georgia's founder, laid them out.
But there's another side of Savannah - a wretched, impoverished side that is hard by the historic splendor.
"You have a lot of exchange here between those who have a great deal and those who have very little," said Michael Donahue, director of research and planning for the Savannah Police Department.
"On one block, you will see complete and total neighborhood blight. On the next block, affluent row houses. … Other cities, you don't see that juxtaposition. In Charleston, you can walk around The Battery at midnight with no problem. You don't do that here."
Donahue notes that "precisely where the visitors go is where most of the crime occurs. That leads to exaggerating the problem. Visitors … are likely more to be exposed to it, but not that likely to be victims of it."
Most criminals and victims in Savannah aren't tourists, Donahue said; they're young black men in the neighborhoods that breed crime.
The most violent is what police call Area C - the southern portion of the historic district and the less-restored Victorian district to its south.
In Area C, some old homes have been restored to grandeur, but more haven't. The contrast is jarring. Once-lovely Victorians sit unkempt, uncared for by the absentee landlords who own them or the down-and-outers who rent them.
The decay extends beyond the sagging siding and crumbling roofs. One of 12 police areas in the city, Area C had one third of the city's homicides, rapes and burglaries in 1990 and 43 percent of drug offenses.
Under the new crime plan, the community patrols throughout the city are augmented by bike and horse patrols in the historic district and downtown.
"We wanted to assure the merchants there, and other business people, that we are serious about the tourist trade - and we are," Donahue said.
"Savannah is a jewel for all of Georgia, but if we don't keep it shiny, it won't be," said Sheila Morley, a former nurse who now spends most of her time as president of the Citizens Crime Commission. "It has been tarnished.
"I've got friends in Spokane (Wash.) who told me, 'We've been reading about it all the way on the West Coast.' It's rather embarrassing."
Jackson's group has enlisted the help of students at predominantly black Savannah State College, where he is a faculty member, to work with young people in the housing projects, tutoring and trying to act as a positive influence.
"The ones who will be the new murderers in '96, we're working in that age group now," Jackson said. "Perhaps if we can get them young enough, we can cut it off. … I don't know how much you can do with the ones who have already robbed someone or held up a store."
Brown takes hope in the recent convictions of "Little" Ricky Jivens and 20 others in Savannah's most notorious drug gang, which police blamed for a dozen killings in 1991. Jivens is serving a life sentence in a federal prison.
"They have taken one of the most bestial felons and his pack off the streets," Brown said. "It appears that was the root cause of a lot of problems here."
Ms. Morley also thinks things may be getting better, partly because of increased community concern.
"I am hopeful," she said. "There's a feeling in our community, and the task force I serve on, that we're putting things together. … I really see a change."

 

End of Document
