

An AP New Dimensions Feature - HEAD: College Bonds - the Allure and the Drawbacks
The Associated Press
April 12, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 926 words
Body




---
 
 By CHANGING TIMES
The Kiplinger Magazine
For AP Newsfeatures
Zero-coupon, general obligation municipal bonds might sound intimidating to the uninitiated investor. But call them college savings bonds and parents can't buy enough of them.
In Illinois, state-issued college savings bonds are so popular that brokers are sometimes swamped with more orders than they can fill. When the bonds were first offered in Connecticut in 1988, the state sold $$110 million worth - twice as much as expected. Twenty other states have issued zero-coupon college bonds in some form, and most report that the bonds sell like hotcakes.
Besides the name, what's the allure?
The bonds are a safe way to tuck aside money for college and earn an attractive tax-exempt yield. The rate you'll lock in is less fetching than it was a few months ago. But when a taxable five-year certificate of deposit earns about 8.5 percent and a 10-year Treasury note less than 8 percent, the tax-exempt yields of nearly 7 percent on college bonds with 10- to 15-year maturities still look good. If you're in the 28 percent tax bracket, 7 percent tax-free is as good as 9.72 percent taxable. And because such bonds can also be exempt from state taxes, your taxable equivalent yield on a long-term bond could easily break into double digits.
College bonds are a good alternative to Series EE U.S. savings bonds for parents whose incomes are too high to qualify for the tax break available when series EE's are used to pay for college tuition, notes St. Louis financial planner Katharine A. McGee. Series EE bonds currently earn 7.19 percent and are completely tax-free for parents filing jointly with income less than $$60,000, adjusted for inflation when the bonds are redeemed.
 
 RUSH TO ISSUE
Illinois, the first state to sell college savings bonds, got its inspiration from Michigan's tuition prepayment plan, which allows parents to pay tuition at state schools in advance in exchange for a guarantee that the investment will keep up with rising college costs. The Michigan plan became less attractive when the IRS ruled that the earnings on prepayments are not exempt from federal tax. So the Illinois legislature responded with a zero-coupon, general obligation bond issue packaged to appeal to small investors saving for college.
The college savings bond moniker worked. Although some issuing states have sold the bonds only once, others do so annually or semiannually. Arkansas, Colorado, Louisiana, Ohio and West Virginia have authorized the bonds but haven't issued any yet.
 
 WHAT YOU GET
Like all zero-coupon bonds, "baccalaureate" bonds have no coupons to clip and exchange for interest payments. Instead, the bonds sell at a deep discount and are redeemed for face value at maturity. A $$1,000 Texas college bond that matures in 2001 sold for $$511 in January, for example. The interest, in effect, is reinvested at the bond's original yield to maturity.
The bonds' values fluctuate with the market and are more volatile than those that pay interest regularly. But if you hold the bonds to maturity, you're assured the stated yield.
"These are meant to be bought and held," says Michael Kabarec, an Illinois financial planner and president of the National Association of Personal Financial Advisers.
Most states offer a range of maturities, anywhere from one to 30 years. Face values at maturity are usually $$1,000 or $$5,000 but can be less.
 
 LONG, S FE YIELDS
Most Gf jhe college bonds are general obligation bonds, which carry high bond ratings because they're backed by the taxing power of the state. And they're noncallable in most cases, so the state can't pay off the bond early if interest rates fall. One reason the bonds are in such demand is that noncallable, general obligation bonds are hard to come by.
North Carolina is an exception. It has designated a portion of many revenue bond issues since August 1987 as college bonds, and those bonds are sometimes callable after eight or 10 years. If you buy revenue bonds, whi 0 e the proceeds from these bonds for any purpose. But several stat 0 ons that determine whether you're eligible for state financial aid.
 
 HOW TO BUY
Like other municipal bonds, these are sold through brokerages, not directly to investors by the states. It's probably easiest to buy a college savings bond when it's first issued. Most states advertise new issues in the local media. Connecticut, Iowa and New Hampshire have even sent fliers home with public school students to promote new issues.
But the bonds often sell out quickly. In Illinois, brokers and banks take orders for a week, then fill as many as they can. On long maturities, sometimes five of every six orders go unfilled, says Mark Gallagher, a vice-president at First Chicago Capital Markets.
You can also buy the bonds on the secondary market, although your broker may have to hunt for 0 e double tax-exempt only if you live in the District of Columbia or in one of the 12 states that don't tax income from out-of-state municipal bonds.
In other states you may have to pay taxes on the "phantom" interest that accumulates annually, even though you don't collect the interest until the bond matures.
 
 WHAT CAN GO WRONG
The main risk inherent in zero-coupon bonds, assuming you hold them to maturity, is that high inflation could erode the purchasing power of your final payout. For that reason, Kabarec recommends putting no more than 40 percent of a college-savings portfolio into zeros.
The rest should go into more aggressive investments, he advises, especially if college is several years off.

 

End of Document
