

And the Band Played on: Hitting the High Notes for More than 100 Years
The Associated Press
January 9, 1992, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 689 words
Byline: By DEB RIECHMANN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: FROSTBURG, Md.
Body




The Frostburg Arion Band already had been making music for two years when Thomas Edison invented the electric light in 1879.
The musicians played through World War I, the stock market crash of 1929, the Great Depression and World War II. It practiced at its white- and green-shuttered hall here through the civil rights movement, Vietnam and Neil Armstrong's step onto the moon.
The band has played on.
"We wanted to play and we just kept playing," said Jack Nickle, who has been a tenor saxophone player in the band since 1946.
His great-grandfather's brother, Conrad Nickle, organized the community band, which then was called the German Arion Band. Conrad Nickle, a furniture maker who immigrated from Germany in the mid-1860s, was the first conductor. The musicians rehearsed in his furniture factory until it burned in 1888.
The Arion Band, named after a Greek lyric poet and musician in the 7th century B.C., claims to be the second-oldest continuously operating band in the United States. The Allentown (Pa.) Band, which started in 1828, boasts of being the oldest.
"Why did it last? There's just enough of that small-town spirit left in everyone," said Kurt Lemmert, 28, a math instructor at Frostburg State University, who has played trumpet in the band for 10 years. "The regulars just make time for it."
Almost every Monday night, the players assemble at the old band hall on Uhl Street in Frostburg, a community in the foothills of the Alleghenies that was once dependent on coal.
"Part of it is fun. Part of it is community. Part of it, to me, is this old band hall. It's musty. It's history," said George McDowell, the seventh man to conduct the band.
On the walls, century-old, tarnished helicons, a predecessor of the sousaphone, remind today's band members of Arion Band's past. Dusty old cabinets are filled with yellowing sheet music for hundreds of arrangements. Old photographs and black-and-gold wool uniforms hang on hooks around the hall, which is cluttered with music stands and chairs.
McDowell, who is music coordinator at Garrett Community College in McHenry, has little time for the band, but it's still one of the top priorities in his life.
"I'm not a fireman. I'm not an emergency medical technician," McDowell said. "This is a way to put something back into the community. This is bigger than us. It will be here when we're gone."
When he feels overwhelmed with band responsibilities, McDowell needs only to look at 82-year-old Tommy Lewis puffing on his baritone horn, his white-haired eyebrows rising with the high notes.
Lewis, who has vision problems, wears two hearing aids and suffers from emphysema, has played with the Arion Band for 74 years, including two years as director.
In its early days, the directors chose music with a German flavor to appeal to immigrant families, McDowell said. During World War I, the band tried to get away from its ethnic background and become more of a community organization. When negative German sentiment rose in America, band members renamed the "Kaiser Friedrich March" to "Americana," crossing out the title on every page of the old score.
In the 1920s, the band played standard concert works. Patriotic marches were popular during World War II. In the 1950s and 1960s, the band moved toward pop.
McDowell said he tries to choose music that will appeal to those in their mid-30s and above.
"The young kids, the teen-agers, they've got their Walkmans on and they're not listening," McDowell said. "We're appealing to the above 35 crowd, so we're playing music with Dixieland flavor, Broadway samplers, and we try to play two patriotic marches."
He said 35 to 40 band members play 12 to 15 engagements a year at nursing homes, parks, outside St. Michael's Church in downtown Frostburg and on the Fourth of July.
Nickle said he thinks the band has lost popularity over the years as Frostburg's older residents have died. But he and others still believe the band will play on.
"I've been playing in this band since 1973 and I have no intention of stopping," said Charlie Hill, a 37-year-old tuba player who makes a living as an auto mechanic in Cumberland. "A lot of us are lifers."
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto

 

End of Document
