

Anguished Prayers for the Dead, No Mercy for the Murderers
The Associated Press
January 26, 1995, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 774 words
Byline: By FRANK BAJAK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: OSWIECIM, Poland
Body




The voices were full of pain and prayer. There was anger and fear. The children who had lived through starvation, torture, medical experiments and the murder of their parents were grown up, grown old.
"As I walk to the gate, I have the same fear as I had 50 years ago," Elie Wiesel, the Nobel Peace prize winner, said today.
Wiesel, the writer who first used the term Holocaust to describe the Nazi extermination of Jews, headed the U.S. delegation that came to remember the 50th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz-Birkenau, the gravesite of 1.5 million people.
"It is in me, it is still the same fear," he said.
Tensions between Poles and Jews over the commemorations continued today. While some Jewish leaders joined President Lech Walesa's official ceremony to mark the anniversary, others, like Wiesel, snubbed it, saying the program didn't pay enough attention to Jews killed at the death camp.
Wiesel instead went to an observance on the site of the camp's gas chambers. There, gray-haired Jewish men marched through the gates of Birkenau, wearing prayer shawls like those the Nazi guards had stolen from their fathers and grandfathers.
There was anguish in the voice of cantor Moshe Stern, singing the El Maleh Rachamim - "Oh, Merciful God" - the traditional prayer recited over the dead.
There was more anguish, for some, at the thought of what that mercy might mean.
"God, merciful God, do not have mercy on murderers of Jewish children," prayed Wiesel. "Do not have mercy on those who created this place. Do not forgive the people who murdered here."
Beside the tumbled concrete blocks of the crematoria, the gas chambers the Nazis had blown up to try to hide their murders, the prayers rang out - in Hebrew, Yiddish, Polish, English and German.
"We do not believe in collective guilt. Only the guilty were guilty," said Wiesel, who spent part of his childhood at Auschwitz.
Originally set up for Poles who resisted the Nazis, Auschwitz-Birkenau killed up to 8,000 people a day in four gas chambers and crematoria before Soviet soldiers stormed the camp on Jan. 27, 1945.
The president of Germany, Roman Herzog, stood silently, pain etching his face, as one Jewish survivor told him that he does not forgive the Germans for what they did, but believes in cooperating with the new generation.
Herzog answered: "I am of the same opinion."
At the official ceremony, held today at Jagiellonian University, speakers honored professors who were among the first Poles sent to death camps, though not to Auschwitz.
"Auschwitz today is a great cemetery without graves, where ashes of people were scattered," said Maurice Goldstein, head of the Auschwitz International Committee of about 10,000 survivors.
"Auschwitz as a place of violating human rights should be preserved as a permanent warning for mankind as a scar on all Europe," he said.
Jewish groups and the Polish government have skirmished in the media over the official observances - with Jewish groups contending the government ceremonies do not reflect that Auschwitz was a specifically Jewish tragedy.
Details of Friday's main ceremony Friday still had not been fully settled today. Wiesel said he hoped to meet Walesa for lunch to try to reach a consensus.
Ninety percent of those killed by the Nazis at Auschwitz-Birkenau during their World War II occupation of Poland were Jews.
But the camp is also a symbol for Poles of their nation's suffering at the hands of the Nazis. Leading Polish politicians and intellectuals were also killed there.
"They knew that a nation whose academic and creative elite were destroyed would be easier to strip of the power of resistance, easier to exterminate," Walesa said at Jagiellonian University.
Meanwhile, in Bonn, German lawmakers paid respect today to the victims of the Auschwitz death camp and vilified modern-day German fascists who trivialize or deny the Nazis murder of 6 million Jews.
Members of the lower house of parliament rose from their seats at the start of today's session to reflect on Germany's Nazi past.
The president of the Bundestag, Rita Suessmuth, castigated neo-Nazis who deny the Holocaust occurred, and "revisionist" German historians who contend the Nazis' extermination of Jews was no worse than the crimes of Josef Stalin against the Soviet people.
"Those who want to wipe out the traces of Auschwitz or deny Auschwitz … themselves become guilty by erasing (the victims') past and their suffering and by taking away their dignity," she said. "The crimes of Auschwitz can be compared with nothing else.
Ensuring that "Auschwitz is never again possible remains a duty for us all, and also for the coming generations," Suessmuth said.
 Load-Date: January 26, 1995

 

End of Document
