

Are the Bad Old Days Back for the 'Mistake on the Lake?'
The Associated Press
July 1, 1991, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 698 words
Byline: By RICH HARRIS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CLEVELAND
Body




There are times when it seems this Lake Erie city's bad old days are back.
Once known as the "mistake on the lake," Cleveland struggled in the 1980s to create a new image: a Rust Belt city pulling itself out of the doldrums with a massive downtown building program and a public relations blitz.
New skyscrapers and upscale shopping centers sprang up. The Cuyahoga River, which had been so polluted it caught fire in 1969, was cleaned up. Cleveland was touted as a comeback city.
The Hartford (Conn.) Courant wrote in March of "a $$5 billion downtown renaissance in a factory town that has rolled down its sleeves, fastened a tie under a white collar and stepped into the 21st century."
But Cleveland still has publicity problems:
-Thirty current and former Cleveland police officers were among 47 people arrested in late May in a two-year FBI probe into alleged police protection of gambling.
-Mayor Michael R. White drew national attention in May when a grand jury summons was delivered as he was host of a reception for the National Conference of Black Mayors.
The grand jury was investigating real estate dealings in which White was involved. In the end, White was not indicted.
-Cleveland beat seven other cities for the right to be host of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, which at the time was scheduled for completion in 1992. But fund-raising problems, location questions and squabbling among Cleveland's various boards and agencies have delayed the project time and again. The opening is now set for 1994.
-The city's schools are in such bad shape that former Mayor George Voinovich pledged during his successful gubernatorial campaign last year that the state would take them over if he were elected. He has since toned down his pledge, although he still plans more state control for Cleveland schools.
There have been other national embarrassments.
In addition to the 1969 fire, the Cuyahoga also burned briefly in 1936 and 1952. The city went into default in 1978 under youthful Mayor Dennis Kucinich, who was dubbed "Dennis the Menace."
"What we have is a long-term condition that doesn't really change very much over time, but there's so much attention paid to it that it seems to change," said Norman Krumholz of Cleveland State University's College of Urban Studies.
"In the over-arching view, Cleveland is a very, very nice place to live," he said. "If we stopped agonizing over the fact that it's not what it once was … and start directly addressing the problems it has in a rational way, it wouldn't be seen in that cyclical light at all."
Certainly, some things have improved. At the edge of the revitalized Cuyahoga River lies The Flats, a collection of glitzy nightclubs and restaurants that draws thousands of revelers nightly.
The Cleveland Orchestra is one of the most famous in the world. The symphony's performances are major social events.
While there's not as much laughter at Cleveland's expense these days, the prospect endures.
"It's like the god of humor declared certain things are funny - so Cleveland is funny," said humorist Dave Barry.
Barry, a columnist for The Miami Herald, wrote in March that he had visited Cleveland and found the Rock Hall of Fame "a raging success, with only one minor kink remaining to be ironed out, namely that the Hall does not, in a physical sense, exist."
One recent joke about Cleveland backfired. Jerry Van Dyke, in character as a dimwitted assistant football coach on ABC's "Coach," said in a Monday Night Football promo last season: "I think the problem with Cleveland is, even if you win, you lose. You still got to go home to Cleveland."
White and the residents of Cleveland complained bitterly. Van Dyke and ABC apologized the following week.
Greater Cleveland Growth Association spokeswoman Della Schutt said most residents don't mind a little good-natured joshing. But when outdated stereotypes of the city are dredged up, people in Cleveland get defensive, she said.
"Scandal always plays well. … I don't think Cleveland has any larger share of scandals than any major city in America, but I think that because Cleveland has been the butt of so many horrible jokes and so much bad press that we're a little sensitive about it," she said.

 

End of Document
