

Are Mariners Winning the Battle, Yet Losing the War?
 The Associated Press
September 17, 1995, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 739 words
Byline: By JIM COUR, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: SEATTLE
Body




In the thick of the American League wild-card race, the Seattle Mariners drew 12,102 fans into the Kingdome to watch a critical game with the Minnesota Twins.
The Mariners won the game, but did they lose the war?
Was the city of Seattle sending the franchise a strong message about its lack of support in Tuesday's King County vote to fund up to $ 240.8 million in bonds for a new, retractable-roof baseball stadium?
"I think this town needs a new stadium outdoors," said Mariners manager Lou Piniella. "There were 12,000 people here. I think a new stadium would rectify that in a big way."
According to the pollsters, the stadium that the Mariners say they need to succeed will go down to defeat by a lot closer margin than the experts originally believed.
A poll for KIRO-TV reported Wednesday that 38 percent of the county's voters favor the stadium, 51 percent are against it and 10 percent are undecided. Originally, it was thought the stadium vote would fail by 70 percent to 30 percent.
If the stadium proposal fails, the Mariners could go up for sale immediately - and probably be moved to another city by new owners.
About 37.5 percent - 347,000 voters - of the county's 925,000 registered voters are expected to go to the polls in what is being billed as a vote for the future of major league baseball in Seattle. And perhaps the future of the Seattle Seahawks as well.
The voters are being asked to allow the county to impose a 0.1 percent sales and use tax for up to 20 years. The Mariners would be required to sign a new 20-year lease and contribute $ 45 million to the stadium construction. The county figures it would cost the average county resident about $ 7.50 a year in increased sales taxes.
Also part of the package is at least $ 170 million in bonds for the Kingdome's capital improvements and repairs and other stadium purposes.
The Mariners say they need a new stadium to draw the 3 million-plus fans who will spend enough money each year to put the franchise in the black. They expect to lose $ 30 million this season, bringing the losses sustained by majority owner Hiroshi Yamauchi, the president of Nintendo, to $ 67 million in the 3 years he has owned the club.
Chairman John Ellis of the Mariners was clear about what will happen if county voters say no to the stadium: They will lose the Mariners, too.
"If it's no, then we have to stop the bleeding and sell the team," Ellis said. "And I can guarantee that it will be taken elsewhere."
If stadium supporters think they can get state lawmakers in Olympia to bail them out, they may be disappointed.
The mood in Olympia hasn't changed since the Legislature said no to helping finance the stadium this year. The conservative lawmakers are trying to cut taxes and spending, not increase them.
The Mariners have a lease to play in the Kingdome until after the 1996 season. But the owners can put the team up for sale, as early as Wednesday, one day after the election.
It's unlikely that the county would let the Mariners out of the final season of their lease. If the team is sold to new ownership in another city like an Orlando, Fla., or a city in northern Virginia, the Mariners still must stay in the Kingdome for another season. But it would be a long, uncomfortable year if the Mariners are headed out of town.
The Mariners say the Kingdome doesn't have enough good seats, luxury boxes with a view, or expensive club seats to generate a profit. The club says it can lure more fans by playing in an open-air stadium on grass, and want a retractable roof to guarantee fans coming from far away that games would be played even if it rains.
Opponents ask why the owners won't pay for a new stadium themselves. The trend has been for public support to build new stadiums. The public has helped finance new stadiums in Baltimore, Chicago, Cleveland, Denver, Phoenix (for an expansion team), and Arlington, Texas.
Opponents also complain they are being asked to help pay for a stadium that hasn't been designed, to be built on a site not yet chosen, with a lease that has not yet been negotiated. They say the lack of detail is reason enough not to vote for the tax.
Club officials say many of the details are outlined, if not finalized, in a memorandum negotiated between the Mariners and King County Executive Gary Locke. While the memorandum has never been signed by the Mariners or the County Council, both Locke and the team insist the commitments made by the team are solid.
 Load-Date: September 17, 1995

 

End of Document
