

Art of the Deal: How the Houston Oilers Hit the Road for Nashville
 The Associated Press
December 3, 1995, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 3172 words
Byline: By MITCHELL LANDSBERG, AP National Writer
Body




PART I: CHICAGO
American Airlines Flight 290 rumbled through the murk of the Chicago morning and touched down at O'Hare Airport. It was shortly after 9:30 a.m. on July 7, 1995, and Byron Trauger was on a fool's mission.
At least that's how he saw it. Two days before, the head of Nashville's Convention and Visitor's Bureau had called him to say that the Houston Oilers, one of pro football's venerable franchises, were interested in moving to Nashville.
"Butch, this is nuts!" Trauger told him. "They're just using you."
Houston, the nation's fourth largest city, was going to abandon its football team to Nashville, the 25th largest?
Just months earlier, Nashville had seemed on the verge of landing the New Jersey Devils of the National Hockey League. The deal collapsed when the Devils used Nashville's interest to cut a better deal at home.
But Butch Spyridon was insistent. The Oilers, he said, wanted to meet with a few well-connected Tennesseans, and Trauger, a 46-year-old lawyer who counts Bill and Hillary Clinton among his friends, conceded that it might be an interesting way to kill a morning. He called another of his friends, Nashville Mayor Phil Bredesen.
"Yeah, right," Bredesen deadpanned. "After you get the Oilers here, Byron, why don't you go get the Cowboys?"
So here was Trauger - tall, reedy, red-haired, bearing a striking resemblance to the actor Tom Hanks - here he was stepping off the plane at O'Hare with Spyridon, nearly certain he was wasting his time.
The meeting was planned for American's Admirals Club, a quiet, three-story refuge within the airport where high-flying executives can sip a cocktail, check their e-mail and, if the need arises, rent a conference room.
Trauger's group slipped through the frosted, sliding glass doors, leaving the chaos of the airport corridors behind. They stepped into a conference room that mimicked the pretensions of a corporate board room: polished woodwork, leather-backed chairs, a black, faux-marble table.
What happened next surprised them.
PART II: HOUSTON
Four and a half months later, K.S. "Bud" Adams, the Oilers' owner, leaned his big frame forward in his leather desk chair and fidgeted with a pair of half-frame glasses. The time now was late November 1995; the place, Adams' basement office at the Adams Petroleum Center, a bunker of a building not far from the Houston Astrodome, the Oilers' home field.
It is a big office, perhaps four times the size of a suburban living room, chock full of enough Western art and artifacts to endow a room at a museum. Water gurgles through a fountain made of Southwestern Indian pottery. A rack of antique rifles hangs behind Adams' head.
By now, the deal to move the Oilers to Nashville was set, with just enough wiggle room to encourage last-gasp speculation from the Oiler faithful, what few were left.
The Oilers would change their name to the Tennessee Somethings and move into a new, state-of-the-art stadium on the banks of the Cumberland River for the 1998 season, assuming Nashville fulfilled its end of the deal.
The city's responsibilities included building the stadium, which would seat 65,000, and selling more than 40,000 "personal seat licenses" and roughly 100 luxury suites.
Personal seat licenses are one of the NFL's most brilliant money-making schemes. For a one-time fee, they give fans the right to buy season tickets - a "right" that was previously free. In Nashville, the licenses would sell for about $ 1,600 each. The luxury boxes, the big ticket item in the deal, would sell for a projected $ 50,000 to $ 125,000 each per year.
The total cost of the deal: close to $ 300 million, to be borne by the city of Nashville, fans and the state of Tennessee.
Adams was explaining the economics, which are pretty straightforward: In today's National Football League, the team with the most luxury boxes, the most personal seat licenses and the most control over stadium revenue wins. Maybe not the Super Bowl, but it wins the game that matters most to professional sports owners.
In the past decade, a blitz of stadium construction and team migrations has turned the NFL into a league of haves and have-nots. The haves are teams like the St. Louis (formerly Los Angeles) Rams and the Oakland (formerly Los Angeles, formerly Oakland) Raiders - teams that have managed to strike stadium and licensing deals so favorable as to rewrite the NFL's economic playbook.
The have-nots are teams like the Cleveland Browns, which may be able to fill a stadium with 70,000 dawg-loyal fans, but can no longer compete on the bottom line. That's why they intend to become the Baltimore Browns.
The Oilers weren't losing money - not yet. But Adams could see the writing on the clubhouse wall.
In today's NFL, it doesn't matter how many people pack a stadium; Joe Sixpack just doesn't pay enough. It doesn't even matter if a team comes from a city with a vast television market - TV revenues are divided equally among all teams.
What matters are luxury boxes and personal seat licenses - PSLs. New stadiums, with all the amenities. That's where the money is.
As a member of the NFL's Finance Committee, Adams understood this better than most. In 1990, he said, the most profitable NFL team earned about $ 12 million more than the least profitable team, despite a system of shared league revenue that has invited comparisons to socialist economies. This year, the equivalent figure will be $ 35 million or more.
"Anytime you have that much of a gap," he said, "you're going to see things happening."
And so they are, not just in football but in other sports as well. Seat prices are soaring, players are demanding ever fatter paychecks and bonuses, and teams have been arising in the middle of the night to sneak out of hometowns in search of greener fields.
And now the Houston Oilers - an original franchise of the old American Football League, a team whose very name shouts its allegiance to the oil culture of south Texas - were in the pipeline to Nashville.
"I've been here 50 years, you know," Bud Adams said in the gravelly drawl that bespeaks his roots in Bartlesville, Okla. He came to Houston in 1946, actually, a young oilman on the make, and he had never wanted it to come to this, never wanted to turn his back on his adopted hometown. "But I've got to think of the future of my team and my family."
To say that Bud Adams is not a popular man in Houston now is like saying that Walter O'Malley, the man who moved the Dodgers to Los Angeles, is not loved in Brooklyn. Radio announcers have referred to him as a "tub of lard" and worse; among fans, Adams' name is usually spoken in close proximity to the word "jerk."
Surprisingly, few seem to begrudge Adams the deal he has struck with Nashville. They recognize that Nashville was willing to pay - and pay lavishly - for a franchise that Houstonians would not dig into their pockets to keep.
"He's trying to make some money," one fan shrugged. "I can't fault that."
When you talk about the events that drove the Oilers out of Houston, it's hard to know how far back to go. Back to July, when the team first met the Tennesseans at O'Hare Airport? Back to 1993, when Adams first began talking to Houston Mayor Bob Lanier about the Oilers' need for a new stadium?
More likely, the seeds were sown as early as 1965, when Harris County, which includes Houston, opened the Eighth Wonder of the World, the Houston Astrodome.
It was designed for Houston's baseball team, the Astros. Adams, whose Oilers had been playing in a converted high school stadium, thought it might accommodate pro football as well. Eventually, it did - but only after two years of haggling over the terms of the lease.
By 1987, the Dome was no longer the wonder of the sports world and Adams began to demand improvements: more seats, more luxury boxes. Astrodome officials balked, and Adams threatened to move to Jacksonville, Fla.
In the end, he stayed. Harris County caved in, agreeing to spend nearly $ 100 million to upgrade the Astrodome. The improvements, Oilers officials are quick to point out, benefited all three major users of the stadium: the Astros, the Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo, and the Oilers.
In the public eye, though, the improvements were seen as entirely a sop to Adams. Worse, in order to add 10,000 seats and 65 luxury suites to the Astrodome, architects had been forced to scrap the stadium's most popular feature: a four-story-tall scoreboard that erupted with fireworks and a snorting bull whenever the Astros hit a home run.
Adams was rapidly evolving into a pariah.
The unraveling of his public image had begun on New Year's Eve of 1980 when he fired the Oilers' folksy and popular coach, Bum Phillips. In the years that followed, Adams did little to help his own cause.
"He doesn't play the game very well," conceded Mike McClure, the Oilers' executive vice president for administration.
Neither did the Oilers, whose on-field fortunes took a nosedive after Phillips was fired. Once, they had been one of the AFL's best teams and won the new league's first two championships. But once the AFL and NFL merged in 1970, the Oilers would establish a dubious tradition of never playing in a Super Bowl.
By the early 1990s, Adams could see that his Astrodome deal fell far short of those his fellow owners were striking around the league. In the spring of 1992, the Oilers told the Astrodome management that they wouldn't be renewing their lease in 1997.
The next two years saw a flurry of mostly behind-the-scenes negotiations involving the Oilers; the new owners of Houston's other sports teams, the Astros and the basketball Rockets; and the new mayor, Lanier.
Lanier was a former developer and Texas highway commissioner who took office in 1992 and quickly earned enthusiastic public support for a no-nonsense platform of improving police and redeveloping decaying neighborhoods.
"We thought, 'Perfect guy,"' McClure recalled. Lanier seemed a visionary who could see the sports landscape through a developer's lens.
In June of 1993, Adams and McClure met with Lanier. Adams proposed to chip in $ 50 million if the city would build a $ 235 million domed stadium that could be used for football, basketball and hockey.
"Mayor Lanier asked him if it was a ploy to get a better deal at the Astrodome," McClure recalled. Adams assured him that it wasn't. He envisioned a dome adjacent to the city's convention center that would be a magnet for redevelopment - and give him the luxury boxes, personal seat licenses and concession income that he craved.
To really fly, the deal needed support from the Rockets, then Houston's ascendant sports team. But Rockets owner Les Alexander wanted his own arena, not a football-basketball hybrid.
The Oilers lobbied. At the mayor's suggestion, they hired economic consultants, architects, financial and marketing consultants. But nothing seemed capable of piercing a wall of public distrust. And time and again, Lanier drew a line: No taxpayer money would be spent on professional sports.
Behind the scenes, Lanier continued to meet with the Oilers. In August 1994, the Oilers flew a private jet to Martha's Vineyard, where the mayor was vacationing, to pick him up for a tour of new sports stadiums in Cleveland and Indianapolis. When that jet developed engine trouble, the Oilers chartered another.
As McClure remembers it, Lanier spent much of the trip talking about how the city could tap into a stadium's luxury box money; the Oilers said they were willing to spend as much as $ 75 million or $ 80 million up front on the stadium, but they wanted its revenue. "And you could see that he wasn't buying it."
By the spring of 1995, Adams was ready to give up. By his accounting, he had spent nearly $ 1 million on consultants and lobbyists; he had sought help from every possible ally; he had gotten nowhere.
He decided to try one more time to sway the mayor. He wrote Lanier on July 12, politely demanding action. Impatient, he wrote again on July 18, and this time the polite tone was gone.
"It comes as no surprise to me that I've not received any acknowledgment of my letter to you of July 12, 1995," Adams wrote. "You have consistently displayed a cavalier attitude toward any sense of urgency in resolving the Oilers' stadium situation."
He only had to wait one day for a response. Lanier said he had returned from vacation to find both Adams' letters. He described himself as an Oilers fan. Then he washed his hands of the team.
"It is my conclusion," Lanier wrote, "that the primary moving party on any new stadium should be Harris County Commissioners Court." The county owned the Astrodome; the Oilers could stay there.
The message was clear: The city of Houston wasn't lifting a finger to keep the Oilers. But by this time, the Oilers were already talking to Nashville.
PART III: NASHVILLE
When he got back from Chicago on July 7, Trauger called the mayor to brief him on Nashville's chances of landing the Oilers.
"Well," he began, "when I flew up this morning I thought we had about a 2 percent chance, and now I think we have about a 5 percent chance."
The truth was, Trauger had been impressed - and surprised. He had gone to Chicago expecting a sham meeting by wheeler-dealers looking for a bargaining chip to take back to Houston. Then he met McClure.
McClure is a triple letterman, a career sports executive who has worked in the front offices of the Chicago Bulls (basketball), the Chicago White Sox (baseball) and the Oilers (football).
Polished, sincere, with an astounding capacity to remember numbers and dates, he quickly won over the Nashville contingent with a presentation that was so thorough, so well-prepared, that Trauger figured he had to be serious.
McClure had done his homework. That spring, when a despairing Adams had begun to talk about moving the team to Los Angeles or Baltimore, McClure had found himself staring at a map of the United States. Where, he wondered, was the biggest untapped market for professional sports?
He looked at Nashville. He began to imagine concentric circles radiating out to the nearest major league sports market. Out they went, past Knoxville, Memphis, Chattanooga, past Louisville, Ky., and Birmingham, Ala.
You had to go 250 miles south to Atlanta, 290 miles northeast to Cincinnati or 310 miles northwest to St. Louis before you reached a major league team.
He looked at demographics. Assuming all of Tennessee was the market, the team would have the largest television audience in the nation devoted to a single sports team. Tennessee, it turned out, was the only state to have three cities among the top 65 television markets (Nashville, No. 33; Memphis, No. 42, and Knoxville, No. 63) and not have a major league sports team. Together, they had more viewers than the Houston market, No. 11.
Furthermore, Nashville wanted pro sports. The mayor, Bredesen, had proved that earlier in the year when he negotiated for the New Jersey Devils.
Bredesen had been burned that time, but the experience hadn't deadened his interest in landing a team. An admitted sports dummy who had never attended a pro football game, Bredesen nevertheless was convinced that a pro team would boost Nashville's economy and broaden its image, now pretty much limited to its nickname: Music City U.S.A.
It would put Nashville in the major leagues.
So when Trauger came back from Chicago, Bredesen was intrigued but wary. Trauger spent much of July trying to determine whether McClure, who had seemed to be "an honorable fellow," was in fact trustworthy.
McClure spent a lot of time on planes to Nashville. By early August, Trauger and Bredesen had decided that the Oilers could be trusted - to a point. The two sides sat down for serious negotiations that culminated on Aug. 10. On Aug. 11, Bud Adams flew to Nashville.
When Adams walked into the Wild Boar restaurant for lunch that day, he must have felt right at home. The heads of wild game leered from the walls, much as in his own office. And if the rest of the atmosphere wasn't Old West - more like Olde England meets New West - it still emitted a hyper-masculine aura that would appeal to a football titan like Adams.
This was the first time Adams and Bredesen had met and, given Adams' relationship with Lanier, there might have been cause for apprehension. On the surface, certainly, the cool, technocratic Bredesen didn't seem the ideal match for the rough-hewn Adams.
But any apprehension was quickly erased. As McClure recalled it, "Mr. Adams and the mayor seemed to have instant rapport." It turned out that Bredesen shared Adams' passion for Western art, and much of the lunch was taken up with a discussion of their collections.
They also talked business, and agreed to sign the document their negotiators had spent much of the week drafting: an exclusive negotiating agreement that would require the Oilers and Nashville to deal only with each other for 10 weeks.
The agreement was a direct result of Nashville's experience with the New Jersey Devils. This time, the city wouldn't be used as a bargaining chip. If it lost the Oilers, it would lose them on its own.
That evening, Bredesen, on less than 24 hours notice, brought together about 300 prominent Tennesseans at Nashville's Wild Horse Saloon. Guests were told only to expect an important announcement regarding the Houston Oilers.
The Wild Horse is an only-in-Nashville institution, a vast country-western dance hall in a redeveloped corner of downtown. Here, record shops, nightclubs and restaurants have transformed once-seedy blocks of century-old buildings that loom up from the banks of the Cumberland River.
Most nights, the Wild Horse stage is given over to country stars facing a bobbing sea of cowboy hats and Western shirts. This night, Bud Adams and Phil Bredesen gazed out at bare heads and business suits, and announced that the Oilers had signed the exclusive negotiating agreement. If Nashville could pull it together, the Oilers were moving to Tennessee.
The audience gasped. The Houston Oilers? In Nashville? It sounded altogether implausible.
Three months later, Adams and Bredesen sat on a dais in the lobby of Nashville's city-county building, pens in hand. Behind them were their negotiators, including McClure and Trauger. In front of them were a forest of tripods thick with television cameras and lights.
With a flourish, they signed an agreement that should make the Houston Oilers a team of the past. Adams, who had become a virtual recluse in Houston, beamed as he read his prepared text. He is not a public speaker and it showed. But Houstonians in the audience commented that he seemed more at ease than they had ever seen him.
"We won't be coming to Nashville to take, but to give," Adams said. "We want to become involved in the community, we want to become involved statewide, and we want to become involved in charitable ventures here in Houston -" and here he froze.
"Excuse me," he picked up. Nervous laughter rippled through the audience. Bud Adams paused and then explained himself: "I've been in Houston for almost 50 years now, and it's not the normal thing to be sayin' some other city."
 Load-Date: December 3, 1995

 

End of Document
