

As The Primary Season Winds Down, The Abortion Debate Heats Up
The Associated Press
May 19, 1992, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 741 words
Byline: By JOHN KING, AP Political Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




As the primary season winds down, the abortion debate is heating up, a reminder this turbulent election year is sure to get even more contentious.
It's a question of when - not if.
Already, abortion is at the center of the quadrennial platform debates, and the issue is sure generate even more political heat when the Supreme Court rules this summer on a Pennsylvania law restricting abortion rights.
If the high court reverses the Roe vs. Wade decision that guaranteed abortion rights, the political landscape will shift immediately, just as it did when Los Angeles erupted after the Rodney King verdict.
"People think Roe won't be overturned, so when it is, it is going to blow everyone's mind and it is going to change things dramatically," predicts Ann Stone, leader of a Republican group that supports abortion rights.
Democrats decry the court's willingness to chip away at abortion rights, yet see voting-booth victories in their courtroom losses.
"Pro-choice is mainstream," National Abortion Rights Action League executive director Kate Michelman told Democratic Party platform drafters Monday.
Polls support that assertion to a degree: only about 15 percent of Americans want abortion outlawed under all circumstances, and nearly two-thirds say Roe vs. Wade should not be reversed.
For all its divisiveness, the abortion issue never has proven decisive in the four presidential contests since Roe vs. Wade. And the issue ranked 15th of 16 when the Gallup organization had voters choose the most pressing presidential issues for 1992.
But the high court's ruling this summer guarantees abortion will be at center stage in the fall campaign.
"It wasn't a presidential issue when it appeared the court would protect the right regardless of the president," says Stone. "That's no longer the case."
Ironically, Bush is a product of the moderate GOP wing that many Democrats, and some Republicans, predict will turn on the president if the Supreme Court reverses or substantially guts the Roe decision.
That's a blind bet at this point, although abortion looms large if the race is close.
"No matter what happens in the Supreme Court, abortion is not going to jump to the top of the priority list," said Gallup editor-in-chief Frank Newport. "But all it would take is the 15 percent who feel very strongly about the issue to tip the election one way or another if it were close."
Although Democrats say that bodes well for them, it could work against them in a close three-way race including Ross Perot, in which Bush would be the only anti-abortion candidate.
Still, Republicans who believe Bush and others in the party are vulnerable if the court scales back abortion rights are urging the GOP to adopt platform language welcoming all points of view on the issue.
Democrats see no similar need to offer an olive branch to anti-abortion forces within their ranks, and promise to pummel Bush on the issue if the court erodes abortion rights.
Pennsylvania Gov. Robert Casey appealed Monday for the party to drop its abortion-rights plank or at least favor restrictions including parental and spousal notification.
"Our party has always been the voice of the powerless and the voiceless," Casey told platform drafters. "Let us add to this list the most powerless and voiceless member of the human family: the unborn child."
His view, however, was rejected by the majority, and conflicts with the positions taken by likely Democratic nominee Bill Clinton, the Arkansas governor.
Although his state has a parental notification law, Clinton has pledged to support legislation that would not only make the Roe vs. Wade decision the law of the land but, according to many interpretations, go even further and prohibit most state restrictions.
Perot also has pledged to sign the measure.
Clinton's statements in support of abortion rights are the surest applause lines of his campaign, although he insists he wishes that wasn't the case.
"Those of us who want to unify the country should make it very, very clear that we don't want another election where another politician can stand on another podium like this and get a hand like you just gave me, because the right to privacy should mean just that," Clinton said last week. "We shouldn't try to criminalize, politicize or divide the American people on this issue ever again."
At least on the last two counts, he won't get his wish this year.
 
 ---
EDITOR'S NOTE - John King covers national politics for The Associated Press.

 

End of Document
