

Ash Cloud Circling the Globe, Perhaps Cooling the Climate
The Associated Press
August 13, 1991, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 739 words
Byline: By RANDOLPH E. SCHMID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The ash cloud from the Philippine volcano Mount Pinatubo now girdles the globe, a haze that could cool the climate even as it brightens sunsets, scientists report.
Parts of the gradually spreading cloud now extend as far north as Fayetteville, N.C.; Memphis, Tenn., and Albuquerque, N.M., according to the National Environmental Satellite, Data and Information Service.
Residents of Hawaii and California have reported spectacular sunsets, possibly a result of light being filtered through the dust.
While the visible signs of the ash cloud are readily apparent, it remains to be seen what the effect will be on weather.
To date, the greatest hazard from the ash cloud - besides the immediate threat to people nearby - has been engine damage in aircraft flying near the mountain.
Mount Pinatubo began erupting June 9 with the most powerful blast June 14-15. The eruptions forced the U.S. military to evacuate more than 17,000 dependents and troops from Philippine bases.
The volcano continues spewing ash from time to time and scientists say it could erupt for up to three years.
The ash cloud extended as high as 14 miles into the stratosphere, where winds carried it from east to west around the globe, according to satellite observations made by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
The ash cloud completed its planetary circuit July 7.
Larry Stowe of NOAA's Satellite Service reports that the thickest ash cloud now extend between 20 degrees north and south of the equator, roughly as far north as Mexico City and south almost to Rio de Janeiro.
But a thinner layer stretches as far as 35 degrees north latitude, roughly the location of Albuquerque, Memphis and Fayetteville.
Measurements based on reflected sunlight show the thicker parts of the cloud are more than double the normal load of dust in the air, Stowe said.
The haze has the potential to cool the climate somewhat, possibly for several years, according to NOAA scientists.
But measuring the change could be complicated by the El Nino-Southern Oscillation, a periodic change in air pressure coupled with a warming of the tropical Pacific Ocean that seems to be gaining momentum. This irregular phenomenon can cause worldwide weather changes.
And these two factors may also confuse the attempts to measure global warming, with some scientists concerned that the world's climate may be slowly heating due to the so-called greenhouse effect.
To date, 18 jet aircraft have been affected by the ash cloud, with several experiencing engine failures and other mechanical problems, reported Mike Matson of the National Environmental Satellite, Data and Information Service.
No crashes or deaths have occurred, but ash-induced engine damage can cost "big bucks" to fix, Matson observed.
As many as 10 jet engines have been replaced because of ash damage, said Tom Casadevall of the U.S. Geological Survey.
He said scientists meeting at Mount St. Helens late last month held a special session on Mount Pinatubo to discuss satellite tracking of the cloud, aircraft damage and the communications problems that allowed so many encounters to occur.
"The saddest thing is that we here in the United States had the satellite information which allowed us to track the plume, but … the information did not get to the countries in the region."
"We really don't expect there to be any measurable climatic effects for at least several months," reported Chester Ropelewski of the federal Climate Analysis Center in Camp Springs, Md.
But some researchers expect the ash to block part of the incoming sunlight, cooling the earth.
That occurred in 1982 after the eruption of El Chichon in Mexico. Then, globally averaged temperatures fell 0.2 to 0.3 degrees Celsius for several years after the event. The Mount Pinatubo eruption is estimated at twice the size of El Chichon's.
El Chichon blocked an estimated 5 percent of solar radiation, according to measurements from the National Geophysical Data Center in Boulder, Colo. The dimming was as high as 20 percent in some areas.
Perhaps the most storied volcano-weather connection came in 1815-16 after the eruption of Tambora in Indonesia.
That blast threw massive quantities of dust into the air, spreading around the world with effects ranging from brightly colored sunsets in Europe to severe cold in America.
In New England, 1816 was marked by snow in June, extreme cold in July and crop failures. It has become known as "the year without a summer."

 

End of Document
