

At the Court of St. James, The First Career Diplomat Bows In
The Associated Press
May 9, 1991, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 545 words
Byline: By MAUREEN JOHNSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




America's new ambassador to Britain is honing skills acquired as a career diplomat by deflecting questions about how he'll afford to entertain in a job that traditionally went to wealthy friends of the president. "There'll be no second helpings," cracks Raymond Seitz.
He is the first career Foreign Service officer in the plum post that for 200 years has been reserved for political intimates of presidents and rich supporters.
Anyway, 50-year-old Seitz asked a group of American reporters Wednesday, who knows for sure that he isn't rich? "I may have acres and acres in Texas that people don't have any idea about."
He scheduled his arrival last week, leaving wife and high-school-age son in Washington, to take advantage of a three-day holiday weekend in Britain.
That was just about enough time to look round his new home: Winfield House, the 35-room Georgian-style mansion in Regent's Park which Woolworth heiress Barbara Hutton gave to the U.S. government in 1946.
With Winfield House goes the expectation of lavish hospitality. Past ambassadors are reported to have dipped heavily into their own personal fortunes to pay for the parties.
The embassy refuses to say what the entertainment allowance is or whether it will be increased.
Seitz is Washington's 66th ambassador to what the British call the Court of St. James. He succeeded Henry E. Catto, Texan millionaire owner of a string of television stations, who is the new director of the U.S. Information Service.
Before Catto there was candy millionaire turned banker, Charles H. Price, a major fund-raiser for President Ronald Reagan's campaign. Price followed John B. Louis Jr., genial heir to the Johnson's Wax fortune, who'd also given generously.
The list of envoys, dotted with famous names such as Joseph P. Kennedy and Walter Annenberg, rolls on back to the end of the War of Independence and the 1785 arrival of John Adams, later the second president.
Seitz, who was No. 2 at the London embassy from 1984-89, is modest about what prompted President Bush to break the tradition at the London embassy.
"I really don't know how the president came to that conclusion … I thought it was probably pretty prudent not to question it," he said.
British newspaper comment has been sparse but approving.
The Independent said Bush's choice of a "professional politician instead of a rich friend" was "a diplomatic event that is nicely out of the ordinary."
Seitz's appointment, said The Times of London, was "a sign of the political climate. The White House has seen that the job no longer suits a presidential friend or veteran of the wartime special relationship."
Like Bush, Seitz went to Yale and has adopted Texas as his home state. He is the son of a career army officer and joined the Foreign Service in 1966.
Seitz's last appointment, assistant secretary of state for European and Canadian Affairs, put him at the heart of the German unification and he was decorated by the Bonn government for his role.
On the future of the special relationship between Britain and the United States, Seitz goes tactfully beyond the diplomatic niceties about a common language, shared history and values.
Change was inevitable because the Soviet threat was gone and Britain's future lies with the European Community's plans for closer union.

 

End of Document
