

At the Movies: 'The Last of the Mohicans'
The Associated Press
September 22, 1992, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 570 words
Byline: By HILLEL ITALIE, Associated Press Writer
Body




"The Last of the Mohicans," James Fenimore Cooper's "classic" adventure novel set during the French and Indian War, can trap a film director in one of two ways: Adapt it too faithfully and you're stuck with a meandering story about warring tribes and warring countries; adapt it too liberally and you may lose the mythological power that has made the novel so influential for more than 150 years.
The story takes place in upstate New York in 1757 and stars Daniel Day-Lewis as "Hawkeye," or Nathaniel Poe (Natty Bummpo in the book). He is a white man who was raised among Mohicans and rejects the values of "civilized" society. Living in the forest, his closest companions are his adopted father, Chingachgook (Russell Means), and Chingachgook's son, Uncas (Eric Schweig).
The three end up helping a British officer (Steven Waddington) protect a British commander's two beautiful daughters: the dark-haired Cora (Madeline Stowe), and the fair-haired Alice (Jodhi May). Their main enemy is a determined Huron named Magua (Wes Studi), who vows revenge for the injustices committed against his people.
It is a well-paced, well-crafted movie. "Miami Vice" creator Michael Mann, who directed the film and co-wrote the screenplay, does an intelligent job of paring down Cooper's often difficult narrative. He also has taken great care to get the period details right and to flesh out the author's rather thinly drawn characters, especially Magua.
But something is missing, and it has to do with the film's most important character - Nathaniel. The problem is how Day-Lewis, who won an Academy Award for "My Left Foot," plays him, and Mann directs him.
Natty Bummpo is one of the great early American archetypes: the frontiersman, the rugged individualist. As much as anyone, he is the model for all the cowboys and private eyes and Dirty Harrys to come, for all the gunslingers who have ever taken the law into their own hands.
Little of this comes through in Day-Lewis' performance. The actor has described Nathaniel as a man without 20th-century neuroses, but he doesn't seem to have figured out what does make him tick. His character seems flat, undefined. Day-Lewis looks right, with his athletic build and flowing hair, but there's no fire, no sense of danger, no inner life.
Mann himself makes an unfortunate decision: He has Nathaniel and Cora become lovers. One of Cooper's principles is that Natty could never feel as strongly about a woman as he does about his life in the forest. He is a child of nature, and the idea of him settling down with a woman would be as alien to him as wearing a powdered wig.
In the end, what should have been a compelling account of honor and individualism becomes an often interesting, but conventional story about romance. Nathaniel does it all for love, which makes for a very different sort of hero.
"The Last of the Mohicans," produced by Mann and Hunt Lowry, is a Twentieth Century Fox release. It has an R rating, with often graphic violence. Running time is 111 minutes.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.

 

End of Document
