

At The Movies: 'The Naked Gun 2 : The Smell of Fear'
The Associated Press
June 27, 1991, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 457 words
Byline: By BOB THOMAS, Associated Press Writer
Body




The firm of Zucker, Abrahams and Zucker once again practices its lunacy in "The Naked Gun 2 : The Smell of Fear."
The same co-conspirators of the first "Naked Gun" are back - Leslie Nielsen, Priscilla Presley, George Kennedy and O.J. Simpson - joined by a new crop of villains, most of them in the energy industry.
Would you believe this is an environmental comedy?
There are three full-out, sanity-endangering belly laughs - and that's before the opening titles are over.
After that, the laughs are spaced, big yocks between dull patches.
Lt. Frank Drebin is now head of Police Squad in Washington, D.C., and he creates havoc at a White House dinner. His principal victim: Barbara Bush, played by dead ringer Margey Ross.
Drebin becomes mired in a plot by tycoons who seek to sabotage the nation's energy policy. The leader is an oily petroleum boss (Robert Goulet), who's willing to use murder, kidnapping and Drebin's former girlfriend (Presley) to achieve his goals.
Any further analysis of the plot is useless, since it wanders down any alley that might conceal a likely gag. Puns proliferate, and a few jokes just lay there ("Do you gamble?" "Yes, every time I eat out.")
But it's hard to dislike a movie in which the detective and the hit man battle it out with an electric toothbrush and a blow-dryer.
No target is too big or too small for the David Zucker-Pat Proft script. They include big oil (a TV commercial shows oil tanker captains taking sobriety tests) and even John Sununu, No. 1 on today's hit parade.
The writing is erratic, but David Zucker's direction is on the money; the bum jokes fly past to make room for good ones. He has fun with the movie traditions (the billing reads "un film de David Zucker") and the orgasm montage displays all the cliches, including some new twists.
A closet Clouseau, Nielsen exploits Drebin's massive ineptitude, his utter seriousness making it all the funnier. Presley's deadpan manner is a perfect response. Kennedy and Simpson endure their indignities with eloquent resignation.
Like Wayne Newton, Goulet makes an ideal villain. Perhaps they could start a new Las Vegas industry.
A Paramount Picture, "The Naked Gun 2 " was produced by Robert K. Weiss, with Jerry Zucker, Jim Abrahams and Gil Netter as executive producers. Rating is PG-13 for some racy comedy. Running time: 85 minutes.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.

 

End of Document
