

At the Movies: 'The Pelican Brief'
The Associated Press
December 14, 1993, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 599 words
Byline: By DOLORES BARCLAY
Body




John Grisham, Hollywood's golden novelist, had a box-office smash with "The Firm." Will his "The Pelican Brief" do just as well? Probably so, because both films relied heavily on star power. "The Firm" had Tom Cruise; "The Pelican Brief" has Denzel Washington and Julia Roberts.
As for substance, don't look for any. What you get with a Grisham yarn is good, old-fashioned melodrama, with a few thrills along the way.
Which all means that "The Pelican Brief" is great entertainment but won't in any way tax the brain cells or yield any memorable lines or scenes.
Like "The Firm," and every other novel written by the best-selling author, "Pelican" focuses on law and lawyers - or, in this case, a law student.
Two U.S. Supreme Court justices are assassinated. One was the mentor of Tom Callahan (Sam Shepard), a constitutional law professor at Tulane University and lover of one of his students, Darby Shaw (Roberts). During one of their intimate moments, the two speculate on why the justices have been killed. What linked the two?
Darby, an eager little thing, digs through various decisions and finds a link: ecology. Digging a little further, she discovers a corrupt developer with ties to the White House. She writes all this in a brief, dubbed the Pelican Brief by the FBI and CIA, since the land at issue is a refuge for the pouched bird.
When Callahan is killed by a car bomb intended for Darby, she goes underground, playing a deadly game of cat and mouse with various agents of the government, an international hit man and the greedy developer who wants her dead and all knowledge of the brief erased.
Darby teams up with an investigative reporter for a Washington newspaper, Gray Grantham (Washington), who brings her in from the cold, as it were.
Together, they unravel the plot and race against time - and killers - to finally expose it.
As in "The Firm," Grisham's denouement in "Pelican" is a letdown. The fact that a large law firm would represent Mafia interests is hardly earth-shattering; the motive for killing off the justices is equally as forced.
But Alan J. Pakula moves the story along at a brisk pace.
Unfortunately, Roberts simply isn't a believable law student. It's a real stretch to see her arguing torts. For the most part, her vulnerability and "cuteness" get in the way of her character, who is a whole lot stronger than the fragile Roberts.
Washington continues to grow as an actor, finding just the right blend of journalistic professionalism, humor and terror. But can any print reporter afford to live in a Washington townhouse - by himself? Hey, it's show biz, folks.
There also is a good turn by John Lithgow as Gray's acerbic editor. Lithgow squeezes out a few choice lines - he calls it "the bird brief" and Darby "the bird girl."
Shepard is perfect as Callahan, William Atherton is his usual smarmy self as the CIA head, and Robert Culp's doddering president is a dead-on impersonation of a recent inhabitant of the White House.
Hume Cronyn puts in a tidy cameo as Justice Abraham Rosenberg, who is dispatched in his sleep with a bullet to the brain.
Pakula produced the Warner Bros. release with Pieter Jan Brugge. "The Pelican Brief" is rated PG-13.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Load-Date: December 14, 1993

 

End of Document
