

At the Point of the Gun Lobby: NRA Pressure Grows More Strident
The Associated Press
September 29, 1994, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 760 words
Byline: By JIM DRINKARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




When gun advocates saw a ban on assault-style firearms looming in late July, they scurried to draft a loophole for dozens of copycat guns. But at the last minute, the National Rifle Association backed out, adopting an all-or-nothing strategy.
In the end, the NRA got nothing.
The crime bill President Clinton signed bans 19 specific assault-style weapons, as well as 100 or more similar firearms. Critics of the 3.5 million-member gun lobby say its growing disdain for compromise is making the group its own worst enemy.
"There's no middle ground with them," said Sen. Ben Nighthorse Campbell, D-Colo., who denounced the NRA after his office was subjected to threats during the crime bill debate. "I don't know of any other group that plays it that tough."
The assault-style weapons ban wasn't the only recent defeat for the NRA; it also lost a high-stakes battle over the Brady handgun law last November.
But those losses did nothing to tone down the lobbying group's strident advocacy. If anything, the talk is tougher heading into the November elections.
The NRA plans to spend millions of dollars to defeat its enemies and reward its friends between now and Nov. 8. And it will seek to channel its huge and angry membership into the political arena.
Even longtime friends are not immune from the NRA's wrath.
"If you vote for them 99 times and once against them, it's very bad," said Campbell, who said he declined to renew his NRA membership after an aide received death threats.
For those in Congress, the threat can't be ignored.
While polls "always show the same result, 60 or 70 percent are against gun-owner rights," said Al Rubega, chairman of Gun Owners of New Hampshire, "it seems to be our people who turn out to vote."
Behind the group's mobilization is Tanya Metaksa, who took over its lobbying arm early this year with the goal of unleashing gun owners' anger on Washington.
Hard-edged and uncompromising, Metaksa sometimes introduces herself by spelling her name: "That's M-E-T, A-K as in AK-47, S-A as in semiautomatic."
Under her direction, the group ran a full-page ad earlier this year calling gun-control advocate Rep. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., "the criminal's best friend in Congress." Several congressional offices said telephone calls from constituents on the NRA's issues have taken on a tough, at times nasty, tone.
While the NRA has never been accused of being wishy-washy, its lobbyists a few years back appeared more comfortable with the give-and-take of Congress, knowing when to press and when to back off.
"There are times when you don't need a hatchet, just a well-sharpened penknife," said former chief lobbyist James J. Baker, who left the organization when Metaksa arrived but still works as an NRA consultant.
Metaksa acknowledges a hardening of tone and tactics.
"In the 1980s what happened was … we got too much involved in playing the inside game in Washington and forgot we had all this power out in the grassroots," Metaksa said in an interview.
But harnessing anger can be risky.
In early August, dozens of people streamed into Campbell's office in Colorado Springs, Colo., waving signs opposing gun control and shouting. They stormed past a receptionist and interrupted a meeting held by Campbell aide Laura DiBiase.
"They were just screaming, absolutely screaming. I couldn't understand anything," DiBiase said. Although asked to leave their names to be contacted later, none did. The receptionist, intimidated, quit her job.
In separate incidents a few days later, two men wearing guns in holsters entered the office to protest the gun ban, and Campbell's offices in Washington and around Colorado were subjected to profanity, abuse and threats by telephone callers.
One caller said he wanted to get Campbell, an American Indian, "by his ponytail and scalp him," an internal office memorandum says. Another told an aide she "better hope you don't have to walk to your car by yourself."
Campbell cast the decisive vote last year to keep the assault-style weapons ban alive in the Senate, against the expectations of gun advocates who had been counting on him.
Some callers acknowledged they were phoning in response to an NRA legislative alert, and many used the same words in objecting to the crime bill, the aides said.
Metaksa disavows responsibility for such incidents.
"It's interesting to me to see people posturing against the NRA and our 'tactics,"' she said. "What they really are talking about is people in their district who are unhappy with how they voted. … We have not done anything to Senator Campbell. It is his constituents."
 Load-Date: September 29, 1994

 

End of Document
