

At the Movies: 'The War Room'
The Associated Press
November 18, 1993, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 581 words
Byline: By LINDA DEUTSCH, AP Special Correspondent
Body




Political junkies yearning for the high of a presidential campaign won't want to miss "The War Room," a documentary look inside the powerhouse political operation that put Bill Clinton in the White House.
Although it is a historical document, "The War Room" plays out as a "buddy" film with two men - James Carville and George Stephanopoulos - emerging as figures charismatic enough to carry this feature-length movie.
Carville, the irrepressible "ragin' Cajun" who guided Clinton's strategy, is a fiery counterpoint to the buttoned-down, intense Stephanopoulos, the young Rhodes Scholar who later moved to the White House as Clinton's communications director. Accomplished documentary filmmakers D.A. Pennebaker and Chris Hegedus give Carville and Stephanopoulos star billing for good reason. They are the heart and soul of this movie just as they were the heart and soul of the campaign.
Clinton plays a supporting role.
To tell their story, Pennebaker and Hegedus traveled with the campaign but also invaded "The War Room," the control center in Little Rock, Ark., where an army of young volunteers gathered to create a president. Hegedus has described it as having the appearance of a big college dorm, and indeed the fresh faces of the campaign workers set the youthful tone of this political adventure.
The commanders are Carville and Stephanopoulos, two men who couldn't be more different. The tall, casually dressed Carville and the shorter, formal Stephanopoulos make an odd Mutt and Jeff duo. But their shared dedication to Clinton is visible in every frame.
Carville, the general, gives a tearful farewell to his troops at the conclusion that is as powerful as any fictional scene that could have been scripted.
The film opens at the end of the primary race with the Democratic National Convention as a focus. It ends on the day of victory.
Pennebaker and Hegedus shot 40 hours of film from which they culled the 96 minutes on screen. They leave us wanting more.
They had to fight for access all the way and were able to include only a few intimate moments with Clinton himself conferring with advisers. They were not allowed into closed-door brainstorming sessions, and the viewer is left wishing they had been able to document these as well.
But what we see is fascinating, funny and revelatory.
There is, for instance, Carville's failed attempt to leak a story to the news media potentially damaging to President Bush. The story, which Carville perceived as a bombshell, fizzled out and never was reported. The segment offers pungent insight into the insular quality of a campaign which magnified the importance of a piece of data which was essentially trivial.
The filmmakers effectively intersperse news footage, notably the Gennifer Flowers news conference which nearly sank the campaign and Clinton's bemused response to the woman's sexual accusations which he called as reliable as claims that martians had landed on Earth.
We see Carville's exasperation at the incursion of Ross Perot into the campaign and hear his sarcastic one-liner which sums up the Texas billionaire's effort for one of the film's biggest laughs.
The filmmakers clearly grew fond of their subjects, and the pro-Clinton tone may annoy those who took the other side. But "The War Room" includes enough footage of Carville's woman friend, Mary Matalin, espousing the Bush philosophy, to keep the picture in perspective.
"The War Room" was produced by R.J. Cutler, Wendy Ettinger and Frazer Pennebaker. It is unrated.
 Load-Date: November 18, 1993

 

End of Document
