

At the Movies: 'The Perez Family'
The Associated Press
May 11, 1995, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 712 words
Byline: By DOLORES BARCLAY
Body




Somewhere, deep within Mira Nair's "The Perez Family" is a lovely little story waiting to be told.
And that's only part of the disappointment with this engaging tale of love, hope, dreams and starting over.
The big problem with "The Perez Family," a story about Cuban immigrants, is that the filmmakers decided to cast white actors in the major roles. By doing so, not only has the Samuel Goldwyn Co. robbed the film of its integrity, but the studio also has taken a giant step back - to the days when white actors were painted brown and black to portray Africans in the Tarzan movies. The practice was racist then and it's racist now.
And worst, Goldwyn's marketing people make the incredible excuse that the reason whites were cast in the lead parts was because the studio wanted the movie to be less "ethnic" and more "mainstream" so it allegedly would appeal to a wider audience.
You need only look at the critical and popular success of the wonderful "My Family" to know that Goldwyn, like the emperor, is wearing no clothes.
"The Perez Family" is based on the novel by Christine Bell. It tells the story of Juan Raul Perez (Alfred Molina), a political prisoner in Castro's Cuba who dreams of once again being with his wife, the aristocratic Carmela (Anjelica Huston), who has immigrated to Miami with their daughter, Teresa (Trini Alvarado).
Juan is released as part of Castro's boatlift from Mariel to America of what the regime deemed to be "undesirables" - mostly prostitutes, political prisoners and the elderly.
He meets the spirited Dottie (Marisa Tomei) on the boat trip to the United States and they embark on a mutual journey of survival.
Meanwhile, Carmela, anxiously awaiting her husband's arrival, has become infatuated with a police officer, John Pirelli (Chazz Palminteri).
But once in America, husband and wife remain separated through miscommunication and bad timing. Juan tracks down Carmela, but is led to believe that she's abandoned him. And Carmela's hustler of a brother, who has a dislike for all boat people, does everything in his power to keep Juan and Carmela apart.
Dottie, herself a hustler and a survivor, convinces naturalization officials that she and Juan are married. This way, they'll have an easier time of finding someone to sponsor them in the United States. She adds a "son" and a "father" and soon the newly formed Perez family has a home and jobs selling flowers on the boulevard.
At its heart, "The Perez Family" is a love story, romance that works out in the end for everyone. But getting there is like slogging through a sugar cane field during a storm in your bare feet: The pacing is tedious at times; the dialogue strays.
Molina is touching as Juan, bringing a depth and soul to a tortured man. Palminteri is charming as the courting cop, and Huston is a coquettish matron.
The effervescent and delightful Tomei is strapped with a bad accent ("you" comes out "jew") and an interpretation of Cuban culture that seems to originate with old Carmen Miranda movies. She is somewhat over the top with her stereotypical prances, and the crotch-grabbing should be offensive to all women - Cuban or American. But through it all, she maintains her spirit and freshness.
Alvarado adds sweet support as Teresa and look for Celia Cruz, the queen of Afro-Cuban jazz, in a small role as an immigrant who befriends Dottie and Juan.
Nair ("Mississippi Masala," "Salaam Bombay!") seems somewhat tentative in her direction of the screenplay by Robin Swicord, as though struggling with the subject matter. Where she excels is in delivering tender interplays between mother and daughter (Carmela and Teresa) and husband and wife.
There's a great score by Alan Silvestri and some hot Latin sounds. Only problem: actors who don't know a mambo from a polka.
"The Perez Family" is produced by Michael Nozik and Lydia Dean Pilcher and is rated R.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Load-Date: May 11, 1995

 

End of Document
