

At the Movies: "Grand Canyon," "The Double Life of Veronique"
The Associated Press
December 17, 1991, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1125 words
Byline: By DOLORES BARCLAY
Body




"Grand Canyon"
 
 Things happen to the characters in Lawrence Kasdan's "Grand Canyon" that would make a TV soap opera look like an uneventful day in paradise.
Mack almost buys the big one when his car breaks down in a tough neighborhood one night and a group of thugs surround him with intent to do very definite bodily harm. His wife, Claire, who is menaced by a huge, hulking homeless man, finds an abandoned baby and wants to keep it. Davis, Mack's best friend, is shot in the leg by a street crazy who mugs him for his Rolex. He is permanently crippled.
Simon, the tow-truck operator who rescues Mack, has a deaf daughter and a sister whose son runs with neighborhood gangs. His sister's house is sprayed with bullets one night; she and her young daughter are almost killed. His brooding nephew faces death and dying one night with his gang.
Meanwhile, Mack's secretary, Dee, is trying to get over her affair with him; her best friend, Jane, also is coping with loneliness in the city; Mack and Claire's son becomes a camp counselor and discovers love.
"Grand Canyon" is an ambitious journey through the nightmares of urban decay. The cast is talented, the acting commendable. But the story and concept are as muddy as the Mississippi.
Everything that happens in "Grand Canyon" indeed occurs in American cities with horrifying regularity. However, too much happens to Kasdan's small circle of characters, thus straining credibility and turning what could have been a powerful inspection of life in urban America into a soap opera joke. Kasdan even has a dream sequence, complete with floating bodies.
Simon (Danny Glover) is the visionary of the story, a man who has taken the time to "smell the coffee" so to speak. Or, in this instance, to visit the Grand Canyon and absorb its majesty.
Mack (Kevin Kline), an immigration lawyer, is concerned with just how fragile life is and ruminates even further when his own mortality comes into question. After Simon recues him, he wants to do something nice for Simon and helps Simon's sister and her children move to a better neighborhood. He also fixes up Simon with Jane (Alfre Woodard). Love quickly blossoms.
But Simon and Mack's lives are now braided, and Simon must return the kindness. So he takes Macks family, Jane and his nephew to the Grand Canyon, which serves as a metaphor. In the end, Jane says, it is all worth it.
Kasdan is a wonderful director with ensemble casts, as he demonstrated with "The Big Chill" and "Silverado," which featured Kline in both and Glover in the latter. But he often seems tentative in "Grand Canyon," like he's not quite sure where to take his actors.
As the materialistic Davis, a producer of schlock slice and dice flicks, Steve Martin is terrific. After his brutal attack, he has an epiphany of sorts and decides that he will no longer make violent movies. Once home and back to work, he realizes his "folly" and resumes his old filmmaking.
Woodard ("Cross Creek," "Miss Firercracker") has little to do here, aside from being pleasantly supportive to her friends. Too bad. She's such a sturdy and fine actress. It would be nice to see more of her. Mary-Louise Parker (Dee) also puts in a good turn as the secretary with the heart of gold.
Unfortunately, Mary McDonnell (Claire) gives a somewhat wooden performance as a middle-aged woman who doesn't want to stop being a mother.
There are some bright moments in "Grand Canyon," especially from Martin, and some stirring ones. There's also an opening sequence of a Lakers' game with Magic Johnson working the floor.
Kasdan produced the 20th Century Fox release with Charles Okun and Michael Grillo as co-producers and Meg Kasdan as associate producer. "Grand Canyon" is rated R.
---
"The Double Life of Veronique"
 
 "The Double Life of Veronique" opened this year's New York Film Festival and was a critical and audience hit. It stars the beautiful Irene Jacob in the dual role for which she was awarded the best actress prize at the Cannes Film Festival.
Directed by Polish filmmaker Krzysztof Kieslowski, it is a lyrical portrait of two women - one Polish, one French - who live in separate cities, have separate lives but a deep link to each other's soul.
Kieslowski's camera is never still. Even when it freezes on an image, the screen is alive, vibrant. The point of view constantly changes, with angle shots, reflections, silhouettes. He makes exquisite use of glass and mirrors, sometimes rounding his images without distorting them.
As for Jacob, Kieslowski caresses her every pore; his camera virtually makes love to her.
The story opens in a small village in Poland, where Veronika lives a simple life singing in a chorus. Her voice is a magnificent instrument, a reedy but sweet contralto that seems to draw from her soul. She constantly has the feeling that she is not alone, that someone else is with her - Veronique. She also is given small warnings of a weak heart.
During a visit to her aunt in Krakow, she auditions for a prestigious music group and wins the position. But during her solo performance, she collapses and dies of a heart attack.
But while in Krakow, Veronika sees her other self is on a tour bus snapping photos. Veronique unwittingly takes Veronika's picture.
At the moment Veronika dies, Veronique feels a grave sorrow. She also knows that she must give up her singing career because her heart is too weak. Like Veronika, she, too, always has felt she was not alone - that she was in two places at the same time.
Veronique meets a puppeteer, Alexandre (Philippe Volter), at the school where she teaches music. He is entranced by her and sets about with a game to lure her to him. He mails her clues that once unraveled will lead her to his identity.
She eventually solves the riddles and comes to him. They unite in love. He makes two puppets that look like her and tells her he is writing a story about two women, born on the same day but in different cities. He will call his story "The Double Life of .. .," but he does not have a name.
Jacob is a unique and brilliant actress, one who registers with her face, ,her body, her dialogue. There is good support from Volter and from Halina Gryglaszewska as Veronika's aunt and Claude Duneton as Veronique's father.
There also is an exceptional musical score by Zbigniew Preisner and some wonderful vocals.
The Miramax Films release is unrated. ---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.

 

End of Document
