

Back to the Future: With War Over, Pentagon Turns to Shrinking the Military
The Associated Press
April 20, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 723 words
Byline: By ROBERT BURNS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




By peculiar coincidence, the Pentagon unveiled its plans for a new streamlined military the day Iraq invaded Kuwait. Eight months later, the war with Iraq behind it, the Bush administration has turned its attention to transforming plans into reality.
The administration has been saying for more than a year that the military will become smaller. Now, with the enormous gulf buildup in fast reverse, it's becoming clear just how quickly the uniformed ranks will shrink.
The Pentagon decided earlier this month that about 60,000 Army, Navy, Air Force and Marine Corps jobs would be cut by Sept. 30, the end of the budget year. That will be the start of cuts totaling about 500,000 personnel by 1996.
Some in the Pentagon were pressing the Army to take even bigger personnel cuts over the coming year, but Army officials strongly objected and the idea was dropped.
G. Kim Wincup, the Army's assistant secretary for manpower, wrote in a March 26 internal note to Deputy Defense Secretary Donald Atwood that returning Gulf War veterans "deserve a reprieve."
"They should not be expected to turn immediately to the task of positioning themselves to fend off" layoffs, the note said.
Fewer soldiers, sailors, airmen and marines will mean fewer military bases. The Pentagon on April 12 proposed closing 31 major U.S. military installations, and it plans to announce shutdowns soon of many U.S. bases abroad.
Among the chief implications of this new thinking for the nation's armed forces:
-A much greater proportion of U.S. forces will be based at home. The contingent of roughly 325,000 soldiers and airmen that America stationed in Europe during the Cold War will be cut sharply, perhaps to below 100,000. Defense Secretary Dick Cheney recently said a "corps-sized force" of perhaps two Army divisions, support elements and an undetermined number of Air Force close-air support aircraft would remain.
-More effort will be put into building ground-based defenses - akin to the Patriot missile - against short-range ballistic missiles of the sort Iraq fired on Saudi Arabia and Israel during the Gulf War; less effort will go to developing space-based weapons against an all-out Soviet nuclear missile barrage.
-The Air Force and the Army will suffer the greatest blows; the Navy and Marine Corps will fare best, at least in terms of manpower. The Air Force, which was bigger than the Navy in 1987, is now smaller and is losing manpower more than twice as fast as the Navy. The Air Force also will lose 10 of its 36 tactical fighter wings by 1996, and the Army will shrink from 28 divisions to 18.
-Reserve units will continue to play an important role, but their numbers also will fall. By September 1993 the reservists' ranks will fall below the 1 million mark for the first time in more than a decade, and by 1997 their number will be about 20 percent smaller than today, if Congress accepts the administration's plan.
-More forces will be put in a sort of standby condition, giving the Pentagon the option of rebuilding the fighting forces in the event of a major war. The Army, for example, plans to create two "cadre" divisions in the reserves, which would exist mostly on paper in peacetime but in a protracted crisis could be filled to strength and trained for war. Also, the Navy is putting 40 anti-submarine frigates in standby reserve.
As the armed forces partially withdraw from Europe and slightly reduce their presence in South Korea over the next five years, they are likely to assume a bigger role in the Middle East.
As a result of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, the administration is considering establishing a permanent air base in the gulf area, the Navy is likely to increase its traditional presence in the gulf and the Army may undertake more joint exercises on the Arabian Peninsula with Saudi and other Arab troops.
The new defense policy calls not only for smaller forces, but also for a switch in focus on the type of warfare those smaller forces should be prepared to fight.
All-out war with the Soviet Union in Western Europe is no longer the basis for U.S. defense planning, Cheney says. The new strategy puts a top priority on responding to smaller-scale conflicts in other regions.
"It is aimed primarily at taking advantage of what we believe to be a less threatening international environment in the years ahead," Cheney said recently.

 

End of Document
