

Behind The Election, A Change in the Benefit-Cost Ratio
The Associated Press
November 16, 1994, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 671 words
Byline: By JOHN CUNNIFF, AP Business Analyst
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Judging by the election results, Americans may have reached a tentative decision on the role of an activist government, perhaps deciding that the benefit-cost ratio no longer was in their favor.
That reassessment may have been evolving well before the Ronald Reagan era, but for several decades before then, back to the Great Depression of the 1930s, it wasn't that way at all.
Their faith shattered by the Great Depression, millions of Americans during the '30s accepted as right and proper the growing involvement of government in their personal lives and to a lesser extent in their businesses.
There was little dispute about the primary role of government in the early 1940s, when events dictated that all else be secondary to the war effort, and individuals and institutions accepted government dictates.
The trend continued into the postwar years. It was widely accepted that a people who had gone through the worst depression and a great war deserved government benefits, including financial security, housing and education.
And equality - financial, racial, gender. And a sound environment too; government became more and more involved in seeing that the elements of life were maintained. You can add safety and a host of other issues to the list.
All this cost money, so taxes inched higher. Deficits too: Since 1958, the federal budget has had a surplus in only two years, 1960 and 1969. Inflation in the 1970s was at rates never experienced by most living Americans.
By the 1980s, more Americans were questioning the benefits and worrying about the intrusions into their lives. While living conditions might have improved, it was becoming harder for blue-collar workers to save and get ahead.
Government was everywhere, and for all its benefits, everyone was tripping over it.
A federal government that spent $ 1.7 billion in 1902 spent $ 942 billion in 1980. Per capita taxes that were $ 18 in 1902 were $ 3,286 in 1980. The number of federal employees numbered 3.2 million in 1929, but 17 million in 1980.
There were positive impacts, on poverty, housing, equality, environment, safety, the workplace and much more, but increasingly, negative ones too: Laws, regulations, mandates, rules and limitations on behavior. And waste.
Doubts continued to rise about the benefits of activist government, with increasing references to the intentions of the founding fathers, and prominent among the citations were the words of James Madison, to wit:
"I believe there are more instances of the abridgement of the freedom of the people by gradual and silent encroachments of those in power than by violent and sudden usurpation."
According to many people, government was a burden on their back. The Reagan administration sought to relieve the burden, but relief actions were countered by new efforts of legislators who felt duty bound to enact laws.
Thomas Hopkins, an author specializing in the subject, observed in 1992 that the Declaration of Independence required only 1,322 words, but that government regulations on the sale of cabbage totaled 26,911 words.
After reaching about 70,000 in 1980, the number of pages in the Federal Register, the publication in which new regulations are published, fell again but not for long; it was back to 69,688 pages in 1993, and headed higher.
Many people felt they were more hurt than helped by government, that government had gained too much power over the private sector, that it was intrusive in their lives, and that government costs were outrageously high.
Robert Rector, a Heritage Foundation analyst, estimates that the average American family of four now pays 24.5 percent of income to the federal government in taxes, including Social Security, versus 2 percent in 1948.
And the National Center for Policy Analysis, a Dallas think tank, cites figures showing compensation (benefits included) of federal civilian workers in 1991 averaged $ 46,164 versus $ 31,789 for private-sector workers.
If people perceive the benefit-cost ratio has changed, quite likely these are among the reasons involved.
 Load-Date: November 16, 1994

 

End of Document
