

Beleaguered FEMA Finds Itself in the Eye of the Storm - Again
The Associated Press
September 13, 1992, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1496 words
Byline: By ROBERT DVORCHAK, AP National Writer
Dateline: HOMESTEAD, Fla.
Body




Hurricanes come and go. The Andrew-force fury howling around FEMA goes on and on.
In south Florida and Louisiana's midsection, the grievances mount: FEMA - the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the government's main agent coordinating the recovery from the costliest natural disaster in U.S. history - is shrouded in a bureaucratic fog, storm victims say. It is slow to respond.
Worst of all, the gripes have been heard before - after Hurricane Hugo and the Loma Prieta earthquake in 1989 and Hurricane Bob last year - and lessons were supposed to have been learned.
"FEMA itself is a disaster," said ex-Marine Ed Badalota of Contingency Management Services, a consulting service. "It's never come to grips with being a response agency. It's not bureaucratically agile. It hasn't learned its lessons. It has institutional and organizational problems. It takes someone with a black belt in bureaucratic politics to pull this all together."
A month before Hurricane Andrew, a House Appropriations Committee report called FEMA "political dumping ground" or "a turkey farm" plagued by weak, inexperienced leaders.
In the private sector, crisis managers say FEMA is unable to provide what's needed at crunch time - a take-charge team that can deliver emergency services while it plots long-range needs.
U.S. Rep. Bill Green, R-N.Y., notes that the magnitude of Hurricane Andrew - which left mile after mile of splintered houses, 250,000 homeless and over $ 20 billion in damage - may have been beyond any agency's ability to respond.
The way things are, FEMA coordinates, not commands, the activities of 27 federal agencies and the Red Cross. The job it performs is not what's really needed in a disaster of this scale.
"FEMA is doing what Congress has legally told it to do. In a super disaster, maybe Congress has to tell it to do more, to really take charge," said Green, a member of the House Appropriations subcommittee that determines FEMA's budget.
But Lawrence Korb, a former member of FEMA's advisory board and a Defense Department official in the Reagan administration, thinks FEMA is beyond help and should be replaced with a streamlined team of professionals.
"The agency should be abolished," said Korb. "It has a really big job, but it hasn't been given the money or the leadership, and it's a dumping ground of mediocre political appointees. How can you expect it to work?"
Created in 1979 by President Carter, who felt the nation's ability to cope with disasters had eroded, FEMA was cobbled together from what used to be Civil Defense, the Federal Disaster Assistance Administration, the Federal Preparedness Agency, the Federal Insurance Administration and the National Fire Prevention and Control Administration.
With 2,400 employees, FEMA is the White House agency that's supposed to respond to nuclear attacks, hurricanes, earthquakes, floods, fire and catastrophe. (One FEMA-funded study in 1985 said factory workers would best try to save themselves in a nuclear attack by jumping into a large pool of water.)
FEMA acts when the president declares a disaster, and there have been 40 such declarations in the past 11 months.
While the Red Cross and Salvation Army provide emergency services, FEMA handles a variety of duties, from letting contracts for trash removal to dispensing food stamps to facilitating low-interest loans. In its most visible role, FEMA provides checks for temporary living expenses and covers uninsured losses.
But the process is agonizingly slow. FEMA sets up disaster application centers or a toll-free number to take applications. If the centers are swamped, victims get a date for a later appointment. Once an application is received, an inspector is dispatched to verify the damage. If substantiated, a check will be in the mail in a week to 10 days under the best of circumstances, provided the mail is being delivered and someone has a mailbox still standing to receive it.
The biggest grumble is that FEMA's battle plan is essentially to tell those in need to take a number and the check's in the mail.
"The red tape is eating us up," said Oray Rogers, president of St. Mary Parish in hurricane-battered Franklin, La. "It's like if you go to the emergency room and the doctor tells you to do all this paperwork before you get treated. These people need help now. Worry about the paper trail later."
After Hurricane Hugo, it took FEMA 10 days to open its first disaster application center in Charleston, S.C., and the inspectors were woefully inadequate to handle tens of thousands of claims. Sen. Ernest Hollings, D-S.C., called FEMA "the sorriest bunch of bureaucratic jackasses I've ever worked with."
With electrical power knocked out within 80 miles of Charleston, Mayor Joseph Riley was stunned when he asked FEMA for help and was in turn asked if he had done an damage assessment.
"I told them to send every portable generator they had, that none of them would go unused, and they asked me about an assessment. They also told me it's very important to account for all expenses," Riley fumed.
Later, in the California earthquake, FEMA quickened its pace and dispatched 10 times more inspectors. But it ran out of application forms in Spanish and was short on linguists. Its top medical coordinator also went on scheduled vacation the day after the quake hit.
After rounds of FEMA-bashing by oversight panels, the agency said it would do better. In April, FEMA published its new response plan - a three-quarter inch thick document of assignments, responsibilities and the like. Critics called it cumbersome.
Although resources were drained by the Los Angeles riots, FEMA had people in place in Florida and Louisiana before Andrew hit. Managers pledged to pull out all the stops.
But problems surfaced with FEMA even before the storm hit at 3 a.m. on Aug. 24, according to officials in Florida's Emergency Operations Center.
"It was confusion, it was unprofessionalism, it was clown-like behavior," said John Brennan of the Civil Air Patrol. "Not one person would make a decision."
In the confusion, Florida Gov. Lawton Chiles said he asked FEMA for federal troops, which can only be dispatched to a state upon written request. The Pentagon said no requests were received. And troops weren't dispatched until Aug. 27.
"We were making requests that we thought were all we had to do. It appears we should have been making the requests louder and in more places," Chiles said.
The devastation was unprecedented. While governments operated in a fog, people battered by the storm scavenged for food, water and necessities.
"No petrochemical company would be allowed to respond to a disaster the way the state and federal government has. This is America's Bhopal," said Robert Wilkerson, a former FEMA official and the head of Corporate Response Group Inc.
"FEMA is a convenient whipping boy. But there is a gap in emergency response. Nobody has been clearly assigned the job of what to do in the first two weeks," Wilkerson said.
President Bush, who in his trips to Florida and Louisiana pledged the full support of the government, named Transportation Secretary Andrew Card as his point man in the emergency.
That did little to boost the stature of FEMA Director Wallace Stickney, a protege of John Sununu, the former White House chief of staff.
And it underscored the House Appropriations Committee assessment that Stickney was "uninterested in the substantive programs of FEMA" and had turned over day-to-day management to deputy Jerry Jennings.
The day Andrew hit Florida, the White House announced Jennings was leaving to take another job in the administration.
FEMA's No. 3 man, Thomas R. McQuillan, was banished by Stickney to a basement office without a staff earlier this year after he attempted to make a homosexual worker name other gays in the agency.
FEMA careerists agreed with congressional overseers who say morale has suffered.
"We have good soldiers but crummy generals," said Leo Bosner, the head of an employee union at FEMA. "The management is totally and sorely lacking. Stickney has to go if the agency wants to survive."
Through all of this, FEMA workers have been trying to do their jobs. The first disaster assistance center in Florida opened four days after Andrew hit and the first checks were delivered four days later. Agents toiled by flashlight in converted nightclubs or under olive-drab tents.
Two weeks after the storm, FEMA had written 1,445 checks worth $ 3.1 million. The number of claims filed was over 43,000 at 18 centers and over a toll-free phone network.
FEMA's Jay Eaker said aid was moving as quickly as possible, "short of taking C-130s and dumping Treasury bills out the back of the plane."
But Ivan Porter, whose 40-acre vegetable farm was flooded by salt water and whose job at Homestead Air Force Base was lost when the place was obliterated, said he got no satisfaction from FEMA.
"They may be helping some people, but they're not helping me," said Porter, 55. "The main problem is red tape, bureaucracy. I'm fed up."

 

End of Document
