

Beneath the Harmony, Liberal Unease With the Moderate Ticket
The Associated Press
July 13, 1992, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 809 words
Byline: By JOHN KING, AP Political Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Beneath the harmony of Bill Clinton's convention is a simmering unease among some Democrats with a presidential ticket that for the first time in decades does not feature a prominent liberal.
Indeed, it is an irony of this week's convention that Southern moderates who for years have warned the party to change its liberal ways are celebrating a ticket that excites them in the home city of perhaps the party's leading liberal spokesman, New York Gov. Mario Cuomo.
"It doesn't take a rocket scientist to figure out you're not going to be able to sell Walter Mondale or George McGovern in the South," said Alabama Rep. Claude Harris. "But this is a ticket people can run with, rather than run away from."
Such enthusiasm contrasts, at times sharply, with the mood of liberals including several of the party's black leaders. Most promise to support the Clinton-Gore ticket but are decidedly unenthusiastic in their endorsements and critical of what they see as Clinton's aloofness to the party's most loyal voters.
"You can't shove people away," said former New Mexico Gov. Toney Anaya. "We are the party of the people. This tent can hold all of us."
Clinton, in an interview with Cable News Network Monday night, said he was trying to reach common ground with liberals and others with whom he has differences.
But, Clinton said: "The Democratic Party is always going to have honest differences of opinion among its different leaders and I think that is a very healthy thing. … I have to stay with the convictions that I started this campaign with."
For his part, Cuomo has offered repeated praise of Clinton and his running mate, Sen. Al Gore of Tennessee, and will nominate the Arkansas governor on Wednesday. Still, Cuomo has underscored some differences with the ticket, calling for Clinton to acknowledge he might have to raise taxes and taking issue with Clinton's support of capital punishment.
Clinton favors higher taxes on the rich, but is hardly likely to embrace Cuomo's broader tax talk.
In addition, at a Sunday rally for Jesse Jackson, Cuomo warned Clinton against seeking more white votes by ignoring blacks. "I don't want addition by subtraction," Cuomo said.
There also have been grumblings from two-time Democratic candidate Jackson, even after his tepid endorsement of the Clinton-Gore ticket, and from a good number of the convention delegates, primarily those aligned with Jerry Brown and Paul Tsongas. "Unity yes, uniformity no," was former California Gov. Brown's rally cry at an afternoon meeting of his delegates.
As the convention opened, Brown delegates frequently interrupted early speakers with chants of "Let Jerry Speak." It is unclear whether Brown will be allowed to address the convention without endorsing Clinton.
Ken Dean, Brown's Maine and Vermont coordinator, complained Clinton was keeping opposing views from the carefully scripted convention program.
"The Clinton people are being very gestapo-like in their approach and that's not creating very good karma," Dean said.
Clinton aides say they are not willing to make concessions to Jackson, Brown or Tsongas that they believe will damage Clinton's chances in the fall. And they ascribe the grumbling from Brown and Tsongas delegates more to sour grapes than to ideological rifts.
And some Clinton allies clearly see the restiveness of liberals as a plus.
"The resistance to this ticket from Jesse Jackson and others on the left has helped define this as a new breed ticket, as a ticket of change," said Al From, executive director of the centrist Democratic Leadership Council.
Even with Monday's intensified criticism from Brown delegates, the convention was remarkably calm by Democratic Party standards. And some at the convention suggested too much was being made of inevitable delegate grumbling because of the lack of drama.
"There's a little turbulence here and there but things are OK," said party strategist Bill Carrick.
Mondale, who was the vice presidential nominee twice and presidential nominee in 1984, came to Clinton's defense, reminding Brown that Clinton won the nomination - including a victory in Brown's home state of California.
"The nominee has won it fair and square and he has won it on a certain program," Mondale said.
Another of the party's leading liberals, Iowa Sen. Tom Harkin, also came to Clinton's aid. "There comes a time when you get behind the leader of your party," said Harkin, an unsuccessful candidate for the nomination who suggested Brown's rumblings were not a defense of liberal principles but an "ego trip."
Interviews with dozens of Brown delegates suggested that, while most are inclined to vote for Clinton in the fall, the Arkansas governor has considerable work to do if he wants to get them actively involved in his effort.
"We can't have unity if all sides of the puzzle are not together," added Brown' New Mexico whip, Steve Cabiedes.

 

End of Document
