

Books and Authors: Gunter Grass Sounds the Call of the Toad --- "To come out for freedom of opinion … is to plead for diversity, to protect the desperately blasphemous outburst, to tolerate the kitsch that blooms everlastingly, to grant admittance at all times to subversive doubt, even where faith has established an entrenched society, to live with the contradictions characteristic of man and human society." - Gunter Grass, speaking in 1973.  ---
The Associated Press
January 8, 1993, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1391 words
Byline: By HILLEL ITALIE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Like a parent scolding his rebellious children, Gunter Grass might be tempted to say, "I told you so." For years, the German author insisted the reunification of his country was a bad idea, that a single nation would be "a colossus loaded with complexes."
"I'm not glad about being right," he said with a sigh, his gravelly voice trailing off. "After all my warnings, it came out in some ways much more terribly than I thought it would.
"It was too quick. There was no reason to hurry up like this. It was clear from the beginning that it would be very difficult. You have the people in East Germany living in a closed society, 40 years under communism after the Nazis, a change from one dictatorship to another. There was no understanding from the West. They came like colonial officers to teach them how to behave."
These days, the newspapers are full of reminders of Grass' work. His essay collections warned against reunification. The attacks on foreigners in Germany recalls his 1980 novel "Headbirths," in which he imagined the German population overwhelmed by Asians.
His books also haunt the Sunday features sections. Soon after Grass arrived in the United States for a recent publicity tour, The New York Times Magazine ran a cover story about the world's dying frog population, an uncanny, unintentional companion piece to his new novel, "The Call of the Toad."
"It sounds as if a glass bell were struck," Grass writes of the toad calls that are referred to throughout his book. "That plaintive double note after a short strike. That everlasting lament, 'Oh, woe to you!' No wonder the call of the toad … has given rise to superstitions. In many German fairy tales … the call of the toad foreshadows disaster."
Grass' novel fits in with his previous books in a number of ways. Like the novels "The Tin Drum," "Cat and Mouse" and "Dog Years," it takes place in his hometown of Danzig (now Gdansk, Poland). Like Oskar Matzerath's tin drum in "The Tin Drum," or the talking rat in "The Rat," the toad's call is a warning, an alarm clock for the sleeping masses.
The new book begins in 1989 and has a deceptively modest, almost whimsical plot: a German widower and a Polish widow fall in love and decide to create a burial ground in Gdansk for Germans exiled after World War II.
But when East meets West, business booms and the "German-Polish Cemetary Association" becomes yet another colossus with complexes. The opening of the German-Polish border brings in more customers than the association can handle. Xenophobia emerges. As dying toads dot the roads, swarming capitalists build golf courses and residential housing for the relatives of the deceased.
"I had this idea for a long time in my mind about the wishes of some people to find an ending for their life, the last place where they are going to," Grass said in an interview.
"Then in 1989, the changes really started, not only in Germany but also in Poland and Czechoslovakia. I had to make clear when my story really begins - the last days of the Wall, beginning in November '89.
"I had to write it in the present time, with no distance. Normally, I write about something 10 years or 20 years or a hundred years back. I like this risk."
He is one of the world's most famous authors, but even if you didn't know who he was, the 65-year-old Grass would be a difficult man to ignore. There's his large, drooping mustache and dark, matted hair; the way his stubby fingers wrap around a thin, Brazilian cigar; the custom-made matchbox with his name on the cover.
Interviewed in a dimly lighted Manhattan hotel room, he offers many of the contrasts of his best books: earnest but soft-spoken, self-effacing but profoundly ambitious, slightly rumpled and supremely civilized.
"Do you think the Civil War in the United States is really over?" he asks in response to questions about Germany's past, his long, narrow eyes looking up through the half-glasses that rest across the middle of his nose.
"People sometimes have a short memory, because the Vietnam War is not finished; we have to pay for it. We had the sleepy '80s, the Reagan-Bush era. We didn't do anything, and now we are confronted with disasters to pay for the mistakes."
It's hard to imagine asking an American novelist about a recent election or the meaning of the Vietnam War. With few exceptions, such as Norman Mailer or Gore Vidal, contemporary fiction writers in the United States have concerned themselves with their characters' personal lives, focusing on the politics of love and family rather than on the impact of a government policy or an historical event.
Grass, however, works in a different tradition, more in line with John Steinbeck or South Africa's Nadine Gordimer or Israeli writers such as Amos Oz and A.B. Yehoshua.
Those authors function as unofficial historians: chronicling, clarifyfing, criticizing. The fate of their characters, from Tom Joad in "The Grapes of Wrath" to Oskar in "The Tin Drum," cannot be separated from the fate of their countries. The characters are both victims and makers of history. Their very existence raises questions that demand to be answered.
In Germany, Grass' books matter to an extent almost unimaginable in the United States. Critics attack him both as a writer and as a person. A Bret Easton Ellis can grab a few headlines with the gory violence of "American Psycho," but the controversy around Grass has nothing to do with easy sensationalism. He is trying to say something about his country, something many fellow Germans would rather not hear.
 
 "Always ready to hiss.
Sooner hissed than thought
No longer with fists
people argue, but hissing.
Soon they will say:
He was hissed to death.
But still he's alive and speaks.
His questions were answered by hisses."
-from Grass' poem "The Steam Boiler Effect."
 
 If you had to mark one of the turning points in a person's life, it's the realization that everything in the past matters. There are issues and feelings that will never be resolved, like a deficit too great to be paid in a single lifetime.
Born in 1927, Grass was a member of the Hitler Youth as a teen-ager and was drafted to serve in the Luftwaffe near the end of World War II. He was wounded during the defense of Berlin in April 1945, was a prisoner of war and had his first exposure to a Nazi death camp.
The effect was personal, political and artistic. Grass knows he always will be haunted by the question of what he would have done had he been born 10 years earlier. Would he willingly have served? What if he had been posted in Auschwitz or another death camp? At what point would he have been old enough to know better?
In turn, he never has stopped asking his country the same kind of questions: Why did it happen? Can it happen again? How can a Fourth Reich be prevented?
"The past doesn't end," Grass said. "If you live in Germany, you see it. The young generation born after the war grew up in peacetime. They are very comfortable, but not being confronted with the dirty job of their parents and grandparents.
"But I don't like people saying, 'You are German and you are therefore a Nazi and will always be a Nazi.' It is not easy for people in Germany always to be confronted: 'Oh, you are coming from Germany. How is the situation there? I hear about the neo-Nazis.' "
Gifted as a writer, a poet, a playwright, a painter and a sculptor, Grass has spent the last 40 years working on his own private Marshall Plan, using art and literature to reconstruct both his life and that of his country.
"The Tin Drum," "Dog Years" and other books relentlessly bring back the years of Nazi rule. "The Call of the Toad" and the nonfiction "Two States - One Nation?" address the present. "The Rat" is an ominous look to the future.
But Grass is neither shrill nor smug. Like Joyce, Chekhov and Raymond Carver, his books reveal an affection for everyday life, such as the scenes in his new novel when his characters buy flowers and cook mushrooms. It isn't pessimism that makes him bring up so much unpleasantness; it's caring too much to say nothing at all.
"All of the terrible things we have seen that happened did not come from heaven," he said. "It was done by human beings, and human beings have the possibility to change it. I can't say it's a hope - it's a possibility."
---
"The Call of the Toad" is published by Harcourt Brace Jovanovich and has a suggested retail price of $ 19.95.

 

End of Document
