

Books and Authors: Between the Butter Churner and the VCR
The Associated Press
October 22, 1993, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 783 words
Byline: By HILLEL ITALIE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The way Bobbie Ann Mason likes to imagine it, her family tree begins somewhere along the border between England and Scotland, extends to Northern Ireland in the 17th century and then turns west with the long, crowded ship ride across the Atlantic.
If her ancestors were like others who ended up in Mason's part of the world, they were farmers, poor, as many women as men. They journeyed down to the Shenandoah Valley in Virginia, along the Cumberland River from Tennessee into Kentucky, settling in the western part of the state.
By the 20th century, the Masons had enough land to start a dairy farm, 54 acres. The author's mother still lives there; Mason left long ago.
Had she been born 20 years earlier, in 1920 instead of 1940, Mason might have stayed as well. Instead, like the immigrants who arrived from Ireland, she imagined a better life elsewhere: She went away to college, moved out of Kentucky, wrote books that showed how she could uphold traditions at the same time she could break them.
"My mother grew up in the '20s, but her family did things much the way they've done them before. I can remember a lot of it myself; it hasn't changed. My granny used to churn butter; we have her butter churner," the soft-spoken Mason said during a recent interview in the lounge of a Manhattan hotel.
"I remember her butter mold with the fern pattern on it, and I remember her making butter. I remember what it felt like, to touch it. So there are all these sense memories I have direct experience with. … It's very jarring to have an image like a butter churner and a VCR in your head at the same time, but I do."
Mason, who now lives with her husband in rural Pennsylvania, has set most of her fiction in the New South, against a background of shopping malls and fast-food restaurants.
But the butter churner with the fern-leaf pattern can be found in her new novel, "The Feather Crowns." The book looks back to a time when her grandmother was a girl, its inspiration a newspaper article about a Kentucky woman who at the turn of the century gave birth to quintuplets, not far from the Mason farm.
When the story begins, it is 1900 in Hopewell, Ky., and James and Christie Wheeler are the dazed parents of five new babies, Christie's labor so prolonged it takes Mason three chapters to finish the job.
The Wheelers have barely figured out which infant is which when the outside world comes calling. It starts with a local reporter, then a journalist from St. Louis. Letters and presents arrive, horses and wagons fill up the front yard. There are doctors, more journalists, thousands of spectators. One visitor crawls through a window. A woman, in a large straw hat, looks at the babies and bursts into tears.
That the quintuplets soon fall ill and die within days of each other only makes the Wheelers more famous. A Mr. W. Greenberry McCain persuades them to embark on a "civic endeavor," a tour with the Fair Day Exhibition Series in which the "miracle" babies - preserved as reverently as the Elgin marbles - will be displayed for purposes of "educating the generally and concerned public."
Up until then, the book is like no other Mason has written. But as Christie travels from Canada to Georgia, reconsiders her marriage and redefines herself as a woman, she becomes the true ancestor of the author's contemporary characters. She is Sam Hughes, the free-spirited teen-ager from the novel "In Country." She is Norma Jean from "Shiloh," who leaves her husband at the end of the story and wonders about the world beyond the Tennessee River.
"I think it's basically a positive view of life," Mason said, "that even though she (Christie) went through extreme challenges, she came out of it with her intregity and her sense of herself.
"That's really the challenge for a person."
It is a challenge Mason endured early. In high school, she was fan club president of a local band called the Hilltoppers. Her reasons for contributing to the school paper at the University of Kentucky admittedly had less to do with journalism than with the desire to see her name in print.
By the time she had made a name far beyond Kentucky, fame was no more appealing than dating the captain of the football team. Book tours didn't seem very glamorous, neither did being cooped up in limousines while promoting the film version of "In Country" in 1989.
"My husband was with me, and we went to two or three different places to go to these premieres. And the last one, the last day, the last ride to the airport, my husband said, 'The last limousine.' We kind of made a joke about it, like a title, 'The Last Limousine of Our Lives."'
---
"The Feather Crowns" is published by HarperCollins and has a suggested retail price of $ 23.
 Load-Date: October 22, 1993

 

End of Document
