

Books and Authors: Finding the Other End of the Closet
The Associated Press
October 25, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 883 words
Byline: By HILLEL ITALIE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




In the basement of the Lackawanna Public Library, just south of Buffalo, a museum can be found. Dedicated a few years ago, it contains photographs, equipment and blueprints for a steel factory constructed nearly 100 years ago.
Much of what's left of the Lackawanna steel industry is on that floor, a few hundred square feet in size. For decades, steel provided thousands of jobs, but that changed a decade ago. By the mid-1980s, the factories were gone and the library gathered the remains.
Among the museum's visitors has been Connie Porter, a writer and Lackawanna native. She was there for research, working on her first novel, "All-Bright Court," the story of a company town, like her own, and what happens when business goes bad.
"It's based on where I grew up because where I did grow up about 99 percent of the neigborhood worked in the steel factory," Porter explained during a recent interview at the Manhattan offices of Houghton Mifflin.
"My parents' generation came up from the South in the '40s and the '50s and they believed that things would get better. People would come back with stories about the North, leaving out all the problems with segregation and violence."
Porter begins her novel at a diner in 1960, with a steelworker named Samuel Taylor digging in to a breakfast of three eggs, sunny-side up. He came from the South, from Mississippi, one of many blacks who migrated after World War II. He brought his wife, Mary Kate.
Taylor lives in All-Bright Court, first built during World War I to accommodate immigrant steel workers. "Even as the cinder blocks of the buildings were being set in place they were crumbling," Porter writes. While improved housing was eventually built for white employees, blacks were forced to live in the old tenements, painted in bright colors.
Times were good at first, when the union was strong and civil rights legislation made it easier to vote and find a job. But by the end of the 1960s, there was rioting in the streets, kids were going to Vietnam and the major steel employer was "scaling down."
"… a man whose anger is white-hot enough to consume the world can be made to stand in line by the church and the state so long … that his anger can be reduced to a single candlepower," Porter writes as the pink slips start arriving.
"His rage can become a sallow wavering flame, barely capable of illuminating the contents of an egg, and susceptible to the slightest wind."
Porter, 31, knew men like the ones in her book. Her own block was working class, built during the 1940s, with rows of two-story brick buildings and a steel plant within walking distance. The residents were all black and railroad tracks separated their homes from the white side of town.
The steel industry thrived during World War II and the next two decades, but when it collapsed during the 1980s, Porter's old neighborhood was devastated. Many are still looking for jobs or getting by as janitors or fast-food workers. A gunman recently sprayed bullets as he raced his car through the streets.
But Porter could still dream when she was growing up. She would dig through her toys, convinced there was a secret exit on the other side of the closet. She would eavesdrop on her parents and their friends, the voices re-emerging in her novel.
She was too young to remember the civil rights movement, but was able to appreciate the options it brought her. Freedom meant ambition. The women she writes about can only long for a husband and children, but Porter wanted a different kind of recognition, starting in her own home.
"I watched how my parents reacted to my oldest siblings," she said, "something they got praise for, bringing home a poem and having someone look at it with those beautiful gold or red or purple stars. This was something special and I couldn't wait to bring home my poems to get the reaction they got."
At age 14, she received a typewriter for Christmas and began tapping out poems. She studied creative writing at the State University of New York in Albany and received an M.F.A at Louisiana State University.
"All-Bright Court" was originally a short story, written five years ago for a class at LSU. She expanded it to a novella and eventually fleshed it out to 224 pages after signing with the publishing house Houghton Mifflin.
Porter's novel may center on a particular neighborhood, but it really chronicles the rise and fall of a dream. Going North was something to work for. When Samuel Taylor and others arrived in Lackawanna, their thoughts were of brick towers and a new car every year.
That's gone by the end of the story. People no longer believe any closet you crawl into has an exit on the other side. Samuel's generation has been defeated while the next generation knows too much to take the same chances and too little to take any new ones.
"I think it still is a bit bleak, at least where I lived," Porter said. "I don't think anyone could imagine that people would spray gunshots from street to street. The biggest trouble we had when I was growing up was when people from Buffalo would come; we would run in the house.
"The hope that's in there is with people who don't get noticed by the media, the people who do outreach and work in chruches and community centers. These are people who work every day and I think that's where there is some hope."

 

End of Document
