

Burn the Ballots, Bury the Controversy,
The Associated Press
May 28, 1991, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 657 words
Byline: By CANDICE HUGHES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MEXICO CITY
Body




The ballots from the disputed 1988 presidential election are a hot item in Mexico again, and the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party would like to make them hotter still. With a match.
Opposition leaders want them put in the National Archives and made available for public inspection - no problem for countries with a history of clean elections.
But things aren't so easy in Mexico, which has such a long tradition of electoral high jinks and one-party rule that an entire slang vocabulary has arisen to describe ways to steal an election.
There is the "taco," a ballot that has several others wrapped inside it, the "lightning voters" who strike at various precincts, and the "oven," where results allegedly are cooked.
No one may ever know the real outcome of the 1988 election, in which reformist President Carlos Salinas de Gortari came to power, unless the ballots are recounted.
Ballots, tally sheets and other materials from 54,000 polling places nationwide have supposedly lain behind locked doors at the Legislative Palace since shortly after the election.
Soldiers armed with automatic rifles are on guard 24 hours a day.
"The last time I tried to see the ballots, a machine gun was shoved in my belly," Abel Vicencio Tovar, the leader of the conservative National Action Party, or PAN, told the center-left daily newspaper La Jornada.
The aura of mystery surrounding the election materials is so thick that some suspect the ballots have disappeared.
"I don't think there is anything there," Ignacio Castillo Mena, a deputy from the leftist Democratic Revolutionary Party, or PRD, told La Jornada, which this week is running a series on the ballots' fate.
Oppositions parties have maintained from the outset that the Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI, stole the presidential election to maintain its more than 60-year-old grip on power.
Both leading opposition parties have proposed that the election materials - or microfilm copies - be stored in the National Archives.
Such a move would presumably make the ballots open to public inspection, - something opposition parties have been fighting for since 1988.
However, the Authentic Party of the Mexican Revolution, a PRI handmaiden, says the ballots should be sold for scrap.
The governing party wants the ballots burned.
"The election has been decided. These ballots are useless," a PRI spokesperson who spoke on condition of anonymity said Monday.
The Chamber of Deputies is scheduled to decide the fate of the ballots - if indeed they still exist - during the legislative session scheduled to end July 15.
By law, ballots must be kept for two years and normally are destroyed. But authorities have been reluctant to order their destruction because the results have been disputed.
The smart money is betting on a bonfire since the PRI has a majority in the lower house.
In 1988, Mexico was deep in the throes of a crippling economic crisis and the PRI's popularity was at an ebb. Salinas, who now scores well in opinion polls, was a candidate without charisma or a clear public following.
Even his fans privately admit it is highly unlikely he got as much as half the vote.
"Our best analysis is that he probably got about 35 percent of the vote," a Western diplomat, who insisted on anonymity, said in a recent interview.
That likely was more than either of the other two major candidates, but not enough to claim the presidency without a runoff.
The PRI claimed victory on election night before the votes were counted. Cries of fraud echoed through the streets outside the Interior Ministry, which ran the elections. Opposition candidates stood outside the ministry's iron gates demanding in vain to be admitted.
The demonstrations went on for months.
Salinas was declared winner with just a shade over 51 percent of the vote. Opposition parties disputed the returns from the polling places where they had been able to deploy watchers. But no one was ever allowed to inspect the ballots.

 

End of Document
