

Burundi Village: The Town Is Empty - The Graves Are Full
The Associated Press
April 4, 1995, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 661 words
Byline: By TERRY LEONARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GASORWE, Burundi
Body




Market stalls stand empty at noon. The mud huts are abandoned.
Only fresh graves show there was recently life in this northeastern village before the soldiers came to kill.
A Roman Catholic priest said Tuesday that last week a driver with the Tutsi-led military allegedly was wounded in a grenade attack.
"So the military came back to kill people," said the Rev. Paolo Stasi, a parish priest in the nearby village of Gisenzi.
U.S. Ambassador Robert Krueger said more than 150 people were killed in Gasorwe in attacks that began last Wednesday and continued into Friday. He said up to 450 people had been killed in similar attacks in the area over the past two weeks.
"People say there are armed bands around here. But it is not true. It is a pretext by soldiers to kill and loot," said Stasi.
The priest said he did not know how many people were killed in the massacre at Gasorwe, but he agreed that the death toll in the area over the past two weeks probably did total 450.
"The soldiers come and start shooting in the air. They drive the people down the hills into the lowlands where more soldiers are waiting. They kill the people with bayonets and clubs."
The massacres around Gasorwe are typical of the periodic and brutal episodes of ethnic violence between the majority Hutus and the minority Tutsis which have killed hundreds of thousands of people in this country since independence in 1962.
Hutus make up 85 percent of the population, but the Tutsis have the firepower, controlling the army and all other security forces.
Few here expect the small Central African country to suffer a genocide on the scale of neighboring Rwanda, where at least 500,000 people, mostly Tutsis, were slaughtered last year. But more than 100,000 people have been killed in ethnic violence here since October 1993, where elements of the army assassinated the first elected Hutu president during a coup attempt.
More than 350,000 Burundians are displaced within their country, driven from their homes and farms by the ethnic fighting.
The government is weak, torn by infighting, and incapable of controlling the army. Extremists on both sides also fuel the ethnic hatred for their own political gain.
The price of hatred is paid in villages like Gasorwe.
A tiny cross fashioned from two sticks marks a fresh grave, hidden in a coffee field on the outskirts of the village. A local man, one of only a few found in the area, said seven people were buried end to end in the long narrow row on Saturday.
Spent cartridges from automatic weapons litter the road near the coffee field. The doors stand open on the abandoned houses along a red-dirt lane.
No one around here could say Tuesday how many people had lived in the village, made up mostly of ramshackle huts built from mud and straw. It appears to have been home to a few hundred.
But tiny Burundi is one of the most densely populated countries in the world. Many of the people who called this village home lived on one of the web of small dirt roads that snake through a countryside of subsistence farms, banana groves and coffee fields.
A few people emerged from the foliage to peer at passing foreigners, but most of the houses in the village and surrounding countryside are abandoned.
"The people who survived escaped into the hills," said Stasi.
Most of the people left in Gasorwe are soldiers. A platoon of men in camouflage fatigues keep watch on the deserted village from their camp on a hill just above it.
Some of the wounded survivors made it to the hospital in Muyinga, about 20 miles to the east. Dr. Makhsout Kouchekbaev, a surgeon from Kazakhstan, said the hospital had received seven patients from the attack on Gasorwe.
A 13-year-old girl, her head wrapped in a large bandage, lay unconscious or asleep on a bed surrounded by her relatives. Across the room an 11-year-old boy, his head and face bandaged, tried to eat from a bowl.
"Some have been hacked with knives, some have been beaten with clubs, and one was shot," said Kouchekbaev.
 Load-Date: April 5, 1995

 

End of Document
