

Call It the White Wine War. Call It the Grape War. Or …
The Associated Press
November 6, 1992, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 867 words
Byline: By MARTIN CRUTSINGER, AP Economics Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Call it the Grapes of Wrath.
The Bush administration's announcement that it will impose 200 percent tariffs on 240 varieties of European white wine threatens to set off a full-blown trade war with America's largest trading partner - the 12-nation European Community.
Some questions and answers about the trade tiff:
Q: What happened?
A: U.S. Trade Representative Carla Hills announced that the United States will impose 200 percent tariffs on $ 300 million worth of exports from the European Community starting Dec. 5 to punish the Europeans for practices it alleges are robbing American farmers of $ 1 billion in sales of soybeans and other oilseed crops annually in the European market.
Q: What European products will be affected?
A: The biggest target is white wine, accounting for 90 percent, or $ 270 million of the $ 300 million total.
Q: If the fight is over soybeans, why pick on wine drinkers?
A: Hills said the products selected for the punitive tariffs were carefully selected to achieve America's negotiating ends. Translation: The administration wants to exert maximum pressure on France, which is seen as the biggest stumbling block to resolving both the soybean dispute and a related fight over all European farm subsidies. The second battle has stalled efforts to complete free trade talks.
Q: Why white wine instead of red?
A: Americans spend more for French wine - both red and white - than for wine from any other foreign country. But the administration believed that American consumers would be less upset if they were forced to drink more domestic white wines, which officials and some in the wine industry say enjoy a better reputation among many American wine drinkers than domestic red wines. Additionally, Germany is a big producer of white wines and that country has been a key French ally in the farm fight.
Q: What will be the impact of 200 percent tariffs?
A: It will basically triple the price importers pay for white wine and depending on how much of the cost hike is passed on, consumers could pay triple the current price as well.
Currently, a $ 10, 750-milliliter bottle of European wine faces an import tax of seven cents. Under the new tariffs, the tax will jump to $ 20.07. That means the cost to importers for the same bottle of wine will triple, going from $ 10.07 to $ 30.07. Retail markups, including shipping, taxes and profits, vary widely but average around 87 percent above the price paid by importers. That means that the $ 10.07 bottle of wine sells on average for $ 18.83 at retail. Under the new punitive tariffs, the same bottle of wine will cost importers $ 30.07 and will likely cost consumers $ 56.23, or almost triple the pre-tariff price.
Q: Is a tripling in price the only consumer impact?
A: No. Wine drinkers can expect short supplies as well. Wine importers have said they will cut back drastically on their orders so they won't be stuck with high-cost supplies they can't unload.
Q: Is wine the only product affected?
A: No. The administration also targeted $ 30 million in imports of wheat gluten, an ingredient used in baking and as a binder in pet food, and rapeseed, for the 200 percent tariffs. France is one of the leading European producers of both products.
Q: What is rapeseed used for?
A: It is sold in grocery stores under the more appealing name, canola oil. It's a big hit with health-conscious consumers who believe it can lower cholesterol levels.
Q: Are those all the products affected?
A: For now. But the administration has $ 3.4 billion more in potential targets on the shelf. Before the smoke clears, this could turn into a real Yuppie trade war. On the standby hit list are red wine, gourmet cheeses, snails, mineral water, and fine glassware.
Hills has said if the soybean fight isn't resolved she will boost the original $ 300 million in affected products to $ 1 billion, equal to the estimated annual loss being suffered by American farmers.
Q: How is Europe reacting?
A: In the "eye-for-an-eye" pattern typical in trade disputes, the Europeans are busy drawing up their own hit list of American products. European foreign ministers are scheduled to discuss the issue on Monday although an actual retaliation list will probably not be drawn up until later.
Q: Are the higher tariffs inevitable?
A: No. Hills said she was delaying the implementation of the tariffs until Dec. 5 to give negotiators another chance to resolve the subsidy fight. And while the French are still talking tough, there are indications that other European countries are bringing pressure behind the scenes to resolve the dispute before retaliatory tariffs take effect.
Q: So consumers can breathe easier?
A: Not quite. Just as in the outbreak of real wars, trade disputes have a way of getting out of hand. Consumers are still living with the effects of the "chicken war" of 1962. In that year, European nations, led by West Germany, imposed higher tariffs on U.S. chicken shipments. America retaliated with 25 percent tariffs on trucks, a duty aimed at limiting sales of German-built Mercedes-Benz trucks. Neither side ever rescinded those tariffs and as a result American consumers today pay higher prices for Japanese minivans, which are subject to the 25 percent duty.

 

End of Document
