

Can A Chemist Find The Right Formula For Fixing The CIA?
The Associated Press
May 9, 1995, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 774 words
Byline: By ROBERT BURNS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Without a ripple of dissent, the Senate voted Tuesday to install John M. Deutch as the new CIA director. A chemist by training, Deutch will try to restore the spy agency's lost luster.
By a count of 98-0, the Senate handed Deutch the job he initially turned down after President Clinton's first CIA director, R. James Woolsey, resigned in January.
Deutch is to be sworn in as the 17th director of the CIA on Wednesday. Adm. William O. Studeman, who has been acting director since Woolsey left, will revert to being deputy director. It is not clear how long Studeman will stay.
In brief remarks to reporters later, Deutch said he was heartened by the Senate vote. He reiterated his intention to shake up the agency.
"There will be some changes in the leadership," he said. "That's not going to be a bloodletting. That's going to be a team affair." He mentioned no names but said the exact nature of the personnel changes would be clear in a few weeks.
President Clinton said in a statement he has the "greatest confidence" that Deutch "will bring a renewed sense of purpose, direction and spirit to the CIA and the intelligence community."
Deutch, 56, told his Senate confirmation hearing on April 26 that he believed it was time to sweep out the senior CIA leadership that has presided over a tumultuous period highlighted by the embarrassment of the 1994 Aldrich Ames spy scandal.
"It is time for a new generation of leaders and managers at the CIA," Deutch said then.
Changes already are under way. Hugh E. Price, who headed the CIA's clandestine branch that is responsible for spy operations, resigned last week, and at least two other senior managers already have made plans to leave this year.
For the past year Deutch served as deputy defense secretary. He was the senior Pentagon official responsible for intelligence matters, particularly the budgets. He is a former dean of science and provost of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He is considered an expert in nuclear weapons issues and technologies used in the intelligence business.
Deutch has stressed his concern about low morale at the CIA. In farewell remarks to reporters at the Pentagon, he said, "There are a lot of very good people out there," but "I think there will be a period of building morale."
In Tuesday's Senate vote, the only members not voting were John Warner, R-Va., and Daniel Patrick Moynihan, D-N.Y. Warner is a strong advocate for the CIA; he didn't vote due to an illness. Moynihan, a vocal critic of the CIA and an advocate of dismantling the agency, underwent cataract surgery Tuesday.
Defense Secretary William Perry told reporters Deutch had been "perhaps the most" effective second-in-command at the Pentagon ever, and that Deutch was "admirably suited" to the challenge of turning around the CIA's misfortunes.
The CIA's trouble is multilayered. Part of it is the pain of being forced to get smaller, get by with fewer resources and try to adjust to the disappearance of the Soviet Union as the dominant target of intelligence efforts.
Morale also has been hurt by a perception that Clinton puts little stock in the CIA's work. Some said that view was reinforced by the White House's bungled first attempt to find a replacement for Woolsey. Deutch initially declined to be the nominee, then changed his mind after Air Force Gen. Michael P.C. Carns was announced as Clinton's choice but quickly stepped aside in a burst of controversy over his relationship with an immigrant worker.
For a time it seemed no one who was qualified wanted the job.
As director of central intelligence, Deutch will head not only the CIA but also other intelligence agencies whose budgets are much bigger than the CIA's. These include the National Reconnaissance Office, which operates the nation's spy satellites; the National Security Agency, which intercepts foreign communications and protects U.S. communications from foreign eavesdroppers; and the Central Imagery Office, which analyzes spy photographs.
The total U.S. intelligence budget is secret but is believed to be about $ 28 billion.
One of the CIA's lowest moments came last year with disclosure that Ames, a 31-year agency veteran, had operated as a Soviet mole inside the CIA for more than eight years. He stole vital secrets right under the noses of CIA counterspy officers and sold them to Moscow for at least $ 2 million.
Deutch told his Senate confirmation hearing he was determined to restore the CIA's credibility with the public. In his remarks Tuesday, he said he could do that without personally taking a prominent public role in defending the CIA.
"The performance of the agency will speak for itself," he said.
 Load-Date: May 9, 1995

 

End of Document
