

Can "The Silence of the Lambs" Beat December Films Oscar Derby?
The Associated Press
January 17, 1992, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 817 words
Byline: By BOB THOMAS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




Now that the deadline for Oscar hopefuls is past, Hollywood faces the question: Can "The Silence of the Lambs," released in February, beat out movies released in December?
History is against it.
Of the 56 best-picture winners since the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences started giving awards on an annual basis (the first six were for split years: 1927-28), 44 were released in the second part of the year. An overwhelming 27 reached theaters in November and December.
Movie studios have heeded the odds, saving what they consider to be their prestige films for late in the year, when they would be fresh in the minds of the Academy voters. "Driving Miss Daisy," winner for 1989, came out at Christmas of that year. "Dances With Wolves," last year's winner, was released before Thanksgiving.
"The Silence of the Lambs" is now in video release and is one of the Top 5 rentals. This might help keep the movie in voters' minds.
Orion Pictures released the movie on Valentine's Day, and the Jonathan Demme film was hailed by critics as a thriller of great originality, superbly acted by Jodie Foster and Anthony Hopkins. The film was named best of the year by the New York Film Critics Circle and the National Board of Review.
With Orion in bankruptcy court and therefore unable to launch an expensive ad campaign, and "Lambs" long out of release, the film faces competition from more recent movies such as "Bugsy," which won the Los Angeles Film Critics award, "The Prince of Tides," "JFK" and "Fried Green Tomatoes." The surprise spring hit "Thelma and Louise" and Terry Gilliam's "The Fisher King" also are possibilities.
Here's how the other major races are shaping up:
-Best actress:
This category languished during the 1970s and '80s when there were few meaty parts for women in film.
This year, Miss Foster, 1988 winner for "The Accused," will undoubtedly be nominated for "The Silence of the Lambs." Susan Sarandon and Geena Davis could be a tandem entry for "Thelma and Louise," though one critics' poll listed Davis as supporting actress.
Laura Dern seems a likely nominee for her ingenuous country girl in "Rambling Rose." Other possibles: Bette Midler, "For the Boys"; Jessica Lange, "Cape Fear"; Annette Bening, "Bugsy"; Jennifer Jason Leigh, "Rush"; Kathy Bates, "Fried Green Tomatoes"; Isabelle Huppert, "Madame Bovary."
If voters overcome their resistance to Barbra Streisand (her "Yentl" went unrewarded), she might be mentioned for "The Prince of Tides."
-Best actor:
Hopkins seems a sure thing as the man-eating doctor of "The Silence of the Lambs." The National Board of Review selected him as supporting actor, but Orion is entering him as best actor, and the nominating actors branch is likely to agree.
Warren Beatty, the charming killer of "Bugsy," appears to have the best chance of his career to win the big prize for acting (he was named best director for "Reds" in 1981). Robin Williams should again be in the running for "The Fisher King." Nick Nolte is a strong entry for "The Prince of Tides." The perennial nominee, Robert DeNiro, could be cited for "Cape Fear."
-Supporting actress:
The supporting nominations customarily go to the major films; rarely does a lesser film draw recognition.
Mercedes Ruehl and Amanda Plummer seem likely nominees for "The Fisher King." Other nominees could be Diane Ladd, "Rambling Rose"; Mary Stuart Masterson, "Fried Green Tomatoes"; Maggie Smith, "Hook"; Kate Nelligan, "Frankie and Johnny"; Mary McDonnell, "Grand Canyon"; Juliette Lewis, "Cape Fear."
-Supporting actor:
Robert Duvall, 1983 winner as best actor for "Tender Mercies," is a prime choice for another Southern characterization in "Rambling Rose."
A sentimental favorite is Jack Palance, who stole the show as the leathery trail boss in "City Slickers." Alan Rickman's devilish Sheriff of Nottingham was the hit of "Robin Hood, Prince of Thieves."
Other possibilities: Joe Pesci and Tommy Lee Jones, "JFK"; Aidan Quinn, "At Play in the Fields of the Lord"; Ben Kingsley, "Bugsy"; Samuel Jackson, "Jungle Fever"; Michael Lerner, "Barton Fink"; Steven Hill, "Billy Bathgate."
-Best director:
The best picture nominees generally - but not always - bring nominations for their directors. Thus the contenders appear to be Demme, "The Silence of the Lambs"; Barry Levinson, "Bugsy"; Miss Streisand, "The Prince of Tides"; Oliver Stone, "JFK"; Ridley Scott, "Thelma and Louise"; and Gilliam, "The Fisher King.
Other possibilities: John Singleton, "Boyz N the Hood" and Lawrence Kasdan, "Grand Canyon."
Nominations are made in categories. For example, actors vote for actors, cinematographers vote for cinematographers, directors vote for directors and so forth. All members vote for best picture.
The nominations will be announced Feb. 19 in the usual pre-dawn ceremonies at the Academy headquarters in Beverly Hills. The Oscars will be presented on the stage of the Los Angeles Music Center on March 30.

 

End of Document
