

Can Squabbles Over the 1990 Census Be Settled Before the 2000 Head Count?
The Associated Press
August 18, 1991, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 697 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




When in doubt, the government reflex is to commission a study. That may not solve the problem, but it's action of a sort.
So there's a growing census of studies looking at the census, as Congress tries to figure out what it wants done about the 1990 undercount that missed some 5.3 million people, 2.1 percent of the population.
The missing persons numbers are based on the post-census survey the government conducted to check the results of the traditional head count. Most of the people missed were minorities and the poor in big cities.
So more than 30 cities and states are challenging the census results in a lawsuit that probably will go to trial in New York City in November, seeking to force adjustment of the population numbers on which shares in federal aid programs are computed.
That case, with likely appeals of any verdict, will last well into the decade that the census covers, unless there's a compromise that satisfies the cities.
Indeed, by the time all the studies of the last census are done, it won't be long before the next one, in 2000. Some Democrats already are complaining that the administration is trying to shift the emphasis there in order to change the subject.
"'Let's work on the 2000 Census' seems to be the convenient catch phrase that administration officials and opponents of a census adjustment seem to be using," said Sen. Daniel K. Akaka, D-Hawaii, supporting a Senate amendment to require that the 1990 numbers be fixed.
Secretary of Commerce Robert A. Mosbacher announced on July 15 that the census figures would stand even though the government knows the 1990 count came up short. He said the proposed corrections weren't certain enough to warrant changing the head count for the first time in 200 years.
But that traditional process certainly will be changed next time to include statistical sampling and adjustments.
Meanwhile, Mosbacher suggested, the 1990 adjustments might be applied to the allocation of federal aid to cities and states that stand to lose funds because of the short count.
That could settle the financial side of the dispute while avoiding the more intractable problem of adjusting political district boundaries on the basis of estimates that lack the specifics of the actual head count.
Sen. Ernest F. Hollings, D-S.C., proposed those terms to the Senate in an amendment seeking to order that the census be corrected, with the proviso that the changes wouldn't apply to political reapportionment.
He said there wouldn't be any losers because the adjustments would all be upward.
But in any adjustment, some states and cities would win and others would lose in population-based federal aid programs. Adding population numbers won't add money to the $ 40 to $ 50 billion involved. It is allocated on the basis of shares in the population, so when one goes up another has to go down.
Mosbacher told Senate Republicans that if Congress tried to force the adjustment, he would recommend that President Bush veto the bill.
In the end, the Senate settled on an amendment that would have a census subcommittee study the use of adjusted population figures for federal aid purposes, with a report due by Feb. 1, 1992.
The House voted earlier to finance a study by the National Academy of Sciences to consider changes in the traditional census process.
Another academy of sciences panel will be studying the process for the Census Bureau as it plans for the count in the year 2000.
Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan, D-N.Y., has proposed that Congress create a bipartisan commission to review the census system so that improvements and corrections will be planned in advance next time.
But the last word on the last census may come in federal court as New York and other cities press their suit for changes.
That case may also force release of detailed, adjusted population numbers produced by the survey, computer ready for shipment to the states had the census been changed. In saying he wouldn't adjust the census, Mosbacher declined to release the data. Democrats have been demanding it.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 25 years.

 

End of Document
