

Carribean Hoteliers Plea: Take from the Ships, Give to the Shore
The Associated Press
June 8, 1993, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 690 words
Byline: By KEVIN NOBLET, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico
Body




Beleaguered Caribbean hotel owners have fired a new broadside at the cruise ship business in their perennial ship-to-shore war for tourist dollars.
Cruise operators, already reeling from a recent pollution scandal, responded with a strategic retreat, sailing off in an angry huff from the Caribbean Tourism Organization.
Their main objection is to the hotelier's powerful new cannon: former Jamaican Prime Minister Michael Manley. One of the region's most respected statesmen, Manley is leading a hotel-backed task force in an island-hopping lobbying effort for hefty increases in port taxes on cruise ships.
At each stop, Manley has denounced the ships' "tax-free condition," saying that the floating hotels give too little to the islands and enjoy an unfair advantage over their landlubbing rivals.
"It takes 4.5 million cruise ship stopover passengers to contribute to the local economies what 150,000 land-based guests provide," he said during a May 20 visit to San Juan, the Caribbean's busiest tourist port.
The same day, the Florida-Caribbean Cruise Association suspended its participation in the Caribben Tourist Organization, the principal forum for industry issues. Cruise operators said they would boycott the organization until it came out against the Manley-led campaign.
Michelle Paige, a spokeswoman for the Miami-based cruise association, called the hotelier's effort "a hate campaign" based on disinformation.
"The cruise industry has at least two dozen taxes and fees they pay that the hotel industry does not pay," she said. "We are very heavily regulated."
Paige said the cruise companies, which say they promote hotel tourism by giving passengers a taste of the Caribbean's charm, are "cornered" by the new lobby and its spokesman, Manley.
CTO Secretary-general Jean Holder, seeking to maintain neutrality in the spat, declined to criticize Manley's efforts. He urged the both ship and hotel operators to "keep the debate on the table … not to call names."
John Bell, vice-president of the San Juan-based Caribbean Hotel Association, called the cruise operators' stance "very silly and narrow and short-sighted."
"You don't solve anything by picking up your marbles and going to play in someone else's yard," he said.
The deepening rift, an indication of an increasingly competetive market, may prove to be a windfall for Caribbean vacationers.
"Business is pretty tight," said Arly Sobers, a CTO researcher. "The hoteliers have had a pretty rough two years."
That's largely because of a sluggish U.S. economy. At the same time, cruise companies have been offering big discounts to fill a rapidly growing number of berths.
Land-based tourism has grown at a lethargic 4 percent a year over the last five years. Stay-over visits dropped from 11.9 million in 1990 to 11.6 million in 1991, but rebounded to 12 million last year, according to the CTO.
Cruise ship tourism, due in part to highly effective marketing, has grown more than twice as fast - from 6.3 million passengers in 1988 to 8.9 million last year.
At the same time, more and more big new ships are crowding the seas, adding 16,000 berths in the last two years alone - a 19 percent increase in total capacity.
Within two years, ship capacity is expected to nearly equal the Caribbean's 110,000 hotel rooms.
While cruising's popularity rises, so does the criticism from a variety of interests, including environmental groups. Charges the ships are big polluters gained credibility recently when a passenger showed a congressional panel a videotape of crewmembers tossing bags of garbage from the Regal Princess into seas off the Florida Keys in 1991.
In April, the ship's operator, Princess Cruise Lines, pleaded guilty to illegal dumping and paid a $ 500,000 fine.
To the delight of the hotels, which are echoing the accusations in Hotel Association press releases, the cruise companies are accepting some blame.
"We know we have been negligent," said Paige, the cruise association spokeswoman. "We can do better. We have a plan."
She said a campaign to reduce the use of plastic and throwaway containers has cut trash production aboard the ships by 40 percent in the last 18 months.

 

End of Document
