

Catching Up With the People Who Shaped the Case
The Associated Press
June 1, 1995, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 883 words
Byline: By ANNIE SHOOMAN, Associated Press Writer
Body




The O.J. Simpson case has been shaped by scores of friends, family and neighbors, as well as investigators, four-wheel-drive vehicles and one plain manila envelope. A look at some of them:
AL "A.C." COWLINGS: Simpson's longtime friend, who drove the Ford Bronco in which Simpson fled murder charges last June 17, visited Nicole Brown Simpson's grave on her 36th birthday May 19. He's also been seen at a trendy Malibu restaurant and jogging in Brentwood, where he lives. A grand jury investigated Cowlings' apparent complicity in Simpson's flight, but no charges were filed. Cowlings set up a 900-number called "A.C. Speaks Out!" on which callers can pose questions or hear recorded opinions. Cowlings spoke about reporters June 1: "It's like they've taken and reached in and ripped my heart out to say these things with no facts."
PAULA BARBIERI: The model and girlfriend of Simpson seems to have had enough of Los Angeles. She moved back to her native Florida, where her family still lives. She put her one-bedroom furnished condominium in West Los Angeles up for sale at $ 220,000. Tabloid reports say Barbieri and Simpson have parted ways.
COWLINGS' WHITE BRONCO: The vehicle that police and helicopters pursued over 60 miles of Southern California freeways is at an undisclosed location, Cowlings' lawyer said. Cowlings at one time sold it for $ 200,000, but a dispute on who had first dibs squelched the deal.
DENISE BROWN: The sister who most resembles Nicole Brown Simpson spoke out in November, accusing Simpson of murder for the first time. She testified in February, tearfully telling jurors how Simpson degraded and abused her sister. Today, she spends much of her time traveling the country speaking out against domestic violence.
MARK FUHRMAN: The LAPD detective who first attracted the spotlight because he found a bloody glove on Simpson's estate later came under fierce defense attack as a racist who may have planted the evidence. In his testimony, Fuhrman denied making racist comments, and he has since filed a $ 50 million libel lawsuit against The New Yorker magazine, the author who first reported the defense's evidence-planting theory and Simpson attorney Robert Shapiro. The 19-year police veteran is still on the job but has said he will take early retirement because of the defense accusations.
BRIAN "KATO" KAELIN: The former Simpson houseguest who was declared a hostile witness by prosecutors when he testified in March has become a media darling, popping up everywhere from the nation's capital to the Kentucky Derby. More than 5,000 fans jammed an Indiana mall for his first public appearance after testifying. Plans to try stand-up comedy as an opening act for headliner Louie Anderson in June were postponed.
KATO THE DOG: Renamed Satchmo, the bloody-pawed white Akita who belonged to Ms. Simpson and led Brentwood neighbors to her slashed body is staying in Dana Point, where the Simpsons' two children live with their grandparents, Lou and Juditha Brown. With no eyewitnesses, prosecutors point to the dog's "plaintive wail" as a signal of murder.
ROSA LOPEZ: The maid who worked at the house next door to Simpson's was last seen in her native El Salvador fleeing reporters. The defense's star witness, whose testimony was videotaped and has yet to be seen by jurors, said she saw Simpson's Bronco outside his home sometime after 10 p.m., about the time prosecutors claim he was slashing his victims.
KATHLEEN KENNEDY-POWELL: The judge who oversaw Simpson's preliminary hearing last summer and ruled there was "ample evidence" to hold him for trial is still handling preliminary hearings in Municipal Court. Kennedy-Powell is probably best remembered for brandishing the defense's "mystery envelope."
MYSTERY ENVELOPE: After months of speculation, it was revealed that the manila envelope contains a knife. The defense has suggested the knife was overlooked by police in repeated searches of Simpson's home and wants to use it to show jurors that police were sloppy and incompetent.
FAYE RESNICK: Ms. Simpson's friend went into hiding but gives sporadic interviews since chronicling the Simpsons' tumultuous relationship in her book "Nicole Brown Simpson: The Private Diary of a Life Interrupted." In one recent interview, she repeated her certainty that Simpson is guilty. Resnick, a recovering cocaine addict, has been highly criticized by Simpson and his attorneys, who floated a theory that the murders could have been committed by Colombian drug lords to send Resnick a message. She may be called to testify.
RONALD SHIPP: The former Los Angeles police officer who once took co-workers to Simpson's estate for autographs testified for the prosecution, saying Simpson told him after his ex-wife's death that he'd dreamed of killing her. Shipp, employed two years by a property management company as a tenant liaison, endured hostile cross-examination and may be called to testify for the defense.
KEITH ZLOMSOWITCH: Ms. Simpson's ex-boyfriend who told a grand jury that Simpson stalked the couple and spied on them making love on Ms. Simpson's couch said in a recent interview that he was sickened by people who have tried to cash in on the slayings. The former Mezzaluna restaurant manager will likely be summoned to the witness stand near the end of the prosecution's case.
 Load-Date: June 2, 1995

 

End of Document
