

Check the Pulse for Signs of Life in the Economy
The Associated Press
November 2, 1991, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 857 words
Byline: By STEFAN FATSIS, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Pinch it. Poke it. See if it's moving.
The nation's economy - which the Bush administration pronounced has emerged from the recession - is showing few signs of life.
The last week was filled with desperate reports:
-The unemployment rate climbed to 6.8 percent in October. Factory and construction workers were laid off by the thousands. About 140,000 Americans joined the unemployment rolls, leaving 8.6 million people without work.
-The main index that forecasts economic performance six to nine months in the future slipped in September. The Index of Leading Economic Indicators had risen on average for the last seven months.
-A leading study of consumer confidence plunged to recessionary levels. The Conference Board said its gauge fell 12.5 points in October to 60.4 points, just six points higher than its low during the 1982 recession.
-The manufacturing sector appeared to be weakening. A key survey of corporate purchasing managers fell in October after eight straight monthly gains that had signaled growth in new orders from factories.
The overload of bad news obscured even the few positive statistics.
The nation's total output of goods and services - gross national product - rose at an annual rate of 2.4 percent in the third quarter. Inventories appeared to be rising, indicating businesses might be restocking their shelves. And consumer spending rose in September.
The rise in GNP was the first rise after three straight quarterly declines and it prompted Commerce Secretary Robert Mosbacher to proclaim: "The recession is over."
But economists quickly dismissed such talk. They focused on the preponderance of negatives and the administration backtracked, adding caution to its comments and calling for a further drop in interest rates.
By week's end, however, with the outlook grim for the crucial Christmas shopping season, the Federal Reserve still had not taken any emphatic steps to lower interest rates in an attempt to stimulate the economy.
There was no indication the bad economic news would cease.
 
 RED, BUT NOT DELICIOUS: Losses Mount for Automakers
Cherry red. Rose red. Fire engine red.
Pick a shade, any shade. The red ink on the balance sheets of the nation's automakers couldn't be much brighter.
Chrysler Corp., the No. 3 car and truck maker, announced third-quarter losses of $ 82 million. General Motors Corp. and Ford Motor Corp. earlier had announced combined losses of $ 1.63 billion.
The figures almost guaranteed the auto industry its worst year, surpassing the $ 4.5 billion loss in 1980.
But there was one silver lining in the auto cloud: Analysts had expected Chrysler to lose up to $ 225 million in the third quarter. They attributed the decent performance mostly to cost-cutting at Lee Iacocca's shop.
At the same time, however, Chrysler confirmed the lousy economy had forced it to scale back car and truck production plans for the fourth quarter by almost 10 percent. Auto sales were not expected to improve.
 
 END OF AN ERA: Pan Am Leaves 29 Foreign Destinations
Pam Am's royal blue globe logo once signified a pioneer.
Now it's just another sign of the times.
On Friday, Pan Am jets made their last flights out of 29 cities across the Atlantic. Delta Air Lines picked up most of the routes, instantly becoming one the nation's major world carriers.
Founded in the late 1920s by a young entrepreneur with bold visions, Pan American World Airways for years was synonymous with world travel. Big and bold, it even kept a list of people who wanted to fly to the moon someday.
Within the Earth's atmospheric confines, Pan Am was the airline of choice for kings and queens, performed the Berlin airlift and evacuated civil war refugees.
It was the first airline to regularly carry passengers across the Atlantic and Pacific. It was the first to use the 707 and 747.
But Pan Am was hurt by deregulation in 1978, and it struggled in an increasingly competitive market that saw numerous airlines flounder. Pan Am sought federal bankruptcy protection in January, like a handful of other ailing carriers.
While the Pan Am glory is dead, the airline lives on. A smaller Pan Am will be based in Miami, rather than New York, and concentrate on flying to Latin America.
 
 TICKER: AT&T Squeezes Ex-Customers, Salomon Squeezes Bonus Babies
 
 e Warner Inc.  granted a 12.5 percent stake in its cable, movies and film businesses to two Japanese companies, Toshiba Corp.  and C. Itoh & Co.  in exchange for $ 1 billion. …
 
 American Telephone & Telegraph Co.  admitted it reached out and bilked some people. The company said it continued charging customers for its Reach Out long-distance calling plan after they had switched to other carriers. … Salomon Inc. 's new chairman, Warren Buffett, slashed 1991 bonuses by $ 110 million. Salomon also set aside $ 200 million to pay for fines and lawsuits from its bond scandal. … Drugstore giant Rite Aid Corp.  offered about $ 585 million on cash and stock for rival Revco D.S. Inc., which is in bankruptcy. … More than 40 people were injured, including an elderly woman who was paralyzed, during botched evacuation drills for McDonnell Douglas Corp. 's new 400-seat version of its MD-11 jumbo jet.

 

End of Document
