

Clinton May Savor Victories, Changing the Way the White House Runs
The Associated Press
August 19, 1994, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 639 words
Byline: By TERENCE HUNT, AP White House Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Clinton is thinking about changing the way his White House runs.
When victories come, perhaps he should savor them for a while instead of charging off to slay new dragons. The idea is for the president to take "victory laps," offsetting attention from any setbacks.
Another idea: Try to separate Americans' perception of his presidency from what an increasingly partisan Congress does - or won't do.
Privately, Clinton has grumbled that he feels as if he's Ahab and Congress is Moby Dick, their fates inextricably linked. Perhaps he should accentuate areas of his presidency that are not dependent on lawmakers, such as foreign policy and the politically popular "reinventing government" program to shrink the federal work force and make it more efficient.
The ideas are being explored as part of a new drive to revive Clinton's troubled presidency and stop his slide in the polls.
Clinton has acknowledged in meetings with aides and others that he's made some fundamental mistakes, underestimating the bitter partisanship in Congress and failing in communication efforts to connect with the public.
Clinton also feels he hasn't gotten a fair shake from the news media, complaining that press coverage has been more intense, more negative and more inaccurate than any of his predecessors have encountered.
The president recently remarked that if he were an average American and saw the things written about him in the newspaper or broadcast on television, he wouldn't support Clinton, either.
The administration fears there's a cynicism that threatens Clinton's ambitious agenda, that the public wants change but doesn't trust government to do it right. Clinton has told aides that a big part of his job in trying to rebuild his presidency is to change the climate of mistrust.
"There is a fundamental lack of confidence in the minds of Americans that this Congress understands what the problems are and has the willpower to do anything about it," Republican pollster Linda DiVall said.
"The problem the president has is that they don't believe in his convictions, they don't know where he wants to go," she said. "When the heat is on, he finds some way to strike a deal, to cave on his principles, to get something passed."
Increasingly, White House officials are frustrated that the president has not gotten credit for victories on the budget, trade and gun control, as well as steady improvements in the economy.
The administration argues that Clinton has had the most solid performance of any president since Dwight Eisenhower - or Lyndon Johnson before the Vietnam War engulfed his administration.
White House Chief of Staff Leon Panetta said that even if Clinton had won the crime vote in the House last week, "there would have been kind of a sense that, 'So what's next for the president?' and not a recognition of the victory that would have been."
Analysts say Americans are still waiting for Clinton and Congress to deliver on the big issues - crime and health care. "That becomes the standard by which the public says they can make it happen or they can't," said pollster Andrew Kohut of the Times Mirror Center for the People and the Press.
Since last week's crime bill setback, Clinton has waged a fierce campaign to win support among the 58 Democrats who deserted him and the more than three dozen Republicans who had once voted for the bill's ban on assault weapons. Increasingly, the administration is confident it will win when a more modest bill is considered.
There's far less certainty about the fate of the embattled health reform bill, delayed in the House and moving at a snail's pace in the Senate. Clinton's allies are increasingly gloomy about its prospects.
Still, Clinton hopes to survive his congressional encounters, unlike Ahab, the whaling captain in the classic novel who was eventually done in by Moby Dick.
 Load-Date: August 19, 1994

 

End of Document
