

CLINTON'S WEEK: Demilitarizing the Economy and Easing the Blow
The Associated Press
March 13, 1993, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 625 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




"The chief business of the American people is business," President Calvin Coolidge said in 1925. And President Clinton sang from the same psalm book last week, making it the government's business to come to the aid of enterprises in need of a lift.
His purpose was to encourage businesses to create new jobs for workers who will be idled by the process of demilitarizing the economy. He sought to steer bank credit to hungry new ventures and to ease the lot of defense companies cut off from Washington money.
But both exercises were as much symbol as substance.
Clinton could do no more than jawbone the bankers. And the money he earmarked for easing defense industries' conversion to the civilian economy represented but a fraction of the $ 112 billion he plans to slash from the Pentagon budget over the next five years.
It was no coincidence Clinton's announcement came a day before Defense Secretary Les Aspin walked the base-closing plank, identifying 31 major military installations he would like to close - at great pain to their local communities.
Some of the president's defense conversion proposals were old ideas in new packages; he'd already announced some of them, with a flourish, on a trip to the West Coast.
Over five years, under Clinton's cushioning plan, the government would earmark $ 20 billion to ease the pain by retraining displaced military people and civilian workers, helping communities hit by defense cutbacks, promoting "dual-use" products for both civilian and military use and developing new technology that could be manufactured by defense companies.
Clinton's idea was not without critics.
Economist Murray Weidenbaum, who used to advise President Reagan, said Clinton had ignored "the sad history" of previous attempts to get defense companies into new lines of work.
"These typically are very specialized companies," Weidenbaum said. "They're very good at making aircraft, missiles, space vehicles. They don't know the civilian markets and it doesn't make sense to use the taxpayers' hard-earned money so they can get some expensive, on-the-job training."
Clinton's effort to funnel bank credit to small and medium-sized businesses was another case of using the White House pulpit. He cannot coerce banks into making loans they don't want to make.
What he did was persuade four government regulatory agencies, which operate free of presidential direction, to relax and streamline regulations that make it difficult for businesses to borrow.
At a time when the IBMs and Sears, Roebucks of the business world are eliminating jobs by the tens of thousands, expansions of small and medium businesses are crucial for the economy's well-being.
"If these businesses can't expand or try new ventures, that means stagnation," Clinton said.
The regulatory agencies agreed to encourage banks to make more "character" small-business loans, based more on the reputation of the borrowers than on their financial statements.
On a third front last week, the president met with more success than he had asked for in cutting federal spending.
The House Budget Committee approved plans to exceed Clinton's cuts by $ 63 billion over the next five years; its Senate counterpart went further, approving deficit cuts by $ 96 billion.
In three weeks, Clinton went from saying he had proposed as many cuts as he could without hurting essential programs to acceding to far deeper slashes.
But the reductions are all in the abstract, a commitment to make them real later this year when appropriations bills come up and legislators must identify whose oxen are to be gored.
Still, they represented a dramatic reversal in the atmosphere in Washington. Polls show continuing strong support for Clinton's anti-deficit rhetoric, and Congress has gotten the message.

 

End of Document
