

Clinton Brought the Fallen-Away Back to the Democratic Fold
The Associated Press
November 4, 1992, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 717 words
Byline: By JILL LAWRENCE, AP Political Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Democrat Bill Clinton, with his centrist message and Baby Boom background, won the White House by reversing the exodus from his party of young people, independents and suburbanites.
The affinity young voters felt for Clinton and his youthful running mate, Al Gore, perhaps best illustrated the dramatic difference four years can make.
President Bush carried voters under the age of 30 by a 63-37 percent margin in 1988, one exit poll showed. But Clinton was 10 points ahead of Bush in the same age group this time, even with independent Ross Perot siphoning off 22 percent.
According to the massive Voter Research & Surveys exit poll, Clinton had an even bigger edge, 14 points, among the very youngest voters, those aged 18-24. He picked up 48 percent of first-time voters, compared to 30 percent for Bush.
"This completely reverses the Reagan-Bush gains of the last 12 years with younger voters," said Republican pollster Bill McInturff. He attributed the falloff to "the whole image of Republican Party, the way the convention played, the whole sense of status quo vs. change."
Another Republican pollster, Vince Breglio, said young people turned away from his party over the issue of jobs.
"There was a young generation of voters who were very, very impressed with Ronald Reagan, in large measure because he held out a promise of economic opportunity," Breglio said. "For many of them, that promise paid off. For the more recent generation of young voters, that promise has rung hollow."
Clinton's pollster, Stan Greenberg, said younger voters responded "when we spoke about growth, about the economy, about both the country's long-term decline and the need for stimulating this economy."
Democratic strategist Mark Mellman said the Clinton campaign had "cut across all demographic and geographic lines." Final exit poll results showed one major exception - white voters, who went for Bush 41 percent to 39 percent.
But there were many dramatic turnarounds besides the youth vote.
A 1988 exit poll showed Bush taking the over-65 group by 10 points; Clinton had a 13-point edge this year. "We had sort of the May-December coalition here," said Clinton strategist James Carville, referring to the oldest and youngest voters.
Suburbanites were another disaffected component of the 1980s Republican coalition. For years they helped Bush and Reagan offset huge Democratic majorities in cities like Detroit, Cleveland and Philadelphia. This week, Clinton, Bush and Perot split suburbanites 43-37-20 percent.
McInturff said the "classic Republican anti-tax-and-spend message" has lost some appeal in the suburbs. Now, he said, "they're looking for a much more active definition for what government's going to do about health care, the environment and crime."
Independents went strongly for Bush in 1988, by a 14 point margin, but Clinton led this year's race despite Perot's obvious appeal to the group. The Arkansas governor had 38 percent followed by Bush at 32 percent and Perot at 30 percent.
The independents helped Clinton compensate for attracting only 77 percent of Democrats, among whom were more than half of the ethnic, blue-collar, Rust Belt Reagan Democrats who voted for Bush and Reagan throughout the 1980s.
Bush, meanwhile, set what Gallup polls show is at least a 40-year low for holding onto Republicans. He got 73 percent nationally, 20 points below the 1988 loyalty rate. The next lowest showing was the 80 percent Barry Goldwater attracted in 1964.
The exit polls suggested that, besides young people, working women and unmarried Americans also did not warm to the image of the GOP conveyed by its convention, a showcase for the religious right and causes such as banning abortion.
Clinton won working women over Bush by 45 percent to 36 percent. While the two candidates split married voters 40 percent to 40 percent, Clinton was preferred by margins of 12 to 18 points among people who were single, widowed, divorced or separated.
"If you don't happen to be married and you're living in any other kind of household in America, you were voting Democratic by very comfortable margins," McInturff said.
Voter Research & Surveys, a joint project of ABC, CBS, CNN and NBC, surveyed more than 15,000 voters as they left the polls Tuesday. The margin of error is usually about 3 percentage points, plus or minus.

 

End of Document
