

Clinton Was Once the Democrat the Republicans Wanted
The Associated Press
November 2, 1992, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 735 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




There was a time when Bill Clinton was the Republicans' favorite Democratic challenger. Now the man they thought would be vulnerable is at the doorstep of the White House, the election-eve favorite to defeat President Bush on Tuesday.
To compound the irony, the original GOP reckoning may have been right.
The character and trust questions Bush was pressing in the final days, when Clinton's lead in the polls narrowed to striking distance, couldn't have been applied to a different Democrat.
One top Republican mused that if the Democratic nominee had been one of the front-rank dropouts - Bill Bradley of New Jersey or Sam Nunn of Georgia, for example - the president's re-election chances probably would be none instead of slim.
The GOP theory was that Clinton was a flawed candidate, carrying too much political baggage to oust their incumbent president. He certainly had baggage, but he carried it skillfully, and dispensed with much of it early in the season.
Even so, when Bush and his allies began bearing down on character as an issue, the president did show temporary gains in the polls.
However, a new, final ABC News poll released Monday night indicated that Bush had been doing better in the closing days because more voters were persuaded that the economy was improving. The survey showed 18 percent believed it was getting better by the end of October, up from 10 percent early in the month, and that helped Bush. But 49 percent still said the economy is getting worse.
The poll, completed Sunday, showed Clinton leading Bush by 7 percentage points.
"We simply cannot take a risk on Gov. Clinton," Bush said Monday. "You have to have the trust of the people through character and you have to have the trust of the world when you are president."
Bush said he didn't come up with the word "slick" to describe Clinton. "I did say slippery when wet. I will stand with that."
The Gennifer Flowers affair accusations and Clinton's varying accounts of the way he avoided the Vietnam draft both surfaced before the presidential primary elections began; both were problems but not the disasters they could have been later.
When all that was happening, the Republicans chose to let Democrats wrangle among themselves. Indeed, as Clinton noted after Bush raised the draft question in the final campaign weeks, the president had discounted it as an issue last winter. At that point, rival Democrats were making the case against Clinton, and warning the party that their attacks were only a pale preview of what he'd face from the Republicans in the fall.
That was in the days when Clinton was emerging from a thin Democratic field to effectively clinch the nomination only weeks into the campaign. By the time he did, Bush had his own intra-party problems - the conservative challenge and the persistent protest vote in the GOP primaries.
He also had his own baggage: the economic slump. That's been the Democrats' issue from the start, along with the classic outsider's message that it's time for a change. Bush bounced among themes, trying to find one that would work. One effort was the unlikely claim that he'd bring change, not an easy case for an incumbent to make.
Indeed, Bush talked more about changing his own administration in a second term than he had about changing things in 1988, when he was campaigning to succeed Ronald Reagan.
All of that gave Clinton a relatively free ride prior to his nomination, and it was extended when the Republicans looked past him and tackled Ross Perot after the independent entry climbed in the polls.
With Clinton's nomination, the Bush campaign decided on a theme that had worked before: They'd depict him as a tax-and-spend liberal, just like the Democrats who lost in 1988 and 1984. But he had run as a centrist, and had been nominated over liberal resistance, so it wasn't an easy case to make.
Bush still was trying on election eve, saying Clinton's first move would be to raise taxes, telling voters to watch their wallets. And Clinton still was countering that he wants a new economic policy, neither tax and spend nor trickle down but investment and incentives, not bigger government but better government.
But the Republicans knew their last hope of an upset didn't hinge on policy. It was a question of trust.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.

 

End of Document
