

Clinton's Got the Big Lead, But Brown's Setting the Tone
The Associated Press
March 31, 1992, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 627 words
Byline: By JOHN KING, AP Political Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Never mind that lopsided delegate count. It's getting harder and harder to tell who's ahead as the Democratic presidential campaign unfolds in New York.
Bill Clinton is the runaway leader in the race for the party's nomination, near the halfway point in the delegate chase. But it's Jerry Brown, just off the starting blocks in the delegate tally, who's been driving the dynamics.
So much so that Clinton has tossed out the front-runner's manual and is seeking almost daily debates with Brown leading up to next week's primaries in New York, Wisconsin and Kansas. The two staged a New York debate doubleheader Tuesday and had another on tap Wednesday at the Apollo Theater in Harlem.
Clinton is casting his challenge in the best possible light, saying he wants as many opportunities as possible to speak directly to New York voters, cutting out the rough-and-tumble local media as middlemen.
But just last week Clinton was frowning on debates. Why the shift? To borrow one of Clinton's favorite phrases, this isn't rocket science.
"This is an effort to reverse the tide, which right now is flowing against him," said Democratic strategist Ann Lewis. "There are times in a campaign when you really don't need polls to know what the candidate is hearing. One of those times is when the acclaimed leader challenges the other guy to a series of debates."
Brown sees it that way too.
"There's a little rule in politics - you never debate a challenger until you're a loser," Brown said Tuesday. "That's the category he's in now."
That's a bit of an exaggeration - Clinton had 1,015 delegates to Brown's 153 heading into Tuesday's Vermont caucuses. Still, the front-runner clearly sees trouble.
After Clinton lost Connecticut last week, another round of doubts surfaced about his durability, which translates into viability.
Earlier in the race, Brown was considered just barely off the fringe, his anti-politics message clashing with his lifelong political career. But now Brown is seen as a serious contender - he has virtually no chance of winning enough delegates to claim the nomination, but could deny it to Clinton by battering him in the late primaries.
The best way for Clinton to end such talk is to beat Brown in New York, a state more like Illinois or Michigan, where Clinton won big, than Connecticut.
There is no guarantee he'll succeed.
"The elbows are flying," says Lee Miringoff, a pollster at the Marist College. "New York has become very competitive."
In seeking so many debates, Clinton is returning to the media saturation strategy he believes rescued his campaign in New Hampshire when allegations of draft dodging had him on the ropes.
"The more direct contact I have the better," he says. "These people need to get to know me and I want to give them that chance."
He also wants them to hear more about Brown's flat tax and other proposals, ideas that Clinton complains haven't been given enough scrutiny by the media.
All strategy aside, the state's Democratic chairman thinks the debate-athon is the right recipe for the final days of the turbulent New York campaign.
"A lot of people have not made up their minds," says John Marino. "I think the most positive thing to happen here is that we seem to be heading toward solid discussion of the issues."
Maybe.
Many of the debates have been gentlemanly and substantive. But several were dominated by pointed personal attacks - with Clinton the most frequent target and Brown the flame-thrower.
So the front-runner's gambit could well backfire.
"It's a gustsy call - a deliberate strategy to let people see him sweat - to let people see that he wants it badly enough to make himself vulnerable," said Lewis. "But any gamble goes both ways."
 
 ---
 
 TOR'S NOTE - John King covers national politics for The Associated Press.

 

End of Document
