

Clinton's Day: The Host but Not the Star
The Associated Press
September 13, 1993, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 656 words
Byline: By RON FOURNIER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




He was the host, a man with 3,000 guests in his back yard. And he came through with an eloquent speech for a "great occasion of history and hope." But President Clinton was not the master of this ceremony.
Not with a beaming PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat, seeking with peace what he couldn't seize with pellets.
Not with Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, the sour-looking warrior pleading for an end to bloodshed. "Enough!"
Still, it was quite a day for Clinton, who gave one of the most stirring speeches of his presidency. "A peace of the brave is within our reach," he told the crowd.
"Today we bear witness to an extraordinary act in one of history's defining dramas, a drama that began in a time of our ancestors when the word went forth from a sliver of land between the River Jordan and the Mediterranean Sea," Clinton said.
He praised former President Carter, who brokered peace between Egypt and Israel in 1979, when "many believed the past would always have the upper hand." His old political foe, former President Bush, showed "skillful leadership" in organizing Mideast peace talks in Madrid two years ago.
But he said the day belonged to Rabin and Arafat.
"Above all, let us today pay tribute to the leaders who had the courage to lead their people toward peace, away from the scars of battle, the wounds and the losses of the past, toward a brighter tomorrow," the president said.
Without offering specifics, Clinton promised that the United States would help implement the promise of peace.
"Throughout the Middle East, there is a great yearning for the quiet miracle of a normal life," he said.
"We know a difficult road lies ahead," Clinton said. "Every peace has its enemies, those who still prefer the easy habits of hatred to the hard labors of reconciliation."
Following remarks from Rabin, Arafat and others, Clinton ended the ceremony by urging the crowd to "Go in peace. Go as peacemakers."
The president pulled Arafat aside after the ceremony for an unscheduled five-minute meeting in the Map Room. Martin Indyk of the National Security Council quoted Clinton as saying to Arafat, "It is essential to move quickly to get things going on the ground."
He said the president also made the point that Israelis must be confident of their security.
Rabin, who had scheduled a lunch with Clinton, was kept waiting with Vice President Al Gore. When they finally met, Clinton and Rabin were alone in the room, an unusual arrangement in diplomatic circles.
Clinton was kept to a tight schedule: Meet with former presidents Bush and Carter, then the Israeli and PLO delegations; speak at the ceremony; lunch with Rabin; remarks to Arab American and Jewish groups; and dinner for 25 couples.
Carter and Bush arrived in the Oval Office shortly after 10 a.m. Clinton proudly showed them the new decor - a bolder blue carpet and brighter furnishings. Carter seemed especially interested.
They walked to the Blue Room, where several people were already sipping coffee and orange juice in the room, including Gore, Secretary of State Warren Christopher and diplomats from Russia and Norway.
Arafat arrived later with his lieutenant, Mahmoud Abbas, followed by Rabin and Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres.
The Israelis gravitated to the southern end of the oval room, with Arafat and Abbas on the west end, about 15 feet away. Arafat and Rabin didn't say a word to each other, nor did they shake hands.
They left the room and attended the ceremony, where Arafat and Rabin capped the day's events with an awkward handshake, two old foes grasping for peace.
Much earlier Monday, Clinton awoke after five hours of rest. It was 3 a.m. and he couldn't get back to sleep. Aides said he read the entire biblical book of Joshua.
In the quiet of the White House residence, he reworked the speech, quoting the Prophet Isaiah: "The cry violence shall no longer be heard in your land," and ended with words of peace in three languages: Shalom, Salaam, Peace."
 Load-Date: September 13, 1993

 

End of Document
