

Cloistered Nuns Venture Beyond the Monasteries to See the Pope
 The Associated Press
October 5, 1995, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 478 words
Byline: By HUGH A. MULLIGAN, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: NEWARK, N.J.
Body




It was a rare excursion indeed: A group of cloistered nuns ventured beyond their monasteries to see Pope John Paul II and were stunned by what they saw of the outside world.
Helicopters hovered overhead, snipers with rifles patrolled the rooftops. Helmeted police on bicycles and horseback surrounded Sacred Heart Cathedral as more than 100 sisters from the Dominican order exited their buses to attend the pontiff's twilight prayer service Wednesday.
What had become of the world since they renounced it?
"The noise inside the cathedral, everything was so different from what we're used to," said Sister Mary Daniel of the monastery of the Holy Rosary in Summit. She has led a cloistered life for nearly 50 years, going out only to see a dentist.
Besides the great swelling anthems of the cathedral organ, there was the constant blare of giant-screen televisions right next to the Gothic pulpit. A mini-skirted anchorwoman reported at top volume on the pope's every movement, from his touchdown at Newark International Airport to the arrival at the church of his popemobile in a wail of motorcycle sirens.
The sisters at first seemed surprised at the congregation cheering and applauding wildly when the screens showed the pontiff slowly descending from the plane. But by the time he arrived at the cathedral, they enthusiastically joined in the applause.
Some brushed away tears with their veils when the pope reached out to take their extended hands as he slowly moved up the middle aisle. Some hid their faces with their music sheets when TV cameras scanned the aisles.
They were ecstatic over the pews they were assigned: just four rows back from President Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton, and not far from Bob Hope. And they beamed with pride when one of their own, Dominican Sister Catherine from the Newark monastery, climbed toward the tall marble pulpit usually reserved for priests, to read the scripture selection.
The pope in his brief homily paid them "profound gratitude for your immense contribution to the church's life" and regretted "if in the past these gifts were sometimes insufficiently esteemed or thwarted."
The sisters laughed along with the pontiff when he jokingly took credit for the inclement weather that greeted him on his fourth visit to the United States.
"We had been praying for rain to help our little orchard," said Dominican Sister Mary Albert, "and we're afraid we might have overdone it."
Since the Vatican announced the pope's trip, nothing has been quite the same inside the monastery, Sister Mary Daniel said.
"All of a sudden reporters are calling on the telephone for interviews," she said. "We never dreamed of being interviewed by anybody.
"We had just come from chapel yesterday when a lovely man from CBS called and told us O.J. had been acquitted," she said. "We seldom watch television, but he thought we definitely ought to know."
 Load-Date: October 5, 1995

 

End of Document
