

Combating the Negative Image: The Search for Solutions
The Associated Press
May 19, 1991, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 833 words
Byline: By WILLIAM M. WELCH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Samuel L. Myers Jr., professor of economics and director of Afro-American studies at the University of Maryland, avoids wearing jogging suits in public when he goes off campus.
"I have to wear a coat and tie in this state in order to keep from getting arrested," Myers said. "It's just part of this perception that all black males are crooks."
Myers, an author of many academic studies into the plight of disadvantaged minorities in America, says that all black males - himself included - suffer from the widespread negative image of black men.
The statistics that underlie that image are indeed staggering: Black men have the highest unemployment rates, highest rates of crime, murder and imprisonment; high rates of illiteracy and low rates of education; the highest mortality rates and shortest life expectancy.
Many of those problems affect poor urban black families - women and children - too.
Yet sociologists and policy analysts increasingly are zeroing in on young black males as a key to breaking the cycle of despair. To the degree that they achieve economically productive lives, they can uplift their families.
Sensing a need to help black males, and with them the entire black community, a bipartisan group called the 21st Century Commission on African American Males was formed with private grant support last year. Its members will hold a three-day conference this week in Washington to explore the problems and search for solutions.
"It is a recognition that the black male represents a very special area of concern in the African-American community," said Douglas G. Glasgow, a social researcher and author. "It is the other side of the single, female-headed family."
The commission's hope is to call attention to the problems, but also to try to dispel the negative image by pointing out the other side: half of black males have wives or families; 75 percent in the 20-to-29 age group have no serious encounters with the law; more than half of those 16 to 24 who are not in school are gainfully employed.
The panel also hopes to encourage government initiatives on education, jobs and health, including improvements in job-training programs so the training better matches future labor markets.
Any improvements will help all of black America, Myers said.
"All blacks," said Myers, "are being affected by what's happening to the poorest, the most disadvantaged, the ones most entangled at the bottom of the socioeconomic ladder."
Virginia Gov. L. Douglas Wilder and Sen. Terry Sanford of North Carolina, both Democrats, are honorary co-chairmen of the commission. Both testified with others in March at a Senate Banking and Urban Affairs subcommittee, which is holding a second hearing on the plight of black males Tuesday.
Glasgow, resident scholar for the commission, is the author of a 1981 book, "The Black Underclass," in which he contends the underclass is a group locked into poverty over generations.
The searing poverty that entraps these families, he said in an interview, is driven by the inability of black males at the bottom rungs of the economic ladder to secure a productive spot in the nation's economy. Changes in the nation's economy - increasing demands for skilled and technical workers, and the increased emphasis on information - have left them behind.
Myers contends that many black males have been "marginalized" - relegated to the fringes of the economy.
"It's not simply that a person is unemployed or has low wages, but that a person is either out of the labor force altogether or not in the path that's likely to lead to productive participation," Myers said. "The person is literally and figuratively on the margins of the economy, perched precariously between falling out altogether and just being an occasional participant on the periphery."
Many of these young urban men are ill-trained for the work force but have talents and innate abilities of organization and even management, Myers argues. It's hardly surprising then, he says, that they turn to the illegal drug trade.
While highly profitable, it is a high-risk enterprise, and a big factor in some of the most tragic trends of the ghetto. Black males are seven times more likely to be murdered than white males. The numbers of annual homicides among black men 15 to 19 years old doubled between 1984 and 1987, according to FBI statistics.
Many who survive land in prison. Nearly half the nation's inmates are black.
Almost one in four black men 20 to 29 are in prison or in jail or on probation or parole, and more black men are under control of the criminal justice system than are enrolled in higher education, according to Marc Mauer, assistant director of The Sentencing Project, a Washington-based group studying prison trends.
"Where are black men?" Glasgow asks.
"They are disproportionately out of the labor force. They are in disproportionate numbers in the criminal justice system. … They are also the most severely impacted by poor health. They are dying at a rate higher than all others in our society."

 

End of Document
