

Coming Back from Scrap: The Rebuilding of the Fleet
The Associated Press
November 12, 1991, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 562 words
Byline: BY HUGH A. MULLIGAN, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: HONOLULU
Body




In the final analysis, Rosie the Riveter beat Tokyo Rose.
Fifty years after the Japanese inflicted America's worst naval defeat, a key victory achieved by a blue-collar army of women and men firing rivet guns is viritually forgotten. Often working double shifts, they battled in all kinds of weather to raise the decimated U.S. Pacific Fleet up from scrap and hurry it back into action.
Of the 94 U.S. warships in Pearl Harbor on that infamous Sunday morning, 18 were sunk or severely damaged. Yet only the Arizona, the Utah and the Oklahoma were unable to get back into the war.
The Arizona and the Utah rest where they went down and serve as memorials for the crew members entombed in their wreckage. The Oklahoma was moved and sunk off Oahu to clear its berth on Battleship Row. It eventually was refloated and sold for scrap, but sank in a storm while under tow to the breakers yard.
The California was raised, repaired and returned to the fleet less than a year later as a virtually new ship. It won seven battle stars, training its big guns on Japanese strongholds as U.S. forces island-hopped their way toward Tokyo.
The West Virginia, sunk at its mooring, was raised and modernized in time to take part in the action at Leyte Gulf. It was the first Pearl Harbor survivor to anchor in Tokyo Bay. The Tennessee, which was double-parked beside it and badly damaged, was ready for action less than three weeks after the surprise attack. The Maryland also underwent speedy repairs and saw action in the first month of the war.
The battleship Pennsylvania and the destroyers Cassin and Downes, sitting ducks for the torpedo bombers in Dry Dock No. 1, sailed back into action with new hulls and achieved excellent war records.
The cruisers Honolulu, Helena and Raleigh all rejoined the war. The minelayer Oglala, the Old Fall River Liner that shipyard workers jokingly said "sank from fright" during the attack, was salvaged and refitted for further duty in the South Pacific.
The Nevada, then the oldest battleship in the Pacific Fleet, was the only one to get under way during the Japanese attack. It attracted swarms of Zero fighters and Val dive bombers and, severely damaged, nosed into the mud off Hospital Point to avoid blocking the ship channel out to sea. Later pulled off by salvage tugs, it was rebuilt and restored to action. It took part in the Aleutian campaign and Normandy invasion, then witnessed the dawn of the atomic age as a target ship during the tests on Bikini Atoll.
In Egyptian mythology, the Phoenix is a fabled bird consumed by fire that rises from the ashes. The cruiser Phoenix rose from the rubble of Pearl Harbor to win nine battle stars by war's end. Later, it was sold to the Argentine navy and its luck ran out. As the Gen. Belgrano, it was sunk by the British in the Falkland Islands war.
Two harbor tugs that survived the Japanese attack still are at work. The Wapello nudges ships in and out of the Panama Canal. The Hoga is in the employ of the city of Oakland, Calif. The Coast Guard cutter Taney, which 50 years ago was based in Honolulu Harbor, is now at the Baltimore Harbor Museum.
Only two of the 32 surface ships in Adm. Isoruku Yamamoto's task force were afloat when the surrender was signed aboard the USS Missouri. All six Japanese carriers that delivered the 360 attack planes to within range of Hawaii were sunk by the end of the war.

 

End of Document
