

Congress: The Rich, the Poor, the Eternal College Loan…
The Associated Press
June 12, 1993, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 727 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




One thing disclosed by the financial disclosure forms all members of Congress must file is that they're not all millionaires.
Some live in ordinary houses with ordinary mortgages.
Some are in debt.
Some got a raise by getting elected.
And some struggle with the college loans incurred by their children - or themselves.
Rep. Timothy Penny, D-Minn., born in 1951, was elected to the Minnesota state senate 24 years later and, after knocking on every front door in his southeastern Minnesota district, to Congress at age 30.
He lives in the suburb of Vienna, Va., has four children and a fairly ordinary $ 200,000 house - not much to speak of by Washington real estate standards. He leaves the minivan to his wife, a teacher, and rides to work on Washington's subway.
Peter Blute, a freshman Republican from Massachusetts, increased his income four-fold by becoming a $ 129,500-a-year congressman. He made $ 28,290 in 1992 from his work as a state legislator.
Another New Englander, Rep. Gary A. Franks, R-Conn., the son of millworkers and a self-made millionaire in Waterbury real estate, shows himself slowly reducing his debts.
He owes between $ 215,000 and $ 530,000 on three mortgages and four unsecured personal loans. In 1991, his debts ranged between $ 335,000 and $ 865,000.
This inside-the-wallet information on Congress comes from financial forms covering 1992 and released last week for all House and Senate members except those who sought official extensions.
Although assets and liabilities are disclosed in broad ranges rather than exact amounts, they still offer insights into the financial conditions of the people who make the nation's laws.
Even the mighty have mortgages and, like millions of their fellow citizens, have discovered the benefits of refinancing. Sen. Sam Nunn, D-Ga., was paying 10 percent on his mortgage on an A-frame house in Houston County, Ga. So he refinanced by borrowing instead from his mother at 6 percent.
Xavier Becerra, a Democratic freshman from California, came to Congress still carrying a student loan of between $ 10,000 and $ 15,000. Leslie Byrne, D-Va., listed her children's student loans as a debt.
Lawmakers may accept gifts worth up to $ 250. Sen. Paul Simon, D-Ill., famous for wearing them, reported the gift of two bow ties.
Simon and Sen. Christopher Dodd, D-Conn., were paid $ 400 each for cameo appearances in the movie, "Dave."
The rich stayed rich. Sen. Claiborne Pell, D-R.I., who may be the wealthiest member of Congress, listed earnings of between $ 1.25 million and $ 8.36 million in capital gains from sale of securities.
Pell's financial disclosure form, a matter of a dozen pages for most senators, runs to 88 pages of stock and real estate holdings and transactions. In addition, Pell drew $ 11,419 from his U.S. Coast Guard pension; he gave it to charity.
The forms reveal a Congress that's not immune to the recession. One of Democratic Sen. Frank Lautenberg's two blind trusts used to bring in more than $ 1 million a year. Now the returns are down to six figures.
Under new ethics laws, members of Congress must give honoraria to charity for delivering speeches or attending meetings; its enactment cut down sharply on those practices. But free trips are still acceptable. Sen. J. Bennett Johnston, D-La., took 22 trips as the guest of companies, organizations and universities.
Senate Republican leader Bob Dole of Kansas gave away $ 64,100 in honoraria. His wife, Elizabeth, president of the American Red Cross, gave much of the $ 328,000 she got in speaking fees to a Red Cross fund for at-risk youth. She reported assets worth up to $ 5 million.
Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell, D-Maine, helped meet expenses by renting out the basement of his Washington home.
Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., listed his personal car as an asset - it's a 1976 Jaguar. Rep. Bill Paxon, R-N.Y., listed a 1987 Pontiac worth $ 3,500, and attached his state and federal income tax forms.
Sen. Bill Bradley, D-N.J., a former New York Knicks basketball player, will begin to collect $ 2,000-a-month for life from the NBA pension plan when he turns 50 next month.
Sen. Pete Domenici, R-N.M., reported his ownership of a mausoleum crypt, valued at between $ 1,000 and $ 15,000.
Rep. Bernard Sanders of Vermont, the only Socialist in Congress, spoke at a Socialist Scholars Conference in New York. For his troubles, he got a free meal.

 

End of Document
