

Congress Considers Turning the Tables on the IRS
The Associated Press
March 25, 1995, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 565 words
Byline: By DAVE SKIDMORE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




In a criminal trial, the government has to prove that the defendant is guilty. In an audit, just the opposite situation is in force for taxpayers.
They must be able to justify every deduction, exemption and credit for which they file, producing receipts and any other proof the law and Internal Revenue Service regulations say are required. If not, the government can slap them with additional tax, interest and penalty.
There's talk in Congress of turning the tables, putting the burden of proof on the IRS.
IRS Commissioner Margaret Milner Richardson thinks that's a terrible idea that would destroy the tax system by making it all but impossible to collect taxes from those who don't want to pay.
"You might as well repeal the income tax law and pass the hat," she told the House Ways and Means oversight subcommittee on Friday.
Richardson and Deputy Assistant Treasury Secretary Cynthia G. Beerbower said they adamantly oppose a bill, sponsored by Rep. Jim Traficant, D-Ohio, which would shift the burden of proof in all civil tax cases.
The IRS already has the burden of proof in criminal cases and civil cases involving fraud.
"An accused mass murderer has more rights than a taxpayer fingered by the IRS," Traficant said in a statement to the subcommittee. "Jeffrey Dahmer was considered innocent until proven guilty. Mom and Pop small business owners, however, are not afforded this protection."
However, Beerbower said a "longstanding and well-established legal doctrine" in all civil proceedings, not just tax cases, is that the party that has control of the facts has the burden of proof.
Shifting the burden of proof would force the IRS to intrude into taxpayers' lives far more than it does now, interviewing people other than the taxpayer and summoning information from third parties such as banks and credit card companies, she said.
"As a result, the simplest audit would become a costly nightmare if the taxpayer refuses to cooperate," she said. "For example, if a taxpayer claims a child as a dependent and the IRS suspects the child does not exist, the IRS would be forced to interview neighbors."
Four former IRS commissioners - Donald Alexander, Lawrence Gibbs, Fred Goldberg and Sheldon Cohen - submitted testimony backing Richardson's and Beerbower's position.
Traficant, a longtime crusader against the IRS, has his salary garnisheed to pay for a tax case he lost in the mid-1980s. It stemmed from a criminal charge, for which he was acquitted, when he was a candidate for county sheriff in Ohio.
Subcommittee members reacted coolly or not at all to his idea but said they may seek to reduce taxpayers' burden of proof in one area. Taxpayer Bill of Rights legislation enacted in 1988 allows taxpayers who win their cases with the IRS to seek reimbursement for legal fees.
But subcommittee Chairwoman Nancy Johnson, R-Conn., said in practice most taxpayers find it very difficult to prove the IRS "was not substantially justified in maintaining its position," even when the IRS loses the case.
Johnson said she hoped this year to enact what she called a Taxpayer Bill of Rights II. One provisions being considered is expanding the power of the IRS ombudsman to issue orders protecting taxpayers. Other provisions would oblige the IRS to corroborate information on reports filed on taxpayers by employers and banks and increase the authority of the IRS to waive interest on late taxes.
 Load-Date: March 25, 1995

 

End of Document
