

Countering The Critics: Jobs And The Health Plan
The Associated Press
October 6, 1993, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 765 words
Byline: By NANCY BENAC, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Clinton administration rolled out its top economic guns Wednesday to counter claims the president's health-care plan would cost large numbers of American jobs.
The energetic defense came as a group of moderate legislators introduced a rival plan they called more "jobs friendly."
Laura Tyson, chair of the Council of Economic Advisers, predicted that Clinton's health-care plan would alter America's unemployment rate - 6.7 percent in August - by no more than a half percentage point in either direction.
"Our position is the net effect is small," Tyson said at a briefing with four other top members of the administration's economic team. "The effects that tend to increase employment strengthen over time and the effects that tend to decrease employment weaken over time."
Tyson said it was impossible to predict the exact impact of Clinton's health-care plan on jobs, but denounced studies predicting job losses of 3 million or more as "flawed" and "just wrong." And she predicted that within the health-care industry itself, the plan would generate a net increase of 400,000 jobs.
Lined up at a White House briefing to second that message were Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, National Economic Council Chairman Robert Rubin, Labor Secretary Robert Reich and Small Business Administrator Erskine Bowles.
"It's a simple message: Long term, the health our economy is absolutely dependent on health-care reform," Bentsen declared.
The administration's stepped-up effort to defend its plan coincided with the release of a rival plan by a coalition of conservative Democrats and moderate Republicans who said their proposal was more moderate and affordable than Clinton's.
The coalition, led by Rep. Jim Cooper, D-Tenn., and Rep. Fred Grandy, R-Iowa, wouldn't require employers to provide coverage and aims to move toward "universal access" by making insurance affordable for low-income people and small businesses.
"Since we do not have an employer mandate in our bill … we think our approach is more jobs friendly than any other plan," Cooper said. The plan has 27 Democratic and 19 Republican co-sponsors.
The latest entrant on the health-care scene was welcomed by the National Federation of Independent Businesses, a vocal critic of the Clinton plan that opposes any requirement for employers to provide health insurance.
"There is no doubt that small-business jobs will be lost if employers have to foot the bill," NFIB Vice President John Motley said. He added that the Cooper-Grandy plan "preserves a competitive health insurance marketplace while making sure that all Americans have access to quality care."
But Bentsen said that while the legislators' plan would "contribute to the debate in a meaningful way," it contained "serious problems." He said the plan would not ensure health coverage for all Americans, did not spell out what benefits would be guaranteed and could prompt many companies to cut back on the coverage they now provide.
Rep. Jim McDermott, D-Wash., the leader of an 89-strong faction in the House pushing a government-run "single-payer" system, criticized the Cooper plan as well.
"This plan is like the Emperor's new clothes," McDermott said. "It's presented as though it means broad new coverage. In fact, it leaves 25 million Americans uncovered."
Under Clinton's plan, employers would be required to offer insurance to their workers and would pay at least 80 percent of average premium costs, with workers covering the rest. Tyson said the plan would avoid placing any undue burden on employers by limiting the amount they would have to pay toward their share of health-care premiums.
The Clinton administration continued to defend its health-care plan on Capitol Hill, as well, where congressional hearings on the proposal have become a daily fixture.
Health Secretary Donna Shalala told the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee that the Clinton benefit package will be expanded to provide free mammograms for women at high risk of breast cancer as well as those 50 and older.
The American Cancer Society and other health groups have complained that the Clinton package would skimp on coverage of mammograms, Pap smears and other screening services.
She said women of any age could get mammograms that a doctor felt were medically necessary, paying some sort of copayment. Pap smears and mammograms would be free every two years for women ages 50 to 64.
Shalala said the White House was also looking at the possibility of providing more coverage for high-risk children, and of charging poor people less than $ 10 each time they or their children go to the doctor.
 Load-Date: October 6, 1993

 

End of Document
