

Counting the Dead, Assessing the Damage
The Associated Press
May 2, 1991, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 574 words
Byline: By RON HARRIST, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: STERLINGTON, La.
Body




Emergency crews searched for four missing workers Thursday amid the wreckage left by a thunderous explosion that killed at least four others at a chemical plant that is this little town's economic life blood.
Wednesday's explosion also injured more than 120 people.
Small fires still burned Thursday as firefighters pumped water on the wreckage and state environmental officials checked air quality.
Roughly 500 to 600 of the town's estimated 1,200 residents were evacuated immediately after the blast at the IMC Fertilizer plant. Although the state police evacuation order remained in effect Thursday, a few merchants were allowed back to assess damage.
They found buildings with windows blasted out and ceilings caved in, siding ripped from houses, dozens of burned-out vehicles and chunks of twisted metal littering the streets. At the plant, the explosion site was a mass of twisted metal tanks and pipes.
Mayor James H. Rainwater worried about the economic harm the blast did to the town.
"This has really hurt our business district," he said. "We don't have a large business district, but we were really hit bad."
One merchant, Ray Lowery, said town retailers relied heavily on commerce from the plant. He said Sterlington sits in what once was a natural gas field. But the gas played out seven or eight years ago and IMC is now the heart of the town's economy.
About 450 people worked in the plant.
The blast damaged a complex of equipment used to manufacture nitroparaffin, a base chemical for paints, cosmetics and pharmaceuticals. Propane and nitric acid are used in the process.
The unit is owned by Angus Chemical of Northbrook, Ill., but was operated and manned by IMC Fertilizer, which owns two ammonia fertilizer plants at the site. The ammonia plants apparently weren't damaged but IMCF, also headquartered in Northbrook, said they were shutting them down for a safety inspection.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration was investigating the accident.
OSHA last conducted a safety inspection at the plant in 1985 and uncovered nothing significant, said Gilbert Saulter, an OSHA regional administer in Dallas. No injury or illness rates at the plant were immediately available, he said.
An OSHA health review of the plant's ammonia unit in 1989 uncovered three "serious" violations relating to a lack of fall protection on tall ladders, the absence of written procedures for the use of respirators and an improperly adjusted grinder in the machine shop.
"None of these would have contributed to this catastrophe," Saulter said, but added that inspectors hadn't discovered the cause.
Bill Patterson, general manager of the IMCF plant, said workers were checking out a problem with a small compressor in the unit when they noticed a small fire and sounded an alarm.
"About 30 seconds later there was the explosion," he said. People eight miles away heard the first blast, which was followed by a series of smaller explosions.
Tom Unzicker, company spokesman in Northbrook, said it was uncertain when the entire fertilizer and chemical operation would be operating at full capacity again. Patterson said IMCF would set up an office in town to help people affected by the explosion.
"This definitely will hurt business in this town," he said.
Of the 123 injured, 22 remained hospitalized with injuries that were not believed to be life-threatening, said Sgt. Hamilton Mixon, a state police spokesman in Baton Rouge. The others were released.
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto XSTR3

 

End of Document
