

Cover Story:The Wonders of the Appalachians and Filming 'The Journey of August King'
The Associated Press
September 30, 1994, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 875 words
Byline: By JULIANNE BASINGER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LITTLE RIVER, N.C.
Body




John Duigan, director of the movie "The Journey of August King," has found what many longtime Appalachians know - a mountain is more than a scenic backdrop.
Unusually heavy summer rains in the mountains of western North Carolina plagued the film's crew during eight weeks of shooting this summer, but it also helped create some fortuitous effects.
"In a curious way, it's quite often that it's worked in our favor," he said during an on-location interview next to High Falls in Transylvania County. "The sky clears sufficiently for us to get some wonderful vistas of the mountains, but with spectacular clouds."
The film is a dark, atmospheric rendition of the 1971 novel by John Ehle, who wrote the screenplay. The historical drama follows the physical and psychological journey of a mountain farmer, August King, played by Jason Patric, who helps a 17-year-old runaway slave, played by English actress Thandie Newton.
"It's like a road movie set in 1815," Duigan said. "But instead of being in a car crossing the country, we're in a cart, with a pig in the cart and two geese, and a horse."
The film, scheduled for release next year by Miramax Films, also features Larry Drake as the slave owner Olaf Singletary, with Sam Waterston as August's neighbor, Mooney Wright.
Ehle, a 69-year-old Asheville, N.C., native who now lives in Winston-Salem, said the rugged land helped shape the history the film addresses.
"Slavery was unpopular in western North Carolina, but it did exist," he said. "The terrain didn't make slavery popular in the way it was in certain parts of the country."
Duigan, 45, who was born in England and raised in Australia, often writes his own original screenplays for the films he directs. But he said this script's historical aspect was part of its attraction for him.
"It was a piece of history that I knew very little about and that rarely gets depicted on screen," said Duigan, who turned to slave narratives and historical accounts in researching the period.
"Slaves are perceived and experienced as a rarity by August. And he's probably never even been close to anyone such as the slave owner," Duigan said.
But while the oddity of August's encounter with Annalees increases the drama, Duigan said the film shouldn't be judged solely as a story about American slavery.
"To some extent, the political story is more the backdrop for the interior, psychological journey that August makes," he said. "It is one of a number of important strands."
August, whose wife recently has died, has chosen to cut himself off from detailed human relations as the story begins, and he encounters the runaway slave Annalees.
"The circumstance is something that is a catalyst for probably an enormous upheaval in his own way of looking at life," Duigan said. "In a paradoxical way, Annalees helps August as much as he helps her."
Newton, whose father is English and whose mother is from Zimbabwe, said Annalees' journey to emancipate herself stems from her pride and strength.
"She's projecting herself into a world that she knows nothing about," Newton said. "What she had at the outset of the film is not worth the life that she's living, is not worth life. As she moves through the story, as the journey continues, I think she gets more and more of a hunger for what there is out there."
Duigan said the fact that neither he, Newton nor the film's cinematographer, Slawomir Idziak, are Americans may bring the story a different perspective.
Idziak, a native of Poland, includes the French films "Trois Couleurs: Bleu," and "Double Life of Veronique" among his previous work.
"What can happen - I'm not saying it's the case with this - but
"Sometimes an outsider can shed new light simply because they're approaching things from a slightly altered perspective," said Duigan, who most recently directed "Sirens," set in Australia.
'There is certainly an attempt to do justice to the material."
The production designer, Patricia Norris, said that despite a modest budget, much attention has gone into making "The Journey of August King" look historically authentic.
Norris drew from sources as disparate as letters by early North Carolinians and paintings by James Whistler to re-create the clothes and way of life. All the buildings and furniture were built especially for the film, with carpenters often using tools from the period, she said.
That penchant for detail extended to selecting the film's more than 400 extras, most of whom are from the Asheville area, playing the early Appalachians who came mainly from Ulster, Ireland and Scotland.
"We have a lot of interesting-looking faces," Norris said.
In some cases, whole families are working as extras, such as Steve and Billie Buie and their two daughters, Hannah and Sarah.
For Suzanne Caldwell, whose costume includes a matron's cap and a bark basket around her neck for gathering medicinal herbs, the work has been an education in the customs of the time.
"They won't let us show our earlobes or any of our hair," she said. "That was supposed to be racy."
But Caldwell, whose family has lived in the Asheville area for many years, remains most impressed by the mountains.
"You could see clouds clinging to the hillsides below," she said. "And there were black-eyed susans and blueberries in the field up there."
 Load-Date: September 30, 1994

 

End of Document
