

Covering the Simpson Trial the High-Tech, High-Priced Way
The Associated Press
September 26, 1994, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 588 words
Byline: By ANH BUI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




You saw dozens of them camped outside O.J. Simpson's Brentwood mansion for days on end armed with coolers and satellite trucks, lawn chairs and cellular phones.
You wondered if the media could get any thicker on the ground.
You ain't seen nothin' yet.
Camp O.J. has moved to the courthouse, concentrating the power of at least 75 news organizations at Simpson trial coverage headquarters and bringing new meaning to the word stakeout.
Live broadcasts have been put in some doubt by Judge Lance Ito's threat last week to limit media coverage, but reporters are here in force to tell the story one way or another.
The parking lot across the street has been rented by the Radio and Television News Association, coordinator of the double murder trial coverage, and is now home to 40-plus satellite trucks and air-conditioned trailers.
Straddling the vehicles are massive wood and iron scaffolds built to allow TV networks and their affiliates to tape their reports away from courthouse crowds with downtown as a backdrop.
Taking the top spot is NBC's tower - a whopping 40 feet tall.
Why so high? All the better to see over CNN's 30-foot tower, CBS's 20-foot towers and the three-tiered universal platform where all the local stations have spots staked out.
"I guess it's kind of a bravado thing," shrugged Scott Shulman, RTNA's engineering consultant.
The scaffolds can be daunting.
"I'd like to see it before I put Tom (Brokaw) up there," David Bohrman, NBC's executive producer of news specials, said with a laugh. "I'll have to have a conversation with our troops to see if they're planning to launch a space shuttle out there."
Technicians deny they're stressed out working long hours atop the wobbly scaffolds.
"I would be more worried about this building falling on me than this going down. See, this moves," said CBS technician Hunter Bloch as the scaffold swayed beneath him. "If an earthquake hits, it'll just move with the ground."
Camp O.J. is not without amenities, including: five portable toilets (cleaned daily), four 24-hour security guards, daily trash pickup, 600 phone lines and, for some, coffee, donuts and catered lunches.
About 40 miles of cable pulled through a tunnel underneath Temple Street connect the parking lot to the 12th floor of the courthouse, where a whole other contingent of news people have made their home.
In one room, perpetually warmed by the heat of thousands of dollars worth of broadcasting equipment, more than 20 TV and radio crews will monitor proceedings via the feed from one lone remote-controlled camera in the courtroom.
In another room, the print media has established its headquarters, complete with portable fax machines, laptop computers, miniature tape recorders, answering machines and four TV sets.
There are at least 50 more miles of cable wiring the courthouse and another 200 phone lines on the media floor, Shulman said.
The cost of bringing the Simpson trial to every living room in America?
Just readying the press rooms cost $ 500,000, RTNA president Milli Martinez said. Rental of the parking lot next to the quake-damaged Hall of Justice: $ 24,000 a month. Throw in the cost of electricity, fiber optic cables and the rest and a six-month trial could cost the group $ 700,000.
With each news organization paying for its own scaffold, trailer, equipment and, of course, staff, the price will easily reach into the millions, Shulman said.
Not everyone was impressed by all the attention the trial is getting.
"I don't have much interest in it," Shulman said. "I'd rather watch a movie."
 Load-Date: September 26, 1994

 

End of Document
