

Debate Over The Debates Mark Of The Presidential Verbal Contest
The Associated Press
August 8, 1992, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 713 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




For as long as there have been televised Great Debates between presidential nominees, the first argument has been over when, where, how many and ground rules down to the finest print. Bill Clinton's campaign is trying to pre-empt that pre-debate debate by skipping it.
His manager, Mickey Kantor, has told the Commission on Presidential Debates, which sounds official but isn't, that Clinton accepts its plan for three debates with President Bush this fall.
The Bush campaign won't be dealing with debate planning until some time after the Republican National Convention in Houston next week. "I'm sure there will be debates and I will be ready to join the fray after the convention," Bush said weeks ago.
That fray usually begins in negotiations between rival campaigns. The pattern has been that they settle on dates, format and ground rules in bargaining that sometimes has taken weeks, involving such details as whether debaters would sit or stand - they stood - and whether they could jot notes - yes - or bring notes - no.
To bypass all that, the Democratic campaign has simply said yes to the plans set by the debate commission, the privately financed matchmaker that sponsored the 1988 debates. It is bipartisan, headed by two former national party chairmen, Republican Frank J. Fahrenkopf Jr. and Democrat Paul G. Kirk Jr.
The commission had been dickering with the major television networks on the 1992 debates, but balked at their insistence on studio settings, with no live audiences, and with their anchormen as moderators.
So the commission issued its own plan, prior to the Democratic National Convention. After Clinton's nomination, Kantor accepted in his behalf.
It calls for 90-minute debates between Clinton and Bush beginning at 9 p.m. Eastern time on Tuesday, Sept. 22, Sunday, Oct. 4 and Thursday, Oct. 15. The vice presidential debate would be on Tuesday, Sept. 29. Fahrenkopf said the commission expects to choose debate sites within the next two or three weeks.
That's more debates than the Republicans have bargained for in the last three campaigns. And the Clinton campaign's agreement doesn't mean that the Bush camp won't want to negotiate changes.
In 1988, Democrat Michael Dukakis sought four presidential campaign debates, but the Bush camp bargained it down to two. James A. Baker III did the Republican negotiating then, as he had for Ronald Reagan and may again for Bush.
The commission plan also includes a new format that would put Bush and Clinton face to face with no panel of questioners, only a moderator to keep time and order. That's been proposed before, but it is a riskier format than one buffered by questioning panelists, and the autumn debates always have returned to that format. Dukakis wanted one-on-one confrontation with only a moderator in 1988, but Bush's negotiators wouldn't agree.
A debate usually works to the advantage of the challenger; indeed, after the Great Debates of 1960, incumbents or favorites avoided them for three campaigns.
But in 1976, President Gerald R. Ford, running for the office he held by appointment, lagged behind Jimmy Carter, so he challenged the Democratic nominee to campaign debates.
They met three times, to Carter's advantage because of the lapse in which Ford insisted that the Soviet Union did not dominate eastern Europe, a mistake that rearmed the detractors who said he was a bumbler.
Carter, who said later that he wouldn't have won without the debates, was in trouble himself, and sought another round against Reagan in 1980. They met only once, a week before the election. Reagan won easily. Reagan was the first favored incumbent to debate the challenger in his re-election campaign.
It once seemed likely that Bush would be in that position this fall. But Clinton has soared far ahead in the public opinion polls since the Democratic convention and Ross Perot's dropout. While the Republican expect to cut the margin at their own convention, and Bush says he's just getting ready to take on the Democrats, this could be another campaign in which a president seeks a comeback.
In those circumstances, more debates can look more inviting.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 25 years.

 

End of Document
