

Defining the Deficit Problem Was Easy, Finding the Solution Isn't
The Associated Press
December 9, 1994, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 730 words
Byline: By DAVE SKIDMORE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Sen. Bob Kerrey's proposal to raise the retirement age to 70, limit tax deductions and cut Medicare and Social Security in the next century touched off heated discussion Friday in a federal deficit-cutting commission.
At the end of three hours of debate, Kerrey, the chairman, admitted he had only four or five votes of the 20 he needs to get an official recommendation from the 32-member Bipartisan Commission on Entitlement and Tax Reform.
Only about two-thirds of the commission members showed up and many of those urged Kerrey to postpone the vote scheduled for next Wednesday to allow more time for deliberation.
Kerrey, D-Neb., criticized what he called the "manana" attitude about finding a way to prevent federal red ink from burgeoning when the members of the Baby Boom generation start retiring after the turn of the century.
But he said he would consider postponing next week's vote if it appears the delay would help build a consensus on a plan to hold the federal budget deficit steady, as a percentage of the total economy, through 2030.
Without action, the deficit will balloon over 35 years from 2.3 percent of the nation's economy to 18.9 percent, according to a report adopted by the commission in August.
"Mathematics and demographics are conspiring daily to compound the size of tomorrow's problem," Kerrey said.
He and the commission vice chairman, outgoing Sen. John Danforth, R-Mo., offered a package of proposals Friday. For people now 28 and younger, Kerrey, supported by Danforth, would raise the retirement age for Social Security and Medicare to 70.
He also would limit the full benefit of income tax deductions to taxpayers in the 28 percent bracket and below, which would reduce the value of deductions for those in higher brackets - for couples, starting with those earning more than $ 91,850.
He would limit Medicare, veteran's compensation and unemployment insurance benefits to recipients whose income fell under certain limits.
The 6 percent Social Security withholding tax would be cut by 1.5 percentage points, but employees would be required to put that 1.5 percent of their income into accounts modeled after Individual Retirement Accounts.
Growth in Social Security benefits would be limited to the growth in national wages. And benefits would be reduced for mid- and upper-wage workers after 2002.
Commission members, both liberals and conservatives, praised Kerrey and Danforth for their boldness but then attacked the specifics of their plan.
Investment banker Pete Peterson, chairman of the Blackstone Group and a longtime advocate of eliminating the deficit, said the commission should aim for that more ambitious goal. He complained the package too heavily penalized those younger than 30 while leaving those 55 and older virtually untouched.
Richard L. Trumka, president of the United Mine Workers of America, said any problems in the Social Security trust fund, which is now running a surplus, could be addressed after 2010.
Trumka said any remaining fiscal distress could be relieved by adopting comprehensive health-care reform and eliminating business subsidies and tax breaks, which he called "corporate welfare."
Former Rep. Tom Downey, D-N.Y., also a member of the commission, labeled Kerrey's call to halve congressional pensions as "the sort of hot-button, red-meat" proposal that belongs on conservative Rush Limbaugh's radio talk show.
Outside the hearing room, AFL-CIO Secretary-Treasurer Thomas R. Donahue called Kerrey's plan "a disaster for working people" and said it eventually would cut Social Security benefits by 50 percent.
Horace B. Deets, executive director of the American Association of Retired Persons, said he was stunned at the plan, which he said would "require older Americans to bear, not share, the burden of deficit reduction."
Most of Kerrey's proposals would not start taking effect until 2000 but one, increasing Medicare Part B premiums, for physician and outpatient services, would start in 1996. For the better-off elderly, he would institute a premium for Medicare Part A, which covers hospitalization.
And he would reduce payments to Medicare providers and give patients the option of leaving Medicare for private health insurance paid for by government vouchers.
Kerrey would cut entitlement programs other than Social Security by 10 percent and then keep their growth in line with inflation and population growth.
 Load-Date: December 9, 1994

 

End of Document
