

Democrats Say They Have the Votes To Pass the Budget Bill
The Associated Press
August 1, 1993, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 628 words
Byline: By H. JOSEF HEBERT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Clinton administration and Democratic congressional leaders said Sunday they have enough votes to narrowly pass the deficit-cutting budget package despite the loss of a key senator who said he no longer could support it.
Sen. David Boren, D-Okla., who grudgingly went along with the legislation when it passed the Senate by one vote, said Sunday he would not approve the measure as it emerged from negotiations with the House.
"I must vote against this plan," Boren said on CBS' "Face the Nation," adding that he thought it contained too little in spending reductions, especially for social programs such as Medicare.
Though the administration must now convince at least one of the six Democratic senators who voted against the original bill to change sides, Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell, D-Maine, and Vice President Al Gore expressed confidence the needed votes will be found.
The negotiations were expected be formal wrapped up Monday.
"We haven't counted on Senator Boren for quite some time," said Gore, who cast the tie-breaking ballot when the Senate approved the deficit reduction package in June by 50-49 vote.
White House economic adviser Gene Sperling criticized Boren on Sunday.
"Boren's call is for more delay, more talk, more hiding from tough choices when the country and the economy need action," Sperling said from the White House's budget "war room."
"When he presented his alternative, he lowered the tax burden on the most wealthy Americans and then asked 27 million Social Security recipients, some just over the poverty line, to take a cut in benefits."
Mitchell predicted a very close vote on the compromise legislation. But he said he was confident the bill - which negotiators say would cut about $ 496 billion from the deficit over five years - will clear both the Senate and House this week.
"We will pass it," agreed Sen. Daniel P. Moynihan, D-N.Y., chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, adding that Boren all along had been "doubtful."
President Clinton and senior administration officials for more than a week have beseeched wavering Democratic senators - especially the six who voted no in June - for their support in the final vote.
Clinton forewent his usual Sunday golf outing to make phone calls to lawmakers on the bill. Among those he has actively courted in hopes of changing their votes are Democratic Sens. Bennett Johnston of Louisiana, Richard Bryan of Nevada and Dennis DeConcini of Arizona.
No Republican in the House or Senate voted for the original bill.
As for the compromise, "there won't be any Republican votes for it," Senate GOP Leader Bob Dole of Kansas said Sunday on ABC's "This Week With David Brinkley."
He said he expects Democrats to garner enough votes for a narrow victory.
Mitchell and Moynihan said the final compromise would amount to deficit reductions of about $ 496 billion over five years from a combination of spending cuts and tax increases, primarily higher taxes on the wealthy and corporations as well as a 4.3-cent-a-gallon increase in the gas tax. Most of the spending cuts are in defense and in controlling future increases in Medicare.
The reductions in Medicare - about $ 56 billion over five years - as well as curtailment in spending on other social programs have raised concerns among some liberal House members, especially members of the Congressional Black Caucus.
For the first time, the members of the black caucus "have been able to … decide whether legislation passes or not," acknowledged Moynihan.
Largely to win support among the black lawmakers, negotiators restored earned-income tax credits aimed at the working poor.
The credits would increase to $ 3,300, for families of working poor with children, Moynihan said. Clinton had wanted the increase, but the Senate had deleted it.

 

End of Document
