

Democrats in the First 100 Days: Bystanders At The Revolution
The Associated Press
April 11, 1995, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1001 words
Byline: By JILL LAWRENCE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Congressional Democrats are trying to make the best of their new, virtually powerless status. Everyone should experience a forced march through enemy territory, they suggest, but not for long.
Forcibly relieved of running the House after 40 years, Democrats say they have new freedoms - from responsibility, from compromise, from producing results, from having to hold their tongues.
But as the song goes, freedom's just another word for nothing left to lose. Particularly in the House, where Democrats have been frustrated bystanders at a Republican revolution.
The 104th Congress had barely opened before Democratic Rep. David Bonior was angrily complaining about rules limiting debate and shouting "I object!" at Republicans presiding over the House for the first time.
Outwardly, it was hard to tell that 203 of the 204 Democrats had never before served in the congressional minority. Many knew what to say on the floor; they just played back what they'd heard Republicans saying for years.
But the inner adjustment was more difficult. Not only had they lost control, their new speaker was the man who'd been attacking their ethics, their leaders and the very institution of the House for a decade. There were recriminations, there was confusion, there was disbelief.
"It's like death and dying," said Rep. Bob Wise, D-W.Va. "Denial, depression, rejection and then finally acceptance. That's when you begin to function again."
No new Democrats were elected to the Senate last year. The Democratic freshman class in the House was so small - 11 compared with 73 for the GOP - that a non-partisan orientation was canceled; only a conservative seminar featuring talk-show host Rush Limbaugh was available. Nor was much guidance forthcoming from their more senior colleagues.
"We wanted to know where to go and what we should be doing and they didn't even know what they were going to be doing," said freshman Rep. John Baldacci, D-Maine. "We were always looking for a base of experience and they couldn't offer any."
House Minority Leader Dick Gephardt, who turned over the gavel to House Speaker Newt Gingrich three months ago "with resignation," said his party's reduced circumstances sank in gradually.
"Almost unconsciously you believe that you have a majority," said Gephardt, D-Mo. "It took a while to understand that we weren't going to win. We could make a point, we could make arguments, we could say what we would like to do, but we were not going to win."
Morale has worsened with a stream of defections. Rep. Nathan Deal of Georgia became a Republican this week. Two Democratic senators have switched to the GOP since the election, when Republicans recaptured the chamber after a six-year absence. And four Senate Democrats from competitive states have announced retirement plans, with more departures a distinct possibility.
Unlike House Democrats who are totally shut out of the legislative process, the 46 Democratic senators have a shot at some real influence. It takes only 40 votes to sustain a filibuster, for example.
Their successes include killing the balanced budget amendment to the Constitution, a top GOP priority, and blocking a Republican attempt to embarrass the White House on a strikebreaker issue.
House Democrats have had to settle for uniting with nary a dissent behind an alternative welfare-reform bill that was doomed to fail - and did. They are also becoming expert at parliamentary maneuvers that make life difficult for the new majority, and are trying to view that as success.
There is clout to be found, however, in the public relations arena. Democrats in the House, Senate and White House have waged a massive, highly coordinated rhetorical assault that depicts GOP priorities as heartless, unfair, bad for the economy and damaging to the nation's future. Polls show the campaign is having some impact.
Under these new conditions, no one is flourishing more than Bonior. The Michigan Democrat, Gephardt's second-in-command, has become a partisan pit bull in the Gingrich mold. He attacks the speaker's ethics and agenda and even parodies his rhetoric, all with unabashed relish.
Bonior's incantation of GOP budget cuts goes like this: "You can't renew American civilization by taking Big Bird from 5-year-olds, school lunches from 10-year-olds, summer jobs from 15-year-olds and student loans from 20-year-olds."
If it sounds familiar, it should. For years, and as recently as last Friday, one of Gingrich's trademark applause lines has been: "America cannot survive with 12-year-olds having babies, 15-year-olds shooting one another, 17-year-olds dying of AIDS and 18-year-olds graduating with diplomas they cannot read."
Rep. Barney Frank of Massachusetts is another natural as a GOP nemesis. "On a day-to-day basis, there's more enjoyment and less responsibility," he says. "Most people would rather be brain surgeons than spend all day at the beach, but it's enjoyable to go to the beach."
There's also pressure on the Senate side. Paul Wellstone, D-Minn., for one, offered non-stop floor amendments the first week of the new Congress to prove the election had not cowed him into silence. Since then he has used various maneuvers to halt committee meetings and offer amendments.
"I'm glad I didn't just get here. I'm glad I know the rules. I'm glad I know the process," Wellstone said. "I'm not going to get rolled. I have a fair amount of determination about that. It comes with being 5-foot-5 ."
In one measure of how well Democrats are adapting, Rep. Harold Volkmer of Missouri told Gephardt he'd cancel his planned retirement next year and run again if he could be assured Democrats would remain in the minority.
Volkmer was joking, but some House Democrats are genuinely elated at the party shift - conservatives who never had any luck getting their bills to the floor until the GOP took over and shoved them through. "At least now we're in the majority philosophically," said Rep. Billy Tauzin, D-La.
 
 ---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Jill Lawrence covers Congress for The Associated Press.
 Load-Date: April 11, 1995

 

End of Document
