

Democrats Regained the Middle Class, Crumbling the GOP Coalition
The Associated Press
November 5, 1992, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 648 words
Byline: By WILLIAM M. WELCH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Bill Clinton's victory has shaken the foundations of the Republican coalition that Ronald Reagan built. He drew the middle class back to the Democratic Party and also welcomed new voters.
With a victory that cut across most demographic and geographical boundaries, Clinton scored important gains among suburban and middle-income voters that had abandoned Democrats for Reagan a dozen years ago and had stuck with George Bush in 1988, according to surveys of voters as they left their polling places.
Running as a more moderate Democrat than his recent predecessors, Clinton paid a price by faring worse among liberals than Michael Dukakis did four years before him.
But clearly it was a trade worth making. Clinton benefited by leading Bush among both the well-educated and the uneducated, the young and the old, and among all but the wealthiest of Americans.
"What you read out of the exit polls is that Bill Clinton learned the lesson of the 1980s - that in order to win you have to be able to speak to the mainstream of Americans," said Democratic pollster Geoffrey Garin. "He did much better with middle class voters."
Against Bush in 1988, Michael Dukakis won heavily among the poorest Americans but won just half the vote among those earning between $ 12,500 and $ 25,000 a year. He lost substantially among Americans earning more than that.
This time, the income fault line was much more favorable for the Democrat.
Not only did Clinton win among Americans earning up to $ 50,000, he held his own among those earning between $ 50,000 and $ 75,000.
It was only at the highest income levels, those earning above $ 75,000, that Clinton fell far behind. He won just better than one-third of those voters.
But again, it was a trade worth making for Clinton. Only 13 percent of voters said they made more than $ 75,000. Two-thirds of all voters said they earned $ 50,000 or less.
And looking at education levels, Clinton's improvements were equally impressive. Even with a three-man race, Clinton won a larger share of the vote among college graduates and those with post-graduate degrees than Dukakis did four years ago in a two-man race.
Such gains made Democrats' thoughts turn to the possibility they have both broken the so-called Republican electoral lock on the White House and laid the foundations for a new coalition of their own.
While talk of an enduring realignment is premature, a Republican pollster, Vincent Breglio, acknowledged that Clinton may have asserted a fundamental shift among one category of voters - the young.
Throughout the 1980s, the youth vote belonged to Republicans - a trend built on admiration for Reagan and the economic prosperity of his tenure. But to those who entered the workforce during Bush's term, the economy offered a much bleaker future - a fact Breglio said propelled the newest group of young voters toward Clinton.
"They're saying, 'It hasn't worked for me, and we have to do something about it,"' Breglio said.
In fact, exit polling for the television networks by Voter Research & Surveys showed better than one voter in 10 was casting a ballot for the first time. Fewer than one-third of those chose Bush.
At the same time Clinton was getting new voters, Democratic defectors were returning. More than half the Democrats who said they voted for Reagan in the past voted for Clinton.
Fewer than one in four Reagan Democrats voted for the Republican this time.
"Clinton brought the middle class back to the Democratic Party, and he brought the moderates back," Garin said. "That's what you have to do to win elections."
Whether the trend proves ephemeral or lasting for the Democrats depends on their success with the economy now that the party is in control of both Congress and the White House. No one knows that more than Clinton and his team.
"We didn't find the key to the electoral lock here," said Clinton strategist James Carville. "We just picked it."

 

End of Document
