

Double-Teaming the Big Issue of the Day
The Associated Press
September 21, 1993, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 654 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




It was Team Clinton at work.
Partners at a power lunch, President Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton were explaining and promoting the health care reform program he presents to Congress and the nation tonight.
The moment is here for universal health care coverage, debated since the days of Franklin D. Roosevelt, the president was saying, "because I think there is a shared consensus."
"I think there is a great deal of energy and motivation in the Congress now and that we're going to get a health care reform plan in the next year," the first lady added.
On a hectic White House Tuesday of briefings, interviews and conferences on the administration's centerpiece health care program, the Clintons spent more than an hour over lunch with 23 invited columnists and commentators, serving pinwheels of chicken breasts, asparagus, rice saffron and the case for reform.
"I'm anxious for this debate to begin," the president said.
When it does, the first lady said, they'll consider alternatives and options, even a possible slowing of the transition to universal health care coverage if that's what Congress prefers.
"These are all things we are open to talk about," Mrs. Clinton said.
"That ought to be a two-way street," the president continued, fine-tuning a bit.
For the most part, though, the answers were seamless. They have, after all, been living with the program for eight months, since the president put the first lady in charge of a task force on health care reform.
"She'll be sharing some of the heat I expect to generate," he said when he announced the unpaid, unprecedented assignment. She also shares the stage. He presents the program to Congress in a nationally televised address. She testifies for it before congressional committees that will be drafting the details.
Terms of the plan were disclosed in advance. Details, including the size and mix of tobacco and alcohol "sin taxes" that will finance it remain to be settled. So the task at the White House was to explain it and sell it.
In that effort, the whole, iron-fenced compound had a bustling, hurry-up atmosphere. Here the columnnists, arriving for lunch. There, nearly 200 radio talk-show hosts, in for briefings and a presidential talk. Across the way at the Executive Office Building, non-stop briefings, about an hour a group, Ira Magaziner and his health care cadre sometimes working two conference rooms at a time.
The first lady talked with the radio crowd first. "Was Limbaugh there?" the president asked when she came in for lunch. "He didn't come," she said. "I read somewhere that he said it was a plot for him to have been invited at a time when he couldn't be here." Conservative Rush Limbaugh, no Clinton fan, was doing his show in New York at the time.
There were no real surprises in the day's briefings, except, perhaps, the one Clinton got.
Mrs. Clinton said living wills, in which people leave instructions on medical treatment, are going to be strongly encouraged "so that we will have better informed decision-making in the last years and moments of life from individuals themselves."
"I haven't told my husband this yet, I was asked … did we have a living will and I said no, but we will, and we will do it publicly."
"I need one in my line of work," the president said.
Then he left lunch and went, a half-hour late, to speak to the talk-show hosts. He explained he'd been with the columnists. That drew jeers.
"Would it make you feel better if I said I didn't enjoy it?" he asked.
After a lunch she'd hardly touched - Clinton ate his - the first lady was still answering questions on the details of the health plan.
"You know," she said, "when Franklin Roosevelt proposed Social Security, he didn't go out selling it with actuarial tables and books of regulations. … He basically said, 'Here's the deal, you pay in, you're taken care of, you have Social Security in your old age.' …
"We are living in a much more difficult time for social policy."
 Load-Date: September 22, 1993

 

End of Document
