

Election Night Notebook: The Agony and The Ecstasy
The Associated Press
February 19, 1992, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 685 words
Dateline: MANCHESTER, N.H.
Body




It was a dispirited group down at the Mario Cuomo write-in headquarters.
Gail Sullivan buttonholed reporters and tried to put the best face on the Cuomo write-in effort, which failed to catch fire among New Hampshire Democrats.
"To get 5 percent is really quite an extraordinary victory," said Mrs. Sullivan, of Lancaster, Mass. She candidly described her effort as "spin control," a far cry from the optimism the Cuomo supporters harbored before the ballots were cast.
---
For one brief moment, professional commentator Patrick Buchanan was almost speechless.
After his "victory" speech Tuesday night, second-place finisher Buchanan began making his way down from the podium and hundreds of supporters began singing "America."
He paused and stared, visibly moved.
The sea of frenzied supporters pushed closer and the cheers grew louder.
"God Bless America," Buchanan sang. The barely audible refrain trailed off as a reporter stuck a microphone in his face.
---
The crowd at Arkansas Gov. Bill Clinton's headquarters was subdued when the polls closed.
His supporters were very much aware of the recent polls showing their candidate was running behind former Massachusetts Sen. Paul Tsongas.
But when early results came in showing the Democratic hopeful running neck-and-neck with Tsongas Clinton supporters became excited.
When Clinton finally spoke, the crowd was in a frenzy. He called himself "the comeback kid" and the ballroom exploded into cheers and applause.
---
If Bush's New Hampshire campaign officials were worried by Buchanan's showing, they didn't admit or show it - unlike White House aides.
Buchanan may claim victory, but he didn't win, they said.
"You don't win anything if you get 40 percent," said Bob Reel of Manchester.
Still, Bush's victory celebration was subdued. About 200 listened to a rallying speech by New Hampshire Gov. Judd Gregg, but their numbers began dwindling soon after.
---
In most political races, third place is nothing to brag about.
But for Nebraska Sen. Bob Kerrey, it was good enough, as he makes his way to friendlier territory in the Midwest.
"We may not be golden yet, but bronze ain't bad," Kerry told his supporters.
Bill Kerrey, the candidate's younger brother, said New Hampshire voters started getting Kerrey's message in the past week.
"He's connecting with the people. He's not a policy nerd," the younger Kerrey said.
---
Consumer activist Ralph Nader's campaign produced barely a mention in the election returns, but he says the impact is there.
Combining the votes cast for himself, Republican Patrick Buchanan and Democrat Jerry Brown, a majority of New Hampshire voters preferred "protest candidates," he said.
And that will make the major contenders take notice, he said.
"The majority of voters cast a straight-on, no-confidence hex on all your houses," Nader said.
---
The cheers and jubilance among Jerry Brown's supporters belied the fact that their candidate came in fifth in Tuesday's balloting.
"We did better than expected," said Brown's niece, Katherine Hoe.
And the least concerned by the loss was Mrs. Hoe's 2 1/2-year-old daughter, Kaitlin, dressed in a sweatshirt that read "Uncle Jerry for President."
The little blonde poked at balloons while her uncle greeted well-wishers, and she grew fussy only when she had to stop playing and pose for the cameras.
---
Iowa Sen. Tom Harkin's brother, John, admitted that "we're a little bit disappointed" that the candidate wound up New Hampshire's primary in a tie with Nebraska Sen. Bob Kerry. "We were hoping for third."
But Harkin was upbeat.
"Do I look like someone who's going to tuck his tail and run? No way," he said, as the crowd chanted his name.
---
Former Massachusetts Sen. Paul Tsongas pumped his fists into the air and shook hands that reached toward him from a cheering crowd of 2,000.
He was a winner, but a humble one at that.
"I'd like to thank the person who is the charisma in our family," he said. "My attitude about charisma is, if you don't have it, marry it."
His wife, Niki, stood at his side as the crowd chanted "Niki, Niki," before turning their attention back to the candidate, chanting, "Tsongas, Tsongas."

 

End of Document
