

Europe and Bosnia: Botching the War, Can They Manage the Peace?
 The Associated Press
December 14, 1995, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 642 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER BURNS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




The Bosnian peace agreement may have been strong-armed into existence by the United States, but the treaty's glittering signing ceremony here underlined Europe's ultimate role in making the plan stick.
Perhaps that's why while President Clinton spoke in florid images of hope and healing at Thursday's signing, European leaders deeply involved in the 3 -year-old Bosnian quagmire spoke in more sober terms.
"Peace must be more than the absence of war," said German Chancellor Helmut Kohl. British Prime Minister John Major said it was up to "all of us to turn cease-fire into peace, to turn peace into reconstruction."
As golden cherubs stared down from the ceiling of President Jacques Chirac's Elysee Palace, Clinton stood over the shoulder of Slobodan Milosevic while the Serbian leader penned his name to the blueprint.
Clinton appeared to want to make sure that Milosevic was in fact putting his name on the treaty, formalizing a peace process that Bosnian Serbs only entered under the force of U.S.-led NATO bombing runs.
Bosnia's bitter Serb, Croatian and Muslim enemies initialed the plan last month in a drab hotel on an air base in Dayton, Ohio. The 18th century grandeur of the Elysee Palace and the glare of TV lights brought home to Europeans and the Bosnians that this was their peace to lose.
"This could seen as an opportunity for Europe," said Philip Gordon, a senior research fellow at the Institute for International and Strategic Studies in London.
"They resent being seen as having botched the war for four years. They were responsible and the war went on," he said.
The plan is for the 20,000 U.S. troops to only be around for one year, and the clock started ticking as soon as the ink dried Thursday. With European nations providing the bulk of the 60,000-strong NATO force and European Union envoy Carl Bildt heading reconstruction, it will be up to Europe to prevent the process from unraveling.
In the end, it was American initiative that rescued them from the Bosnian morass. Now Europe sees the peace mission as an opportunity to show that it can take care of its own affairs.
It would be unfair not to mention the rapid reaction force deployed in June by France and Britain to back up beleaguered U.N. peacekeeping troops and help save Sarajevo and the remaining "safe havens" after Srebrenica and Zepa had fallen.
But it was a wave of U.S.-led NATO airstrikes in August that helped change the map of Bosnia, allowing Muslim-Croat forces to regain land and a balance of power with the Serbs.
The peace plan still leaves a path fraught with obstacles.
Sarajevo's 80,000 Serbs are bitterly, possibly violently opposed to the plan's call for the divided city to come under control of the Muslim-led government.
The final status of Brcko, a Serb-held town on a narrow stretch connecting Serb territories in western and eastern Bosnia, is to be determined by arbitration within one year.
And the parties have yet to agree on the status of Prevlaka, Croatia's southernmost peninsula on the border with Montenegro, which is now under U.N. control.
In addition, when the Americans pack up a year from now, "there are going to be real problems: arming the Muslims or not, leaving or not, and who's paying for the reconstruction," said Gordon of the Institute for International and Strategic Studies.
The European deployment is open-ended, and it will probably be up to Europe to follow through on the reconstruction.
"There's a lot left open here," Gordon said, but added that trying to solve all the problems at the Dayton talks "would have condemned the effort.
"You do what's possible and you worry about other things later," he said. "This has been applied in the Middle East, to do it step-by-step and try to build confidence."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE: Christopher Burns, Paris news editor for The Associated Press, has reported on European affairs since 1992.
 Load-Date: December 14, 1995

 

End of Document
