

Everyone Asks The Same Question: Where was the U.S. Army?
The Associated Press
September 30, 1994, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 607 words
Byline: By JEFFREY ULBRICH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti
Body




Where were the Americans?
After a second day of shooting, beating, death and injury, that was the question asked in Haiti on Friday by both supporters of ousted President Jean-Bertrand Aristide and paramilitary auxiliaries blamed for much of the disorder.
U.S. troops made no attempt to intervene when violence broke out at a pro-Aristide demonstration at the capital port Friday, even though some of the 20,000 American soldiers in Haiti were stationed nearby. The clashes left at least three people dead and about 15 injured.
The Haitian police showed up briefly and left.
The American soldiers never showed up at all.
Under intense questioning, U.S. military spokesman Col. Barry Willey repeated the same refrain half a dozen times: "Our mission still is not to serve as the police force for the country of Haiti. That function is the responsibility of the Haitian police."
U.S. Embassy spokesman Stanley Schrager said it was "unfortunate that inadequate Haitian police protection on the street permitted anti-democratic elements...to attack marchers and disrupt a peaceful demonstration."
"This behavior is unacceptable."
Willey and Schrager were questioned repeatedly about why the Americans neither stationed forces around headquarters of the far-right Front for the Advancement and Progress of Haiti, or FRAPH, nor sent help when it became clear Haitian police would not stop the violence.
The most violent clashes Friday were outside the FRAPH militia headquarters.
Two days earlier, FRAPH gunmen fired on pro-democracy marchers in the same spot, souring the opening of Parliament for the first time since January.
Many democracy supporters blamed FRAPH for the explosion of a grenade along another march route Thursday. Seven people died and at least 86 were wounded.
"I can only say what I said a moment ago: our mission today was to contain the crowd … to provide a presence and create a stable atmosphere to allow the demonstration to go on as planned," Willey responded to each question. "Our mission was not to intervene right up there amongst the demonstrators."
During the fray outside FRAPH headquarters, when a news photographer ducked into a private home to escape the shooting and stone-throwing, a man inside asked if he was American.
When he replied that he was, the man repeated: "Where is the American security? Where is the American security."
Even members of FRAPH, who violently oppose the American effort to restore Aristide to power, asked where the U.S. Army was in the melee.
"We are going to kill them," said one angry, stick-wielding man in front of FRAPH headquarters, referring to Aristide supporters. "As you can see, there are no U.S. troops."
Schrager, reminded that he had earlier called Haitian-on-Haitian violence "unacceptable," was asked why it was being tolerated.
"It's clear we are going to do something about it," said Schrager. "What we are going to do about it is under discussion at the highest level." He did not elaborate.
In Cannes, France, Defense Secretary William Perry said Port-au-Prince will be "blanketed with soldiers" in a U.S. effort to hold down Haitian violence. He predicted "a turbulent weekend" and unrest continuing as long as two weeks.
Many Haitians were hopeful the American presence would bring peace and security to this Caribbean nation beset with violence and political repression throughout most of its 190-year history.
The danger is that the population will turn against American forces if they remain aloof and refuse to step in to stop the clashes.
"There is a great concern about that," Willey acknowledged, but reiterated that such intervention is not the mission of the U.S. force.
 Load-Date: October 1, 1994

 

End of Document
