

Faces Behind the Podiums at the White House, Pentagon, State Department
The Associated Press
January 27, 1991, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 927 words
Byline: By JILL LAWRENCE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




When war came, the first White House word came from a good-natured veteran turned somber for his momentous task. Now, with the battle joined, a youthful former broadcaster holds court at the Pentagon.
Pete Williams, lanky, brown-haired and bespectacled, looks more like a studious college kid than the spokesman in charge of briefing America on the gulf war.
A longtime aide to Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, Williams had little background in military matters when he followed Cheney from the House of Representatives to the Pentagon. He's from Wyoming, like Cheney, and was a news director and broadcast reporter there for 10 years.
But Williams, 39, has an appealingly straightforward style leavened with lots of humor. And he doesn't hesitate to admit what he doesn't know.
When asked, for example, about the purpose of Secretary of State James A. Baker III's "quiet and private" visit to the Pentagon three nights before the war started, Williams replied: "It was so quiet and private I didn't even know he was here."
Williams has a self-described passion for sharp suits and an equally deep devotion to mountain climbing, illustrated by photographs of the Grand Tetons on his office walls. In his off-hours he is also an avid biker and chef.
On the job, he's respected for his ability "to translate military gobbledy-gook into what a normal person understands," as one journalist put it. He also gets good marks for knowing where to find information and is generally considered an authoritative source.
The question is, during wartime, what is he allowed to say?
Asked last week why there had been no discussion of air-launched cruise missiles in Operation Desert Storm, Williams replied:
"We just don't discuss that capability. I can't tell you why we don't discuss it, because then I'd be discussing it."
Williams has accepted responsibility for the unfortunate experiences of the Pentagon press pool during the invasion of Panama.
Those pool journalists were called late, missed most of the fighting and were banned from seeing any injured or dead Americans. Williams has vowed to be more aggressive in making sure the pool has better access to the action in the gulf, but it is unclear whether the military will cooperate.
For reporters covering the gulf war from Washington, the main problem will be trying to maintain the proper level of professional skepticism in the face of Williams' disarming qualities. "You almost have to watch out because he's such a nice guy," said one, who asked not to be identified by name.
Presidential spokesman Marlin Fitzwater, 48, has been a familiar figure since he started at the White House under President Reagan in early 1987. His figure, however, has changed - he has gone from roly-poly to svelte and halfway back during his White House years.
"I don't have any particular ambition to be a TV star, I'll tell you that," Fitzwater said during his first briefing on Feb. 2, 1987.
But between superpower summits and the gulf crisis, Fitzwater has turned up on television quite a bit. The balding former Kansas newspaperman is no glamorous presence, but rather a reassuring reflection of the plainspoken Midwest.
During that first briefing, Fitzwater muffed a few questions and said his predecessor - Larry Speakes - was looking more and more like a genius. His confidence level has risen considerably. Last April, when Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev decided to appoint a presidential press secretary, Fitzwater commented: "I can only assume that he took a look at my performance and said, 'I must have one of those. Get me a Marlin."'
Fitzwater used to be known for cracking jokes during daily briefings and sometimes serves as the butt of Bush's mild teasing. But as the pressure on the White House has mounted, his lighthearted remarks have faded.
The day before the war began, Fitzwater made an unusual personal appeal to journalists still in Baghdad, urging them with some emotion to leave Iraq.
"These are people I know and like and feel affection for," he said. A day later, he gravely read the first White House statement of the war.
Baker and the State Department have been nearly invisible since diplomatic efforts ceased and the war began. But new developments - like State Department assertions that Iraq-supported terrorists are planning to attack coalition countries - are made public through Baker's spokeswoman, Margaret Tutwiler.
Tutwiler was a familiar TV presence during Baker's last frantic days of diplomacy. A stylish Alabama debutante who never lost her deep drawl, Tutwiler likes to read and garden in the few hours she permits herself off the job.
She came to State on the strength of a close relationship with her boss but with little grounding in the subject she was to handle. "I'll be honest with you. It was absolutely overwhelming," she said a year ago, discussing her first days on the job.
Tutwiler was Baker's assistant at the White House, at the Treasury Department and in the 1988 Bush presidential campaign. The State Department is her first stint in front of rather than behind the scenes.
Journalists generally give her credit for being polite, charming, informed, intensely loyal to Baker - and steadfast in resisting their attempts to dig beneath her pre-mapped, pre-approved comments on world affairs.
Republican Party Chairman Lee Atwater has called Tutwiler "one of the best message deliverers in the business." Few reporters would disagree. But despite her extraordinary access to Baker - they have adjoining offices - few count on her as a source of information beyond the official line of the day.

 

End of Document
