

Facing the Future, Mexicans Struggle with the Past
The Associated Press
March 14, 1995, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 702 words
Byline: By JOHN RICE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MEXICO CITY
Body




The president who promised to lead Mexico out of the Third World into the First seems to have taken that path himself, flying into exile and leaving behind an angry, confused and still-impoverished country.
The reported flight of former President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, little more than three months after leaving office, has Mexicans reliving a past of half-hidden power struggles and political violence rather than moving forward into the brave new free trade world they had been promised.
"A time that combines tragedy and farce, the grotesque and the ridiculous," analyst Jesus Silva-Herzog Marquez, son and grandson of famed Mexican politicians, wrote Monday in the daily Reforma.
For at least a day, nobody was quite sure where Salinas had gone. The White House said Monday it didn't know if Salinas had reached the United States. But a few hours later, Salinas' office confirmed he was visiting New York.
Salinas and his crack team of Ivy League economists were once the toast of Wall Street. Leaders around the world praised their financial savvy and their North American Free Trade Agreement with the United States and Canada.
Salinas promised greater democracy and a more prosperous economy through free trade and private enterprise.
Mexicans saw their state-run economy crash in 1982, then suffered years of sacrifice - limits on wages and pensions - while dreaming of better jobs, of cars, of houses with plumbing and clean water. Once NAFTA was signed, imported goods from Pierre Cardin to Pringles were supposed to blossom in the windows of newly built shopping malls and thousands jobs would sprout.
Instead, the path to the future ran into a brick wall last year, with an Indian uprising in the south, the assassination of two top political leaders and a major devaluation in the peso.
President Ernesto Zedillo, who took office Dec. 1, blamed Salinas for the mistakes that plunged Mexico into a devaluation in December. He also had Salinas' brother arrested on charges of masterminding a major political assassination in September.
Raul Salinas was charged Feb. 28 in the killing of Jose Francisco Ruiz Massieu.
Even last year's hero - crusading prosecutor Mario Ruiz Massieu - is now accused of being a fraud, of moving millions of mysterious dollars out of Mexico while covering up Raul Salinas' involvement in the assassination.
Prosecutors say they are also investigating political motives for the murder last March of Luis Donaldo Colosio, the ruling party presidential candidate.
Zedillo, who won office in the freest Mexican presidential election ever, has imposed fiercely unpopular austerity measures - tax hikes, soaring interest rates, huge cuts in real wages - promising to set the stage for renewed growth.
The most surreal event of Mexico's recent political turmoil was Salinas' brief hunger strike early this month: a two-day appeal for public sympathy by the man most Mexicans blamed for causing them vast personal hardship.
The apparent exile and arrest called to mind the bad old days of Mexican politics, when political strongmen clashed for power and elections were little more than occasions for public fiestas and payoffs.
Many compared it to 1936, when President Lazaro Cardenas forced strongman Plutarco Elias Calles into exile to end his meddling.
Zedillo says things are different this time. "It is certain that the effort required is very intense," he said Sunday night. "But it is also certain that it will be temporary."
Mexicans, though, are skeptical. A poll published Sunday by Reforma showed 66 percent opposed Zedillo's economic policies, and 97 opposed his price hikes on gasoline and electricity.
That could mean trouble for a government that seems to have made its clearest advances in achieving freer elections.
The ruling party has already lost one governorship this year - only the third such loss it has ever admitted. The party faces tough races in the three other races this year, and the opposition is even dreaming of winning the 1997 congressional races.
"If that scenario comes to pass," wrote analyst Juan Molinar in Reforma, "we will be contemplating the death of the old Mexican political system."
 
 ---
John Rice has been an AP correspondent in Mexico since 1990.
 Load-Date: March 14, 1995

 

End of Document
