

Five Years and Billions of Dollars Later, the End of the S&L Cleanup
The Associated Press
February 22, 1994, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 770 words
Byline: By DAVE SKIDMORE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Nearly five years after the government launched its cleanup of the savings and loan industry, the end is in sight, but the cost to the taxpayers is steep - $ 150 billion and counting.
While the industry is no longer in financial trouble, echoes of the S&L disaster remain, like the 1989 failure of an obscure Arkansas thrift, Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan.
Madison's owner - 11 years before the failure - invested in some rural real estate with a small-state governor who later became president.
On Thursday, Republicans hope to turn a congressional hearing on the performance of the Resolution Trust Corp., the S&L cleanup agency, into a forum on President Clinton's long-ago investment.
The thrift industry now looks like this: last year, only 10 S&Ls failed, the fewest since 1979, and none so far this year.
The industry - about half its former size - is profitable. It's earned $ 8.9 billion since the start of 1992.
And the government bureaucracy charged with cleaning up the mess is making plans to close its own doors - its work finished - by the end of next year.
The RTC already has whittled its workforce from a peak of 8,800 to 6,740 currently. It has wrapped up the affairs of 680 S&Ls and disposed of $ 394 billion in assets - the equivalent of the country's two biggest banks, Citicorp and BankAmerica Corp., combined.
Clinton in December signed legislation providing the agency with $ 18.3 billion to finish its job, bringing the taxpayer tab for the S&L disaster - including pre-RTC bailout deals in 1988 - to more than $ 150 billion.
By the time the RTC shuts down, it expects to have handled an additional 63 failed thrifts now operating under its control and sold the $ 64 billion in assets left in its portfolio.
Clinton had nominated Florida developer Stanley Tate to preside over this final phase but Tate withdrew after his nomination ran into trouble. Washington attorney Lawrence B. Simons, head of the Federal Housing Administration in the Carter administration, now is the leading candidate.
His main challenge, aside from trying to smoothly merge the remains of his agency into the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., will be selling assets such as hopelessly delinquent loans and vacant land.
"We're just getting to the bottom of the barrel," said RTC spokesman Stephen Katsanos.
The industry that the RTC leaves behind is far smaller than the one it confronted when it opened in 1989. At the end of last September, just 1,719 S&Ls with $ 785 billion in assets operated, compared with 3,147 institutions with $ 1.35 trillion in assets at the start of 1988.
For the most part, the traditional thrift that offered customers savings accounts, home mortgages and little else, has disappeared. It's been supplanted by commercial banks and mortgage companies who sell their loans to big government-chartered mortgage buyers such as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
The surviving thrifts look like consumer-oriented banks and soon even the legal distinction between S&Ls and banks may disappear. The Clinton administration has proposed merging the Treasury Department's Office of Thrift Supervision into a new Federal Banking Commission.
"Thrifts didn't have much of a future 10 years ago and they have much less of a future today," said economist Paul Getman of Regional Financial Associates in West Chester, Pa. "Clearly … the thrift industry will vanish at some point."
Meanwhile, according to academic experts and others, the lesson of the crisis - if anything that lasts for years can be called a crisis - largely has gone unheeded.
"Washington has a certain kind of benevolent myopia about it," said U.S. Chamber of Commerce economist Martin A. Regalia, who formerly worked for the S&L industry's trade association.
What policy makers should be doing is examining the implications of rapidly changing financial and information technology and figuring out what federally insured financial institutions should be doing in the next century, he said.
"Instead the attitude is to make a few minor corrections here and there. … We've fixed the potholes. But have we designed the highway of the future? No," he said.
So what did the taxpayers get for all their money?
According to economists, the payoff is not in what taxpayers gained but in what they avoided: a collapse of the financial system and the irrevocable rupturing of public trust in the government.
"The taxpayers stepped up because the government had already guaranteed the depositors would not take a loss," said University of Houston professor Paul Horvitz. "The government and the taxpayer had to make good on that obligation. There was really no alternative."
 Load-Date: February 22, 1994

 

End of Document
