

Flood Survivors Rebuild and Pray the Rain Stays Mainly Off the Plain
The Associated Press
July 10, 1994, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1005 words
Byline: By SHARON COHEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WEST ALTON, Mo.
Body




Cathy Kinnard has been told she's foolish, she's making a mistake, she's asking for trouble. She sees it another way: She's just a flood victim going home.
Last year, endless rains submerged her house and broke her heart, and it could happen again; her house is in harm's way - in a flood plain.
Still, Cathy Kinnard is going back - rebuilding her home with the help of volunteers, friends and family and a $ 10,111.50 check from the federal government.
"I couldn't afford to do anything else," says Miss Kinnard, who is unemployed. "There was no place to put my kids. … There was no way I could mortgage anything. No one would even finance it."
"I've been called stupid and just about everything else," she says with a laugh, puffing on a cigarette in her living room, bare but for a rickety table, fan, mattress and television. "It doesn't bother me a bit. They need to walk in my shoes before they can judge."
Throughout the flood-scarred Midwest, thousands of folks whose homes were destroyed or damaged have since returned to repair, rebuild and, hopefully, rebound.
For some, it's money; for others, tradition or a love of the river. For all, there's a fierce determination to make a go of it again.
"We never thought of leaving," says Jerry Daugherty, who is building a new house in back of his condemned trailer in Portage Des Sioux. "It's our home. It's our heritage. It's our culture. . .. And the river, once it gets in your blood, it's there."
Home is St. Charles County, where the Mississippi and Missouri rivers meet, an area so ravaged that only about 10 percent of some 3,500 people hit by the flood are back home. Many more may never return.
This county typifies a paradox of many flood-wracked areas: While the federal government is spending millions of dollars to buy out residents of the flood plain, it also is spending - or loaning - millions more to rebuild the homes of these same residents' neighbors.
"Yes, there is something contradictory," says Steve Collins, operations manager of the county's buyout program. "There are a lot of reasons why people are staying, and some of them are legitimate."
"In many cases, people not taking advantage (of the buyout) don't have the credit or income to move," he says. "There are $ 25,000 and $ 30,000 homes that serve a vital need for people living on the edge. Many of the people staying are in that position."
Flood victims are allowed to reoccupy their homes if damage didn't exceed 50 percent, but federal policy allows local communities to base that calculation on a home's replacement costs, rather than its market value.
In the Midwest, replacement costs are much higher, so flood survivors with substantial damage have been able to use the more generous equation to return home - a fact that has stirred some debate.
"It's clearly the nature of our country to have sympathy and help people recover from a tragedy," says Todd Davison, chief of the Federal Emergency Management Agency's technical assistance and compliance branch. "That may be to have people reoccupying their homes - and that's not necessarily bad in the short term. In the long term … it may not be the right thing to do."
But Davison also noted that there is intense political pressure to allow people to rebuild in the same area and that no one can expect an immediate mass migration from the flood plain.
"Progress is incremental," he says. "We're not going to solve all the problems in the Midwest. … We've given communities choices. To sweep down on communities and make direct land use decisions is not a prerogative of the federal government, nor should it be."
Cathy Kinnard's house was first condemned but when she fought it, presenting a recent appraisal of about $ 38,000, the decision was reversed. She was allowed to stay.
She used $ 14,000 in flood insurance to pay off her mortgage. With her FEMA check, she gutted the entire house, installed cabinets, a floor, new wiring, a furnace with ducts in the attic, and air conditioning units on the roof - in case of more floods.
Miss Kinnard, 39, ran out of money long before the work was done, but left her temporary apartment in April and returned home with her 10-year-old daughter, Jamie. Her son, Jeremy, 20, now lives in the basement.
They have few comforts and many inconveniences - no beds, no bathroom sink, no closets. The living room floor isn't finished; rats have been scurrying about, and a snake recently was found in the cellar, home to another flood survivor: Basement Bob, a mangy yellow-haired cat with a broken leg.
And each time the river rises, so does her anxiety level.
"You think, 'All the work I put in, maybe I shouldn't have.' You get this overwhelming sick feeling," Miss Kinnard says, clutching her stomach with mock desperation.
"But you accomplish something every day and it gives you strength for the next day," she adds, pointing to purple morning glories she planted in a tree hollow. "It's just that one little step forward."
Beth Machens, part of a fourth-generation farm family near West Alton, has made progress, too.
The family's flooded home has been elevated 8 feet and they've started over with a 30-year government loan. As farmers, Mrs. Machens says there was little choice.
"It's not something you can walk away from," she says of their 1,200 acres that also were wiped out last year. "We've invested too much money and too much time."
Vicki Wunderlich also stayed in town; her husband is a native of the area. The couple considered moving, but couldn't find anything in the same income bracket to replace their damaged home.
They also didn't want to leave this close-knit town of 400.
"Everybody here knows everybody," Mrs. Wunderlich says. "If you need something, somebody's there. How often do you get that in your neighborhood? It's happened here more so since the flood."
She says she once questioned why - and how - people lived in towns that regularly flooded and endured constant turmoil. She doesn't anymore.
"You rebuild," she says. "You establish your life again. You pray that it doesn't happen again."
 Load-Date: July 10, 1994

 

End of Document
