

For All The 100-Day Talk, The Score At 200 Will Tell More
The Associated Press
April 29, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 721 words
Byline: By JOHN KING, AP Political Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Clinton hit the 100-day mark Thursday with mixed reviews but a common theme: uncertainty. A better benchmark comes in another hundred days, when the fate of Clinton's ambitious agenda will be much clearer.
In a way, to borrow a baseball metaphor, a president's first 100 days can be like spring training: full of excitement, rookie mistakes, experiments - and scores that don't necessarily tell you much about the long season to come.
Not that they don't tell you anything.
"I learned that things are not going to change quite as fast as I wanted them to," Clinton said Thursday. "But this country has some serious problems and we're going to have to get everybody serious about dealing with the problems."
Much of that dealing will come in the next 100 days, a period full of dilemmas, decisions and deadlines for Clinton.
At home, the president is putting the finishing touches on a dramatic health care reform package and his national service program, with campaign finance, welfare and education reform initiatives to follow. And, come July, Clinton faces his deadline for a plan allowing homosexuals to serve openly in the military.
All this while Congress turns Clinton's economic blueprint into an economic program, a process that will test his resolve and political skills against the myriad interest groups and lawmakers out to make changes, large and small.
"That's a real action period," says White House communications director George Stephanopoulos. "You can't really judge until that is done."
Or, as Senate Republican leader Bob Dole puts it, "We start shooting real bullets now."
Meanwhile, there are worries in Washington, shared by the public at large, that Clinton is trying to do too much, too soon.
"It's important for the administration to get back its focus on the economy and health care," said Democratic pollster Celinda Lake.
Those issue no doubt will be the major focus of a White House that says it learned a lesson watching Senate Republicans kill Clinton's jobs bill.
In the next hundred days, he will spend more time courting Republicans and, more importantly in the White House's view, more time trying to rally public support for his cornerstone initiatives.
But Clinton hardly has the luxury of focusing solely on the domestic front.
He must deliver on promises to take tougher steps against Serbian aggressors in the former Yugoslavia and to offer Russia an additional $ 1.8 billion aid package. On neither issue is there consensus in Congress or public opinion.
"For a president, having to do too much at once is a fact of life," said Republican Sen. Richard Lugar of Indiana. "He has to be both the president of the United States and the president of the free world."
At the 100-day mark, Lugar is a minority among Republicans: He credits Clinton with a "very vigorous 100 days" and believes even better days lie ahead.
"I would think in the second hundred days that the president will move much more in the direction of building bipartisan coalitions," Lugar said. "And if he does, he is going to have a great deal of success."
Democratic Sen. John Breaux of Louisiana said he already sees evidence of that on health care, "the next big issue."
Some aides want Clinton to hold off on health care until after the economic plan is adopted, but the president is committed to unveiling his plan next month.
Pollster Lake said it would be "political suicide" for Clinton to wait, but that the White House better do a better sales job than it did with the jobs bill.
"It can't be a debate about taxes. It has to be a debate about security and reform," she said. Health care, she said, "gives Clinton an enormous opportunity to define this presidency."
Even most Republicans agree it has been hard to define Clinton's presidency during the first 100 days, what House Minority Whip Newt Gingrich called "the shakedown period."
Clinton enters the next phase with many in Congress eager to test him, and a public growing increasingly impatient for proof its demands for change will be met.
"They voted for effective government," said Republican pollster Ed Goeas. "You can run a campaign on rhetoric and promises but you can't run the White House, you can't run the government, unless you have results."
 
 ---
EDITOR'S NOTE - John King covers national politics and the Clinton administration for The Associated Press.

 

End of Document
