

For Bush, Clinton, Early Pivot Points In The Struggle for The White House
The Associated Press
October 31, 1992, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 906 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




At the time, it seemed no more than an adroit way out of a political trap. But when Bill Clinton succeeded in casting himself as "the comeback kid" instead of a loser right at the start, it was a crucial stride in his unlikely march to the lead for the White House.
For President Bush, the judgments that haunted a beleaguered campaign for a second term began before Clinton was running to take advantage of them, none more critical than the decision not to attempt to spark the faltering economy in 1991 with tax cuts and jobs spending.
Amid all the words, the positioning, the debating, the spending, the ads, the protests, the road shows and the TV shows, those were among the pivot points in the struggle for the White House.
In large part, they shaped the competition before the final, fall drive for the votes Americans will cast on Tuesday, choosing among Bush, Clinton and the increasingly wild wild card, Ross Perot.
As Clinton's strategists see it now, his "comeback" claim in dealing with a New Hampshire primary defeat that wasn't even close was a defining moment in his journey from fallen front-runner to the Democratic nomination.
It proved the skills of the survivor, and he needed them all spring.
Once the leader, he'd fallen in the polls after the Gennifer Flowers affair allegations, and the controversy about his draft avoidance during the Vietnam War. Former Massachusetts Sen. Paul Tsongas won the primary, by an 8 percentage-point margin when all the votes were counted.
But before Tsongas could claim the victory, when incomplete returns gave the impression it was a close race, Clinton got the first word, the comeback claim suggested by adviser Paul Begala.
It stuck. Defeat in New Hampshire had undone Sen. Bob Dole as a Republican candidate in 1988; a relatively narrow victory had crippled Sen. Edmund S. Muskie in the Democratic campaign of 1972. Clinton survived the setback, initially because he made defeat look successful, later because he was organized and financed to keep going, and his rivals were not.
At the same time, Bush was paying political dues for the administration's misreading and inaction on the economic slowdown. The economy had slipped to recession in July 1990, but the Persian Gulf crisis and war overrode the problem and Bush's poll standings soared despite the slump at home.
Technically, the recession ended in the spring of 1991 and the economy began to grow, but so sluggishly that most voters didn't notice.
"I maintain we've been growing for six straight quarters, and most people think we're in a deep recession," Bush lamented in the final days of his campaign. But he'd already acknowledged that it didn't make any difference to an unemployed worker.
He got a boost one week before the election when the government reported a bigger than expected 2.7 increase in the economy, evidence, the president said, of the resurgence he'd been forecasting. But it still left him trying to convince voters that they were better off than they thought.
Bush had tried to talk the economy up, to restore confidence when it was sagging, but he began acknowledging about a year ago that it wasn't rebounding as he wanted, and that people were hurting.
But Bush chose not to push a 1991 economic revival plan. Then, when he got to New Hampshire to start his own campaign, he conceded that the economy was in free fall there, and promised a program to deal with it.
By that time, congressional Democrats had been arguing for months that this was a president with no program and not much interest in domestic policy. Bush insisted it wasn't so, but it stuck, and the theme was waiting for Clinton when he entered the race.
It remains an issue central to the Democratic campaign for change, unshaken by the president's subsequent economic revival proposals and his belated promise to put a new economic team in charge in a second term.
Weakened by the economic slowdown, Bush was susceptible to the protest vote he weathered in the primary elections. Because the primary season challenge came from a conservative, he tried to respond with gestures to the right, in the spring and at the convention. That may have placated GOP conservatives, but it didn't help him with wavering, middle-road voters.
The rise of Ross Perot also was a defining event in the 1992 campaign, whatever his share of Tuesday's vote.
For weeks during the spring, the polls showed Clinton limping in third place, behind Bush and Perot. That started to shift after the other two got into a scrap in June, Perot accusing the Republicans of dirty tricks, the Bush people calling him paranoid and frightening.
While that was happening Clinton published his economic proposals, worked the TV talk show circuit, stared down Jesse Jackson, and said he'd let Bush and Perot argue without him.
It worked, and Clinton's managers see that as the point at which their man began to project the stature and attention of a potential president. Clinton came out of the July Democratic convention leading in the polls, a standing he has held ever since.
That's why he's staying out of the second bout between Bush and Perot.
"Let the other guys fight … and call each other everything but a blue goose," he said in Raleigh, N.C., the other night.
He's ahead, and doesn't want any more turning points.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.

 

End of Document
