

For Whom the Bells Toll - The Beggar at the Gate
The Associated Press
November 8, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 745 words
Byline: By DAVID BRIGGS, Associated Press Writer
Body




Each weekday morning, tens of thousands of commuters filing out of Grand Central Terminal in New York City will pass by scores of destitute people.
Some of these less fortunate people will be just pulling up the cardboard boxes layered over warm-air grates on which they have slept the night before, and be ready to disappear into soup kitchens or city parks.
Others will call attention to their plights; the mother sitting down in a terminal passageway with her children beside her asking for money, or older men, with crudely painted signs telling of their disabilities, holding out a tin cup or a box in front of the stores along fashionable Fifth Avenue.
In a city so filled with humanity that insensitivity to others becomes for many almost a survival tactic, the claims made by street beggars easily can be dismissed. But particularly with the approach of Thanksgiving and Christmas, days when many Americans stop to count their own blessings, the appeals of the poor in New York City and throughout the nation seem more compelling than ever.
And the Bible offers little consolation to those who ignore their responsibility, according to clergy and biblical scholars.
In the 25th chapter of the Gospel of Matthew, Jesus says that individuals will be judged on how they treat the "least of these my brethren." The reward for caring for the poor, eternal life; for ignoring the poor, eternal punishment.
The parable of the beggar at the gate evokes an even more powerful image in the Gospel of Luke. The rich man who ignored the beggar during his lifetime is now in Hades, rejected by Abraham in his plea even to have the beggar Lazarus dip the end of his finger in water to offer a brief respite from his eternal torment.
"Son, remember that you in your lifetime received your good things, and Lazarus in like manner evil things; but now he is in comfort here, and you are in anguish," Abraham replied.
But what course of action does that suggest for today? Do religious individuals fulfill their moral responsibility by filling the kettles of the Salvation Army or similar social agencies, or are they called to in some way meet the needs of every individual who approaches them?
The biblical mandate to care for the poor is clear, but no one way is prescribed, according to Paul D. Hanson, Lamont Profeesor of Divinity at Harvard Divinity School.
"I think the response ultimately does have to come out of the individual conscience," Hanson said.
So the person who walks past the street beggar, but works in a homeless shelter or lobbies for political action on behalf of the poor may be doing more for the needy than the person who gives something to each individual who asks for help, he said.
Still, gifts that some would argue come more from the heart than from the mind have a special meaning.
Several years ago, while walking toward his car in Boston with Nobel laureate George Wald, Hanson and Wald were approached by a panhandler who appeared to have been drinking. When Wald gave him a bill whose denomination he did not notice, Hanson asked him why, since it seemed obvious the man would just "drink it up."
Hanson recalled that a beneficent aura fell over Wald's face when he replied, "I hope it warms him for an instant."
In upstate New York, Monsignor David Lee solves the dilemma by bringing a pocketful of change with him wherever he goes, whether it is downtown Buffalo or downtown Manhattan.
He knows both that people may try to take advantage of him and that the limited resources he offers will not be enough to change the individual's life. But the act of listening to the person asking for help and responding even in a small way is important, Lee said.
"I feel I have at least tried to show that person I have some compassion and understanding for their suffering," the soft-spoken Roman Catholic clergyman said. "I need some way to show respect for the dignity of the human person who is there."
What resonates in his mind is the rich man's response to Lazarus in the parable in Luke.
"The master never stopped to notice me. That image kind of haunts me," he said.
Hanson would understand.
"We've got to act in a humane way, whatever our choice is," the Lutheran professor said. "I think that the act is at least as important in saving our own humanity as in meeting that particular, immediate physical need."
---
David Briggs has reported on religion for The Associated Press since November 1988. Briggs received his master's degree from Yale Divinity School in 1985.

 

End of Document
