

Freshman and the Faithful: Guns, Waco and Government as the Enemy
The Associated Press
July 9, 1995, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1031 words
Byline: By JILL LAWRENCE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RICHMOND, Ind.
Body




The earnest freshman congressman, his sleeves rolled up and his professionally lettered charts on display, had just described his party's ambitious and potentially explosive plans for balancing the budget and revamping Medicare.
But many of the constituents who showed up at Rep. David McIntosh's town meeting had other things on their minds: Parental rights. National ID cards. The federal ban on assault weapons. A government that thinks farmers are "dumb." Civil liberties abuses in a new anti-terrorism bill. Tragedies involving the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
"A lot of people don't realize that twice as many children were killed at Waco than Oklahoma City," one man said angrily. "There needs to be something done."
Welcome home to the heartland.
Bolstered by a weak opponent and the national GOP landslide, McIntosh won a congressional seat last fall in a district long held by moderate Democrat Phil Sharp. It's a classic American mosaic of farms, factories, tiny towns and a handful of small cities. McIntosh returned here in the midst of Congress' Fourth of July recess.
Richmond, population 38,705, was settled in the 1800s by Quakers. Their pacifist legacy endures in Earlham College; modern times are reflected in gangs, several recent shootings and the Old Trails Rifle and Pistol Club, which has doubled its membership since President Clinton took office.
The Richmond City Council is split 5-4, Democrats to Republicans. "The town is quite bipartisan. Every eight years or so they switch to a mayor of the other party," said Dick Holden, Earlham's publicity director and a 25-year resident of the area.
"There's a lot of independent thinking and common sense," says Sally Hutton, a house cleaner, health-care aide and city council member who chairs the county Democratic Party.
McIntosh, 37, is unswervingly conservative. A graduate of Yale and the University of Chicago law school, he once held one of the most polarizing jobs in Washington - director of the Dan Quayle competitiveness council aimed at dismantling regulations. Now he's a freshman-class leader in the vanguard of the GOP assault on big government.
The young lawmaker's "town meeting" was attended almost exclusively by gun-club members and alumni of his campaign. He said he visits nursing homes, meets with union leaders and talks with plant workers on their lunch breaks to hear from other types of voters - people he'll need to keep his seat.
According to McIntosh, he stood firm for the huge tax cut in the GOP budget plan because so many blue-collar workers told him to "just cut our taxes." He also said nursing-home residents warned him in no uncertain terms to leave Medicare alone - leading him to conclude that any cost-cutting plan needs to retain the current system as an option.
Republicans are proposing massive $ 270 billion savings in Medicare - a prospect McIntosh presented in the rosiest light possible at the outset of his town meeting. "Preserve, protect, improve," is the GOP theme, he said.
Though most of his audience was elderly, only two people brought up Medicare. One made a statistical point and the other wanted to share all the waste, fraud and abuse she observed as a driver for the program.
People won't focus on what Republicans are doing to Medicare "until it affects their pocketbook," Hutton said. Her party is holding meetings across the country telling senior citizens the GOP is planning major Medicare disruptions in order to finance a tax cut that benefits mainly the wealthy.
"We're anticipating they will get the message that is calculated to make them fearful," McIntosh says. But he also acknowledges that "right now is a somewhat precarious time for Republicans" because the party has made a commitment to slow down the Medicare growth rate without saying how it will achieve that.
At his town meeting, McIntosh got off easy across the board. Only one person questioned a new Republican policy - a local official who sought and received reassurances that small towns would get their share of the many new state-administered block grants in the pipeline.
Many people asked about issues central to the hard-line conservative agenda. They were happy with what they heard.
The very first questioner asked McIntosh where he stood on a "parental rights restoration act" creating a presumption that parents have the right to determine how their children are raised and disciplined.
"Right now we've got the closest thing to martial law that I've ever seen, the way welfare can come in and take a child over a phone call, an anonymous phone call," said the agitated questioner.
"I think that's wrong," McIntosh told her, and said he'd already committed to co-sponsor the bill.
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms "frankly needs some controls," he said in response to another question. A new anti-terrorism bill making it easier for the government to wiretap phones and examine financial records "tramples on a lot of liberties" and "goes in the wrong direction," he said.
McIntosh also assured his audience that Congress would hold hearings on Waco in July and vote on the weapons ban before the end of the year. He said he still supports repeal, a position criticized by the local newspaper.
"People who are gun-owners feel that elected officials … have betrayed them," McIntosh said later. "They do come back and they do check … They are definitely testing that issue."
They were not the only ones checking. Others wanted a progress report on GOP plans to get rid of the Education Department and end federal funding for public broadcasting and the National Endowment for the Arts. And one woman, echoing the anti-government sentiment palpable throughout the 90-minute session, asked McIntosh's position on national identification cards she considered "very scary."
The congressman said he couldn't agree more. "They have a tremendous amount of information about us. If you let them centralize it in one computer with an ID card, it's too tempting for Big Brother to come in and try to control our lives," he said.
They? Them?
McIntosh said later he didn't even realize he had referred that way to the government of which he is part. "I guess it's a mindset," he said.
 Load-Date: July 9, 1995

 

End of Document
