

Gays in the Military: Paying a Political Price on the Installment Plan
The Associated Press
July 25, 1993, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 661 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Once the campaign promise was uttered, there was no way to avert a political price for President Clinton's pledge to lift the ban on gays in the military. Now he's paying it on an installment plan.
He stirred the issue in the first place, let it become an early White House distraction, arranged to make an unpopular decision twice, and isn't through with it yet.
Congress is going to vote on a compromise that satisfied neither the gays who want the ban eliminated, nor the opponents who want it to stand unaltered. With the influential Sen. Sam Nunn apparently on board for the Clinton plan, chances are it will be approved, but not without a fight.
The courts are just getting started and they'll have the last word. They might have had the first, too, but for the campaign pledge that put a no-win question on the Clinton agenda.
"I don't view it that way," Clinton said on Larry King's CNN call-in program. "I was in a no-win if the only way I win is to do exactly what I think is right ..."
That would have meant lifting the ban as promised, a step he said Congress would have overruled immediately, probably as part of a defense bill he could not have vetoed.
Besides, to let it become a veto issue - his first - would have heightened the argument and helped opponents keep it going, into the 1994 congressional campaign and probably into Clinton's own in 1996.
Republicans didn't tackle Clinton on the question in the 1992 campaign, when the subject drew neither notice nor attention. The year before the election he'd said that he wanted to lift the ban, an ad lib reply to a student question after a talk at Harvard University. He made the campaign promise to a gay audience at a fundraising rally in Beverly Hills, and in his campaign book, "Putting People First."
Clinton says he never committed to a change in the rules of conduct that would let gays serve in the military without regard to what they do in private. The record bears that out; he didn't mention it.
Now private lives have become the disputed crux of the compromise, which forbids disclosure of homosexuality and continues the rule against homosexual conduct, on or off base. It takes effect Oct. 1.
Still, Secretary of Defense Les Aspin said it achieved most of what Clinton promised. His nutshell explanation at one in a series of congressional hearings on the issue:
"As a general proposition, the policy being 'don't ask-don't tell-don't pursue,' the new part is in the 'don't ask' and 'don't pursue,' not in the 'don't tell.' "
So the military won't try to find out who's gay - no inquisitions or witch hunts, Aspin said - but if it does learn of homosexuality, that remains grounds for discharge.
It also will be grist for lawyers. "We're going to have to test any proposal in the courts," Aspin said. "There are people out there who want to litigate lots of things, and test the limits and push their different agendas ..."
A USA Today-CNN poll published on Thursday suggests that Clinton may have gained support with the compromise, deemed acceptable by 58 percent, including some of the majority who still favor a ban on gays in the military.
A first, temporary order, to stop asking recruits about homosexuality, was issued Jan. 29.
To counter complaints that he'd been distracted and lost his focus, Clinton commissioned a time study and said he showed he'd spent only 2 hours on the issue in his first 100 days. According to the White House, the president spent very little time on the matter until the week before the new policy was set, and then dealt with it for only a few hours.
That same sensitivity erupted when Clinton was asked a question that suggested his compromise signaled weakness.
"I am the first president who ever took on this issue," he snapped. "… It may be a sign of madness, sir, but it is not a sign of weakness."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.

 

End of Document
