

Getting the Mob Out of the Garment District - Really
The Associated Press
July 13, 1995, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 737 words
Byline: By LARRY McSHANE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The government's long war on organized crime has not removed the mob from the Fulton Fish Market. Or the construction industry. Or the garbage carting business.
Mobsters went off to jail; the mob stayed behind.
But New York's Garment District is a different story.
A unique 1992 plea bargain, authorities say, let the mobsters stay out of jail but stripped them of control of the district's trucking business - a multimillion-dollar source of cash for the Gambino crime family since the late 1950s.
"In the old days, you would take out one guy, and the new CEO moved up," said former Police Commissioner Robert J. McGuire, who oversaw the dismantling of the Gambino cartel. "You never interrupted their operations. Nothing changed."
Nothing is the same in the Garment District since brothers Thomas and Joseph Gambino were driven out.
Manufacturers say the cost of shipping clothes has been cut in half, from 40 cents to 20 cents per item. Scores of independent truckers have flourished and created new competition. And revenues on the former Gambino-controlled trucking routes have tumbled by $ 4.1 million in the last three years, McGuire said.
"Times have changed. Everything has changed," said independent trucker Louis Chan, whose willingness to speak was another sign of the changing times.
"I don't want to say I was skeptical at the beginning of this, but you say to yourself, 'Nothing works the way it's supposed to in life,"' McGuire said in his office at the New York security firm Kroll Associates. "This one did."
What made this one work, even as Gov. George Pataki stewed over chronic union corruption at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, the district attorney pursued charges against mob-controlled garbage haulers and Mayor Rudolph Giuliani struggled to break the mob's decades-long grip on the fish market?
It started with the prosecution of the Gambino brothers, sons of powerful mob boss Carlo Gambino. Thomas, who was married to the daughter of mob boss Tommy Lucchese, was a reputed family capo. He and brother Joseph allegedly lined their pockets through the lucrative fashion industry trucking trade.
No business in the Garment District, which runs for 10 blocks west of Seventh Avenue, survives without truckers. On a typical morning along 39th Street, trucks and vans of all sizes battle for parking spaces. It's not unusual to see three dozen on a single block.
For 30 years, the Gambinos controlled trucking between the Garment District manufacturers and sewing shops in Chinatown, shuttling the unfinished product - "cutwork" - back and forth.
Initially, they recruited business the old-fashioned way: through violence and intimidation. By the 1980s, however, they were so entrenched that a whispered mention of the Gambino name made truckers flinch. No muscle was needed.
Mob control raised retail prices for Gambino-trucked items 7 percent, authorities say. Because of the "mob tax," a $ 200 Ralph Lauren blouse, for example, would cost $ 215.
Yet the Gambino brothers avoided conviction until 1992, when they and two associates cut short their trial to cut a deal with prosecutors.
To avoid jail, the Gambinos pleaded guilty to restraint of trade and paid $ 12 million in fines. They sold off their trucking companies. And, along with their younger brother and Thomas' son, they agreed to stay out of the trucking business.
The fines were used to pay for McGuire's operation as special monitor for the Garment District - a vital factor, since previous monitoring efforts at other mob-controlled sites were hamstrung by a lack of cash.
The monitors paid out $ 800,000 in victims' compensation to businesses damaged by the monopoly, gaining instant credibility in the insular fashion industry.
McGuire's mission was specific: create a level playing field in the district's trucking industry. He assembled a team of investigators, accountants, computer specialists and business analysts. A huge computer database tracked prices, business contacts, new companies.
It's not clear if the end of Gambino domination has translated into savings for shoppers. McGuire, whose job as monitor runs through February 1997, has no numbers regarding clothing costs.
Thomas Gambino, who dodged a prison term in the Garment District, wasn't as lucky with his Connecticut loansharking and bookmaking operation. A more traditional prosecution led to a conviction.
The 65-year-old Gambino is waiting to begin a five-year sentence.
 Load-Date: July 13, 1995

 

End of Document
