

HEAD: James Carroll prints the facts, not the legend
The Associated Press
June 21, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 618 words
Byline: By MARIO SZICHMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




In the movie "The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance," a journalist says that when the legend is better than the facts, he prints the legend.
In his eighth novel, "Memorial Bridge" (Houghton Mifflin), author James Carroll seems to have done just the opposite. He has printed the facts instead of being carried away by the legend that surrounded his father's life - and in doing so, he has paid homage to a man who, during the Vietnam War, was at the opposite side of the trench chosen by two of his sons.
Carroll admits that Sean Dillon, the main character in"Memorial Bridge," was inspired "by the life story of my father, Joseph Carroll," an FBI man in Chicago who apprehended gangster Roger Touhy in the late 1930s, went to Washington during World War II, became an Air Force general and finally the founding director of the Defense Intelligence Agency, from the time of the Cuban missile crisis to the Vietnam War.
But the main concern of the novelist was "with the inner life of the character, Sean Dillon. "
Obsessed with the bigger-than-life image of his father, Carroll started to think of "Memorial Bridge" when "my father began to die, three years ago. He had a series of strokes and died last winter. And it occurred to me that as a novelist, it was my license to answer the great questions about his conscience, his heart, the interior world of this man of powerful morality who witnessed the systematic corruption of the intelligence community. I did not have real access to that. My father never confided in me. So this, in a sense, is fiction, although the large arc of this life is factual."
An author who always feels "very grateful" when he is compared to Graham Greene, Carroll says that he likes "intense, heated conflict. I think of my novels as battles between opposing forces. So the trick is to have forces powerful enough to permit a serious confrontation over something that matters.
"That is why I do write in my novels about large political conflict, the Depression, World War II, Vietnam, large public issues. But for me, the question is always: What is the effect on individuals, on private lives?"
It is possible that Carroll's Irish heritage has helped him to imagine his world as a battlefield. "The main characters in 'Memorial Bridge' are Irish-Americans. To me, the great story of the Irish in the United States is that they left behind a kind of innate experience of conflict with the oppressing ruling class, and gradually, in the United States, they became part of the establishment. But I think that many Irish-Americans, Sean Dillon among them, can not quite completely give themselves to this establishment. They seem to be on the margin of it."
The novelist thinks that although his father "stayed with the Pentagon over 20 years and made a success of his life there, he was an outsider" who, at the end of his career, took the risk of becoming an outcast.
The main challenge for the Carrolls, father and sons, came with the Vietnam War. While Gen. Carroll was director of the Defense Intelligence Agency, James, then a Catholic priest, was an active opponent of the war, and his brother, Dennis, was a draft-resister.
The time came, James recalls, when Dennis needed a lawyer to defend him before a Selective Service appeal board. "He asked my father to be his lawyer. And my father did. He went to the board, in uniform, and made my brother's case, and my brother was granted conscientious objector status as a result of it. There was a powerful reconciliation between him and my brother. And that event allowed our family to stay intact."
In "Memorial Bridge," James Carroll meticulously prints the facts, and it is hard not to think of them as the stuff of which legends are made.

 

End of Document
