

Hear The One About The Republicans Meeting in the Phone Booth?
The Associated Press
January 19, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 413 words
Byline: By DAVID WILKISON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CHARLESTON, W.Va.
Body




The old Statehouse joke is that the Republicans have so few legislators they could all meet in a telephone booth. Now it's no joke.
Sen. Donna Boley is the only one left in the Senate to call the shots for the GOP.
Even in West Virginia, which has a Democratic registration edge of more than 2-to-1, a ratio of 33 Democrats to one Republican is uncommon.
According to the Denver-based National Conference of State Legislatures, the state is the only one in the nation with a sole Republican in the Senate.
The isolation doesn't deter Boley, 55, of St. Marys in the northwestern part of the state.
"I don't anticipate any trouble being a Republican state senator from one district representing all the people and then trying to represent the whole Republican Party," she said.
And she does have 26 Republican colleagues in the 100-member House of Delegates.
She believes many more West Virginians think like Republicans, "but when it comes to the polls, when it comes down to voting, they do not have a chance to vote for a conservative."
Boley, a retired secretary and accounting supervisor, entered the Legislature in May 1986 to fill the unexpired term of Sen. Sam White and was elected to a full term in 1988.
Last year, she was one of four Senate Republicans. But two lost in the November elections and a third decided against seeking re-election and was replaced by a Democrat. So when the new Legislature began its session Jan. 9, the Senate GOP was left in Boley's hands.
Senate Majority Leader Truman Chafin calls her "conscientious, hard-working and a very caring person. She's emotionally sensitive to things and very protective of the Republican Party."
Paradoxically, though, Chafin wishes there were more senators on the opposite side of the aisle.
"It's not good," said Chafin. "It's not healthy in terms of the functional part of the Legislature. The more Republicans you have, then it makes for a better fight. It's pretty hard to fight with your own party."
The early days of the session have been especially busy for Boley because a state law provides that a Republican be allowed to sit on all 17 Senate committees.
Boley appointed herself to six committees, including committees on finance, education, and health and human services, and the key Rules Committee, which controls the flow of all legislation in the Senate.
"That's a lot," Chafin said. "She just physically can't be in three places at once."
"There hasn't been a spare moment for me or my staff," Boley admitted.

 

End of Document
