

How The Clinton Defense Budget Became the Clinton-Domenici Budget
The Associated Press
May 14, 1995, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 792 words
Byline: By JOHN DIAMOND, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Republican budget writers in Congress faced a dilemma when they got to defense spending: The GOP has been critical of President Clinton's cuts, but defense represented a huge source of potential savings.
And big savings were exactly what Republicans needed.
The result was a surprise. While the House Budget Committee opted to increase spending for arms and troops, the Senate Budget Committee - to the consternation of some influential senators - went down the line, to the dollar, with Clinton.
A number of influential Republicans were unhappy and willing to say so.
"I was a little bit surprised (with the Senate proposal)," said Rep. Bill Livingston, R-La., chairman of the House Appropriations Committee. "I thought that everybody on both sides of the Hill was convinced that we had to freeze (rather than cut) defense spending." He said senior military people "not only are shocked, they're concerned that it's a hit that they can't accept."
Sen. Pete Domenici, R-N.M., chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, acknowledged that many of his own party colleagues wanted more for the Pentagon.
"All the recommendations that I received from those in the United States Senate said our number's too low," Domenici said.
Roughly half of what the government spends outside of interest on the debt and entitlement programs such as Medicare and Social Security goes to defense. Thus the Republicans' difficulty: How to balance the budget and still address their own claims that Clinton has recklessly neglected defense.
"I really felt pulled back and forth," said Sen. Trent Lott, R-Miss., who, as majority whip and a member of both the Senate Budget and Armed Services Committees, had a front-row seat in the defense debate.
The House Budget Committee opted to add substantially to defense in its spending proposal for the next five years. The committee plan represents a pronounced jump compared to Clinton's proposal, which calls for a dip and then a gradual leveling off of the Pentagon budget.
Despite the end of the Cold War, these Republicans want more money for a national missile defense system that could defend against a one- or two-missile attack by a rogue state such as North Korea or Libya. They also argue that steady defense cuts dating back to the mid-1980s have eroded military readiness and led the Pentagon to shortchange modernization programs.
In the Senate, on the eve of Domenici's presentation of his plan, 17 GOP senators - including Majority Leader Bob Dole - wrote him urging an increase.
"Under the Clinton administration, defense has been in a steady decline," the lawmakers said. "If a Republican-led Congress fails to reverse that decline and correct the devastating trends in the armed forces, the American people will hold us accountable."
Sen. Strom Thurmond, R-S.C., chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, called the Domenici plan inadequate, saying that for the next fiscal year alone it falls short by $ 12 billion of the minimum needed.
Opponents of increasing defense budgets were equally harsh.
"The big winners in this budget will be the millionaires and billionaires and defense," said Sen. Barbara Boxer, D-Calif.
Sen. Robert Byrd, D-W.Va., said any notion that defense could be increased while the budget was being brought into balance was "pure folly."
Rep. John Kasich, R-Ohio, chairman of the House Budget Committee, has been emphasizing that Pentagon spending would be just as subject to the budget knife as domestic programs.
Instead of being five-sided, Kasich cracked, "The Pentagon will end up being a triangle by the time we are done."
Nevertheless, his proposal gives the Pentagon $ 70 billion more over the next five years than it would have under the Clinton plan.
By 2000, the Pentagon budget would be $ 287.3 billion in Kasich's plan, $ 11.4 billion more than Clinton foresaw.
For the fiscal year beginning Oct. 1, 1995, the Kasich proposal would add $ 10 billion to the Clinton's budget, which might now be called the Clinton-Domenici plan.
The Senate Budget Committee, meanwhile, was expected at least to maintain defense spending through the end of the decade at about $ 270 billion. Days before the Senate committee plan was unveiled, Lott said that among pro-defense Republicans, "we've had a real struggle trying to get agreement" even on that amount.
What may be going on is some first-round gamesmanship. If the differing versions pass the House and Senate, they would go to a conference committee where House-Senate negotiators would hammer out a compromise.
"In the end it will be something a little bit higher than the president's suggestion," said Sen. James Exon, D-Neb., ranking Democrat on the budget committee, "so the Republicans can take credit for providing more for defense than the Democrat."
 Load-Date: May 14, 1995

 

End of Document
