

How the Republicans Would Get the Deficit to Zero
The Associated Press
May 19, 1995, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 2905 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




For the first 100 days, the Republicans who run Congress worked to reduce what the federal government does. Now they are struggling to reduce how much it spends.
The House has adopted and the Senate is debating plans by their budget committees that would point the way to something not achieved in Washington since 1969: a balanced federal budget.
Under the GOP plans, the federal deficit would reach zero by 2002. The government now spends about $ 200 billion a year more than it takes in, and the budget that President Clinton sent to Congress in January projected deficits in that range for the foreseeable future.
Rep. John Kasich of Ohio, the brash 43-year-old chairman of the House Budget Committee, calls the House plan - it is largely the Kasich plan - nothing less than "revolutionary."
Not only does it outline $ 1.4 trillion in federal spending cuts over the next seven years, it leaves room for a hefty $ 350 billion worth of tax cuts over the seven-year period. The Kasich plan calls for eliminating three Cabinet departments and 13 other agencies. In addition, it envisions that 284 programs would be closed or would have their money sent directly to the states in block grants.
The Senate budget plan, drafted by Sen. Pete Domenici, R-N.M., is less far-reaching and less detailed. It calls for nearly $ 1 trillion worth of cuts in projected spending over the seven years, and would provide for a tax cut only if the tax cuts did not interfere with the goal of a balanced budget.
After both the Senate and House act on the budget plans, the differences will be ironed out and a single governing budget will be adopted.
However, the plans are just that - plans. House and Senate congressional committees would be obliged to live within the overall budget plan targets for the programs they oversee, but they would be permitted to find other approaches for achieving those savings. The debate over exactly what to trim will engage Congress for much of the rest of the year.
If Congress follows the plans as written, hundreds of government programs - big and small, prominent and obscure, new and old - would be cut. The House plan calls for closing down the departments of Commerce, Education and Energy - transferring some of their functions elsewhere and killing off others. The Senate plan would eliminate the Commerce Department but retain the other two.
A big part of the savings would come from reducing the projected growth of Medicare and Medicaid, health insurance for the elderly and the poor, and from other social programs.
 
 Here are summaries of how the Republican House and Senate plans, if implemented in future legislation, would affect some specific programs:
 
 SOCIAL SECURITY: Refiguring COLAs, Reducing Payments
 
 Starting in 1999, retired and disabled Americans would see smaller cost-of-living increases in their monthly Social Security checks under the Republican proposals.
Both the House and Senate plans would change the way the federal government calculates inflation.
Under the House plan, the government would lower the Consumer Price Index, which is used to set cost-of-living increases for Social Security and other retirement programs, by 0.6 percent in 1998. Senate legislation would be less severe, lowering the CPI by 0.2 percent.
So if inflation, as measured by the CPI, were 1.6 percent in 1998, Social Security recipients would get an increase in their benefits of only 1 percent starting in 1999.
Older Americans would feel only a small pinch at first, but the impact is cumulative because not only would each cost-of-living adjustment be lower, but those increases would be applied to a smaller monthly payment.
According to Social Security Administration estimates using the current COLA system, the average retired worker who begins receiving benefits in 1998 would collect $ 831 a month in 1999.
Under the House plan, the same retiree would receive $ 5 a month less - a $ 60 reduction in benefits over a year.
In a decade, the same worker would be getting $ 75 a month less than the present formula would provide.
-By Jennifer Dixon
 

 
 MEDICARE AND MEDICAID: The Boldest Cuts
 
 The boldest piece of the Republican blueprint is the plan to save upwards of $ 450 billion over seven years from Medicare and Medicaid, the government health programs that cover 70 million elderly, disabled and low-income Americans.
Republicans stress that the programs' budgets would still climb, but at only half the current 10 percent annual rate.
But Democrats and lobbyists for senior citizens and medical providers say the belt-tightening will lead to cutbacks in care, force the elderly to pay more and bring hard times for hospitals that serve the poor.
The Senate Budget Committee has deferred to a bipartisan commission to figure out how to achieve its targeted $ 256 billion in Medicare savings.
In the House, a GOP health task force has suggested converting Medicare into a voucher program with seniors getting a fixed amount to shop for private coverage. The elderly now go to any doctor and Medicare picks up 80 percent of the cost.
-By Christopher Connell
 

 
 VETERANS: A Nick, Not a Hit
 
 Spending for veterans' programs, currently at $ 38 billion, would rise slightly over the next seven years to about $ 40 billion in 2002 in the House and Senate budget proposals. That's far less than the White House projected.
Conscious of veterans' political power, the Republicans would keep compensation and full cost-of-living adjustments for veterans now receiving benefits.
But they also would drop or limit VA medical facility construction, phase in higher prescription copayments for some veterans, tighten eligibility rules for some benefits and freeze administrative budgets at 1995 levels.
The Veterans Affairs Department said a Senate provision that would limit compensation to veterans disabled while on duty "would mean veterans of any future conflict involving severe stress and exposure to poorly understood hazards might not get earned and deserved benefits."
-By Jim Abrams
 
MORE
There's some leeriness in Congress about cutting taxes at a time when the government needs every penny it can get to eliminate the federal deficit. In the Senate, Democrats and even some Republicans are cool to the idea. Still, when the budget dust settles, politics point to a tax cut.
Two Senate chairmen - Bob Packwood of Finance and Pete Domenici of Budget - are key players. Packwood hasn't ruled out a tax cut and Domenici has allowed room in his proposed budget for a $ 170 billion cut over seven years, provided - and this is a big if - Congress adopts spending cuts aimed at eliminating the deficit by 2002.
House Republicans, by contrast, want a tax cut twice as large, including a $ 500-per-child credit, a sharp drop in capital-gains taxes, liberalized Individual Retirement Accounts, more generous depreciation for businesses and credits to encourage adoption and the care of elderly relatives at home.
Some senators, notably presidential candidate Phil Gramm, R-Texas, want more tax cuts than Domenici's budget would allow. And Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole of Kansas, the front-running GOP presidential contender, is eager to please voters as well.
Senate Democrats generally have taken an anti-tax-cut stance, but Clinton has signaled a willingness to sign a small tax cut.
-By Dave Skidmore
 

 
 COMMERCE: Splintered, But Surviving
 
 Republicans plan to abolish the Commerce Department but many of its functions would just move under different management. The department estimates that 60 percent of its operations would be transferred elsewhere.
Likely to survive, but be moved, are the Census Bureau, National Weather Service, Patent and Trade Office and the Bureau of Economic Analysis, which compiles data on the economy.
The plans call for cutting $ 1 billion in programs that promote overseas trade and pay for technological innovations.
Commerce Department officials insist that reshuffling the department's 37,000 employees will not make for more efficiency.
"I don't know why you would start with Commerce," said Lawrence Bossidy, chief executive of Allied Signal Inc., a manufacturer of car parts and aerospace equipment. "It does a lot of things that are helpful to U.S. businesses."
-By James H. Rubin
 

 
 ENERGY AND INTERIOR: Scaling Back All Along the Line
 
 The budget plans take particular aim at the Energy Department. The House recommends closing the department and shifting its nuclear weapons program elsewhere. The Senate proposal would keep the department intact, but with sharply reduced research programs, especially those involving renewable energy and conservation programs.
Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary said shutting down her department would produce only marginal savings since two-thirds of its $ 17.5 billion budget goes for weapons and cleanup programs that cannot be abandoned.
Elsewhere, the Republicans target a variety of federal land programs at the Interior Department. Spending on national parks operations would be cut by 10 percent and purchases of private lands within parks would be frozen for five years.
To raise money, the Republicans would sell oil leases at the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in Alaska, a prospect that worries environmentalists.
-By H. Josef Hebert
 

 
 AGRICULTURE: Farm, Nutrition Spending Compete for the Same Dollars
 
 There was a time in Congress when urban interests, seeking to promote nutritional programs for poor people, worked hand-in-hand with rural interests to make sure food and farm programs got plenty of money. But that alliance is fracturing as they compete for scarce dollars.
The Republican budget proposals to decrease spending on farm programs range from cuts of $ 9 billion over seven years, as the Senate committee proposes, to $ 17 billion proposed by the House.
By contrast, the Clinton administration's budget projected trimming the budget by only $ 1.5 billion over five years.
Senate Agriculture Committee Chairman Richard Lugar, R-Ind. and a candidate for the GOP presidential nomination, wants to push the Senate plan to $ 15 billion in cuts over five years by phasing down major crop subsidies and eliminating them altogether for exports.
In addition, the welfare reform bill that passed the House and awaits consideration in the Senate would cut $ 24 billion in the food stamp program over five years.
-By Robert Greene
 
 ---
 
 EDUCATION: Money Saved - and Ideology Served to Boot
 
 For conservative Republicans, cutting the federal education budget would do two good things: Reduce the deficit and end liberals' meddling in schools.
The federal government provides just 6 percent of the money spent on education nationwide, but that money's symbolic importance is great. It smooths inequalities between poor school districts and rich ones, provides extra aid for children with disabilities, and helps young people pay for college.
It also, Republicans say, is used to coerce schools into teaching liberal values.
The House plan calls for eliminating the Education Department altogether, switching some of its programs, such as aid for disabled students, to other agencies. Senate Republicans would keep the department, but eliminate many of its programs.
Both houses would kill Clinton's new national service program for young people and would make student loans for college more costly.
-By Sally Streff Buzbee
 

 
 LEGAL SERVICES: The Long Debate over Lawyers for the Poor
 
 For 12 years, Presidents Reagan and Bush tried to kill the Legal Services Corporation that distributes federal money to numerous programs providing legal help to the poor. But a Congress dominated by Democrats refused to let it die.
Now Clinton is trying to stave off attempts in the Republican-led Congress to kill or greatly reduce the 21-year-old agency. The House budget plan calls for phasing out Legal Services over five years. The Senate Budget Committee's plan would seek a 65 percent cut in the agency's $ 415 million budget.
The agency gives money to 323 local programs that operate more than 900 neighborhood law offices where free lawyers help poor people in such non-criminal legal jams as child-custody battles, benefits disputes and evictions.
-By Richard Carelli
 
MORE
Transportation Secretary Federico Pena says the Republican plans would mean cutting highway projects, dropping cash infusions for mass transit service, trimming safety programs and changing his agency "into a chopping block."
Over five years, the proposed Senate budget plan calls for slashing $ 25 billion in transport spending; the House plan seeks to trim $ 6 billion.
The American Public Transit Association said the GOP plans would force local mass transit systems to raise fares, reduce service and seek more state and local assistance. In small cities, federal aid accounts for as much as 20 percent of operating money.
Deputy Secretary Mortimer Downey said the Senate proposal creates a problem for airlines and passengers by seeking $ 15 billion in savings over five years by creating an independent air traffic control system.
The current air traffic control system is funded largely by a tax on airline tickets.
Under the Senate GOP plan, airplane passengers would still pay that tax, but the government would keep all the money. The airlines would be charged additional fees to pay for the independent air traffic control system, charges likely to be passed along to customers.
The department, in contrast, has proposed making air traffic control independent, but would not impose a new charge on the airlines.
-By Randolph E. Schmid
 

 
 TVA: 'Right Up There With Religion,' And a Tough Target
 
 The Depression-era Tennessee Valley Authority brought power, jobs and hope to hardbitten swaths of the U.S. southeast in years past, giving people such a lift that one former chairman said it was "right up there with religion."
The TVA, with its dams, coal-fired plants and nuclear plants, supplies electricity in seven states, a function largely paid by ratepayers.
The House budget plan calls for an end to federal subsidies for the quasi-government body, which have totaled about $ 140 million a year. One study said half could be saved if TVA charged users more to cover costs of managing the vast lands and waters under its stewardship.
Still, the TVA's backers had enough clout to exempt it from cuts proposed as part of the Senate's ill-fated balanced-budget amendment.
"You're fighting the legend of it," said Sen. Russell Feingold, D-Wis. "You have to strip away the emotional ties and say this is all about tax dollars."
 
 -By Calvin Woodward
 
 FOREIGN AID: Russia and East Europe Are the Big Losers
 
 The Republican blueprint to cut U.S. spending for foreign affairs would have an impact around the world as well as in the federal bureaucracy and academia.
Under the seven-year plans adopted by the House and the Senate Budget Committee, the big losers would be the countries that emerged from the former Soviet Union and its Eastern European satellites. Israel and Egypt, long the biggest recipients of foreign aid, would survive the budget-cutting intact.
The House plan calls for nearly $ 29 billion in cuts over the seven years; the Senate GOP proposal seeks $ 18 billion in trims.
The Republicans also plan on savings from folding the Agency for International Development, the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency and the United States Information Agency into the State Department.
-By Donald M. Rothberg
 

 
 DEFENSE: House Would Go Beyond What Senate and Clinton Want to Spend
 
 The Senate GOP budget plan accepts President Clinton's reductions in defense spending. The House plan would increase defense spending.
Under the Senate version, spending would decrease over the next two years before rising gradually toward the end of the century. The House version would keep spending level next year and then increase it gradually through the end of the century, with outlays of $ 44.4 billion more than Clinton or the Senate propose.
Republicans on the House defense committees argue that the Pentagon has been underfunded and needs an increase in its modernization budget. Their priorities include spending more for missile defense, doubling the B-2 bomber fleet and buying more C-17 transport planes.
All three of these programs would provide major job boosts for defense contractors in California, home of some of the more senior members on the key defense committees.
-By John Diamond
---
 
 THE ENDOWMENTS: If They Closed Down…
 
 What would life be like if conservatives finally succeeded in eliminating the National Endowment for the Arts and the National Endowment for the Humanities?
Supporters of the grants-making agencies predict a decline in the quantity and quality of available art and culture, especially in small towns and rural areas.
But some members of Congress' Republican majority - many of them unhappy with controversial projects the endowments have subsidized - say people will hardly notice the difference.
Both agencies have relatively small budgets - $ 164.4 million for the NEA and $ 177.5 million for the NEH.
Senate Republicans want to cut both budgets by 50 percent. The House plan calls for cutting the NEA budget to nothing over three years and closing its doors in 1999. It also seeks to shut the NEH without giving a timetable.
In recent years, the NEA has been battered by controversies over public funding of homo-erotic art and a photograph of a cross submerged in urine. But supporters say only about 40 its 100,000 grants have attracted controversy.
-By Cassandra Burrell
 Load-Date: May 19, 1995

 

End of Document
