

In The Senate - And On The Trail - Dole the More Agile Candidate
The Associated Press
June 23, 1995, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 753 words
Byline: By JOHN KING, AP Political Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




If, as Democrats complain, the Senate has become the site of the first Republican presidential primary, then Bob Dole is the clear early leader. And Phil Gramm is a man having trouble finding his niche.
With deft maneuvering this week in the debates over tax cuts and President Clinton's choice for surgeon general, Dole reinforced his position as the more agile candidate, so far anyway, in the battle of the senators who would be president.
"Gramm has had a terrible few months," says Scott Reed, Dole's campaign manager. "There has been none of the disciplined, focused Gramm that everybody has heard about."
But he's hardly impartial. And Gramm says not to worry about him.
"Every time that there's a story of the death of my campaign it means somebody at some point is going to have to write a story of a resurrection," he said this week. "The truth is the campaign is not dying."
Indeed, with seven months to go before the first votes are cast, it's far too soon to say whether Dole's apparent tactical edge will hold up. And Gramm, for all his troubles, is still the fund-raising leader among the GOP candidates. He is building respectable organizations in important early primary states.
"Right now it would come down to Gramm and Dole," says Henry McMaster, the South Carolina GOP chairman. "Most people still think it will end up being a Dole-Gramm race," echoes Joyce Terhes, Maryland's Republican chairwoman.
Nonetheless, there is a sense of urgency these days at the Gramm campaign.
Charles Black, a veteran of the Reagan and Bush presidential campaigns who has been advising Gramm, has been asked by the senator to take a much more active day-to-day role, and there is talk of a broader shakeup.
If the campaign is struggling, it is in no small part because of Dole's maneuverings in the Senate and on the campaign trail.
In engineering the defeat of Dr. Henry Foster's nomination for surgeon general with two swift votes Wednesday and Thursday, Dole stole from Gramm some of the thunder the Texan had hoped to get from staging a filibuster. And Dole did so in the face of a suggestion from a top Gramm aide that in bringing the nomination to the floor, Dole had cut some sort of deal with Clinton to "resuscitate" Foster.
"Dole had more to lose on this," said Gary Bauer of the Family Research Council, a conservative group that opposed Foster. "It was really up to him to deliver the votes and in the end he did. People will remember that."
Within hours of defeating Foster, Dole scored another apparent victory on an issue that has dogged him in the past and that many had predicted would cut Gramm's way in this campaign: taxes. Dole intervened personally in House-Senate budget talks and struck a deal with Speaker Newt Gingrich on a $ 245 billion tax cut package.
Just Monday, Gramm had questioned Dole's commitment to tax cuts, called him "too committed to the old ways of Washington of tax and spend" and threatened to block his own party's budget. But by Friday Gramm had little choice but the give the deal his blessing.
It wasn't the first time Gramm was pulled along by Dole's budget maneuvering. After his own tax-cut amendment was crushed in the Senate, Gramm vowed not to support a "cut-a-deal" compromise backed by Dole. But in the end, Gramm voted for it.
These episodes run contrary to predictions that Dole would be hamstrung by his responsibilities as majority leader and Gramm, because of his independence, would be free to pick the right fights as he did last year in leading opposition to the Clinton health care plan.
"That was the conventional wisdom," said James Thurber, an American University political science professor who studies Congress. "But Dole so far has done a pretty good job handling both roles and keeping Gramm in check."
Given Dole's mastery of Senate rules and his past national campaign experience, "I'm not surprised greatly at the current situation," said Morton Blackwell, a veteran conservative activist backing Gramm. "But what counts is not what happens in June but what happens next February and March."
Dole's success has extended beyond the Senate chamber. Just as Gramm tried to repair frayed relations with social conservative leaders, Dole won raves by condemning Hollywood for promoting sex and violence in music and movies.
"You have to be impressed by what he has done," Maryland GOP leader Terhes said of Dole. "Everyone is waiting to see if Dole is going to make a mistake, and so far he hasn't."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - John King covers politics for The Associated Press.
 Load-Date: June 23, 1995

 

End of Document
