

In the Grab for a Person's Leisure Time, Will the Giants Stomp the Small?
The Associated Press
August 6, 1995, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 863 words
Byline: By EVAN RAMSTAD, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Viacom Inc.'s persistence through a takeover battle for Paramount Communications Inc. last year paid off when pre-teen girls this spring were repeating the cry "Marcia, Marcia, Marcia!"
Paramount's "Brady Bunch" movie survived the scorn of critics to reach its target young audience due in part to several well-timed weeks of "Brady" TV reruns on Viacom's Nickelodeon cable channel.
The big media buyouts announced last week - Walt Disney Co.'s of Capital Cities/ABC Inc. and Westinghouse Corp.'s of CBS Inc. - were driven by a desire for the same marketing efficiencies Viacom has found.
Because the number of entertainment choices has grown, but time in a day has not, producers are looking for as many ways as possible to reach a consumer. And so the mass media acquires greater mass.
"Someone home from work in the evening can watch any form of TV programming, on the air or video, listen to radio, log on to an on-line service," said Eric Braun, TV consultant at Frank Magid & Associates. "All of these are fractioning the viewers' discretionary time."
"If you are going to have mass circulation media, it's going to have take on all those things."
While ABC used to be one of four TV broadcast networks that formed the viewing choice for most Americans, cable TV grew to have 50 or 70 selections and direct satellite has come on the scene with dozens more.
And so ABC in recent years raised the prospect that it would grab a few moments of a person's day by adding ESPN and Lifetime cable channels. Disney brings the Disney Channel to their union.
This issue was at the heart of the changes in communications law that, in an unusual bit of timing, were voted on last week in Congress.
But a debate remains on whether the growing size and concentration of media companies threatens diverse expression and the ability for creative people to gain access to an audience.
Some people argue the new laws will allow big companies to swallow up more media properties, removing responsibility for what is broadcast and published further from the local community, where it has traditionally been.
Others say that is happening anyway, driven by market demand for national personalities like Howard Stern and Rush Limbaugh and the high cost of local programming relative to something piped in from a network or delivered from a print syndicate.
"Any concentration is clearly negative," said Nicholas Johnson, a former FCC commissioner who now teaches at the University of Iowa School of Law.
"If we were talking about plumbing or steel, just the conventional antitrust implications of the adverse impact on small owners of media, small advertisers and independent producers in Hollywood would be terribly severe. But they pale in comparison because, this is not plumbing or steel, it's the media. How can we maintain truly independent journalism and truly independent creative artistry?"
Some say technology is part of the answer. The growth of the Internet and on-line services represent a new medium that allows the creative individual to produce for little cost that can reach an audience of any size.
"The important thing is not as much size as it is growth," said Mark Stahlman, president of New Media Associates, an investing and consulting firm in New York.
"At some point, I don't know if we're at that point yet, there's a very strong probability that new media growth will become large enough that it will seriously impact old media," he said. "That's going to completely change the game."
Kevin Kelly, executive editor of Wired magazine, said the "many-to-many" model of information distribution represented by the Internet will be harder to monopolize.
"Initially, there will be an alternative route to the so-called conglomerates that are being assembled now," he said. "But the net may someday have some large conglomerates coursing through it too."
The drawback of computer-mediated communication, for the time being at least, is that computers are more expensive than TVs, radios, newspapers or magazines.
"The people who most need diverse expression are not generally the people who can afford computers," said Beverly Chain, director of communication for the United Church of Christ, which led other churches 30 years ago in support of broadcasting's Fairness Doctrine, now repealed, equal employment in the media and Children's Hour regulations.
And while there are a variety of subjects on-line, there is little sound and practically no video. Such flexibility remains years off for all but the most technically proficient.
The reach of mega-media companies like Disney, Viacom, News Corp. and Time Warner Inc. is easy to see. More difficult to know is whether audiences regard their products as highly as something that is produced locally.
That is why reductions in local ownership of radio and TV stations and even the reliance on syndicated services for music by radio stations or big-city columnists for a newspaper may have already harmed diversity in the media.
With the mega-media companies able to seize more chances to capture a moment in a consumer's day, Johnson said he worries that the impact of local expression will be like "comparing a garden hose to the Mississippi River."
 Load-Date: August 6, 1995

 

End of Document
