

In the next Behind the Wheel: 1995 Ford Contour
The Associated Press
March 12, 1995, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 709 words
Byline: By ANN MARIE JOB
Body




Toyota's littlest car, the Tercel, gets a bigger heart and a prettier look this year.
Now in its fifth generation, the subcompact Tercel, starting at $ 9,998 for a two-door standard model, is redesigned and fitted with a more powerful four-cylinder engine.
It's being "repositioned" a bit to attract buyers with slightly higher incomes, slightly closer to the $ 30,000 to $ 35,000 income levels of Honda Civic buyers compared with the mid-$ 20,000s of buyers of the 1994-model Tercel, says Bill Dabb, manager on the Tercel vehicle team.
To be sure, the 1995 price tag for the base Tercel two-door is some $ 1,000 higher than the lowest-priced 1994 Tercel. And the upper scale four-door DX starts at $ 11,328 vs. $ 10,558 in the 1994 model year.
But the improvements to the 1995 front-drive, five-passenger Tercel are many.
For the first time, there are two airbags up front. The Tercel now also meets federal standards for 1997 side-impact protection.
The sheet metal outside is styled a bit more than before. While still rather plain, it's tasteful and pleasing.
Inside, the Tercel's instrument cluster and dashboard have been changed, allowing easier access to radio controls and better ergonomics all around.
And beneath the hood is a zestier four-cylinder engine that performed heartily in the test four-door DX. The 1.5-liter, twin-cam, 16-valve engine produces up to 93 horsepower at 5,400 revolutions per minute, up from 82 at 5,200 rpm last year.
Yet, fuel economy is improved, with the Tercel earning a 39 miles per gallon highway fuel economy rating from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency with both manual and automatic four-speed transmissions. The city driving rating ranges from 30 to 33 mpg, depending on automatic or manual transmission.
Comparing automatic transmission models like the AP's test Tercel, the Toyota easily bests both the Honda Civic DX sedan and Ford Escort LX four-door in fuel economy.
In some highway passing, the Tercel lagged quite a bit; but it had good about-town power. The all-season steel-belted radial tires got to their limits quickly, however.
I could hear the engine nearly all the time - at idle as well as during acceleration - though much was done on the 1995 Tercel to reduce noise coming inside the car. There's also a good amount of road noise, though Toyota says it added asphalt sheeting, sound insulation and vibration damping materials to reduce noise and vibration.
The Tercel retains its former suspension: MacPherson struts up front and trailing torsion beam with stabilizer bar in back. It's quite stable but doesn't do much to cushion bumps.
Controlling weight was a major consideration in the Tercel's redesign. Although the new model has two airbags and other improvements, the base Tercel weighs the same 1,950 pounds as its predecessor. The Honda Civic and Ford Escort sedans weigh more than 2,300 pounds.
The competitors also are slightly bigger in size than the Tercel and in some areas, roomier.
The Tercel retains its 93.7-inch wheelbase from before and is 4.7 inches shorter than the Escort and 9.5 inches shorter than the Civic. Thus, the Tercel has less rear leg room than the competitors.
The Tercel is skinnier than the others and has much less trunk room: 9.3 cubic feet of space vs. 12.4 for the Civic sedan and 12.1 for the Escort four-door. Much of the Tercel's trunk space is situated under the rear window shelf, so watch that you don't hit your head on the trunk lid as you load.
It's nice, though, that Toyota includes a rear seatback that splits and folds to accommodate long items.
The Tercel, Escort and Civic all ride on 13-inch tires and have standard front-disc, rear-drum brakes. Anti-lock brakes are a $ 825 option on the Tercel.
Toyota's Tercel has long been a quality standout and last year was named the under $ 12,000 initial quality price class leader by J.D. Power and Associates.
The test 1995 Tercel had superb fit and finish.
I found it interesting that even at a pricey $ 16,052, the test model did not have vanity mirrors, tilt steering wheel, automatic antenna or rear window defroster.
Sixty percent of Tercel buyers are likely to be women with median age of 30, Dabb said.
Consumer Reports has ranked past Tercels as much better than average in owner trouble complaints.
 Load-Date: March 12, 1995

 

End of Document
