

In the next Behind the Wheel: 1996 Jaguar Vanden Plas (long wheelbase)
 The Associated Press
December 17, 1995, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 633 words
Byline: By ANN MARIE JOB
Body




They're faster, cleaner, bigger and quieter than ever before. They also have a more formal front end, improved handling, and soon, a continuously variable transmission.
Honda's popular Civics, now in their sixth generation, continue to set benchmarks in the small car field in ride, comfort and technology.
Base priced at $ 9,980 for the low-end 1996 CX hatchback, the Civic comes in three body styles - hatchback, coupe and sedan - with three 1.6-liter, 16-valve, four-cylinder engines offered.
One of those engines is the first mass-produced gasoline powerplant to receive a low emission vehicle certification from the California Air Resources Board.
It was the powerplant in the AP's test five-passenger LX sedan and provided steady power in town and good "scoot" around steep hillsides. Transferring the power to the wheels was a standard five-speed manual transmission that did its job so well, it seemed as if there were more than 106 horses under the hood.
But that's all there is in the LX sedan, and while it's less than the 132 horsepower of the Dodge Neon and the 120 horsepower of the Chevrolet Cavalier, it is up a bit from last year's 102 horsepower.
The Civic LX's torque - 103 pounds-feet - also is less than the competitors'.
But the Civic LX sedan outshines the others in city fuel economy with an Environmental Protection Agency rating of 33 miles a gallon.
And it's not even the most fuel thrifty of the Civic family. That honor goes to the HX Coupe, which for 1996 is powered by an improved, 115-horsepower, VTEC-E, lean burn engine. The HX Coupe fuel economy rating is 39 mpg in the city and 45 mpg on the highway.
Besides the five-speed manual, Honda offers a four-speed automatic transmission. Beginning in calendar 1996, Honda adds another - a continuously variable transmission that will be available only on the HX Coupe.
As its name implies, the CVT's goal is seamless shifting. In the passenger compartment, the gearshift lever looks like an average automatic; just put it in "drive" and go. But underneath, the mechanicals seek to operate amidst a nearly infinite range of ratios to produce fuel economy akin to a manual. Thus, the Civic HX Coupe with CVT is rated at 35 mpg in the city and 41 mpg on the highway.
All the Honda powertrains are wrapped in slightly bigger packages this year as the Civics continue to grow in size. The LX sedan, for example, is two inches longer and three inches taller than before, providing more leg room and head room inside.
In fact, the Civic sedan has a tad more front head room than both the Neon and Cavalier. Rear head room also is greater.
As expected, the sedan interior is pure Honda with well-organized gauges and a no-clutter look. Vanity mirrors and power window and door lock buttons aren't lighted. But the vanity mirrors, glovebox and cupholders are bigger than before.
All Civics are quieter and a bit better handling for 1996. Honda diligently added sound barriers, a new exhaust system and a reworked, rigid body to improve ride quality.
The LX sedan is the best seller of the Civic line. It begins at $ 13,600 for a base model that includes power windows and door locks and cruise control. The AP's $ 15,050 LX sedan had air conditioning and anti-lock brakes.
Cognizant of shoppers' worries that its small cars were getting up there in price, Honda held Civic price increases to a minimum this model year, averaging 1.3 percent, despite all the design changes.
Still, the Dodge Neon Highline sedan starts at $ 11,500 and the Chevrolet Cavalier LS sedan starts at $ 12,900.
The majority of Civic sedan buyers are women - 68 percent - and median age of 35, Honda said. Nearly half are married and median household income is $ 45,458.
Civics have rated highly in reliability for several years in the Consumer Reports owner complaint studies.
 Load-Date: December 17, 1995

 

End of Document
