

Is It Keeping the Peace or Rebuilding the Empire?
The Associated Press
March 28, 1994, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 928 words
Byline: By ANDREW KATELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




The Kremlin, feeling its security threatened, sends its army into three countries.
Hungary in 1956, Czechoslovakia in 1968 and Afghanistan in 1979?
No. Tajikistan, Moldova and Georgia, all in 1994.
Russia is staking out its "near abroad" - the rest of the former Soviet Union - as vital to its security, and in the process has created a quandary for the Clinton administration: how to respect Russia's legitimate interests and support President Boris Yeltsin while respecting the independence of other former Soviet republics and their attempts to escape Moscow's control.
Caught in the middle is the United Nations, which is short of soldiers to keep the peace in various hotspots and wants regional organizations to bear more of the load.
It may be only a matter of time before Russian soldiers are wearing blue U.N. peacekeepers' helmets in the "near abroad." In former Yugoslavia, about 1,200 already are becoming comfortable in U.N. blue.
But Russian forces in other former Soviet republics have been accused of taking sides in ethnic and territorial conflicts. President Clinton and other Western leaders worry that, feeling the pressure of ultranationalists, Moscow may be trying to rebuild the Russian empire, claiming special rights in its region as the United States did with the Monroe Doctrine.
To allay the fears, Russian politicians and diplomats take great pains to depict their country as a responsible world citizen.
Reviewing ethnic conflicts among Russia's neighbors, Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev told the U.N. General Assembly in September: "These problems are too serious and tragic to speculate about 'neo-imperial' plans of Russia, diplomatic 'rivalry' or the search for new spheres of influence."
With instability at Russia's doorstep, he said on another occasion, "We cannot afford to do nothing."
Russian diplomats at the United Nations say the West's fears are largely "old thinking" left over from the Soviet years.
They contend that Russian troops go only where and when invited, respect the sovereignty of host countries and direct military operations toward achieving political settlements. Russia has legitimate security interests in the "near abroad," they say, such as protecting the 25 million Russians living there, preventing wars from spilling into Russia and stemming the drug traffic.
A more subtle motive may be to give the now-impoverished Russian military, humiliated by withdrawals from eastern Europe and the Baltics, something to do.
While other countries recognize some of its goals as legitimate, Russia also is getting the job of peacekeeping in such places as Tajikistan, Moldova and Georgia by default. No one else wants the job.
Other countries have difficulty supplying enough troops to maintain the 16 U.N. peacekeeping missions now in operation. They also have been reluctant to conclude that the ethnic and territorial conflicts plaguing the former Soviet Union threaten international peace and security, a prerequisite for sending U.N. peacekeepers.
In early March, the United States supported Georgian leader Eduard Shevardnadze's request to the Security Council for U.N. peacekeepers in the separatist Abkhazia region.
To keep Russia's influence in check, Clinton insisted that the U.N. force be multinational. The United States also said it would withdraw its support unless progress was made in peace talks with the Abkhazians. The talks stalled and the peacekeeping request has been shelved.
On March 11, Tajikistan asked the council to put blue helmets on its own soldiers and others from Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan who patrol the Tajkik-Afghan border to keep out Afghan militants and drugs. The Security Council has not acted.
Russia seeks U.N. endorsement of its peacekeeping largely for the financial and technical support, prestige and legitimacy that come with it.
"France, the United Kingdom are very proud of what they are doing in Bosnia, for example. Why shouldn't we be proud of what we are doing in the near abroad?" a senior Russian diplomat said, on condition of anonymity.
Ed Luck, president of the U.N. Association of the United States, said the Russians want the "good housekeeping seal of approval" so they can display a "sense of still being a great power" without having their motives questioned.
Fiona Hill, a Harvard specialist on ethnic conflict in the former Soviet Union, said Russia may have trouble meeting U.N. standards of strict impartiality in peacekeeping.
"Russian intervention has shown it's not capable of being a neutral force in the region," she said. "Its goal is more to further its own interests rather than bring about resolution to the conflict."
Ms. Hill cited Russia's support of Georgian forces in Abkhazia, of Russian separatists in Moldova and of the Tajik government against pro-Islamic forces and insurgents from Afghanistan.
Even the most common Russian term for what the Kremlin is doing in the "near abroad" - mirotvorcheskaya missiya - is best translated as "peacemaking mission," not peacekeeping. That is an important distinction in U.N. diplomacy because it implies the use of force, not merely the passive monitoring of a cease-fire.
The Russian diplomat countered that the peacekeepers are separate from regular Russian troops stationed in those countries.
He acknowledged, however, that they have more robust rules of engagement than U.N. peacekeepers. The diplomat noted, for example, that "peace enforcement units" in Georgia's South Ossetia, where residents are trying to unite with Ossetians in Russia, were authorized to shoot cease-fire violators.
 Load-Date: March 28, 1994

 

End of Document
