

Judge and Lawyers in the O.J. Case Arrange a Jury Visit to the Crime Scene
The Associated Press
February 10, 1995, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 580 words
Byline: By LINDA DEUTSCH, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




The judge in the O.J. Simpson case led the lawyers through a rehearsal Friday of what will be a dramatic departure from the courtroom routine - a visit by the jury to the scene of the crime.
Judge Lance Ito said he would convene court at 8:30 a.m. Sunday. He will then accompany jurors, lawyers, the court staff and a heavily guarded Simpson for the all-day tour.
With sheriff's deputies in the entourage Friday, Ito and the lawyers went first to the Brentwood condominium where Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald Goldman were slain the night of June 12.
Tracked by TV helicopters overhead, they continued on to Simpson's estate nearby, where they walked around the grounds and examined places that have been mentioned in testimony.
The jurors on Sunday will visit the two homes as well as Goldman's apartment and Mezzaluna, the restaurant where he worked as a waiter and where Ms. Simpson dined on the last night of their lives.
Only a small pool of reporters, a still photographer and one camera crew will be allowed to cover the event, returning to brief their colleagues when the tour is over late in the day.
The media won't be allowed to hover overhead. Ito ordered air space over Simpson's property and the crime scene restricted during the visit. Late Friday, the court said Simpson will bar the media from his property.
The tour, requested by the prosecution, could help the jurors visualize the sequence of events as alleged by the opposing sides and let them test, for example, whether certain witnesses could have seen what they claim they saw.
The tour presents a host of concerns, including preserving the anonymity of the jurors, protecting Simpson's life and avoiding any kind of incident - such as the display of a banner, a headline or a photograph by onlookers - that could give grounds for appeal or cause a mistrial.
Loyola University law professor Laurie Levenson predicted that seeing things for themselves will have a powerful effect on the jurors.
"It's sort of an eerie feeling standing there at the scene of a crime," she said. "It makes it real. … You can imagine standing where her body was lying, what it was like late at night."
Simpson, charged with the slashing murders of his ex-wife and her friend, will be taken from his cell under heavy security to take part in the tour. As a defendant, he has the right to be present for all court proceedings, and the so-called "jury view," though outdoors, is an official court session.
A court stenographer will be present in case objections are made to any part of the tour. Such tours are usually directed by the judge.
For Simpson, it will be his first trip to his estate since he was taken away in a police car June 17 after the freeway pursuit in the white Bronco.
"It's going to be a very melancholy time," defense lawyer Carl Douglas said.
For jurors, the visit may bring to mind an episode of "Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous." They will see the rambling, multimillion-dollar Simpson estate with its gates, pool, tennis court and guesthouse, as well as the $ 795,000 Mediterranean villa-style condo where Ms. Simpson was slain.
For residents of the well-to-do Brentwood area, it will mean another invasion of reporters, photographers and curiosity-seekers. Authorities plan to close off streets for security reasons.
Ito's rehearsal visit on Friday probably helped him decide what locations will be pointed out to jurors. One decision up to the judge is whether to allow the jurors to ask questions during the tour.
 Load-Date: February 11, 1995

 

End of Document
