

Kermit the Frog Makes the Leap to the World of Words
The Associated Press
May 21, 1993, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 489 words
Byline: By CAROL DEEGAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Kermit the Frog has hopped from TV and motion pictures to books with the publication, "For Every Child, A Better World," which he debuted recently at a lawn party at the mayor's house with dozens of children.
First- and second-grade students from P.S. 304 (Brooklyn, N.Y.) and P.S. 40 (Manhattan) sat on big mats spread across the lawn in front of Gracie Mansion as the party unfolded around them. New York City Mayor David N. Dinkins wasn't there, but his wife, Joyce B. Dinkins, led the festivities.
Dedicated to the memory of actress Audrey Hepburn, who devoted many years of her life to helping children through UNICEF (the United Nations Children's Fund), the 48-page book was "written" by Kermit, with the help of Louise Gikow and Ellen Weiss (Muppet Press-Golden Books, $ 9.95). It was a collaborative effort by Jim Henson Productions, Western Publishing and the United Nations.
Mrs. Dinkins, Broadway actor Tony Randall, New York Giants fullback Jarrod Bunch and others took turns reading the book. Grammy Award-winning composer-producer Lucy Simon and her daughter, Julia, sang "For Every Child, A Better World." The children received copies of the book and had lunch on the lawn.
Simple text and poignant, full-color illustrations by Bruce McNally show how some children have the basic necessities such as food, water, housing, clothing, medicine and schools, while others do not. ("Every child needs water to drink. But sometimes you have to go a long way to get it.")
Kermit is the narrator while Sesame Street-style characters in many different colors are shown in a smoke-spewing city where air is too dirty to breathe; huddled under an ineffective shelter in a rainstorm; and sitting in a battlefield, with their household goods scattered in the rubble and ruins.
Twenty-five percent of the book's proceeds will go to the United Nations, according to Jane Leventhal, vice president and publisher of Jim Henson Productions. Leventhal said the book was in its second printing.
Mrs. Gillian Martin Sorensen, the UN's Under Secretary General and Special Representative for Information and Public Policy, urged children to read the book and to share it with friends and family. She said the United Nations approached Jim Henson Productions with the idea for the book two years ago.
Also attending the party was Brian Henson, president and chief executive officer of Jim Henson Productions, and son of the late Jim Henson. He presented Mrs. Dinkins with a "For Every Child, A Better World" humanitarian award.
Noting that his father devoted his life to helping people, Henson told the children, "it's not a perfect world, but it should be and can be. It starts with one child wanting to help another child."
Although the book is designed for children 5 to 9 years of age, Henson stressed that due to the sensitive nature of the subject matter, it is meant to be a "shared" reading experience between parent and child, or teacher and child.

 

End of Document
