

Lawmakers' Health: Navy Clinic on the Hill; Ambulance at the Ready
The Associated Press
June 13, 1993, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 712 words
Byline: By KAREN BALL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Members of Congress who feel ill can duck into a Capitol clinic staffed by 14 Navy workers. Those with a bad back can seek relief from a physical therapist. An ambulance always stands at the ready for medical emergencies.
It's health care as few Americans enjoy it, a medical security blanket provided largely by taxpayers for the politicians who soon will be deciding the fate of health reform.
"These are attractive fringe benefits, which in a perfect world would be offered to everyone," Rep. Chris Cox, R-Calif., said in an interview last week, as the House rejected his attempt to cut off tax dollars for the Office of the Attending Physician, which costs $ 1.5 million annually.
"But the organization we are charged with running lost nearly $ 300 billion last year. We simply cannot afford all the frills," said Cox, whose proposal was part of a larger effort to trim spending on Congress, and didn't even merit a mention on the House floor.
For years, the Capitol's medical clinic gave free drugs and checkups to lawmakers. But that changed two years ago when Sen. Harris Wofford, D-Pa., cried foul.
"My effort was not received with joy," Wofford recalled of his complaints that lawmakers should not get free health care when so many Americans - 37 million a year, according to government estimates - go without.
Ever since, senators wishing to use the clinic have paid about $ 520 a year in premiums, a figure calculated to be about the same cost as for a private health maintenance organization.
The House argued that the clinic's services were only about half as complete as an HMO. Families, for instance, don't have access. So House members only pay about half of the average HMO premium, or $ 234 this year, increasing to about $ 260 in 1994.
That fee is on top of the normal insurance that members of Congress and Cabinet secretaries purchase on their own, just like any other federal worker. Lawmakers pick from the same menu of health care plans, and must pay premiums.
Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala, for instance, pays about $ 79 biweekly in premiums for the high-option, Blue Cross-Blue Shield package of insurance offered to federal workers, according to a spokeswoman in her office.
But there are other perks that rank-and-file federal workers don't have access to. In the late 1930s, then-President Franklin D. Roosevelt, who had worked for the Navy, authorized members of Congress, Supreme Court justices and Cabinet secretaries to go to the U.S. Naval hospital in Bethesda, Md.
In May, when Sen. Howell Heflin had chest pains, the Navy ambulance stationed on the Hill took him to Bethesda, and that's where he received his first treatment. The Navy's staff billed his federal government insurance for the services the senator got there.
The Office of the Attending Physician is staffed by workers on loan from the Navy. Congress reimburses the Navy for their salaries out of the $ 1.5 million appropriation, said a Navy administrator in the physician's office, who spoke on condition his name not be published.
The physician's office is a maze of rooms tucked away on the Capitol's first floor. The staff includes three internists, a pharmacist, two laboratory technicians, two X-ray technicians and two physical therapy technicians, the Navy administrator said.
In addition, there are 15 registered nurses at first aid offices in each of the House and Senate office buildings, plus the nearby Supreme Court building.
Besides serving lawmakers, the Navy doctors also treat emergencies among the more than 30,000 congressional staffers and 1.5 million tourists who come through the Capitol each year. Presumably, a reporter who suffered a medical emergency could go there for treatment, too.
Last week, the Navy ambulance provided the first treatment to a girl hit by a car near the Capitol, although in years past, there have been complaints that the ambulance was primarily reserved for lawmakers.
Prescriptions doled out to lawmakers are billed to their insurance now, unlike the free drugs given out at one time, the Navy administrator said. And he took issue with Republican charges that lawmakers with back problems can get rubdowns at the clinic.
"I don't think it would be called a massage," he said. "I think the proper term is manipulation."

 

End of Document
