

Lies, Damned Lies and Statistics in the Battle of the Tax Cut
The Associated Press
March 21, 1995, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 913 words
Byline: By DAVE SKIDMORE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




In the battle over whether and how to cut the nation's taxes, Democrats and Republicans have marshaled their weapons - colorful charts for television and vision-blurring statistical tables.
Democrats are ever-ready with graphs and diagrams showing that the House GOP's "Contract With America" will pour money into the pockets of the wealthy while tossing chump change to everyone else.
Republicans are just as ready with their own evidence depicting their package as much-needed relief to overburdened families and working people.
Generally, both sides latch on to any statistic or analytical method that helps them to make their case and ignore or deplore facts and studies that don't.
Each side has its own preferred means of massaging the numbers. In fairness analyses, Democrats prefer dollars while Republicans like percentages.
For instance, Democrats on the House Ways and Means Committee used figures showing that households earning $ 200,000 would get a tax break of $ 11,266 a year vs. only $ 20 for those earning less than $ 10,000.
That looks pretty unfair. But committee Republicans produced a chart showing those making $ 200,000 and up getting a tax cut of 2.9 percent in 2000 and those earning less than $ 10,000 getting a 2.3 percent cut. That appears more equitable.
A chief reason for the difference is that Democrats are ignoring the fact that wealthy people generally pay far more taxes than low-income people. For tax breaks to be proportional, they have to be as weighted toward the wealthy as the existing tax structure.
Meanwhile, the House Republican Conference said that even though a proposed $ 500-per-child tax credit would go to families earning as much as $ 200,000, most of it - 74 percent - would benefit families earning $ 75,000 and less. The GOP point is that the bulk of the largest item in the five-year, $ 189 billion tax-cut package would be going to middle- and lower-income people.
But the Republican analysis overlooks Democratic arguments that those earning more than $ 75,000 may be able to raise their children just fine without a $ 500 tax credit. And the Democrats note that working people too poor to pay income taxes get nothing, while the spending programs that benefit their children, such as free school lunches, are in danger of getting cut under the GOP welfare proposal.
President Clinton's plan would phase out the credit for families earning between $ 60,000 and $ 75,000.
So who's right? According to tax experts outside the partisan bickering, the answer depends on one's political philosophy.
"It just depends on where you think there's a need. At what income level does the need stop?" said Grant-Thornton accountant Tom Ochsenschlager. "I don't know if it's less than $ 60,000, but I have a feeling it's not $ 200,000."
Two studies have been serving as the ultimate source for most of the partisan handouts, one by the administration's Treasury Department and the other by the congressional Joint Committee on Taxation, which is officially bipartisan but run by Republican appointees.
The two studies come up with very different conclusions, even when they appear to be comparing apples to apples. The GOP tax cut for those earning $ 200,000 and over is 9.9 percent through 2000, according to Treasury. The joint committee, which looked at each year separately, has the cut ranging from 0.9 percent to 2.9 percent through the five-year period.
Two differences in analytical methods account for most of the discrepancy. The Treasury Department allocated the effects of corporate tax cuts in the Republican package to individuals with investment income. The joint committee did not.
Also, Treasury counted the proposed cut in the capital gains tax rate as a drop in tax burden even though the lower rate may cause more people to sell assets and that would increase the government's revenue.
Kenneth J. Kies, the joint committee's director, said it is not possible, with any accuracy, to allocate the effect of corporate tax cuts to individuals. And he said it makes the most sense to evaluate the capital gains cut on the actual flow of dollars to the government.
"Treasury manipulates the numbers to show a particular ideological perspective. We don't want to do that," he said.
But economist Henry Aaron of the Brookings Institution, a liberal think tank, said the Treasury Department is using long-established methods and "is playing it straight."
Ways and Means Committee Chairman Bill Archer, who is shepherding the GOP tax cuts through the House, believes asking who directly benefits from a tax cut isn't as important as asking whether it promotes savings and investment and thus economic and job growth.
"The Democrats are always trying to play the rich against the poor. That's been their threadbare pattern," said Archer, R-Texas. "If they can find somebody who has enough money to create jobs for other people, they're going to declare him rich and want to take it away from him."
But House Minority Leader Dick Gephardt, D-Mo., said the Republican position amounts to trickle-down economics - the belief that giving wealthy people a tax break to invest will produce benefits trickling down to everyone over time.
"Democrats have it the other way around. We're bottom up. We believe in investing in people … at the bottom and in the middle and that their wealth will make its way up to the people who have been at the top and that everyone will gain," Gephardt said. "This is the age-old argument in the parties being played out."
 Load-Date: March 21, 1995

 

End of Document
