

Mike Nichols: The View From the Top
The Associated Press
July 7, 1991, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1151 words
Byline: By HILLEL ITALIE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Mike Nichols pours himself coffee and leans back in his chair, letting the mug rest upon his fingertips.
His office suite is spacious and bright and the atmosphere is casual. A piano sits in one corner. Pictures of his three children hang on the wall. An assistant walks by in jeans while Nichols has settled for a blue sports coat and tan slacks, ready to unwind on this warm, sunny day.
He seems at ease with himself, even though the polished, articulate director has a wary take on the world and has spent the past 30 years picking apart the upper classes, men and women with lives not unlike his own.
"Regarding Henry," his new film, has many things to say about the view from the top - none of them good. Harrison Ford stars as Henry Turner, an arrogant, cold-blooded Park Avenue attorney who terrorizes opponents and neglects his family. The people around him aren't any better. His wife (Annette Bening) is smug, his colleagues petty and unscrupulous.
One night, however, Henry stumbles upon a robbery at the corner grocery store and is shot in the head and chest, suffering considerable brain damage. Henry's physical and mental skills are reduced to a childlike level, his bewildered stare recalling Dustin Hoffman's at the start of "The Graduate," a look of dread at what the world has in store for him.
"About five years ago, I had a sort of minibreakdown, caused by a sleeping pill. I never knew what was wrong with me and I went into a deep depression and fell apart for six months," Nichols explains.
"It was a lot like what William Styron wrote about (in 'Darkness Visible'). He's a friend and I lived 15 minutes away from him in Connecticut. He was very helpful during it, and I referred to that experience a lot when I was doing 'Henry."'
The film is structured like a classic morality tale, the near-tragedy giving Henry the chance to redeem himself. He repairs his lifeless marriage, becomes close to his daughter and learns the value of forgiving himself and others.
"A man I thought very highly of said a shocking thing to me," Nichols recalls. "He had lost his beloved wife after a marriage of 50 or more years. We were having dinner maybe six months or a year after and said we're always looking for happiness and we don't notice it's catastrophe that turns our lives in wonderful ways."
Nichols' life began in Berlin on Nov. 6, 1931, two years before the Nazis' rise to power. He was born Michael Igor Peschowksy, the son of a Russian physician who fled the country in 1939 and settled in New York, changing his name to Nichols.
Mike was an outsider as a child, sent to boarding school at age 10 and estranged from his peers after a bizarre reaction to a whooping cough shot made him temporarily lose his hair. After years of "very chic, very progressive" schools, he enrolled as a pre-med student at the University of Chicago.
"I thought I was going to be somebody for whom everything passed by," he said. "but it became clear when I got to college that that wouldn't be the case, that I was going to have a life. Girls liked me all right, I had friends and I saw I was going to be effective in situations. I discovered all that in one year in college."
The sharp-tongued rebel developed an interest in theater and found a kindred spirit in Elaine May, with whom he joined an improvisational group and eventually formed a comedy team in 1957. They soon moved to New York, perfecting their act at small clubs.
They were cute and quick-witted, and Nichols' movies are filled with reminders of their work. One skit is right in the spirit of "Regarding Henry." Nichols plays a businessman who arrives home from work and exchanges perfunctory greetings with his wife; only when she appears on stage does he discover he's entered the wrong house.
The skit in which they pretend to be kids on a date, fumbling to make conversation as each worry about the inevitable question of sex, is a situation that appears throughout "The Graduate" and "Carnal Knowledge."
His partnership with May ended in 1962 and he soon turned to directing, his Broadway debut coming the next year with Neil Simon's "Barefoot in the Park." More hits quickly followed, including "The Knack" and Simon's "The Odd Couple."
Nichols always loved movies and wanted to adapt a slim novel called "The Graduate," but put the project on hold when Elizabeth Taylor asked him to direct her and Richard Burton as a bickering couple in "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?" It was perfect material for Nichols, the story of two literate people longing to find happiness. The film won five Academy Awards, including a best actress prize for Taylor.
Acclaimed as one of Hollywood's most exciting young directors, Nichols went to work on "The Graduate," casting the then-unkown Hoffman as the confused young man just out of college who has an affair with a friend (Anne Bancroft) of his parents.
The result was more than a hit film and an Oscar for Nichols. "The Graduate" was an event, symbolizing for many the "generation gap" that was tearing apart the country. Today, it holds up as a sharp comedy of manners, especially the seduction of the timid Hoffman by the formidable Bancroft.
But then his career faded. "Catch-22" and "Carnal Knowledge" received mixed reviews. "The Day of the Dolphin" and "The Fortune" both flopped. The latter was released in 1975, then Nichols dropped out of movies for eight years, busying himself by raising Arabian horses and working in the theater - he even reunited with May for a revival of "Virginia Woolf."
He returned to film with "Silkwood" and has rarely missed since, with "Heartburn," "Working Girl" and "Postcards From the Edge" all faring well at the box office. Theater projects included producing Whoopi Goldberg's one-woman Broadway show, and directing "Waiting for Godot," which starred Steve Martin and Robin Williams.
For all his criticism of society, Nichols has no complaints about joining a club that was willing to have him as a member. He pokes and jabs at the system, but rarely delivers a knockout punch. In "Working Girl," Melanie Griffith adapts to the corporate world; Meryl Streep repairs her faltering movie career in "Postcards From the Edge."
Henry does leaves his job, but his decision has more to do with seeking a simpler lifestyle than with a desire to change the world, a civilized form of protest that Nichols himself has considered.
"I thought about retiring between 'The Fortune' and 'Silkwood' and I think about it now since my personal life is such that I would be perfectly happy to stay at home, just have dinner ready for my wife and walk the dog," said Nichols, who is married to TV journalist Diane Sawyer, his fourth wife.
"I would be very happy doing that, but I also love making movies. … When I was in my depression I sold most of my painting collection and I didn't sell it very wisely. I thought, 'I'm not meant to collect things, I make movies, let other people collect."'

 

End of Document
