

Mystery of the Week: What's Driving the Economy
The Associated Press
November 7, 1993, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 665 words
Byline: By RICK GLADSTONE, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




If you're wondering how people are earning the money to buy the cars and homes that seem to be fueling the economy's growth lately, the answer is they're not. They're borrowing it.
The mystery over the true strength of the economic recovery was at least partly solved this past week, when the Federal Reserve reported the biggest one-month leap in consumer borrowing in nearly six years for September.
This is important, because it signals that the economy's stamina isn't from a vast increase in high-paying new jobs and rising incomes, but has a limited source of energy. The pace of borrowing cannot last.
"There's something very much wrong with this picture," said Robert Brusca, chief economist at the New York office of Nikko Securities Co. International.
The consumer credit figures released Friday capped a week of surprisingly strong data about the economy that rattled the stock and bond markets by arousing fears of resurrected inflation.
The data showed rising productivity, the first expansion of manufacturing in five months, the biggest gain in home sales in seven years and surging sales of new vehicles.
But a number of economists focused on the weaknesses. Besides the uncertainty of how long consumers will spend money they don't have, questions arose on their spending behavior.
Big American retailers, for example, reported mixed sales results for October, a month that historically has indicated how they'll fare during the Christmas selling season. Discounters did the best, pricier merchants did the worst.
"Yes, there's spending going on, but consumers are very cost-conscious, very pragmatic about what they're buying," said David Bostian, an economist at Herzog Heine Geduld, a Wall Street investment firm. "They're going to the PACE warehouse clubs, the Wal-Marts."
The sharp increase in October automobile sales was at least partly due to necessity. Many consumers have been delaying the purchase of replacement vehicles for years.
"Their cars are falling apart and they need new ones," said Sandra Shaber, a consumer economist at the Wefa Group, a forecasting concern in Bala Cynwyd, Pa.
Moreover, automakers have devised many clever ways for consumers to get behind the wheel of a vehicle they can't otherwise afford, such as low-interest loans and extended leases with no money down.
"The auto companies come up with the financing," said Bostian. "They give you the money if you're halfway creditworthy."
Still, others said they saw signs of significant long-lasting strength in the economy. Although the the Labor Department said the October unemployment rate edged up to 6.8 percent, for example, that was at least partly because more people were again looking for work after having given up their search months before. It also reported companies created nearly 180,000 jobs last month and more employees were working overtime.
"It doesn't sound like much, but it's better than a lot of press reports, which focus on the layoffs and the downsizing and the negatives," said Richard Berner, chief economist at Mellon Bank in Pittsburgh. "Less reported are the positives. There is hiring going on."
---
 
 TICKER: The Good Ship Steinbrenner, Flying Kitchens, Gore Vs. Perot
 
 American Ship Building Co., the century-old contractor run by New York Yankees principal owner George Steinbrenner, sought bankruptcy court protection after the Navy threatened to scrap its remaining contract...United Airlines parent UAL Corp.  offered to forego the planned sale of its food service business as a concession to the pilot and machinist unions, who are trying to buy the carrier...Vice President Al Gore challenged Texas multibillionaire Ross Perot to debate the merits of the North American Free Trade Agreement, and Perot immediately accepted.
---
 
 COMING UP:
The Labor Department reports October wholesale inflation
 
 Tuesday and consumer inflation Wednesday ...The Commerce Department reports October retail sales and the National Association of Realtors reports October home sales Friday.
 Load-Date: November 7, 1993

 

End of Document
