

Newspaper: Government Probe Shows Travel Regulations Vague  A government investigation shows regulations governing travel on military airplanes are so vague that high-level federal officials use them virtually without restriction at a cost of $ 150 million a year, The Milwaukee Journal reported Sunday. The newspaper quoted a draft report by the General Accounting Office, the investigating arm of Congress, as saying the planes based at Andrews Air Force Base, Md., average more than 75 flights a month. "The policies and their implementation by the Air Force and the Department of Defense are inadequate and do not provide assurance that the wing is being used appropriately and an adequate deterrent to abuse," the report was quoted as saying.
The Associated Press
April 5, 1992, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 301 words
Dateline: MILWAUKEE
Body




The investigation has been under way for about a year at the request of Rep. Frank Horton of New York, senior Republican on the House Government Operations Committee.
The Journal said it obtained parts of the draft report, which has not been made public.
The study covered airplanes of the Air Force's 89th Military Airlift Wing, which had 22 fixed-wing aircraft as of December. The wing provides travel for the president, vice president, members of Congress, cabinet secretaries, judges and high-level military officers.
Secretary of State James A. Baker III announced last week that he would start using commercial flights for personal travel after the Journal reported on another GAO study showing he made 11 private trips on military aircraft at a cost to taxpayers of $ 371,599.
The GAO was quoted as saying its estimate of the $ 150 million annual cost included pay for about 1,600 military and civilian personnel, aircraft maintenance and fuel, and other operating expenses. It said it did not include depreciation, new aircraft acquisition or construction costs for facilities.
The agency said that in most cases the use of the VIP wing aircraft was considerably more expensive than commercial travel. For instance, it would cost $ 4,752 for 12 government officials to fly coach to Los Angeles, but the cost on a military 12-passenger jet would be about $ 50,626.
The report said members of Congress made about 16 percent of the trips, and 58 percent of the congressional trips were overseas. It said spouses flew on about 40 percent of the foreign trips, and most were authorized to travel free.
It said 24 percent of executive branch trips and 3 percent of those by military officers were to destinations outside the country. It also said that about 10 percent of the trips were taken by foreign dignitaries.

 

End of Document
