

Newspaper: Brown Appointed Judges Who Made Campaign Contributions  Democrat Jerry Brown appointed more than 100 judges to the bench when he was governor for California after they or family members donated funds to his political campaigns, a newspaper reported Sunday. Brown denied a link between campaign donations and judicial appointments and said had appointed "thousands of people" who were not political contributors, according to the report in the Sunday editions of the Los Angeles Times. The former governor has billed his Democratic presidential campaign as a crusade against the corrupting influence of big contributions on American politics.
The Associated Press
April 5, 1992, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 464 words
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




But the Times reported that between 1979 and 1983, Brown appointed to the bench 118 men and women who contributed to his campaigns for governor, president or U.S. Senate. They made up one-fifth of his judicial nominations during the period.
The Times based its report on an analysis of public records in Washington and Sacramento.
During his 1992 presidential campaign, Brown has imposed a $ 100 per person limit on campaign contributions.
Of the 118 judges he appointed when governor, 42 made sizable gifts of $ 700 or more. In some cases, the Times reported, the contributions were made a few days before nominations were announced.
All told, people who sought judicial appointments or were awarded appointments provided at least $ 122,941 to Brown for his last three races, according to the newspaper.
Brown acknowledged that his campaigns often held fund-raising parties attended by prominent lawyers. And he said he accepted money from anyone, as long as they were not involved in criminal activity.
"I can tell you this, there were lots of lawyers involved in my campaigns, a lot more than doctors," Brown told the Times. "… Most (lawyers) who get involved in politics have to go past the State Bar and those lawyers at some point want to become judges. They become judges by getting to know the governor. That's the way the process works."
Most of Brown's judicial appointees contacted by the Times insisted that they were not required to contribute for their appointments.
"There was absolutely no connection of any sort," said J. Michael Beecher, a $ 7,000 contributor who was appointed to the West Orange County Municipal Court in 1982. "That general line is off the wall. There's nothing to it."
But, in one case, the Times reported that lawyer Richard F. Charvat and his parents donated $ 5,750 to Brown campaigns in 1978 to 1980. On Oct. 5, 1981, Brown named Charvat to the Los Angeles Municipal Court bench.
"I felt I had to go to those dinners in order to become a judge when I was asked to attend," Charvat was quoted as saying.
Charvat's father, a former law partner of Brown's father, told the newspaper: "My son was a lawyer … and I wanted him to be a judge. I made those contributions in the hope he would appoint my son, and he did."
In another case, Michael Scott Luros and his parents contributed a total of $ 7,066 to Brown and also hosted a fund-raising reception for him. In April, 1981, Luros was named a judge on the Los Angeles Municipal Court.
Lawyer Robert Letteau contributed $ 5,500 to Brown and a prominent member of his law firm added another $ 13,480. In 1982, Letteau was appointed to the Los Angeles Superior Court.
Letteau said he saw no link between his contribution and his appointment to the bench. "I just don't think you can buy a judgeship," Letteau said.

 

End of Document
