

Not a Bad Life for Charles Baxter "Look in the terrible mirror of the sky See how the absent moon waits in a glade Of your dark self, and how the wings of stars, Upward, from unimagined coverts, fly." - Wallace Stevens.  ---
The Associated Press
March 5, 1993, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 834 words
Byline: By HILLEL ITALIE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Like a child endlessly wondering what he'll become when he grows up, Charles Baxter writes fiction. He imagines himself an astronomer, a musician, a schoolteacher, even an old man wandering the streets of Venice, Italy.
It's not just his own fantasies he's expressing. Baxter knows he's writing for a land of free-market dreamers, where people select new lives as if switching brands of toothpaste, where presidential candidates promise new beginnings and "morning in America."
"It's the American tradition of making yourself over again, of discarding your history," the author said during a recent interview. "It is part of our historical heritage.
"It's deeply ingrained in the idea of religious revivalism, the sorts of religions invented in the basement. It's all through the Horatio Alger story. In an upwardly mobile culture, you can always hope two years from now you're going to be someone different from what you are now."
But in his three collections of short stories and now his second novel, "Shadow Play," Baxter considers the futility of reinvention, at least the kind of reinvention in which so many Americans believe. One woman tells her husband, "You have to say goodbye to the dreams of everything." Other characters cope by living out dreams of nothing.
"Shadow Play" begins with young Wyatt Palmer lighting out for the territory, running away from the home and the parents he no longer wants to be around. Soon enough, he gets his wish. His father dies of a heart attack. His mother suffers a breakdown. The boy eventually moves in with his aunt Ellen.
Afraid somehow that what happened to his parents was his own fault, Wyatt evolves into an updated version of "The Man in the Grey Flannel Suit," lost in 9-to-5 competency, burying past traumas as he conforms his way into the mainstream.
The novel is about alternative lives, the endless roads not traveled. Wyatt has only to look around him to imagine how he might have turned out. There's the eccentric Ellen, who believes the loving God is dead, replaced by a being who is merely curious. His cousin, Cyril, is the classic poorer relation, trying to emulate Wyatt and failing. At his office, Wyatt works down the hall from the lonely, cynical Alyse.
For much of his life, he has kept all these people at a distance, as if "normalcy" were a rickety house that could be flattened by a single gust of wind. During the second half of "Shadow Play," however, Wyatt realizes that denying his darker side has left him with no life at all.
"When you think of your fantasies," Baxter explained, "they seem diametrically opposed to your own life. That's often the way it seems in my own life. There is this shadow side that I can imagine, that I can become, that I did not become, that is still very much alive in my imagination. In a lot of my stories, all you have to do is throw a spiritual switch.
"What I am interested in is when someone's idea of rectitude is so rigid that any kind of acting out seems dangerous to him. It's like he has to live his adolescence in two weeks because he never had the chance to act crazy. I don't think it's a bad idea for adolescents to act crazy so at least they know what it's like."
Bits of "Shadow Play" are borrowed from Baxter's own life. A plotline about a chemical plant damaging the local environment was inspired by a plant located a few miles from the author's home in Ann Arbor, Mich. Like Wyatt's father - and the father in his previous novel, "First Light" - Baxter's father died young of a heart attack.
A native of Minneapolis who now teaches at the University of Michigan, the 45-year-old author has based much of his fiction in the imaginary town of Five Oaks, Mich. He likes the idea of writing about one specific setting, working in the tradition of William Carlos Williams and others who believed any place could be made universal.
Baxter once dreamed of traveling around the country, but the author now has a wife and son and any journeys these days happen largely on paper. He is trying to find balance for his characters, to offer humility as a way of grace. They worry about losing what they have or about giving up on what they've never had.
"I think there's always some regret; that's part of the unhappiness of growing up, that you are the person you've turned into," he said.
"I know a number of people who have always refused to accept that. Most often, people feel that when they leave their spouses. I often hear this - friends of mine are about to walk, and they say, 'I can't stand being the person I am. I'm going to turn over a new leaf.' Well, guess what, Jack, you're going to be the same person.
"I think I have fewer regrets than most people. Writers are luckier than most people. No heavy lifting, make your own hours. These fantasies, things you dream up on paper. People actually pay cash money to read the stories you make up. That's not a bad life. It's really not a bad life."
---
"Shadow Play" is published by W.W. Norton & Company and has a suggested retail price of $ 21.95.

 

End of Document
