

Once an Enemy, the Russian Spy Game's Still the Same, FBI Says
The Associated Press
March 5, 1992, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 695 words
Byline: By RUTH SINAI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Enemies spy on each other; friends do too.
That's what the FBI is saying about Russian spies: they're as active now as when they worked for the former Soviet Union.
At the same time, American spies don't seem to be standing in unemployment lines either.
"We see no reduction in the intelligence activities of their services," Wayne R. Gilbert, the FBI's top spy catcher, said Wednesday of his old Russian nemesis.
At first, Gilbert said in an interview, the FBI thought it was simply a case of old habits dying hard. But "more and more we see that it's a formal intelligence operation directed from Moscow," said Gilbert, assistant director of the FBI's intelligence division.
Gilbert predicted the Russians increasingly will turn their espionage to obtaining scientific and high-technology secrets by means of the Foreign Intelligence Service, the successor to the Soviet KGB.
But in Moscow, an intelligence service spokeswoman, Tatyana Samolis, said the agency would reduce its network of spies in the United States to a "reasonable" number. She did not elaborate.
But other Russian officials said the spy service was reducing its overseas personnel by 50 percent to 70 percent.
Samolis, quoted by the Interfax news agency, said Russia expects reciprocal reductions but does not believe the United States will reduce its spy operations, given the economic and political turmoil in the Commonwealth of Independent States.
She may be right.
CIA Director Robert Gates said recently that the United States needs to "dramatically" increase its so-called human intelligence collection - in other words, spying.
The State Department, facing painful budget cuts, nonetheless has decided to open embassies in all but one of the former 15 Soviet republics, in part to serve as listening posts to developments there.
Gilbert said some of the former Soviet republics are setting up their own intelligence services with the help of former KGB operatives, and might also target the United States.
He said the GRU - the military intelligence service - is as active as it was under Soviet control and likely would continue its activities here.
Despite the continuing threat, more than 300 of Gilbert's agents have been transferred to help the FBI fight violent crime. Gilbert declined to say how many he had left, but said he wasn't worried because the agents could return to him if the need arose.
His division has a lighter load now because it no longer has to monitor the activities of the former East European countries that shunned communism for democracy.
Spying for both sides, in general, is easier than it was during the Cold War.
Much of the information the United States had to get by stealth in the former Soviet Union is now readily available in the media and in government publications.
And many of the spies the Soviets had to disguise as diplomats and journalists, heavily monitored by the FBI, can now roam freely through the United States under cover as academics, businessmen and just plain tourists.
Starved for cash and for modern technology, the Russians are expected to try to steal American designs and blueprints, said Joseph Trento, an author of several books on espionage activity.
Other countries - Japan, France, Israel - also engage in such activity, he said.
With so much interaction between American and Russian businesses and scientists, "the situation has become so porous there's no way we can control it," said a law enforcement source, speaking on condition of anonymity.
Spying aside, Russian and American intelligence agencies are also cooperating with each other.
Gilbert said the Russians have asked for help on fighting international terrorism and drug trafficking.
The United States, in turn, is believed to have asked the Russians for help in solving some espionage cases involving Americans suspected of having spied for the Soviet Union and Soviets who allegedly spied against this country.
Gilbert declined to discuss any cases, but they are believed to include that of fugitive Ed Howard - a former CIA agent wanted by the FBI for selling secrets to the Soviets - and Felix Bloch, a former U.S. diplomat under investigation by the FBI for the same alleged offense.

 

End of Document
