

One Shining Moment in the Life of the Texas Rose Festival Queen
 The Associated Press
October 15, 1995, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 992 words
Byline: By JULIA PRODIS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TYLER, Texas
Body




In her 100-pound gown with the 17-foot train, the queen of the Texas Rose Festival will take her bow.
The orchestra will play the first notes of "Pomp and Circumstance" as the lights come up on stage. A raised drawbridge hiding her will slowly fall, and the crowd will catch its first glimpse of her bejeweled dress - the color and design kept top secret for months.
She will turn to the Rose Festival president, decked out in tuxedo and tails, and kneel before him as he crowns her, tapping her shoulders left and then right. Rising slowly under the weight of her gown, she then will descend the stage's grand staircase, holding her rhinestone-encrusted scepter, wrist slightly cocked.
On Thursday night, Martie Wolf will perform the Tyler time-honored tradition she has been perfecting for months - a reverential bow to the high society that has cradled her.
It isn't just a demure nod, a coy little dip or a flouncy curtsy. This is Texas, remember. It's a nose-to-the-floor "full court bow," also known as the "Texas Bow," or modified "Dallas Dip."
With the exception of the World War II years, the pomp and pageantry of Texas festivals and their royalty have survived and even flourished through the anti-establishment '60s, the oil-busted late '80s and the downsized '90s.
In an age when many a teen-ager isn't cool without a tattoo, grungy clothes or a pierced nose, Tyler is a place where young ladies are still presented to society in white gowns and kid leather gloves.
"It's very anachronistic. It's like something out of the Civil War days," says Julia Sweeney, former society editor at the Dallas Times Herald. "They make something so social such an important part of their lives."
Life in Tyler, a town of 80,000 people about 100 miles east of Dallas, revolves around the Rose Festival. The elite families, rich in the oil money that has purchased their grand antebellum homes and country club memberships, start planning a year in advance. And girls who would be queen start practicing their bows in grammar school.
The night Martie was designated this year's queen by the festival president, who has sole discretion, her parents and brother had gathered in the living room. When she entered, the president presented her with a bouquet of roses. Then, she knew.
"It was wild," says Martie, 19, a Delta Delta Delta sorority girl who is studying fashion and design at Texas Christian University.
The anticipation has been building since Martie was named queen a year ago. If truth be told, it's been building since she was a little girl in a green velvet dress, holding her father's hand at the Rose Festival's elegant garden tea party. Her father remembers Martie's big brown eyes gazing up at the queen in wonderment.
"It was a look of 'Will I ever be like this?' " Sam Wolf recalls.
You see, Martie is a legacy. Her aunt was queen 20 years ago and her mother was a lady-in-waiting. Her father owns a lumber company and is a past president of the festival - and was his wife's escort at the 1969 coronation before they were married.
Martie has done her part to be eligible - she was a Chamber of Commerce Azalea Belle, personal attendant to the 1991 queen and volunteer at a local hospital through high school.
Ascending the throne is a dream of many Southern girls who possess the right bloodlines and bank accounts. For some, it's a birthright.
"A Southern belle is born knowing she is going to be Southern royalty," Maryln Schwartz, a columnist at the Dallas Morning News, wrote in her book "A Southern Belle Primer, or Why Princess Margaret Will Never Be a Kappa Kappa Gamma."
"If her mother was a queen or a princess or a duchess of the Pilgrimage or the Fiesta or the Cotton Carnival, then she knows one day if she does well in dancing school, behaves herself at her grandmother's pink teas and has a daddy who is willing to mortgage the family home to pay for her royal robes, then she, too, will one day wear a crown and sit on a throne."
The parents must be able to afford the honor - a subject none like to discuss. A coronation costume often costs more than $ 25,000 and involves a personal designer and more than a dozen seamstresses. Parents also must throw a tea party "open to the world" at the city rose garden - and that can cost upwards of $ 75,000. And the queen must buy a solid white gown for the Friday night ball.
Her ladies-in-waiting also must be dressed for coronation night in personally designed costumes that complement the festival's annual theme - this year, it's "Magical Wonderland." They, too, will have white gowns for the ball, all of which must be registered to guard against duplications.
Before Martie takes her bow at the coronation Thursday, her ladies-in-waiting will have paraded on stage and each will have taken her bow.
Martie will be in her personal dressing room, waiting. Her nails will have been polished in a French manicure and her hairdresser, makeup lady and a handful of attendants will be fluttering around her.
When she hears those first notes of "Pomp and Circumstance," the moment she has been waiting for, practicing for, will have arrived. She will descend the stage stairs, dragging her train, so heavy it will pull her back with every step she takes.
Holding her head as if balancing a stack of books, she will gracefully extend her arms out to either side and, like Tinkerbell, wave the scepter slowly from left to right, "presenting the audience."
Then slowly, "it must be very slowly," she will drop to one knee, then the other, her arms remaining outstretched. She will rest her body on her heels and, bending from the waist, glide down until her chest rests on the floor, taking care to keep her back straight.
Finally, pressing her lips inward so as not to smudge her gown with lipstick, she will rest her head in the voluptuous folds of her skirt. She will still be smiling when her chin touches her dress.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Julia Prodis is the AP's Southwest regional reporter, based in Dallas.
 Load-Date: October 15, 1995

 

End of Document
