

OUT FRONT: Memo Confirms Haiti Drug Probe, Concerns A R !s 2 w 0 0 The U.S. Justice Department is investigating drug trafficking within the Haitian military, saying prosecutors have evidence top officers protected incoming cocaine flights and outgoing freighter shipments.
The Associated Press
May 20, 1994, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1081 words
Body




A confidential departmental memo obtained by The Associated Press also reveals concerns that U.S. intelligence agencies may have cooperated with the smugglers.
The Haitian military's involvement in drug trafficking has long been the subject of U.S. Senate hearings and federal law enforcement reports.
The Justice memo, however, is the first official sign a criminal investigation is under way.
As if to underscore U.S. concern about drug smuggling from Haiti, President Clinton at a news conference Thursday listed drug trafficking as one of six reasons America might use force against the Haitian military regime.
In a six-page memo written April 8, Deputy Assistant Attorney General Mark M. Richard in Washington names the targets of Justice's investigation: 14 top military officers, Haiti's port director, and the Haitian National Intelligence Service (SIN).
"The U.S. attorney's office in Miami has established that the Haitian military have been closely involved in the facilitation of drug trafficking since at least the early 1980s," Richard writes.
The officers protect incoming Colombian drug planes and oversee the reloading of cocaine on freighters, the memo says, and drugs confiscated from smugglers are often sold back to other traffickers for delivery to the United States.
Richard's memo says Haitian officers are closely involved with specific Colombian traffickers, who were not identified. It says the investigation is still preliminary and indictments are not expected in the immediate future.
The U.S. attorney's office in Miami refused comment on the memo Friday. But U.S. Sen. Bob Graham, D-Fla., said the memo makes the need for action against Haiti's military more urgent.
"It's further confirmation of how the sovereignty of Haiti has been stolen and used for a whole variety of brutal and evil activities, including increased shipment of drugs into the United States," Graham said.
The most prominent Haitian officer targeted is Lt. Col. Michel Francois, the head of police in Port-au-Prince, the capital city.
Francois, rather than the nation's nominal military chief, Lt. Gen. Raoul Cedras, is considered the most powerful figure in the regime that overthrew elected President Jean-Bertrand Aristide in September 1991.
Cedras' name is not on the memo's summary of investigative targets. A confidential Senate report last year said Cedras' role in the smuggling was unclear.
The Justice memo, sent to the CIA, the FBI, the National Security Agency, the State Department, the Drug Enforcement Administration and other departments, asks the agencies to search their files for any reference to Francois or the other suspects.
Richard warns the agencies that the Haitians may try to use "graymail" to try to avoid prosecution. He suggests the officers might claim the trafficking went on with the knowledge and approval of U.S. authorities.
Press reports have indicated the CIA helped create SIN after dictator Jean-Claude Duvalier was overthrown in 1986, his memo notes.
"Experience certainly suggests that it is best to grapple with any difficult issues early, before an indictment invokes both severe time constraints and public debate," Richard writes.
White House officials are concerned that some U.S. agencies, under the Bush administration, may have participated in the 1991 coup against Aristide and an indictment would bring that involvement to light, a source close to the case told the AP on Friday, on condition of anonymity. The allegation of U.S. participation has often been made by Aristide supporters.
"It's high time our complicity in the coup is exposed," said Steve Forester, chief legal counsel to the Haitian Refugee Center in Miami. "The United States has actively been involved in supporting the Haitian military for years."
The Justice memo mentions the connection between drug-trafficking allegations and the prosecution of Panama's military strongman Manuel Noriega. After a failed attempt to pressure Noriega out of power with a Miami drug indictment, the United States invaded Panama in December 1989 and took him into custody.
In Noriega's subsequent trial, the CIA and other agencies were forced to reveal sometimes embarrassing incidences of cooperation with the defendant. Noriega was convicted and is serving a 40-year sentence.
The DEA has estimated that a ton of cocaine is normally shipped through Haiti to the United States each month, although most shipments have been stopped or slowed by the current embargo of Haiti.
The Justice memo asks agencies to review files beginning with Jan. 1, 1985, and to answer seven questions, including whether agents were aware of drug smuggling or other illegal activities by the officers or SIN.
The memo emphasizes that decisions about the relevancy of their answers will be made in Washington, rather than by federal prosecutors in Miami.
"Any national security concerns that your agency may have regarding those decisions will be addressed and resolved among the intelligence community and with the Department of Justice prior to any use of such information by the prosecutors," Richard writes.
Along with Francois, the memo names as targets Brig. Gen. Jean-Claude Duperval, second-in-command of Haiti's military under Cedras; Lt. Col. Andre Claudel Josaphat, northern regional commander; Col. Antoine Atouriste, head of Haiti's anti-drug squad; and Capt. Jackson Joanis, top aide to Francois and a suspect in the disappearance of pro-democracy activists.
The only civilian named is Max Paul, Haiti's director of ports. In October, using a band of Army-backed toughs, Paul barred the U.S. warship Harlan County and some 200 American troops from docking in Port-au-Prince to prepare for Aristide's return.
Last month, confessed Colombian drug trafficker Gabriel Taboada told a U.S. Senate subcommittee that he saw Francois in 1984 at the ranch of Pablo Escobar, the boss of the Medellin cocaine cartel, who was killed last December.
A previous Senate staff report said Francois receives and distributes $ 100 million each year in drug payoffs from Colombian cocaine kings. Francois has strongly denied the accusations, and on Friday military spokesman Lt. Col. Jean-Robert Gabriel did the same.
"There has always been a good struggle against drugs in Haiti, especially on the part of the military. We play the role of the police. We are the ones who fight against drug trafficking," Gabriel told The Associated Press during a conversation Friday outside army headquarters in Port-au-Prince, the Haitian capital.
 Load-Date: May 21, 1994

 

End of Document
