

People Talk About the Photographs That Mean the Most to Them
The Associated Press
October 14, 1994, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 870 words
Byline: By MICHAEL KUCHWARA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




What if you were asked to choose the one photograph that is most important to you?
Out of such a question, posed by curators Marvin Heiferman and Carole Kismaric, was born "Talking Pictures," a high-tech and highly personal photography exhibition that tells as much about the people asked as the photographs they chose.
That's because the exhibit, on view at the International Center of Photography Midtown through Dec. 4 prior to a national tour, offers not only the photographs but also recorded observations from the eclectic group of 54 selectors. Many of them are well-known in politics, the arts, sports and popular culture. Others, ranging from a 6-year-old boy to a pop-star groupie, are not.
Consider the observations of Watergate participant G. Gordon Liddy. He picked a haunting Life magazine photograph of Marines who died on the beaches of New Guinea during World War II.
"There has never been an 11-year-old like me and there never will be again," says Liddy, discussing the picture that fueled his patriotism at a time when the United States was in peril. "I planned to lie about my age in order to fight in the war."
His comments can be heard by viewers on what is described as "a special handheld key pad." It looks like a fancy cordless telephone and can be programmed for individual speakers by pressing specific numbers.
Visitors can pick up key pads before entering the exhibit - although the devices are not absolutely necessary to enjoy the show, they enhance it immeasurably.
The pads are particularly helpful when famous photographers like Vietnam War ace Eddie Adams and high-fashion guru Bruce Weber explain their choices.
Adams, who chose one of his own photographs, brings a professional's detached expertise to his description of how he photographed a dead Vietcong soldier. Yet it doesn't make the photo any less unnerving.
Weber celebrates the work of early 20th-century photographer Imogen Cunningham, whose nude picture of her husband on Mount Rainier transmits a sensuality that seems modern nearly 80 years after it was taken.
"The person who takes a photograph is going on a journey and so is the person who's lucky enough to look at that photograph," Weber says.
Many of the pictures involve family and friends. Charles Schulz, creator of the comic strip "Peanuts," chose an affecting portrait of his grandmother, showing a face filled with well-earned lines caused by the triumphs and tragedies of life.
Fred Rogers, the star and creator of public television's "Mr. Rogers' Neighborhood," selected a photograph of himself in 1938 as a solemn-looking, chubby little boy of 10. He's talking with his grandfather in what Rogers remembers was the music room of his parents' house in Latrobe, Pa. The room later became the family's television room, where Rogers saw his first TV show. Right then he decided to go into the fledgling medium.
Playwright Wendy Wasserstein received similar inspiration from a poster for an exhibit of photographs by Eugene Atget at the Museum of Modern Art nearly 25 years ago. Wasserstein had the poster of a barren, almost sad, park scene hanging in her apartment while she attended the Yale Drama School.
"I identified with the melancholia of this picture," she says. "When I was working, I would look at this poster. I liked the orderliness of it. As someone who writes plays, structure is very important to me."
Wasserstein wrote the play "Uncommon Women and Others," now receiving an off-Broadway revival, while sitting under the poster. The image of time passing, which she finds in the picture, is one of the themes of the play.
Other photographs are overtly political or focus on social concerns, particularly racial injustice. The Rev. Jesse Jackson chose a photographic remembrance of the 1963 Birmingham, Ala., civil-rights demonstrations in which fire hoses were turned full force on young protesters.
Lawyer William Kunstler went to a Margaret Bourke-White photograph of black victims of a flood in Louisville, Ky., in 1937. They stand in line underneath a giant billboard of a happy white family, riding in a new car. The caption reads, "World's Highest Standard of Living. There's No Way Like the American Way."
Then there are the snapshots of pop culture, seemingly frivolous, but still able to command attention. There's comedian Joan Rivers' homage to playwright Lillian Hellman, who appears - defiantly unglamorous - in a celebrated "What becomes a Legend most?" advertisement for Blackglama mink.
Says Rivers, "I think Hellman walked into the photo session and said, 'You've got 10 minutes. Let's go. You're not going to do anything with this face."'
And performance artist John Epperson, better known as his alter ego Lypsinka, loves a glossy, full-color dance sequence involving Ann-Margret in the movie version of "Bye Bye Birdie." It's brash and trashy fun, not unlike what Epperson puts on stage himself.
Placed strategically in the exhibition is a quotation from another famous photographer, Walker Evans. It commands, "Stare. It is the way to educate your eye, and more. Stare, pry, listen, eavesdrop. Die knowing something. You are not here long."
Good advice, and something these people who contributed to "Talking Pictures" have followed very well.
 Load-Date: October 14, 1994

 

End of Document
