

Prime Minister Candidate Steps Down Following U.S. Drug Allegations  The front-runner for prime minister bowed out Sunday, another politician said, following allegations by the U.S. government that he was involved in drug dealings. The general who toppled a democratically elected government last year was now the favorite candidate for prime minister.
The Associated Press
April 5, 1992, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 280 words
Dateline: BANGKOK, Thailand
Body




Narong Wongwan's Sammakkhi Tham party emerged victorious in general elections March 22 and a coalition of five pro-military parties announced he would seek the prime ministership.
But Narong's chances appeared slim after the U.S. State Department revealed his application for a visa had been turned down in 1991 on suspicion of involvement in the narcotics trade.
Narong has maintained his innocence.
Montri Pongpanich, leader of the Social Action Party, told reporters Narong had decided to withdraw his candidacy. The five-party coalition, which includes Social Action, would back army commander-in-chief Gen. Suchinda Kraprayoon for the top government post, Montri said.
Suchinda was the mastermind of the military coup that toppled a democratically elected government in 1991.
Suchinda did not run in the election and has not said whether he would accept the job. Under the current constitution, the prime minister does not have to be an elected member of parliament - something which has been strongly criticized by academics, students and pro-democracy political parties.
Chamlong Srimuang, who leads the pro-democracy Palang Dharma Party, has warned of a popular uprising if an "outsider" is selected as prime minister.
Suchinda's administration installed an interim civilian government and kept its pledge to hold general elections for the lower house of parliament.
Initially the military administration, known as the National Peacekeeping Council, said it would have a major say in the choosing of the prime minister. But in recent days senior military officers have stated they would let the political parties make the selection.
Suchinda serves as vice chairman of the council.

 

End of Document
