

Putting the Fear of the IRS Into the Hearts of Delinquent Parents
The Associated Press
December 28, 1993, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 757 words
Byline: By JENNIFER DIXON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Internal Revenue Service is on the trail of a painting contractor who hasn't made a child support payment in five years and owes his ex-wife and two children more than $ 70,000.
And there are signs that the man, one of Virginia's most elusive and delinquent dads, may be getting nervous.
His ex-wife, who spoke on condition of anonymity, says the man called her mother after receiving a letter from the IRS recently and "cussed her out" before disappearing again. "Get that damn law off my back," her mother remembers him saying.
The case of the painting contractor, who owes $ 16,000 in legal fees and $ 74,000 in child and spousal support, is one of 698 especially knotty child support cases that have been turned over to the IRS under a new pilot project.
The demonstration, which involves child support cases with an average debt of nearly $ 21,000, may also be a forerunner to sweeping changes in the child support enforcement system.
President Clinton has promised to improve child support collections as part of his overhaul of the nation's welfare system. His welfare reform task force estimates that while the potential for child support collections exceeds $ 47 billion, only $ 13 billion a year is actually being paid.
Part of the gap can be traced to cases in which a child support award was never established, due largely to the failure to establish paternity for children born out of wedlock, the task force said in a confidential draft.
But the gap in potential collections is also due to a failure to collect on child support awards in place, as well as a failure to update awards as the absent parent's income improves.
The administration, says a senior official, sees the IRS playing a bigger role in child support collections under welfare reform.
The task force also recommends that all child support awards be updated regularly through an administrative process, rather than going through the courts, to reflect any increases in the absent parent's income.
Its plan also calls for a federal child support enforcement clearinghouse that would contain the names of all absent parents and the amounts they owe.
The data would be matched frequently against information from the IRS, Social Security and unemployment insurance in an effort to locate the absent parent and determine earnings, the administration official said.
In addition, W-4 forms (the tax forms employees fill out when starting a new job) would be routinely forwarded to the clearinghouse. That would allow the government to track employees as they move from job to job, rather than once a year when their tax return is filed.
The IRS already has the power to dock the tax refunds of parents with delinquent child support payments, and has had the authority for years to investigate certain child support cases.
But bureaucratic hurdles and complicated paperwork requirements discouraged states from taking advantage of that program, known as "full collection," officials say.
According to the Department of Health and Human Services, child support collections under the full collection program totaled just $ 327,357 in 1991 and $ 293,420 in 1992.
Under the pilot project, the IRS is trying to collect on 698 child support cases in 12 states (Arkansas, California, Delaware, Massachusetts, Michigan, Missouri, New York, Oregon, Tennessee, Texas, Utah and Virginia) with a total debt of $ 14.5 million.
More than half the cases cross state lines, and nearly half involve parents who are self-employed, two of the trickiest issues for state child support agencies.
The IRS, however, has access to a worldwide computer network and the ability to tap a delinquent taxpayer's bank account or wages, and even to seize property, without going to court. Under the full collection process, it can use the same tools to collect a child support debt.
The Department of Health and Human Services, which is working with IRS and the states on the pilot project, hopes it will show whether the IRS can be more successful than state child support agencies in dealing with especially difficult cases.
Another question HHS hopes to answer, says a department official, is whether putting the fear of the tax collector in the hearts of delinquent parents will prompt them to settle up.
"In receiving a notice from the IRS, will that cause them to come forward and try to reach some repayment agreement?" the official says.
The mother in Richmond, Va., is skeptical.
"He'll do anything he can to protect his money," she says of her ex. "I keep praying his number will come up, and he'll be caught."
 Load-Date: December 28, 1993

 

End of Document
