

Putting the Fear of the IRS Into the Hearts of Delinquent Parents
The Associated Press
December 29, 1993, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 448 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Internal Revenue Service is looking for a Virginia painting contractor who hasn't made a child support payment in five years and there are signs he is feeling the heat.
His ex-wife says he called her mother recently after receiving a letter from the IRS and "cussed her out" before disappearing again. "Get that damn law off my back," her mother remembers him saying.
The case of the painting contractor, who owes $ 16,000 in legal fees and $ 74,000 in child and spousal support, is one of 698 child support cases turned over to the IRS under a new pilot project.
The demonstration, which involves child support cases with an average debt of nearly $ 21,000, could portend other changes in the child support enforcement system.
President Clinton has promised to improve child support collections as part of his overhaul of the nation's welfare system. His welfare reform task force estimates that while the potential for child support collections exceeds $ 47 billion, only $ 13 billion a year is actually being paid.
A senior official says the administration envisions the IRS playing a bigger role in child support collections.
The task force plan also calls for a federal child support enforcement clearinghouse that would contain the names of all absent parents and the amounts they owe.
The data would be matched frequently against information from the IRS, Social Security and unemployment insurance in an effort to locate the absent parent and determine earnings, the administration official said.
In addition, W-4 forms (the tax forms employees fill out when starting a new job) would be routinely forwarded to the clearinghouse. That would allow the government to track employees as they move from job to job, rather than once a year when their tax return is filed.
The IRS already has the power to dock the tax refunds of parents with delinquent child support payments, and has had the authority for years to investigate certain child support cases.
But bureaucratic hurdles and complicated paperwork requirements discouraged states from taking advantage of that program.
Under the pilot project, the IRS is trying to collect on 698 child support cases in 12 states (Arkansas, California, Delaware, Massachusetts, Michigan, Missouri, New York, Oregon, Tennessee, Texas, Utah and Virginia) with a total debt of $ 14.5 million.
More than half the cases cross state lines and nearly half involve parents who are self-employed.
The IRS has access to a worldwide computer network and the ability to tap a delinquent taxpayer's bank account or wages, and even to seize property, without going to court. Under the full collection process, it can use the same tools to collect a child support debt.
 Load-Date: December 29, 1993

 

End of Document
