

Reconstruction of the Beginning Hours of the Los Angeles Riot
The Associated Press
May 17, 1992, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1568 words
Byline: By JOHN ANTCZAK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




It began with an hours-long simmer, coming to a full boil with the police chief off at a political event and the mayor away from City Hall. He was at a church rally; he hoped it would help release the anger at the Rodney King verdict peacefully.
Television coverage first focused attention on the now-notorious South Central intersection of Florence and Normandie avenues, where Reginald Denny eventually was pulled from his gravel truck and savagely beaten.
Some label that intersection the flash point for the rioting that engulfed parts of Los Angeles, but police maintain there was no flash point.
There were simultaneous reports of disturbances elsewhere in South Central, they say, as well as west of downtown in the department's Rampart Division and northwest in the Foothill Division, where officers in the King case had been stationed.
The police report on the department's much-criticized response was to have been released this week, but instead will be given to a investigating panel headed by former FBI Director William Webster. The Fire Department's own report won't be ready for months.
But what is known of the sequence of events in the first hours of the rioting reveals a situation out of control before the danger was fully recognized.
The Simi Valley jury was in its seventh day of deliberations when it decided the assault and excessive-force charges against four white Los Angeles police officers videotaped 14 months earlier beating King, a black motorist.
It was Wednesday, April 29, shortly after lunch, when the jury notified the judge it was through.
Two hours later, about 3:15 p.m., the verdicts were read: not guilty on all counts but one, and deadlocked on that one.
A small but angry crowd chanted outside the tiny Simi Valley courthouse, and harassed the four policemen as they hurried to their cars.
Los Angeles, 35 miles away, seemed quiet.
At City Hall, Mayor Tom Bradley watched the verdicts alone in his office. His staff had spent several weeks planning for a number of verdict scenarios including "worst possible," a spokeswoman says.
The mayor would make a television address and head to a meeting of civil rights leaders, clergy and others at First AME Church, a leading black congregation. It was planned as a rally to vent anger or happiness over the verdict.
Shortly after 5 p.m., Bradley went on television, denouncing the acquittals but appealing for calm. By 6:40 p.m. he was at the church, southwest of downtown. He had not been in contact with any city department heads in the meantime.
Less than five miles away, at the intersection of Florence and Normandie, the calm already had been shattered. An ugly scene unfolded beneath the news helicopters broadcasting live pictures.
Youths throwing objects and attacking drivers first were reported near the intersection about 5:25 p.m.
At 5:32 p.m., according to audiotape of 77th Street Division police radio calls cited by the Los Angeles Times, a dispatcher asked: "Do we have any units in the area of Florence and Normandie?" The dispatcher added: "We have a report of a man being attacked in a black vehicle." A police unit replied: "We're in the area."
A home video recorded about three minutes later showed a tumultuous scene of officers struggling with a raging crowd. At 5:42 p.m., an officer radioed he had a suspect in custody who was trying to kick his way out of the patrol car.
One minute later came a broadcast from Lt. Mike Moulin, a field commander in 77th Street Division: "I want everybody out of here. Florence and Normandie. Everybody. Get out. Now."
It was the start of a withdrawal that would leave the deadly intersection unpoliced for hours.
Twenty-five miles away, Reginald Denny had just gotten on the road with a load of sand and gravel headed for South Central Los Angeles.
Pilot-reporter Bob Tur, operator of a helicopter news service, had been airborne since 4 p.m. About 6 p.m. he began reporting the disturbance at Florence and Normandie. He broadcast first over radio station KNX and then, with live pictures, over KCOP-TV. But that wasn't the only place he and his crew could see crowds.
"As we flew over the city, there were a lot of other people gathered on other coroners," Tur said.
According to tapes of 77th Street Division police broadcasts, a field supervisor suggested at 6:18 p.m. that a tactical alert be declared. Moulin responded that the decision would be made momentarily, and he ordered units to regroup at another location, the Los Angeles Times reported.
"About 6:30, it really blew up in Florence and Normandie," Tur said.
Pedestrians preyed on motorists. Bottles exploded against passing cars. Drivers were pulled from cars and beaten. A liquor store was looted. And still, traffic kept rolling into the dangerous intersection. Tur saw two police cars race through about 6:35 p.m. They were pelted.
Downtown, Police Chief Daryl Gates left Parker Center, the police headquarters, where a crowd of protesters gathered. He headed west to Brentwood to attend a political fund-raiser for a campaign opposing a police reform measure that would change City Charter protections on chiefs' tenure.
At 6:45 p.m., by Tur's clock, Denny's gravel truck lumbered into the intersection. In seconds, young men yanked him from the truck, delivered a vicious beating, robbed his cab and picked his pockets. The airborne camera broadcast it all, making Denny a symbol of the riot's bloody violence.
"There was no way to help that man," Tur said. "I was so frustrated and angry. If there was any way I could, I would have."
Mayor Bradley, waiting to speak at the First AME Church, first received reports of violence at 6:50 p.m. The reports from City Hall included assaults on motorists, looting and the lack of police presence.
Bradley, according to an account provided by his office, spoke directly to Deputy Police Chief Matthew Hunt and ordered him to send officers to the scene. The mayor also spoke by phone with Gov. Pete Wilson, who called apparently seeking a report on the situation.
At 6:55 p.m., police broadcast a tactical alert, a preliminary stage of a general Police Department mobilization.
Above South Central, Tur watched fires start: a car, then another, then a video store and an auto body shop around Florence and Normandie, then a market 14 blocks north.
City Fire Department units began to respond to blazes, according to Battalion Chief Dean Cathey. But fire units at one staging area shared with police were stymied: They could not get police escorts to venture into the increasingly hostile area.
The sun set at 7:35 p.m., and the city began to burn.
The Fire Department, already moving trucks from around the city to fill in empty areas, checked on the availability of firefighting units from other agencies.
Police Chief Gates, meanwhile, showed up at the fund-raiser on the city's west side. Later, he would say he stayed only five minutes and admit he shouldn't have gone at all. By some accounts, he stayed a half-hour.
Mayor Bradley, still at the First AME Church, delivered an address at 7:40 p.m. and immediately left, reaching City Hall at 8:10 p.m.
Twenty minutes later, he received reports from the city's Emergency Operations Center and began discussions with Police Commission member Jesse Brewer and commission president Stanley Sheinbaum. They decided to request the National Guard.
At 8:30 p.m., the Fire Department requested help from other agencies under a mutual aid plan. Twenty-five fire companies were dispatched to help. Firefighters, attacked by rioters, raced from fire to fire, often leaving before they were fully extinguished, then returning later.
By 8:45 p.m., the mayor had spoken to Gov. Wilson, who agreed to send the National Guard. Bradley declared a state of emergency.
At Parker Center, an anti-police demonstration began to threaten the headquarters building. Demonstrators rushed the front doors but did not enter. A line of police deployed in front of the building. The crowd toppled a parking lot kiosk and set it ablaze.
Finally driven away from Parker Center, the mob rampaged through the civic center. Cars were burned and government buildings attacked. The Los Angeles Times building was vandalized and palm trees adorning a freeway were turned into giant torches by arsonists.
Above Los Angeles, the crew in Tur's helicopter counted 70 big fires burning at 9 p.m. "You would look out over the city and it resembled the oilfields of Kuwait," he recalled.
Looters ran rampant, but the Fire Department's evening-long problem with getting police escorts finally came to an end through what Chief Cathey delicately termed "face-to-face discussions."
By 9 p.m., Gates had returned downtown. He met 30 minutes later with Bradley and county Sheriff Sherman Block in the Emergency Operations Center. There was a conference call with the governor.
Returning to his office at 10:30 p.m., Bradley videotaped a message to the city about the National Guard being called out. At 12:15 a.m. Thursday, nine hours after the verdicts, the mayor signed documents enacting a dusk-to-dawn curfew. He left City Hall at 1:30 a.m.
Over the next two days, assaults, killings, looting and arson spread far out of South Central, hitting hard in Hollywood, Koreatown, the Pico-Union district and neighboring cities.
When the worst urban rioting of the century ended, 51 people were dead, 2,383 people were injured, 5,537 fires were reported and damage was estimated at $ 785 million.

 

End of Document
