

Royals Shatter the Mystique, But the Sentiment Survives
The Associated Press
October 30, 1994, Sunday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 851 words
Byline: By MAUREEN JOHNSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DOVER, England
Body




The military band was rehearsed to perfection, the atmosphere electric, the weather glorious, the onlookers expectant - but Queen Elizabeth II caught a cold and canceled.
No one seemed too sure about the name of the distinguished-looking local who stood in for the monarch during a day of ceremonies at Dover's Connaught Barracks.
"He looks nice enough, but he isn't royal. It just doesn't mean much," said Ernest Hitchins, 71.
For Hitchins and millions of other Britons, the royal show inspires much the same affection it did before the agonized biography of Prince Charles.
But for some, the mystique is gone, shattered by the future king's outpourings about his chilly mother, his domineering father, his loveless marriage and his mistress.
"They don't seem to be in control of anything anymore," said Leanne Dixon, an 18-year-old art student.
It didn't occur to Miss Dixon and a friend having lunch in the park to go and see the queen Friday with the Royal Green Jackets Regiment in the 12th century Dover Castle. It overlooks the English Channel with a distant view - on a clear day - of the French coast.
"You grew up to think, the royals, it's like wow," she added. "Now they're just ordinary people, not even very nice ordinary people."
Aided by years of gossip and press pursuit of the troubled private lives of the 68-year-old monarch's children, Britain's royals have tipped themselves into what many commentators see as a crisis.
Memorable royal images evoke derision or pity: Princess Diana's leaks two years ago about her unhappiness; her husband retaliating with the biography; Prince Andrew's estranged wife, the Duchess of York, cavorting topless with an American financial advisor; 12-year-old Prince William blinking in the glare of photographers' flashlights as the nation and the newscasters dissect his parents' failed marriage.
Monarchists fret about the erosion of respect for the House of Windsor, which often now looks like a satirist's dream - "Marriage is a dirty word in our family," a radio mimic explains in the queen's plummy tones.
Some royal defenders are reduced to citing royalty's role as a tourist-puller.
Circulation-boosting news of royal infidelity has made mere footnotes out of serious arguments about the non-political monarchy being the final safeguard against the abuse of parliamentary power in a country without a constitution.
Now, talk of getting rid of Britain's 1,000-year-old monarchy is not confined to a fringe of left-wing republicans.
"The monarchy's time has passed," the conservative-leaning and respected weekly, The Economist, declared after The Sunday Times published the first extracts of the biography of Charles this month. " … The only powerful argument against abolition is that it is not worth the trouble."
The third and last installment of Prince Charles' authorized biography, published in The Sunday Times, said Charles intended to become king and was willing to scale down the monarchy when he succeeds Queen Elizabeth II.
It also noted that Charles is happier since separating from Diana but has not lost his "essential insecurity and self-doubt."
Things may never be the same again. But while royal attempts since the 50s to reflect family stability have disintegrated, there is scant evidence of a real threat to the British monarchy.
Although support for keeping the monarchy is declining, it is still around 70 percent in most opinion polls, down from nearly 90 percent a decade ago.
And some royal watchers - from constitutional experts to professional image-makers - argue that the monarchy may in the longer term come out stronger from the upheaval of the 90s.
"People confuse mystique with secrecy," Quentin Bell, head of Britain's Public Relations Consultants' Association, said in an interview.
"In a consumer context, companies are having to be more open. Some would say Charles broke the mystique, but he was being more open and honest. I think in a year or two it will have enhanced the specialness of the royal family."
Harold Brooks-Baker, publishing director of Burke's Peerage, gives the monarchy just a 50-50 chance of surviving much past the queen. But even he thinks 45-year-old Charles, by putting his cards on the table, may pull it off.
"The mystique of the monarchy can never be restored after this," he said. "But Charles can perhaps restore the dignity."
At the heart of any recovery lies sentiment.
When the queen did not show up in Dover, the program of regimental displays, honor guards, and band-playing went ahead. But it all seemed a bit pedestrian.
Leicester University politics lecturer Bob Borthwick concluded in a recent study, "Long to Reign Over Us?", that the monarchy has shifted some some way toward greater acceptability in the past few years by, for example, cutting down on the number of royals on the state payroll and opening Buckingham Palace to the public in the summer.
"Their challenge now is to drop the social exclusiveness without becoming a downmarket institution. There is still a deep instinct of loyalty to the institution itself, and part of the attraction is the sense of style and display and tradition."
 Load-Date: October 31, 1994

 

End of Document
