

Sandbagging the Tidal Wave of the AIDS Epidemic
The Associated Press
September 19, 1992, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1052 words
Byline: By MITCHELL LANDSBERG, AP National Writer
Dateline: PHILADELPHIA
Body




Something keeps Richard Liu going, bounding like a bird dog from hooker to hustler, car to club.
"Come here!" he shouts to a transvestite ambling along a downtown sidewalk. Eighteen-year-old Mercedes, dressed this night in a low-cut blue satin blouse, tight jeans and low heels, smiles warmly and crosses the street toward Liu, who presses condoms wrapped in safe-sex brochures into his hand.
"Oh thanks, I needed those," Mercedes says. Then he gestures to Liu and his partners in an AIDS outreach team. "They're a lifesaver."
So they hope.
Seven nights a week, in twos or threes, the AIDS outreach team from Philadelphia Community Health Alternatives prowls the streets, the alleys, the clubs, the bathhouses and the parks of the central city, dispensing condoms, information and advice to the people who are at highest risk of being infected by the AIDS virus.
In the enormity of the AIDS epidemic, it is a small thing they do. They are sandbagging a tidal wave.
But in the small world of Philadelphia's "gay ghetto" and in the sex markets - gay and straight - nearby, what they do accounts for a story of quiet heroism.
By comparison to some cities - even smaller ones, such as San Francisco and Washington - Philadelphia's outreach efforts are modest.
Philadelphia Community Health Alternatives (the largest AIDS organization in the city, although not the only one) has a $ 1.1 million annual budget and a staff of 28, including the eight members of its outreach squad.
But that $ 1.1 million buys a lot - AIDS testing, services for AIDS patients, a myriad of educational programs, and the work of the street team.
No one can say how successful these efforts have been. There are 4,800 Philadelphians diagnosed with AIDS, according to the federal Centers for Disease Control, and the number grows inevitably.
Richard Liu is 22, a college student who grew up in the suburbs outside Philadelphia. He is an "AIDS baby," a gay man who has never known a world of sex without AIDS. In lieu of a cure or vaccine, he and his fellow members of the PCHA street team are doing all they can to save lives.
At a time when younger gay men are spurning safer sexual practices and some older gay men are abandoning them, when more people are dying from the disease than ever, there is a growing sense of urgency to the mission of these young men.
"We're celebrities around here," Liu says as he and 21-year-old Jamal Weaver stroll up 13th Street around midnight, past an adult bookshop, a leather sex-toys shop, an all-male porn theater; past transvestite hookers, teen-age hustlers, gay couples and cruising suburbanites.
They are a diverse group, these members of the AIDS team. The five out tonight are black, white and Asian; gay, straight and bisexual; from the suburbs and the inner city.
And this is their village. They patrol these streets from roughly 10 p.m. to 2 a.m., sometimes later. They are out on this balmy summer night, and they will be out when it snows in January.
They have been working the same streets for nearly a year now, and have so far avoided danger. "We know pretty much where to go and where not to go," says Ahmid Hiller, the youngest member of the team at 20.
That means ignoring some of the areas that offer the highest risk of exposure to AIDS, but also violence - such as drug shooting galleries.
Liu and Weaver have split off from the rest of the team. They walk up 13th Street like cops on patrol, handing condoms and information to virtually everyone they see. Most people take the handout, some sullenly, some greedily, some with a smile or a joke. The idea, Weaver says, is not to supply condoms. It is to supply reminders. To be the conscience of the community. To be a nag.
Two men come toward them, and Liu and Weaver hand them the kits. One of the men, Preston Hart, gratefully takes a condom and stuffs it in his sock. Then he says he won't need it.
"Most of my friends have already died of AIDS," Hart says. "I don't try to do nothing with nobody anymore."
He says he is 29 years old, although he looks older. He is unemployed, and says he spends a lot of his time organizing charity dinners for dying friends. The money helps pay for their funerals.
A man who looks to be about the same age walks by, scowling. Weaver thrusts a condom toward him. The man says he doesn't need it; he, too, claims never to have sex anymore.
"Give it to your friends," Weaver implores.
"They're not around. They died, man."
He walks into the night.
In the clubs, the atmosphere is brighter. The AIDS workers bounce through to the upbeat of dance music, hip Santas who dip into red shoulder bags to hand out their condom kits. "Practice safe sex!" they shout.
"Keep up the good work!" one man shouts back. Some protest jokingly: "I'm a virgin!"
But here, too, there are signs of pathos, of the terrible price the gay community has paid. At Key West, a sleek gay bar tucked away in an alley, manager Jim Gagne is sitting on a bar stool sipping a vodka and soda.
Gagne talks admiringly about the AIDS outreach team, and says they are welcome in his bar. He says he doesn't mind having his patrons reminded of AIDS. "I think they should be reminded." Then he mentions, in an undertone, that his lover of 16 years died of AIDS a year ago. And his voice goes tight with emotion.
A little while later, Rich Liu is sitting on the steps of a building on 13th Street, his night of patrol at a close. A few pedestrians stroll by; two drunken men come by and mumble something unintelligible. Liu, who packs an animated intensity into his slim frame, is talking nonstop. He is talking about gay men and AIDS.
"A lot of the old crowd that were there at the beginning are burnt to a crisp. Now there's a whole new group coming up. … I'm an 'AIDS baby,' and I guess I'm one of the ones who's going to have to step in and fight the war. It's a war, an epidemic, a pandemic. ..." He goes on.
How long can he keep this up? He is young, bright, capable. How long can he keep prowling these streets? "Until it ends," he says fiercely. Then he concedes, "I don't know."
He speaks with pride of the gay community. "We set up our own health clinics, we set up our own food delivery programs, we went out there and created educational literature for other people. We've done a lot. … In our own, crazy way, we're the ones saving the world."
So they hope.

 

End of Document
