

Saving the Salmon Will Mean Economic Change in the Northwest
The Associated Press
November 18, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 629 words
Byline: By JEFF BARNARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GRANTS PASS, Ore.
Body




Engineers mined the Columbia River like liquid ore, extracting cheap power, transportation and water that transformed the Northwest. But the half-century of dam building also choked off salmon runs.
Now the government says the community must pay the debt it owes the river by restoring the salmon - a payback with economic ripples that will extend from fisheries and barge owners to the wheat farmers of the Great Plains.
"We've been incurring this debt for years now. We just haven't been willing to pay it," said Angus Duncan, an Oregon representative to the Northwest Power Planning Council, which is working to restore the salmon.
On Thursday, the National Marine Fisheries Service declared the Snake River sockeye salmon an endangered species, a protection sought by the Shoshone-Bannock Tribe in Idaho. The agency will appoint a team to save the sockeye, but a plan of action is at least a year away, federal officials said.
Snake River chinook salmon also have been proposed for protection, as have lower Columbia River coho salmon.
The planning council, which is working independently on ways to restore salmon all along the Columbia basin, found that the cost of idling hydroelectric turbines and returning segments of the river to the salmon will be less devastating than thought. The council hopes to finish its plan next month.
"I don't see this being another spotted owl," said Rollie Schmitten, regional director of the Fisheries Service, in announcing protection for the sockeye. The timber industry in the Northwest has suffered because of logging cutbacks ordered to protect the Northern spotted owl.
"Once the uncertainties are removed, those segments of the economy will be able to adjust. I don't think you will see major devastation."
The costs will be borne by limited segments, such as barge companies, fishermen, wheat farmers and tourist businesses, said Norman K. Whittlesey, professor of agricultural economics at Washington State University.
The council estimates ratepayers will pay increases of less than 5 percent in their utility bills to make up the $ 70 million in power lost when water is devoted to fish instead of hydroelectric turbines. An additional $ 30 million will be spread around to fishermen, wheat farmers, barge operators and others, Duncan said.
The council wants to draw down four dams on the Snake River and one on the Columbia to speed the time it takes young salmon to migrate to the ocean, where they spend most of their lives.
The idea is to turn lakes behind the dams back into rivers for two months during the spring migration. In the faster moving water, more of the young salmon will survive to reach the ocean.
But that also means hydroelectric turbines will spin more slowly, grain-laden barges will run aground, and irrigation pumps will suck air.
"When we start talking about economic impacts, every single one of us in the region is going to pay. But some are going to pay more," said Ed Mosely, spokesman for the Columbia River Alliance, which represents barge lines, irrigators and other river users.
Judy Olson, president of the Washington Association of Wheat Growers, said farmers already struggling with low wheat prices would have to pay more to get their crops to market. Barges charge 16 cents a bushel to carry wheat from Clarkston, Wash., to Portland. Rail costs 32 cents a bushel and trucks 91 cents.
The Army Corps of Engineers has estimated farmers will have to pay $ 2.3 million extra for storing grain during the two months when the river is too low for barge traffic.
Ken Casavant, an agriculture transportation economist at Washington State University, said farmers would survive the two months but not a longer drawdown.
"If it gets longer than two months, the impact on shippers could be disastrous," he said.

 

End of Document
