

Sealed Papers of James Joyce Released  A treasure-trove for James Joyce scholars opened Sunday when the National Library made public a collection of letters and papers retrieved by a friend from Nazi-occupied Paris. The archive, which includes Joyce's correspondence with T.S. Eliot, Ezra Pound and Henri Matisse, is a "priceless addition to our knowledge," said Prime Minister Albert Reynolds at a ceremony at the library. But the opening of the archive was clouded by the recent release of diplomatic documents indicating that Ireland did nothing to protect the life of Paul Leon, who retrieved the Joyce papers.
The Associated Press
April 5, 1992, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 360 words
Dateline: DUBLIN, Ireland
Body




Leon, a Russian Jew, is believed to have died as a Nazi prisoner in 1942.
Joyce wrote of Leon: "For the last dozen years in sickness or health, night and day, he has been an absolutely disinterested and devoted friend, and I could never have done what I did without him."
Leon was a former Russian officer who was exiled after the Bolshevik Revolution. He met Joyce in 1928 and became part of the author's circle, which included author Samuel Beckett, who like Joyce was in voluntary exile from Ireland.
After Joyce left Paris in 1939 as the Nazi threat grew, Leon collected the papers from his apartment and gave them to the Irish Embassy in Paris with the condition that they not be released for 50 years after Joyce's death. Joyce died in Zurich in January 1941.
The Irish Times newspaper reported Saturday that four recently released documents from the Department of Foreign Affairs show that the Irish government was aware that Leon was in danger from the Nazis, but did not intervene with German authorities. Ireland was neutral in World War II.
The newspaper said one of the documents was a cable from Ireland's ambassador to Germany, which said in part: "In my opinion there is danger that intervention on behalf of L. might be regarded as interfering in internal German matters where no Irish citizen is involved and might even have some effect on our good relations."
In a response to the ambassador, the Irish foreign ministry agreed that he should do nothing, the newspaper said.
The Irish Times said it is believed Leon was shot during a forced March in April 1942, but there is no record of his death.
The library did not release copies or extracts of any of the Joyce papers and it closed for the day shortly after the ceremony.
But David Norris, senior lecturer in English at Dublin's Trinity College, said the archive's catalog indicates there is much material about life, artistic process and contractual arrangements for publication of Ulysses in the United States.
Norris said Stephen Joyce, the author's grandson, was able to have some correspondence removed from catalog, and some of letters given to him, because it is of a personal, family nature.

 

End of Document
