

Slang Dictionary Delivers The Salacious, The Rude, The Unprintable
The Associated Press
July 22, 1994, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 561 words
Byline: By KIM I. MILLS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




If you want to grok the language, get your mitts on the new Random House Historical Dictionary of American Slang.
From "A" - a euphemism for "ass," - to "gytch," to steal, Volume I has the straight dope on dirty words, insults, curses, and offenses against English and its speakers.
Lexicographers already have started calling the 1,006-page tome the beginning of the definitive work on American slang, comparing it to the Oxford English Dictionary in importance.
All of which has J.E. Lighter, the editor, a big flummoxed.
"I never expected that it would receive so much attention," Lighter said Thursday.
He spoke at a brown-bag lunch at the National Endowment for the Humanities, which gave Lighter almost $ 400,000 in grants to complete Volume I, published last month. Cost: $ 50.
NEH Director Sheldon Hackney - calling himself a onetime cracker who's now a wonk - said slang "subverts power relationships of all kinds," is disrespectful and defines subcultures.
"I'm not sure what this dictionary is supposed to do - and whether the government should be subsidizing something so subversive," Hackney said.
Lighter, 45, who teaches linguistics, English and American studies at the University of Tennessee in Knoxville, began collecting slang 25 years ago as a hobby. Halfway through college, at New York University, "I had close to 10,000 citations - in shoeboxes, in orange crates and so forth," he said.
Lighter showed his collection to a professor, who helped him publish his first scholarly work, on the military slang of World War I.
And the comprehensive work isn't even halfway done.
"If I had known the amount of material I was going to find … I probably would have done something else," Lighter said.
Volume II of the dictionary, covering H-R, is due out in spring 1996; Volume III, S-Z, will be published in 1997.
Flipping through Volume I is amusingly edifying.
Out pop the words "dingbat" and "ding-dong pants' (bellbottoms), "double-bagger" (an ugly person) and "dim bulb." And who can resist "ankle-biter" (a small child) or forget "Where's the beef?"
The entries relating to the word "dog" go on for 12 pages and range from "short dog" - a half-pint bottle - to "barking dogs" - sore feet - to "see a man about a dog" - use the bathroom.
Some of the words cited have come to us through the miracle of television - such as "bippy," popularized on "Rowan and Martin's Laugh-In," and "babelicious," from the Wayne's World skits on "Saturday Night Live."
Others were inspired by what television has done to us - i.e., turned America into a nation of "couch potatoes," a term which, Lighter tells us, was registered as a trademark in 1976.
Lighter's opus disproves the commonly held belief that slang is transitory; terms such as "out of sight" and "sweat it out" date back to the 1800s. The earliest use of "bogus" he found was in 1798. And the word "bad" as good isn't new either, Lighter says; he found such references as early as 1877.
One of the longest entries is for a four-letter vulgarity for sexual intercourse which can't be printed here. Its variations fill 12 pages, testifying to Americans' endless inventiveness.
Lighter says he's weary of having to answer questions on that particular word.
"I understand the interest in it but I wish other people would start doing more linguistic research on the topic so I wouldn't be the one assigned all the questions."
 Load-Date: July 22, 1994

 

End of Document
