

Smell the Pizza, Feel the Breeze, Hear the Water
The Associated Press
July 13, 1991, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 343 words
Byline: By BETH J. HARPAZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The guided tour of bustling midtown Manhattan covered a little history, a little architecture, a little advice about restaurants and shopping.
Only this time most of the walkers were blind, and guide Justin Ferate made sure to point out the aromas of a pizzeria and bakery, breezes off the East River and the sound of water splashing in a pool.
The walk was arranged by the Grand Central Partnership, a neighborhood organization that offers tours to employees of businesses new to an area of east-central Manhattan.
Members of the tour were students, volunteers and workers from The Lighthouse, an organization that provides training for the visually impaired, which moved into the area this month from farther up the East Side.
Ferate has given three tours to about 100 people from The Lighthouse. "I give these tours all the time, but this was sort of a challenge," he said.
First stop on Thursday's tour was the Ford Foundation's building and its indoor atrium, which Ferate described as a good place to relax or meet a friend.
"They have a wonderful indoor garden with a lovely little pool with water splashing," he said as the group paused to listen.
In Tudor City, an elegant housing complex, Ferate noted the echoes of traffic, the wind from the East River and a tranquil, shady park.
"This appears to be a very nice little neighborhood. I'm still getting used to it, but I'm especially taken by the park," said Debra Zanca, who operates a word processor at The Lighthouse.
As they walked across the street from the United Nations, Ferate mentioned that it has a great gift shop, and clean public bathrooms.
Betty Bird, a Lighthouse associate executive director who uses a cane to help guide her as she walks, explained that visually impaired people are trained by The Lighthouse to find any address in the city using buses and subways. Most of those who need to get to the organization's new offices have no problem finding it.
But Ferate's tour "gives people a sense of what's available to them in the neighborhood. It's aesthetics, not essentials," Bird said.

 

End of Document
