

Stamps in the News: New U.S. Postcard Boasts the Beauty of Niagara Falls
The Associated Press
August 9, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 653 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




Niagara Falls appears in all its breathtaking beauty as the subject of a new 30-cent U.S. postcard, the 11th in the America the Beautiful series.
The 30-cent denomination is the airmail rate for postcards sent to Canada and Mexico.
The design shows a poriton of the American Falls, Goat Island and Horseshoe Falls. In the misty background, a colorful rainbow rises above the falls. "America the Beautiful" and "USA 30" appear below the illustration.
Niagara Falls is one of America's most spectacular natural wonders and among the most popular tourist sites, attracting 2 million visitors annually. The falls lies on the U.S.-Canada border and attracts spectators to both sides.
First-day cancellations will be available until Sept. 20 in either of two methods:
- The Postal Service encourages customers to buy the card at a local post office, self-address it and mail it in an envelope addressed: Customer-Supplied Cards, Niagara Falls Postal Card, Postmaster, 615 Main St., Niagara Falls, NY 14302-9991.
- Or send, for each cover requested, a self-addressed, pressure-sensitive label and 30 cents payment in check or money order to: Niagara Falls Postal Card, Postmaster, 615 Main St., Niagara Falls, NY 14302-9992.
 
 Fishing Boat Stamp
Water - but not nearly as picturesque nor as spectacular as Niagara Falls - is part of the design of another new postal item, a 19-cent Fishing Boat Stamp. The stamp represents the domestic postcard rate.
The simple design shows one end of a rowboat tied to a wooden post in the water. Neither a dock nor people appears on the stamp. "19 USA" is shown in the upper left.
First-day cancellations will be available until Sept. 7 in either of two methods:
- The Postal Service recommends that customers buy the stamp at a local post office and affix it to a self-addressed postcard or envelope. (Envelopes must be affixed with 10 cents additional return postage.) Mail the cover in an envelope addressed to: Customer-Affixed Envelopes, Fishing Boat Stamp, Postmaster, 900 Brentwood Rd. NE, Washington, DC 20066-9991.
- Or send, for each cover desired, a self-addressed postcard or self-addressed envelope and payment of 19 cents per postcard or 29 cents per envelope to: Fishing Boat Stamp, Postmaster, 900 Brentwood Rd. NE, Washington, DC 20066-9992. Envelopes will be affixed with a 19-cent Fishing Boat stamp and a 10-cent Canal Boat stamp.
 
 A Magazine for Collectors
The Civil War is the theme of the July issue of The American Philatelist magazine, the official publication of the 58,000-member American Philatelic Society.
Among the interesting stories are those concerning Union and Confederate letters. "The Large Regimental Patriotic Envelopes of the U.S. Civil War" by William Stromberg uses illustrated stationery and covers to give a brief sketch of a day in the life of a soldier, which includes guard duty and coping with 2 feet of mud.
All APS members receive the 100-page monthly magazine. For information about membership, write to: American Philatelic Society, P.O. Box 8000-N, State College, PA 16803.
 
 Dolphins and Porpoises
 
 From Palau
The Republic of Palau, a U.S.-administered Trust Territory in the western Pacific, has issued a beautiful sheetlet of 20 different 29-cent stamps featuring dolphins and porpoises of the Pacific.
The horizontal stamps are arranged in five rows of four stamps each. Together, they form a unified design.
Dolphins featured on stamps in the top row are the Pacific white-sided, common, rough-toothed and bottle-nose. Second-row stamps show the harbor porpoise, killer whale, spinner dolphin and yellowfin tuna, and Dall's porpoise. The middle row features the finless porpoise, a map of the Palau Islands, and the dusky and Southern right whale dolphins. Illustrated on fourth-row stamps are the striped, Fraser's and Peale's dolphins, and spectacled porpoise. Dolphins appearing on the bottom row are the spotted, hourglass, Risso's and Hector's.

 

End of Document
