

Stay Lifted in Arizona's First Execution in 29 Years  The U.S. Supreme Court on Saturday lifted a stay that had blocked the scheduled execution of a triple murderer, which would be Arizona's first execution in 29 years. The Arizona Board of Pardons and Paroles will hold a clemency hearing Sunday for Donald Eugene Harding. The hearing is the last step before he could be executed, said Assistant Attorney General Jack Roberts.
The Associated Press
April 4, 1992, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 297 words
Dateline: PHOENIX
Body




After the hearing, required by state law, the board could recommend a reprieve or that his sentence be commuted to life in prison, or it could do nothing. Gov. Fife Symington wouldn't be bound by the board's recommendation, but he can't intervene unless the board recommends that he do so.
"I support capital punishment," Symington was quoted as saying in a story published Sunday in The Arizona Republic. "It is necessary and it sounds to me like Mr. Harding has run out of time. As governor, I have to be open to any last-minute information I receive, but I don't expect the board to make a recommendation to me."
The state attorney general's office asked the nation's high court Friday to lift the stay issued Thursday night by a three-judge panel of the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals in San Francisco.
The high court lifted the stay on a 7-2 vote, with Justices John Paul Stevens and Harry A. Blackmun dissenting.
Harding's execution is scheduled for early Monday.
Harding, 43, was convicted in 1982 of killing two businessmen in a Tucson hotel in 1980. They were hogtied, beaten and shot during a robbery.
Harding also was sentenced to death for killing a third man in a similar manner in a Phoenix motel room the day before the Tucson murders. That sentence is in the earlier stages of appeal.
Prosecutors say evidence and Harding's own admissions link him to at least two other slayings, both in California, committed during a multi-state robbery spree in December 1979 and January 1980.
Defense attorneys argue Harding had inadequate legal counsel during his trial, and say new evidence shows brain damage Harding suffered at birth left him unable to control violent impulses. A U.S. district judge ruled last week that the information didn't fit the legal definition of new evidence.

 

End of Document
