

Strange New World Part II: For the Hmong, Home is Not Where the Heart Is
The Associated Press
August 4, 1991, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1609 words
Byline: By SHARON COHEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ST. PAUL, Minn.
Body




When Chia Vang came to America, she had little left to lose: Her home and land were gone, her husband's life was in danger, and her children were suffering in a squalid refugee camp.
Her last, best hope was a foreign, forbidding land. Eleven years later, it is her home. Her family is here. Her life is here.
Her heart is not.
"It's not my country. I feel lonely," the Hmong mother of eight said in halting English. "It's difficult to find a job. It's hard to make a new life. … In the U.S. I don't have no nothing - just my family, my children. I don't want to live here and die here."
Chia Vang's lament is a common refrain among the thousands of Hmong refugees of Laos who survived the hell of losing their country, their homes, even their families, only to face the purgatory of being strangers in a strange land.
The Hmong, most with little schooling or modern job skills when they fled Laos in the mid-'70s, have endured one of the most agonizing adjustments of any refugee group in America. Theirs is a story of trial and tragedy. But 15 years later, it's also one of small, steady triumph.
"Considering they weren't very far from the Stone Age when they got here, I'd say they've made remarkable progress," said Tim Gordon, a refugee expert for the state Department of Human Services. "(But) it's a long way to go."
Indeed, more Hmong are buying homes, starting businesses and attending college, but many remain locked in poverty. A 1988 federal government report illustrates the disparity: It found 33 Hmong communities were close to or entirely self-sufficient compared with a handful five years earlier, yet many others had welfare rates hovering around 60 percent.
Experts say it's no surprise considering the cataclysmic changes the Hmong have encountered, moving to a land where sophisticated doctors - not shamans - fight sickness, where banking - not bartering - is common practice, and where people live in towering buildings, not thatched-roof, dirt-floor huts.
"The Hmong have not had to cross a time zone, they had to cross centuries to get here," said Jane Kretzmann, a former state refuge official who now is a program associate at the philanthropic Bush Foundation.
Traversing time isn't easy. There are cultural clashes over child discipline, teen marriages and Western medicine. The Hmong believe evil spirits can cause sickness. Some fear doctors sell their blood and body parts. Many suffer from depression. Some have died mysteriously.
Still, their community has expanded to 130,000 nationwide, about 85 percent of whom live in California, Wisconsin and Minnesota, federal refugee officials say.
The Hmong - the word means free man - came because they supported and aided the United States during the war in Southeast Asia. Some were CIA recruits and became guerilla fighters.
After the 1975 fall of Saigon, Americans helped evacuate some Hmong who feared reprisal by the victorious communist Pathet Lao. Others risked their lives escaping and languished years in Thai refugee camps before arriving here.
Like many others, Chia Vang's military husband feared execution. "I had to come to save my family," she said. "I don't want to see my husband or family killed."
Their home, St. Paul, has the nation's second-largest Hmong population - estimates range from 17,000 to up to 23,000. The area typifies the promise and problems of the Hmong.
There are successes: Hmong police officers, a Hmong lawyer, a Hmong school board candidate, a Hmong teen studying at Oxford and, local leaders say, hundreds of Hmong homeowners.
But they're the minority. Some 60 percent of the Hmong in Minnesota depend on welfare, a 1991 report said. About 80 percent of residents in family public housing in St. Paul are Southeast Asian, mostly Hmong.
The Hmong remain at a disadvantage because they have large families and few transferrable job skills. In Laos, they were soldiers, hunters and farmers, growing opium, rice and vegetables and tending to water buffalo. Here, they're lost.
"A leader may have been the best hunter in the clan," said Greg Carlson, director of a center that treats Hmong opium addicts. "What do you do as a good hunter in our society?"
They also face a paralyzing language barrier, complicated by illiteracy in their own tongue. Some speak just a few English words after a decade here.
The Hmong had no written language until the '50s. Boys typically had three or four years of schooling; for women, it's less.
"When you don't speak English, you can't get a good job to pay enough to support your family," said Wa Xiong Pha, a 45-year-old former soldier who is illiterate.
"When I was in the (refugee) camp, I had a hope when I get to this country, life will be better and brighter," he said through an interpreter. "It seems like it gets darker and darker everyday. … Life is a black hole."
Pha, his wife and their eight children depend on $ 1,050 in monthly welfare payments and $ 100 weekly from his part-time janitor's job. Rent alone is $ 500.
"I don't have a piece of land as big as the palm of my hand," he said dejectedly, surveying his cramped, two-bedroom apartment with bare bulbs and tattered couch. "I'd like to have something of mine to call my own."
Adjustment is tough even for the educated, such as Koua Moua, who fled Laos 10 years ago in a three-month jungle hike, surviving on leaves and roots.
"You have to relearn everything," he said. "It's frustrating. You feel inferior. You feel like you have nothing to hope. All things are difficult. You feel you are nothing, nothing."
Resignation, isolation and post-traumatic stress from war experiences have created higher than normal rates of mental illness and depression.
"It's a series of losses that go back 20-30 years," said Dr. Neal Holtan, medical services director at St. Paul's Public Health Department who has extensive experience with the Hmong. "They've lived in wartime conditions since the '60s, then were in refugee camps for five, 10 years, then are coming to a country that doesn't understand who they are."
"There are some problems in the past they are not able to overcome. Now they're facing another problem here - how can they adjust?" said Dr. Touxa Lyfoung, a Hmong physician who runs a support group for depressed Hmong. "The burden becomes greater and greater with time."
New family tensions also create problems.
"The children become very Americanized. The parents have not. They want to hang on to the Hmong culture. The children see all the freedom. We have a great big generation gap," said Sgt. Joseph Mollner, who heads a new program to improve community-Hmong relations, including explaining child abuse laws.
Mollner said problems have arisen because some Hmong discipline their children in ways American authorities consider abuse.
Hmong parents have a difficult time with the permissive American society, experts say.
"To keep control of your kids in this country … you have to understand very well both cultures," said Ly Vang, director of the Association for Advancement of Hmong Women. "You have to sit with your children and explain, 'Your schoolteacher is American, your friend is American, you have to remember you are Hmong, our culture is not that way. You cannot do the American way.' "
But the American way can be more appealing.
"In Laos, women don't have the opportunity to do anything," said 25-year-old Ia Yang. "Here, I can have school, jobs. In Laos, I would never been in school. It's so much better."
Unlike traditional families, the mother of two doesn't want more children. "We're in America," she said. "It's time to change."
To counter the Hmong tradition of teen marriages, Lao Family Inc., a social service agency, conducts a program to discourage teen pregnancies among Hmong youths so they can finish school and become self-sufficient.
Still, cultural obstacles remain.
Many Hmong remain suspicious of Western doctors and have used herbal medicines - some containing arsenic and lead.
Some turn to shamans to drive away evil spirits.
"I don't tell them not to do it. I just try to coexist," said Holtan, who once allowed a shaman to visit a psychiatric ward to help a Hmong woman retrieve a lost spirit.
Other situations are mysterious - and tragic.
In the mid-'80s, about 100 Southeast Asian men, mostly Hmong, died inexplicably in their sleep at night. Some said stress levels were a factor; others linked it to genetic defects in the heart's electrical system.
Some Hmong also have suffered from imaginary venereal disease in which they had symptoms but no evidence of the ailment. One woman hanged herself, Holtan said.
"A lot of people just throw up their hands and say, 'This is just ignorant, this is just crazy,' " he said. "They don't get any support or help."
Some experts say too much has been expected of the Hmong in too little time, and that self-sufficiency will take two or three generations.
Meanwhile, they're moving forward.
"They've achieved some things that are very important to themselves," said Timothy Dunnigan, a University of Minnesota anthropology professor and Hmong expert.
"They've gotten out of harm's way. To some extent, they've been successful in reconstituting their families, they got their kids in school, they're not only surviving, but for some … they're making it possible for some of their kids to achieve some of the things that weren't possible for them," Dunnigan said. "They're fulfilling the American dream."
Chia Vang, a tiny woman with a lilting voice, has another dream.
"I hope in the future, we will get our country back," she said. "I miss Laos. I miss my home. I will go back to Laos. I dream that everyday."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Sharon Cohen is the AP's Midwest regional reporter, based in Chicago.

 

End of Document
