

Study Says Media 'Lost the Information War' in the Persian Gulf
The Associated Press
June 19, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 669 words
Byline: By W. DALE NELSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The news media "lost the information war" in the Persian Gulf by failing to wage a unified fight against Pentagon restrictions on news coverage, the Gannett Foundation said Wednesday.
In a report from its media center at Columbia University, the foundation urged the establishment of a high-level representative council of news media organizations to negotiate ground rules for coverage of conflicts.
The report also said news organizations that covered the war "must carefully assess their performance and the performance of their correspondents with an eye toward improvement."
"Often reporters and news organizations, with a few exceptions, lapsed into cheerleading the war effort instead of striving for more balanced news and historical perspective," it said.
"The media failed to wage any significant battle against the military's press restrictions," the foundation said. "Though both the invasions of Grenada and Panama had foreshadowed what the military would do in any future conflict, the media failed to take heed."
"Though it is indisputable that the gulf story dominated the air waves and front pages, many in the media believe … that the media lost the information war," the report said.
Everette E. Dennis of the media center, the principal author of the report, told reporters at a news conference, "Clearly the media lost the war in regard to its ability to do what the American people ought to expect of it."
The report said that by reluctantly agreeing to abide by Pentagon rules, news organizations "may have weakened their ability to challenge restrictions in any future conflict."
It criticized what it said was the failure of high-level news executives to meet with Pentagon officials to protest the restrictions.
Washington bureau chiefs of major news organizations wrote to Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney in May saying that the Pentagon restrictions prevented Americans from getting "the full story" of the war and that they hoped to arrange a meeting with him.
Andrew Glass, bureau chief for Cox newspapers and one of the signers of the letter, said Cheney had indicated willingness to meet with the group and a delegation was being put together to attend such a meeting. He said no date had been set.
Glass said the Gannett Foundation criticism "is invalid for several reasons."
"The press, up and down the line, made a good faith effort to lay out to the military what its needs were, and they didn't listen," he said. "I don't think the press, by and large, did a splendid job, but I don't think that the reason it didn't was that it didn't fight hard enough with the military for access. The reason it didn't is that from the beginning, at the highest levels of government, a decision was made to control press access, which was then rigorously enforced.".
Clark Hoyt, bureau chief for Knight-Ridder, agreed and said that bureau chiefs were preparing detailed suggestions for Cheney on how any future wars should be covered.
Jonathan Wolman, Washington bureau chief for The Associated Press, commented that "the war was over before we had any eyewitness accounts of the key tank battles. Photographers would return from the front and find that their film was still bottled up in the Pentagon pool process. We're anxious to develop something that might serve the public better in any future conflicts."
Pentagon spokesman Pete Williams has said that "the press gave the American people the best war coverage they ever had" despite the restrictions.
Despite its criticisms, the report also said that the news media "provided a vital link between the American public and events in the gulf region."
"Despite the press restrictions imposed by the military, the media were able to keep Americans informed of most major occurrences, and often very quickly," it said.
But, it said, "on the whole, the news media were unprepared to fight the military's press restrictions," whereas the Pentagon "had made studious preparations for dealing with the press in this war, far beyond what it had ever done before."

 

End of Document
