

Surge in Jobless Rate May Signal the End of the Party for Stocks
The Associated Press
May 7, 1995, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 675 words
Byline: By PATRICIA LAMIELL, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




If Cinderella were dancing on Wall Street, she may have just heard the clock strike midnight.
The stock market, which has been partying longer than many imagined possible, finally heard a warning gong this past week when the government reported a sharp and surprising increase in the nation's unemployment rate.
It's too early to tell whether the April jobs report will stop the rally. But it raised concerns that a recession may be brewing that could cut into corporate earnings and send stock prices lower.
"If the market begins to forecast a recession, the stock market will fall quite a bit," said Mickey D. Levy, an economist at CRT Securities in New York.
Stocks have risen farther than many people thought possible, as companies have reported dazzling profits even in the face of a slowdown in the economy. A major reason for the sterling profits is that interest rates, and thus corporate financing costs, have remained stable.
"When the economy started to show signs of a slowdown, that was good for the stock market," Levy said. "It would involve an expected slowdown in profits, but that would be more than offset by lower interest rates."
The Dow Jones industrial average, which has gained nearly 20 percent since Thanksgiving, plowed into record high territory twice again this past week,closing at an all-time high of 4,359.66 last Thursday and even kissing 4,400 on an intraday basis. Broad-market indexes made new highs as well.
But on Friday, the Labor Department released some surprising news. It said the nation's civilian unemployment rate rose by 0.3 percent to 5.8 percent in April, while analysts had expected the jobless rate to hold steady.
In another indication that the economy may be stumbling, the number of payroll jobs, which had been expected to grow by about 200,000, actually declined by 9,000.
Bond investors celebrated, thinking the fresh signs of economic weakness would reduce the threat of inflation. They bid the 30-year Treasury up nearly 2 points on Friday, pushing its yield down close to 7 percent.
Previously, a drop in yields of that magnitude might have sparked some buying in the stock market. But on Friday, stock investors moved in aggressively to take profits. They worried that the economy could slow down so much that it falls into recession.
The Dow Jones average quickly lost more than 30 points before regaining some lost ground, closing at 4,343.40, down 16.26 for the day but up 22.13 for the week.
Some economists poked holes in the Labor Department's figures, saying they were skewed by the weather and glitches in the calendar. But many said the information was cause for concern.
"No matter how I try to explain it away," said Hugh Johnson, market strategist at First Albany Corp., "they do paint the picture that this economy continued to slow in April, and I would say slowed more than any of us had expected."
Added Larry Rice, chief investment officer at Josephthal, Lyon & Ross in New York: "The concern now is that the soft landing may turn out to be a recession. If in fact it turns out to be a recession, that implies that stock prices are too high."
A slower economy could end the spectacular performance in corporate earnings that has been a big factor in the market's advance.
'Every strategist is worried about his forecast for earnings," Johnson said. "There are likely to be some downward revisions to the forecasts for the economy but also for earnings. And there are three key things to the stock market in the months ahead and that's earnings, earnings and earnings."
On Friday, the NYSE composite index fell 0.01 to 279.90, up 2.59 for the week. The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index slipped 0.42 to 520.12, up 5.41 for the week.
The Nasdaq composite index declined 3.22 to 843.53, down 0.45 for the week. The American Stock Exchange's market value index rose 0.20 to 482.62, gaining 5.06 for the week.
The Wilshire Associates Equity Index, which is the market value of NYSE, American, and over-the-counter issues, ended the week at $ 5.07 trillion, up $ 38.02 billion from the previous week.
 Load-Date: May 7, 1995

 

End of Document
