

Talk of the Tavern: 'We're the Hardest Workers in the World'
The Associated Press
February 5, 1992, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 560 words
Byline: AP Photo PG1, By CLAUDIA COATES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HOMESTEAD, Pa.
Body




Americans work hard for the money, no matter what Japanese officials may assume, say blue-collar patrons at Chiodo's Tavern. Some say they must work even harder now because good-paying jobs are tough to find.
"I think we're the hardest workers in this world. More mechanically inclined. Better trained," said Jay Pishinsky, 29, of Munhall.
Pishinsky trained in high school to become a motor inspector for what then was U.S. Steel, which had a big mill in Homestead. "By the time I finished high school, there was no United States Steel," he said.
Now, Pishinsky, who was laid off from his seasonal job laying asphalt, and his wife, a corporate secretary, can't afford the American dream - but not from any lack of gumption.
He said he and other American workers haven't lost incentive. Quite the opposite: They work harder than ever because of the poor economy. "We have to be that way. We have to prove ourselves," he said.
Others at the bar in this Pittsburgh suburb also complained as much about their fading earning power as about apparent America-bashing by Japanese officials.
Patrons said union jobs that pay up to $ 17 per hour are scarce, and workers who make $ 5 or $ 6 an hour, while hard-working, may be resentful and feel less connected with the workplace.
"I just think it's unfortunate what happened to the low-wage worker," said restaurant owner Tim Cleary, 30, of Pittsburgh.
Chiodo's Tavern once quenched the thirst of laborers from the Homestead Works of U.S. Steel, now USX Corp. The plant forged the structural steel that built the Empire State Building and the Sears Tower but closed in 1986.
The bar (pronounced kee-OH-doze) also served workers from Mesta Machine Co., which then-Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev visited in 1959 as an example of vigorous American manufacturing. Mesta has filed for bankruptcy court protection.
Japanese-America trade tension has escalated since President Bush's visit there last month. A Japanese lawmaker was quoted as saying American workers were lazy and many were illiterate. On Monday, Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa was quoted as telling parliament that Americans "lack a work ethic … to live by the sweat of their brow."
Miyazawa later said the remark had been distorted. But the words still stung, and brought on another round in the national sport of Japan-bashing.
At a Chevrolet dealership in nearby Latrobe this week, people paid $ 150 at a dollar a whack to smash a Japanese-made Honda Civic with a sledgehammer. The money will be donated to a United Auto Workers local.
Chiodo's patrons, though, didn't volunteer any anti-Japan sentiments.
Maybe they remembered that Sony Corp. of Japan plans to open a television assembly factory in nearby New Stanton, where up to 1,000 people may one day be employed.
Or they could have been mindful that Japanese money already is invested about 35 miles to the west, in the Wheeling-Nisshin Inc. steel mill in Follansbee, W.Va. The mill, employing 114 people, is jointly owned by Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corp. of Pittsburgh and Nisshin Steel Co. Ltd. of Japan.
Bubba Reid, a pub owner from Bethany, W.Va., was impressed with the Japanese influence on operations at the Wheeling-Nisshin mill.
"I'll tell you something about efficiency. You talk about cleanliness and organization. No comparison," Reid said. "They're all topnotch people. They don't mess around too much."

 

End of Document
