

Test your reading comprehension by reading the story below and answering the questions that follow.
 The Associated Press
October 9, 1995, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 708 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body



Paper Money To Get a New Look
 American currency is getting a face lift to make it harder for counterfeiters to duplicate. But the changes will have holders of the greenbacks seeing double.
Two portraits of an American historical figure will be on each bill, but you'll have to hold the bill up to the light to see one of them.
It will be the first distinct new look for U.S. paper money in 66 years, a redesign that some experts consider long overdue given the troublemaking possibilities from foreign counterfeiters.
The changeover will begin early next year with the $ 100 bill, a favorite of forgers. Existing bills will remain in circulation.
The most visible change will be to shift portraits off center.
An enlarged portrait of Benjamin Franklin will be moved to the left on the $ 100 bill, making room for a new watermark engraving. The watermark portrait, visible when the bill is held up to the light, is one of several new security features.
Officials said the watermark is extremely difficult to duplicate.
Eventually, there will be similar redesigns for the portraits on nearly all smaller denominations - Ulysses S. Grant on the $ 50 bill, Andrew Jackson on the $ 20, Alexander Hamilton on the $ 10, Abraham Lincoln on the $ 5, and, of course, George Washington on the $ 1.
The exception could be the $ 2 bill, which bears the likeness of Thomas Jefferson. No decision has been made on whether to alter the largely commemorative bill.
Treasurer Mary Ellen Withrow has said borders on the new bills will be simplified, with geometric designs replaced by an assortment of lines and dots that are intended to foil counterfeiters.
Also, color-shifting ink will be used so that the greenback will take on a different hue when viewed from an angle. And government printers may use computer-designed patterns that are made to turn wavy when copied improperly.
The last major change in U.S. currency was in 1929 when bills were reduced in size and given a uniform look. Congress added the words "In God We Trust" in 1957.
Some small changes were introduced in 1990, including a microscopic line of type and a polyester thread visible only when a bill is held up to the light.
 
 Use information from the story to answer the following questions:
 
 1. Why is American currency (money) about to get a new look?
2. When was the last time a major change was made in the design of U.S. paper money?
3. Why will the $ 100 bill be the first to be changed?
4. Why is the portrait of Benjamin Franklin being moved to the left on the $ 100 bill?
5. Will people be able to see the two portraits on the new currency? Explain.
6. What change is planned for the borders of the bills?
7. U.S. paper money is sometimes referred to as greenbacks because of the green ink on the back sides of the bills. How will the back of a new bill differ in color from an old one?
8. Do you think that the $ 2 bill should be altered (changed)? Tell why or why not.
9. In 1990, a polyester thread was added to our currency. Was this a good idea? Tell why or why not.
10. With all the new security features, do you think that forgers will stop trying to copy greenbacks? Explain.
 
 ---
Answer Key: (Wording may vary)
1. American money is getting a new look so that it will be harder to illegally copy.
2. The last time our paper money had a major change was in 1929.
3. The $ 100 bill was redesigned first because it is the one most often copied by forgers. Benjamin Franklin's portrait is on the front of the bill.
4. Benjamin Franklin's picture is being moved off center to make way for the new watermark portrait.
5. Yes. Both pictures will be on the bills. To see the watermark portrait, the money will have to be held up to the light.
6. The new bills will have simple borders made up of lines and dots.
7. The green hue (color) on the back of the new currency will change when the bill is looked at from an angle.
8. Answers will vary.
9. Answers will vary.
10. Answers will vary.
 
 PART TWO
TAKE A CLOSER LOOK
Artist cleverly designed our paper money so that the bills will be difficult to counterfeit. Look at a $ 5 bill. How many times is the word or number "five" printed on it? Be sure to check both sides. Now, hold it up to the light. Find any more fives?
 
 End Advance for use Monday, Oct. 9, and thereafter
 Load-Date: October 9, 1995

 

End of Document
