

Tet 1968, the Military Offensive; Tet 1994, the Economic Offensive
The Associated Press
February 9, 1994, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 835 words
Byline: By GEORGE ESPER, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: HANOI, Vietnam
Body




More than a quarter of a century ago, an event occurred during the celebration of the Tet Lunar New Year that would be remembered in the annals of history as the turning point of the Vietnam War.
Just before 3 a.m., on the night of Jan. 31, 1968, an antitank rocket blasted a hole in the outer wall of the U.S. Embassy along Saigon's tree-lined Thong Nhut Boulevard.
That attack by Viet Cong sappers signaled the start of a Communist-led offensive across South Vietnam that brought down the presidency of Lyndon B. Johnson and set America on a course of disengagement from the Vietnam War. It would go down in the history books as the "Tet Offensive."
Then, the festive atmosphere turned to the ugliness of war - images of America's embassy, the symbol of economic and military might, under attack, and of a Saigon general executing a Viet Cong officer on a street corner.
Now, 26 years later, the 1994 Tet Lunar New Year that begins Thursday brings America and Vietnam together again in peace with the restoration of economic ties last week after nearly 20 years. A resumption of diplomatic relations is on the horizon.
The only shooting is that of firecrackers that superstition has it bring prosperity and good fortune. Families are reunited in peace and a little prosperity instead of being separated by a war that divided North and South Vietnam three decades ago, killing an estimated 2 million Vietnamese and sending another 2 million in flight from the country.
The Tet Offensive pointed to the vulnerability of South Vietnamese cities that were once considered safe, and raised questions about U.S. strategy and tactics.
Most importantly, while it was a military victory for the United States and its South Vietnamese allies, it was a psychological defeat. The images of America's embassy under attack and of war's brutality, prompted hundreds of anti-war demonstrations in the United States and raised congressional opposition to the war to a new high.
President Johnson addressed the nation on television on Sunday night, March 31, 1968, saying the United States was substantially reducing the level of fighting and halting air strikes over most of North Vietnam in a step toward peace.
Then he shocked the world with a 20-word statement that was not in his prepared text.
"I shall not seek, and I will not accept, the nomination of my party for another term as your president." The war had claimed yet another casualty.
There were more than half a million U.S. troops in Vietnam in 1968. This Tet, 23 Americans are here with the U.S. MIA office. Some of them were not even born yet during Tet '68, but they search for the fallen from that era who are still missing.
One of them, the oldest of the group, was here then. Robert Destatte, now 55, of Maumee, Ohio, the MIA office historian, was a soldier with the 173rd Airborne Brigade.
"It was clear to me then, and it remained clear to me, that had we had the vision, the will to stay the course, that we had won it," Destatte said. "It was also clear that we lacked a sense of purpose, and for that reason it was the turning point in their favor."
"It was a success for the United States and South Vietnamese forces, but because of the way U.S. public opinion responded to it, it ultimately turned out to be different," he said.
A year later, the United States began a phased withdrawal of American forces. In January 1973, it signed the Paris Peace Agreement with North Vietnam that ended U.S. military involvement in the war. The fighting dragged on for another two years between North and South Vietnam before it ended in April 1975 with a victory by the Communist North.
But a new generation of Vietnamese and Americans has emerged, many unfamiliar with the past, looking instead to the future of that prosperity in the firecrackers, now that President Clinton has lifted the 19-year economic embargo imposed after the Communist victory.
The young Vietnamese are sharpening their English and high-tech skills, knowing that an army of American businessmen will be invading Vietnam with opportunities - big names like American Express, Pepsi and Coke.
Many of the Vietnamese who fled the country when North Vietnam took over have returned for Tet and to invest in the new American-style market economy.
The Communist government has licensed 30 businesses for some overseas Vietnamese, about 1 million of them who live in the United States and many of whom are American citizens. The ventures include electronics, chemicals, tourism, agriculture, forestry and soft drinks.
Wednesday night, on New Year's Eve Vietnamese style, the mothers and grandmothers will place dishes of food on altars in their homes and pray for the ancestors who are supposed to come back to cheer the whole family on. At midnight, firecrackers will ring in the New Year. There will be no talk of war.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - George Esper reported from Vietnam for 10 years during the war and helped cover the Tet Offensive of 1968. He returned in October 1993 to open an Associated Press bureau in Hanoi.
 Load-Date: February 9, 1994

 

End of Document
