

The Songs Remain the Same; the Politics Have Changed
The Associated Press
April 29, 1993, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 805 words
Byline: By LARRY McSHANE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The topics for today are censorship, presidential politics and the right to vote. Our guests: Steven Tyler and Joe Perry of Aerosmith.
No, this is not "Wayne's World." (First clue: This is a newspaper, not a television.) And yes, these two know what they're talking about. Aerosmith - better known for its attitude than its aptitude - has brought its rock 'n' roll viewpoint out of the studio and into the open in recent years.
There's the anti-censorship award the band received this year from attorney Alan Dershowitz for funding a controversial art show.
There's the outrageous "Rock the Vote" ad they did before the 1992 presidential election, complete with whipped cream and a giant condom, encouraging voter registration.
There are the food-bank shows, the benefit for battered women, their unlikely 1990 hit single about child abuse, "Janie's Got a Gun."
Now there's a new album, "Get a Grip," the band's first since 1989's multiplatinum "Pump." The first single, "Livin' on the Edge," deals in part with the Los Angeles riots.
So what about its, guys? Aerosmith, out-of-control party band of the '70s, new role models for musicians in the '90s?
"I've had enough of rock 'n' roll," Tyler joked in an interview from Boston. "We did enough damage in the '70s, and now it's time to get socially relevant."
To quote Wayne and Garth, "Not!" Which explains some of the other tracks on the new album: "Flesh," "Shut Up and Dance," "Fever," "Eat the Rich." It's more of what you'd expect of the band whose success gave way to excess before a late '80s comeback.
"You don't want to do too much. We try to stay out of politics, stay out of that stuff," explained lead guitarist Perry. "But you bring elements of what you know into your art. You bring in your feelings."
Those feelings include putting their money where their mouths are when it comes to censorship. The band put up $ 10,000 for a 1992 art show at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology after the National Endowment for the Arts withdrew its funding over the inclusion of some nudity.
"That was just, 'Wake up, neighborhood. They're not letting you see this art thing because George Bush is trying to get re-elected,"' said Perry. "It wasn't about art, it wasn't about whether this was art."
In their decadent past, Tyler acknowledged, such issues were not high on the band's priority list.
"There were times in the past we weren't conscious of what was going on, we weren't around enough," said Tyler. "We'd sit around and not get into politics. But you've got to speak up once in a while. We all live here."
Tyler and Perry were living in Los Angeles at the time of last year's rioting in the wake of the Rodney King verdict. "Livin' on the Edge," it turns out, was released just before deliberations started this year in the second trial of four officers accused of civil-rights violations for beating King.
"We were thinking when we wrote this, 'The worst has happened. This won't be relevant,"' Tyler recalled. "But it always will be."
This band's relevance was in doubt during the late 1970s and early 1980s, when it splintered under the drug and alcohol problems of Perry and Tyler. After the multimillion sales of "Toys in the Attic" and "Rocks," they were hailed as the American version of the Rolling Stones.
Instead, the band disintegrated. After six straight platinum albums, their next two records failed to break the 1 million mark. A three-year hiatus followed 1982's "Rock in a Hard Place"; Perry started his own band, and both he and Tyler struggled to overcome their addictions.
A reunion produced the mildly received "Done With Mirrors." By 1987, Aerosmith was back, big and bad as ever, with the smash album "Permanent Vacation" and three hit singles. "Pump" did even better, with 4 million in sales and four hit singles.
The result: a massive new record deal and the No. 18 spot on the Forbes magazine 1991 listing of wealthiest entertainers. The Boston bad boys ranked ahead of Ol' Blue Eyes himself, Frank Sinatra.
Throw in the band's first Grammy and some MTV awards, and it's obvious there's a lot riding on the new record. Pressure, anyone?
"No. We've been through this so many times, that's one of the first things out the window," said Perry. "It felt great winning a Grammy, and you look at the amount of records sold and you know you did something.
"But when it's time to write another record, you can't wonder, 'Are they going to like it? Are they going to buy it?' You can't write from that place."
The next place for the band is the road, with a world tour planned to run through next summer. Rest assured that while raising the roof, Aerosmith will continue raising its voice.
"There's a certain amount of people out there remaining silent," said Tyler. "And the more there are, the more control they (politicians) have. You've just got to show you're there."

 

End of Document
