

The Artists: Valery Gergiev - A Musical Czar for the New Russia
The Associated Press
November 29, 1992, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 843 words
Byline: By VERENA DOBNIK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Kirov Opera conductor Valery Gergiev repeatedly exhorted the chorus: "Attacca!"
In Italian the maestro let them know he wanted them to attack the words as they rehearsed Mussorgsky's "Boris Godunov." He urged the horns to bite into the rich chords of one of the most revered works in the Russian repertoire.
"I am not a dictator, that's for sure. But I can be very aggressive if I have to protect quality," said Gergiev, who's also the company's artistic director.
Many consider the Kirov Opera and Ballet Company of St. Petersburg to be Russia's greatest cultural institution. One reason: For the last four years, Gergiev has led the 350 singers and orchestra members - and shaken things up.
"It was always clear to me that the company had strengths. But also, it was clear to me that it did things the laziest way possible. Slow, dull, not concentrated," the 39-year-old Gergiev said.
"It was like a man who is strong, heavy, but doesn't do anything. For what do you need your strength? You have to do something!"
As political change engulfed the old Soviet Union, he held the company above the fray. While in England on tour last year, the conductor got a 5 a.m. phone call informing him of a coup in Moscow.
"I was afraid people would defect," he said in his Russian-accented English.
At breakfast that morning, he told his musicians: "Please, you all be calm and everything will be OK. I am absolutely sure. … We are the famous Kirov, we are not dependent on the KGB, or the Communist Party. The Kirov will remain an important, brilliant institution under any regime."
The Kirov Opera's appearance at the Metropolitan Opera last summer was its first in New York. A visit by Moscow's Bolshoi Opera the previous year had disappointed, so the St. Petersburg company was awaited with skepticism.
But for two weeks in July, it gave what The Wall Street Journal called "spectacular" performances of "Boris Godunov," Tchaikovsky's "Queens of Spades" and Prokofiev's "The Fiery Angel."
That success set up high expectations for the Kirov's first U.S. tour, which ended at New York's Lincoln Center Nov. 9.
Offstage, it's grueling to be the No. 1 man with a traveling crew of artists, technicians and administrators, all the while tackling the cruel commerce of the arts in the West.
The fact is: Gergiev knows how to deal. When Philips Records offered him a contract to conduct several years ago, he accepted on condition that the Kirov be used for the recordings. Philips took the risk.
"Everybody is afraid of cooperating with Russians because of the chaos and unclear, unpredictable future. So, they thought, yes it's a bit dangerous," Gergiev said.
The happy result: Recordings of the Russian classics, played by artists steeped in the music. They learn the secrets of their country's traditional music by sitting down for "a cup of tea nearly every day with the composers," the conductor said.
Despite his country's perilous economic and social climate, he voices a native son's devotion. "I don't have any doubt that Russia will become a rich and powerful country. Not tomorrow, but . .."
With its state subsidies cut about 60 percent, the company turned to the West for help.
Gergiev looks to Western contracts for most of his own salary, too. "I am not paid, actually, at Kirov at all," he joked about his less than $ 100 monthly pay.
That's OK with him. "I don't want to have every morning a limousine," he said, adding that he's happy with his self-driven Volvo in St. Petersburg.
Nonetheless, it's not hard currency that fuels him.
Under a black, silk shirt, he wears a small gold cross. An ethnic Georgian who grew up in mountainous southern Russia, he said he's not religious, strictly speaking.
The cross was "a gift from a friend, a symbol of places where I felt very easy, very happy. It's not about religion. As musicians, we have a different outlook, we believe in things, in the beautiful," he said.
"One has to understand that it is inside us, not just somewhere upstairs," he said, glancing at the ceiling of a New York hotel suite. "That's what religion means."
Gergiev attributed his success, including guest-conducting in the West, to "a combination of luck and no hurry."
It began with his widowed mother, an engineer who "didn't push me, she didn't want a 'wunderkind,' an immediate success." She was "so clever that I was always moving, slowly, forward," initially as a pianist.
"But she was always doing a lot, a lot, a lot that I will become a confident person."
She also taught him "not to be too arrogant to learn things, not to think that I am better than others."
As the final curtain fell on the recent "Boris Gudunov" performance, the conductor cued his orchestra for a chord that spilled into hot applause from the Manhattan audience. He stepped off the podium without bowing, pointed to his musicians and left the orchestra pit.
"It's how we do it in Russia. I don't want to be the only important one, above everything. My ego is quite calm," Gergiev said.
He reappeared onstage, clasped hands with the singers, and they bowed to the audience - together.

 

End of Document
