

The Day 'The King' Visited the Oval Office
 The Associated Press
December 26, 1995, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 763 words
Byline: By ROBERT SAIZ HOLGUIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SEATTLE
Body




With Hollywood focusing renewed attention on the presidency of Richard Nixon, the anniversary of a truly surreal White House meeting has passed almost unnoticed.
Twenty-five years ago, on Dec. 21, 1970, Nixon sat down in the Oval Office for a little heart-to-heart - with Elvis Presley.
"Well, the word 'strange' comes to mind, definitely," says Egil "Bud" Krogh, the former White House aide who set up the meeting and has just written a slim book - 61 pages - about it.
"For the longest time I thought it was a practical joke," Krogh says. "But then I saw him. The King. The King in the White House."
As Krogh tells it, Presley was on a flight to Washington, D.C., when he had a sudden impulse to discuss with Nixon his ideas for fighting drug abuse in America.
When he reached the capital, Presley scribbled his request for an audience with the commander-in-chief on a piece of paper and handed it to White House security.
"Sir, I am staying at the Washington Hotel … and will be here for as long as it takes to get the credentials of a federal agent," Presley wrote. "I have done an in-depth study on drug abuse and Communist brainwashing techniques."
Krogh's book, "The Day Elvis Met Nixon," describes with amusement the subsequent scrambling by White House staff to set up a meeting between the very serious Nixon and the flamboyant Presley, who was accompanied by his "Memphis Mafia" entourage.
The encounter has been described before, but Krogh's account is based on firsthand knowledge.
"This book is not a scholarly treatise," he said in a recent interview. "It's all true and historically accurate, but I look at it more like pop culture. This was just an amazing thing that happened in my life."
Nixon, who died last year, wrote the foreword with droll humor:
"This account shatters many of the myths that have been spread. It remains to be seen, however, whether the author will be resourceful enough to be able to arrange for Elvis to appear at a book signing."
One of the most compelling images in the book is a black-and-white photograph taken just as Presley, his wife, Priscilla, and their young daughter, Lisa Marie, stepped into the Oval Office.
"They were just awestruck," Krogh says. "It is a fairly impressive office, and you can tell Elvis was just amazed that he was there."
Krogh, an attorney who served Nixon as deputy assistant for domestic affairs in charge of narcotics and criminal justice programs, was indicted in the Watergate scandal and served six months in prison after Nixon resigned in 1973. He was reinstated to the Washington state bar in 1980 and has practiced law in Seattle since.
Krogh says his book is the first to offer the actual dialogue of the Nixon-Presley meeting.
"The Beatles, I think, are kind of anti-American," he quotes Presley as saying. "They came over here. Made a lot of money. And then went back to England and they said some anti-American stuff when they got back."
Krogh speculates that Presley may have considered the Beatles as rivals for fans' affections.
"I detected a bit of jealousy," he says.
Presley asked for and received an official badge from the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, where he was appointed to a special advisory position, Krogh says.
"Elvis may have thought it gave him actual authority, but it didn't. It's on display at Graceland now," he says.
Krogh appreciates the irony of Presley's desire to lead anti-drug efforts, but says the King, who died of a drug overdose, had the best of intentions.
"I've read in other places that Elvis was high during that meeting, but I didn't get that impression at all. He was lucid and enthusiastic. He just came in unannounced and said he wanted to help our efforts to fight dangerous drug usage, and we welcomed his help," he says.
"I detected a young guy who came out of dirt-poor conditions and had made it to the top of his profession but still had the simplicity and naivete of a young kid from Mississippi.
"There was an honest desire on his part to help and be patriotic, but he wasn't sure what he was going to do about it."
Presley wanted to keep the meeting secret. Krogh says he doubted that was possible. A year later, a reporter for the Washington Post broke the story.
Krogh says his most vivid memory of the meeting may be its ending.
Elvis stood up, went behind the president's desk and gave Nixon a big hug.
"I thought to myself, boy, this is the last meeting they let me schedule, because you don't hug Nixon," Krogh says.
"I just remember seeing Elvis hugging the president and the president kind of patting his back as if he was saying, 'There, there."'
 Load-Date: December 26, 1995

 

End of Document
