

The Changing Family: Pooling Resources Name of the Game in the '90s
The Associated Press
May 26, 1991, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 1117 words
Byline: By LESLIE DREYFOUS, AP National Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




When one paycheck, or even two, doesn't stretch far enough, pragmatism dictates the rules. And these days, the rules are continually changing.
Ken and Daria Dolan hear it in the calls they get on their New York-based national radio advice program: Family finances are more than ever a sophisticated family affair in which cooperation and compromise are key.
"My parents put their money in a passbook savings account and that was that," Ken said. "In the 1990s, it's pretty much a survival mode. The money goes on the table and couples are doing the best they can with it together."
The notion of putting a wife on an allowance seems hopelessly outdated with 53 million women in the work force. The old stereotypes no longer apply.
"In some cases, it's the wife doling out the money to hubby for buying lunches and maybe a new shirt once in a while," Daria said.
That's pretty much how it's worked out for the Dolans. Ken turns his paycheck over to Daria and she handles the family finances.
But there are about as many ways to manage a household budget as there are homes in America. The idea is to find something that works - and that can be difficult.
"The roles are in flux," said Martin King Whyte, a University of Michigan sociologist and author of "Dating, Mating and Marriage." "It's much more ambiguous now that there are two incomes and more decisions about whether the money should all go into one place."
It used to be that Dad's paycheck was enough to keep most families going. He brought home the bacon, and she paid the bills with it.
It's not that partners didn't collaborate. But even when consulting each other before making big purchases, it was clear who usually did the advising on what: Mom investigated the new dining set, Dad shopped around for the new car.
As with so much in American family life several decades ago, the lines were more clearly drawn. Men and women knew better where to stand.
Today, more than 58 percent of married women have outside jobs, according to the U.S. Department of Labor. They're asserting themselves in the workplace, and expect equal say-so at home. Men, in the meantime, are participating more than ever in running the household.
"The focus is much more 'family' financial planning today, because so many families are indeed partnerships between the husband and wife, with equal contributions," said Tom Wallace, national director of personal finance planning for Ernst & Young in New York.
The majority of couples questioned by the Roper Organizaton in a 1990 Virginia Slims Opinion Poll said they jointly handle all major financial decisions. Together, they plan the household budget, how much insurance to carry and how much to spend on vacation.
At the same time, however, the poll indicated that women are more likely than men to actually get out the checkbook and pay bills. Wallace, 55, said this holds true in his home.
His wife runs a retail clothing store and "is a very busy lady, but we've continued the practice we started when we were a more traditional family and she was running the house."
Younger couples, however, are more apt to start off with separate checking accounts and an equal hand in bill-paying, experts said.
"If I compare my parents to Paul and me, it's a huge difference," said Anne Hoag, 30, a cable company executive who lives in Asheville, N.C. "We maintain totally separate checking and savings accounts. I've got my own charge cards and he's got his."
Anne and her husband, Paul Rutter, trade off paying the mortgage, utility and other bills. But their decisions are made jointly, with plenty of room allowed for compromise.
When he wanted a lawn mower recently, she said fine. When she wanted a pricey new desk, he knew she'd earned it.
"I see where people have problems with money, and I think it mainly comes down to whether you're selfish or giving," said Paul, 32, who recently started his own medical supplies company.
Complicating matters is that at the same time more women are flexing their financial muscle, many couples are merging families in second marriages.
"And when each person has their own children and view on when to spend money, when to save, future goals versus current spending … it can be a major source of conflict," said Sharon Seiling, who teaches consumer economics at Ohio State University in Columbus.
"You've got to talk things out," she said, "think issues through."
Financial advisers say frank discussion and outside professional counsel often can be valuable peacemakers.
For many couples, however, there's little to argue about. What income they have is spent on necessities.
"Most of our money right now is going toward diapers," said Michelle Lambert, 28, who has two young sons and twin daughters. "This last paycheck, we got down to where we were eating a lot of rice and noodle dishes."
Michelle and her husband, an Air Force staff sergeant, receive a break in off-base housing in Spokane, Wash. But their lives still are lived pretty much paycheck to paycheck.
"We can't do the things my mom and dad were able to do," Michelle said.
Many families find that the money neither stretches as far nor comes in as fast as once it did. But when enough funds flow in to cover the basics, a new set of problems may crop up.
"There are issues of power wrapped up in money, what you earn and who decides to spend it," said Karen Gobel, who teaches consumer science at the University of Wisconsin in Madison.
Karen and her husband, Gerry Campbell, are fortunate. They've got some discretionary income. For them, like a lot of people, the only drawback is: They've got some discretionary income.
"That's where the problems can start," Karen said, "because people often have different values regarding saving versus spending."
Karen, 45, is fairly pragmatic. She's concerned with squirreling away money for the couple's golden years while her husband tends to be a little looser with the purse strings.
"I think that's why we have a boat in our driveway," Karen said. "What's nice is that with women's increasing earning power, if they can't influence joint decisions, they are still able to make decisions on their own."
For some couples, that financial flexibility means a healthier and more egalitarian relationship. Men and woman may compromise in some areas and pursue their priorities independently in others.
For others, however, it can mean serious budget battles - even divorce.
"Women are no longer economically dependent on their husbands. They have the freedom to leave if they choose," said Charles Hennon, editor of the journal "Lifestyles: Family and Economic Issues."
"Women have more of a say, and that's good," he said. "But it makes life more complicated and communication more important than ever."
 Graphic



 
With LaserPhoto, Logo

 

End of Document
