

The Media '92: Will Campaign Coverage Ever Be the Same?
The Associated Press
November 8, 1992, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 1259 words
Byline: By MITCHELL LANDSBERG, AP National Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




After the 1988 presidential campaign, the news media looked back with a shudder and collectively declared, "Never again." They had no idea how right they were.
The 1992 presidential campaign transformed the way Americans conduct politics and the way the press covers it. For better or worse, coverage of the 1996 campaign will stand on the hastily built foundation of this one.
Most people are, by now, familiar with the most obvious changes - how the race was reshaped by Larry King and Ross Perot, MTV and Arsenio Hall, morning shows and town halls and infomercials. The entertainment industry discovered the allure of politics, and left the traditional titans of the news on the outside looking in.
"The traditional press corps has been marginalized," said Marvin Kalb, once the epitome of the traditional network correspondent, now a professor at Harvard.
He added, perhaps ruefully, "The boys on the bus are at the back of the bus. And people like Larry King and Phil Donahue are up front."
There have been other changes, some less obvious than others:
- The news media paid more attention to issues this year and less to the horse race. Statistics compiled by the Washington-based Center for Media and Public Affairs bear this out: Through Labor Day, 60 percent of network news stories were about issues, 40 percent about the candidates' standing in the race. In 1988, the figures were almost exactly the reverse.
- Television networks tried to avoid manipulation by candidates posing in front of pretty or symbolic pictures. They also tried, at least briefly, to lengthen the "soundbites" of political speech.
- The media tried harder than before to keep the candidates honest by checking the truthfulness of their claims, charges and countercharges. They covered political advertising as an integral part of the race.
- Newspapers, especially, made more of an effort to find out what voters were thinking. In some cases, this "citizens' agenda" determined how the press covered the campaign.
The press "proved they were educable" in 1992, said Stephen Hess, a scholar at the Brookings Institution.
Jon Wolman, Washington bureau chief for The Associated Press, said, "I thought that the coverage was a great deal better than in 1988 when the campaign was often dominated by sideshows like Boston Harbor and the flag factories. The shift from rallies to TV talk shows had one great benefit - the candidates couldn't help but focus on issues that might actually matter over the next four years."
Everette Dennis, director of the Freedom Forum Media Studies Center, said he was "encouraged that both the quantity and quality have really soared this year in a way I wouldn't have expected."
Not everyone agrees. For instance, S. Robert Lichter, the director of the Center for Media and Public Affairs, said, "The coverage was more aggressive, more substantive and less balanced than in '88."
Lichter, who sees a liberal bias in the media, said the coverage was tougher on President Bush than on Bill Clinton.
And Marion Just, a political science professor at Wellesley College in Massachusetts who has been conducting interviews with voters in four states, said many people found the coverage to be better but still flawed.
"Many people object to the reporters offering their own, off-the-cuff opinions, especially about things that are obvious or that the voters can determine for themselves," she said.
Between now and 1996, all of this will be scrutinized and analyzed by editors and reporters and media analysts, people who daily ask: What do people want? And why don't they like us?
Those questions were an important backdrop for coverage of the '92 campaign. Newspapers worried about declining readership; television networks about the splintering of their audience into so many strands of cable.
The other important backdrop was 1988. The campaign that year between George Bush and Michael Dukakis - and, by extension, the news coverage - was, by general consensus, something less than America at its best.
Coverage was dominated by trivial messages and images - Bush at a flag factory, Dukakis on a tank. After that election, journalists agreed to adopt higher standards for the 1992 campaign.
They did, and marched off to New Hampshire early this year with the resolve to be better - more serious, more high-minded, more responsible. Then, on Jan. 23, along came Gennifer Flowers' unsubstantiated allegations of an affair with Clinton, and out went the game plan, at least for a few days.
That was a temporary distraction. But then, on Feb. 20, two days after the New Hampshire primary, Ross Perot went on CNN's "Larry King Live," said he might run for president, and everything changed for good.
"Ross showed you don't have to talk to Sam Donaldson to get on TV," Perot's running mate, Adm. James Stockdale, said after the election. "Ross has shown that American candidates can now bypass the filters and go directly to the people."
The good news is that the people asked good questions that carried an authority journalists couldn't match.
"Yes, good morning. Mr. President," a caller said to Bush on ABC's "Good Morning America" a few days before the election. "I'm 26 years old and in the past 13 months I've buried three of my friends. This is supposed to happen to me when I'm 96, not 26. My question is, what will you do in the next four years for AIDS?"
With an introduction like that, what candidate can fail to take the question seriously?
Oddly enough, the talk-show campaign may have made the traditional media more serious.
Without being able to interview candidates regularly, evening news shows turned more to issues and analysis. And the contact between candidates and voters raised, not lowered, the tone of the campaign.
E.J. Dionne, who covered the campaign for The Washington Post, said the serious mood set by voters "created a tone for the campaign that affected what we reporters did. … The whole mood of the country pushed us, and the candidates, in the right direction."
The bad news is that the candidates were rarely challenged in depth about their positions and plans. ABC's Donaldson provided a glimpse of what was missing when he was granted rare interviews with Bush and Clinton the Thursday before the election. He probed deeply into core issues and challenged the candidates in ways that talk show hosts and average voters had been unable to do.
CBS News anchor Dan Rather wrote in The New York Times that journalists "simply have … more experience asking those questions that need to be asked even when other people may be uncomfortable asking them."
But is that enough? Critics say the news media must do more than just ask hard questions.
"If that's all we need journalists for - because they're more shameless, they're tougher than the average person - then that's a pretty negligible contribution," said Jay Rosen, a journalism professor at New York University.
Rosen argued that journalists have lost touch with their audience and need to reconnect. He praised a few newspapers, such as The Charlotte (N.C.) Observer, which exhaustively polled and interviewed voters this year and then tried to cover the campaign from their perspective.
By establishing a "citizens' agenda," he said, these newspapers were able to connect with readers and offer them information that helped them connect with the political system.
"For too long, there's been a pattern in journalism where journalists identify with professionals in politics. … That's got to change," Rosen said. "The reference point has got to be amateurs - citizens. The public's concerns."

 

End of Document
