

The More Things Change, the More Clinton Remains the Same
The Associated Press
May 16, 1993, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 661 words
Byline: By RON FOURNIER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




People who watched Bill Clinton seize power in Arkansas with a brash bunch of young aides and a head full of ideas have something to say to the new president.
Haven't you learned anything?
Clinton, a 32-year-old boy wonder when he was elected to a first term as governor in 1978, lost the election two years later. "I think maybe I gave the appearance of trying too many things," Clinton said at the time.
More than a decade later, Clinton is having the same trouble as president.
Clinton shook his head on Friday, trying to understand it. "On one day people say he's trying to do too much, he's pushing too hard, he wants too much change. And then on the other day say, well, he's really not pushing very hard," the president said.
Some of Clinton's oldest supporters, including a top aide who works for him in Washington, say they've quietly reminded Clinton of the mistakes he made in Arkansas.
"We all want him to be more focused on fewer things," said an Arkansas lobbyist, who asked not to be identified, "We ain't smart enough to tell him how to do that, but we know he's gone wrong this way before."
Arkansas columnist Max Brantley said the parallels of the early Gov. Clinton and the early president are stunning: "Broad, visionary talk, delivery of something less-than-outlined and a cadre of young, ambitious aides who are stepping on toes wherever they turn. You could say the same thing about both eras."
Betsey Wright, Clinton's former chief of staff who helped him return to the governor's office in 1983, said Clinton learned from the mistakes of his first term as governor and will learn from the mistakes of his first months as president.
"The point is, he's gone through this before," she said. "It's just the exercise of going through a process like that and learning from it - evaluating what went wrong and fixing it."
Echoing criticism of the president's first days in the White House, Wright said young Gov. Clinton "didn't do a good enough job of telling people what he was proposing and fully communicating that with his staff and finding a unifying theme."
After his defeat, Clinton spent two years preparing a comeback. One of the first things he did was apologize for the youthful arrogance he and his staff displayed. Some old Washington hands have grumbled about Clinton's cocky crew in the White House.
In his first term as governor, Clinton aides angered powerful state legislators who thought the governor's agenda was being pushed down their throats. When he returned to power, Clinton never again took the Legislature for granted, and developed his reputation as an ace backslapper and compromiser.
Early this year, Clinton aides dismissed the influence of congressional Republicans and even some powerful Democrats, such as Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York. Humbled by the defeat of Clinton's jobs bill, the administration now welcomes Republicans to the White House to talk about health care, Bosnia and Clinton's economic package.
"I thought he had learned so well here that he would work better with Congress," said Brantley, a liberal columnist with the Arkansas Times weekly magazine.
Clinton won the 1982 election and immediately restructured his office to give his new chief of staff, Wright, total control. The management of his first staff was divided loosely among three young aides.
Clinton has already tinkered with his White House staff, hiring Roy Neel as a second deputy to mild-mannered chief of staff Mack McLarty.
Arkansas political consultant Bill Paschall said the similarities between 1979 and 1993 are the talk of the Little Rock, Ark., coffee shops.
"He had a young staff that seemed to make a lot of mistakes when he was first elected governor, and they're having to go through the process in the White House of learning the staff's weaknesses and plugging those holes," he said.
University of Arkansas Science Professor Bob Savage said Clinton "was going in too many directions then and he's going in too many now."

 

End of Document
