

The Great Flood of '93 is Over, The Great Debate Begins
The Associated Press
August 28, 1993, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1353 words
Byline: By SHARON COHEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ST. LOUIS
Body




It was a flood that made history.
Thousands of farms and homes were lost. Fields were swamped. Towns were submerged. People died. Part of the nation was devastated.
The time: 1927. The place: the lower Mississippi River.
A year later, Congress acted. It directed the Army Corps of Engineers to tame the river to prevent a repeat of the disaster that had killed hundreds, left 650,000 people homeless and caused $ 236 million in damages.
Since then, $ 8 billion has been spent building 1,608 miles of federal levees along the river from Cairo, Ill., to the Gulf of Mexico, completing four floodways and making other improvements in an ongoing project.
The results are impressive: Billions have been saved in flood damages.
Fast forward 66 years.
Another historic Mississippi flood. This time, on the upper river.
More than $ 10 billion in damages. Forty-eight dead.
And now, once again, calls for change.
---
The Great Flood of '93, it appears, is over. The Great Debate has just begun.
"Should society pay more to ensure greater security for the flood region or should we pay less and gamble that Mother Nature doesn't go on another rampage?" asks Edward Pfrang, director of the American Society of Civil Engineers. "It's a high-risk tradeoff that society must address."
Politicians already are chiming in, noting that while billions of federal dollars have gone to flood control on the lower Mississippi, towns, farmers and others have built most of the levees on the upper river.
Some experts point out an extensive federal levee project on the upper river might not be cost effective because the floodplain is much smaller than on the lower Mississippi.
But a bill recently introduced in Congress would require the Army Corps to study and recommend flood-control improvements on the upper Mississippi - and examine differences in federal cost-sharing for levees and other projects on both stretches of the river.
"A decision made in this Capitol building 66 years ago has given peace of mind to people who live on the lower Mississippi River," said Rep. Dick Durbin, D-Ill., the bill's lead sponsor. "We want the same peace of mind on the upper Mississippi."
---
As the water recedes, barges start moving and folks dig out their mud-filled homes, the flood post-mortem has raised some thorny questions:
Are levees friend or foe? Is the Army Corps managing the river properly? Is shipping a viable form of transportation? Should residents of the floodplain be forced to relocate? And, the Big One: Can we - and should we - even try to tame the river?
"We welcome the debate," said George Halford, an Army Corps spokesman in Washington. "We always go back and look at what we did right and what we could do better."
Key to that debate are the levees, earthen berms that run parallel to the rivers, protecting homes and land.
The lower Mississippi project - including the extensive levee network - prevented $ 13.5 billion in damages in the 1973 flood, the Army Corps says.
This summer, federal levees, designed to strict standards and built for rare floods, held up well: Of 229 on the upper Mississippi and Missouri basin, two breached and 38 were overtopped, the agency said. Some repairs already have begun.
In contrast, 800 of about 1,100 private and other nonfederal levees failed, the Army Corps said. That's no surprise because they're often smaller, less expensive and less well-constructed - designed for 25-year floods.
Some, however, question the need for levees themselves.
During floods, levees can squeeze the river, forcing it to rise higher and faster and increasing the impact downstream.
"When man made the river a prisoner and constricted it, it could no longer naturally move back and forth across the floodplain," said Norm Stucky, an environmental coordinator at the Missouri Department of Conservation. "The river could no longer give and take. … In this horrendous flood of '93, it took quite a bit."
"I'm not suggesting that we jerk all the dikes and levees out and turn the river loose," he said. "That would be inexcusable to me. … We've pushed the river a bit too hard, confined it a bit too much. A river of this size has to have a little more breathing room."
But some say floodwalls prevented an even greater disaster.
"If you remove the levees, all of a sudden you would quadruple the damage," said Gary Dyhouse, an Army Corps hydrologist in St. Louis. "You'd have a couple hundred thousand people displaced, instead of a couple thousand."
Still, levees are not infallible.
"What made it worse was 45 straight days of rain," Halford said. "That's the bottom line. In July in St. Louis, there was more than four times the normal flow of water in the Mississippi. No flood-control project caused that water."
---
But is the upper Mississippi being managed for flood control?
The Izaak Walton League of America accuses the Army Corps of giving top priority to navigation, sacrificing other concerns.
"We believe that the Mississippi River is being seriously mismanaged by the U.S. Army Corps … and a significant effort at overall watershed planning in the basin is essential," Paul Hansen, the league's Midwest director, said in recent U.S. Senate testimony.
He isn't the only one taking aim at the Army Corps.
"They straightened the river and made a rifle shot out of it," contends Bruce Hannon, a University of Illinois geography professor. "The levees are not there so much as to protect the farmland as to keep the river in place for navigational purposes. . .. We're maintaining this environmentally destructive, hydrologically insane, agriculturally nonsensical position on the river, supporting an antiquated form of transportation."
"Who needs barge traffic?" he asked. "What national system of any kind can you put out of commission three months? The phone system? The interstate highway system?"
The Army Corps and its defenders scoff at such comments.
"You wouldn't be able to do anything in the river if it went back to totally normal form," said Paul Barber, the Army Corps chief of engineering for civil works in Washington.
And it's wrong to say the barge and towing industry is the sole beneficiary of Army Corps activities and to suggest river transportation isn't cost-effective, said Paul Werner, midcontinent vice president of American Waterways Operators Inc.
One barge carries 1500 tons of commodities - equal to 15 train cars or 60 semitractor trailers, Werner said.
"It is simply the most economic means of moving large quantities of product," he said.
---
Flood victims also face a pressing economic question: to return or not to return to the floodplain?
"It's going to happen again," said Stucky, the Missouri conservation official. "Moving back is like standing in line to get held up."
Some suggest residents not be allowed to return to the bottomlands; others say changes should be made for those who do.
"Insurance should be made available only for risks that are quite marginal," said Daniel Mandelker, an environmental law professor at Washington University. "If people choose to live in the floodplain, they shouldn't be insured by the federal government."
"The federal government," he added, "should not be paying losses three times over 12 years."
Some experts recommend relocating entire towns. But the federal government has limited resources for buyouts and many people say they can't afford to move.
"It's difficult for the city or for the government to tell people what they can and cannot do," said Hannibal, Mo., Mayor Richard Schwartz. "For many of them, it's their homes. They want the government to leave them alone. … If they had the economic means, they would not be living there."
Hannon said he's not optimistic the flood will bring about changes.
"We feel like everything should be restored the way it was before. … That's not the way to read the message. The river is trying to tell us 'I tried to get out of the straitjacket and one way or another I'll do it.' "
"I don't think we'll learn anything we didn't already know," Hannon added. "There will be a lot of hurt and discouraged people, a sympathetic Congress and a lot of contractors who want to build. … We'll pay again in the future."

 

End of Document
