

The Miracle That Never Happened; A Dreaded Knock on the Door
The Associated Press
May 7, 1995, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1182 words
Byline: By GEORGE ESPER, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: OKLAHOMA CITY
Body




On the morning of April 19, Peter DeMaster got up at 5:30 a.m. He made coffee as he always did, and set it out with the cream and the sugar. He called to his wife, "Time to get up." Soon, as they had done for years, they parted for their jobs with a kiss, just another companionable goodbye in a loving, satisfying life.
Later that morning, Kay Barry-DeMaster was busy with a project at Northeast High School when she felt … something.
"Can you believe they just blew up the federal building?!" one of the students yelled as he came by.
She told herself not to worry: Pete, who worked for the Defense Department as a security agent doing background investigations, often was away from his office. He could just as easily have been at Tinker Air Force Base. He could be in his car somewhere.
But he was not. As she learned all too soon when one of his colleagues called the high school two miles away, Pete had been sitting at his third-floor desk in the federal building talking long-distance to a fellow agent when the phone line suddenly went dead.
A glance at the school's TV quickly brought home the extent of the horror: Huge chunks of the building were obscenely exposed or simply gone. And the ensuing hours began to establish a horrible truth: Very few survivors were being pulled from the rubble.
And still, day after day after day, for nearly two weeks, Kay Barry-DeMaster tried to hold out hope. What else could she do?
Pete and Kay had come together as divorced neighbors. She lived two doors down, and was raising a son, Brian, now 20 and a dancer in Los Angeles. He had custody of his daughter, Kristin, now a 21-year-old college student.
As a child, Kristin frequently came over to play with Brian, but it was some time before Kay realized the girl's father was divorced. A neighbor across the street purposely invited them all to use her swimming pool, and it was while the kids were swimming that Pete first invited Kay to dinner.
Less than a year later, on April 24, 1982, they were married.
For 12 days after the bombing, through what would have been her 13th wedding anniversary, Kay stayed home, dreading a knock on the door, her hope slowly dissipating into only a fervent wish that her husband's body be recovered. She wore a blue-and-yellow ribbon - the blue symbolizing a nation standing together, the yellow a quiet reminder of the missing.
She asked her mother not to wash Pete's clothes, even though the chances of him being found alive became more remote as the days passed. "It smells like him," she told her mother. "I've got to have something to hold onto."
As the investigation unfolded and the grim details began to filter out, amazingly, Kay expressed no hatred or condemnation for the terrorists who triggered the 4,800-pound bomb.
"I was a counselor for eight years, so I certainly understand that's something a person goes through," she explained three days after the explosion, as the waiting stretched on. "But I haven't been able to get at all interested in who did it and why they did it."
In her mind, none of that mattered. Her concern was with Pete.
"I'm comfortable that he's at peace, and that was really all that ever concerned me," she said. She thought about him being hurt and in pain, and prayed he could last until rescuers found him.
Though she once went to the fringes of the building area to thank the rescuers, she could not bring herself to venture any further - and she could not stand to watch television anymore. Pete's office had literally been blown away.
"It was just gone, and that was so hard to take," she said.
The unbearable thought that her 44-year-old husband's body might be forever entombed in the rubble tortured Kay on one of her worst days last weekend: Officials had given up the search for the living and brought in heavy machinery to recover the dead.
"I'm trying to get myself pulled together," she said then. When her head throbbed, her mother injected her with a prescription migraine pain killer; she did not get to bed until a few hours before dawn Monday.
Late that afternoon, the excruciating wait ended abruptly when two officials from the Department of Defense office came by to tell her Pete's body had been recovered and identified.
"They just showed up," said her mother, Melba Massey, of Conroe, Texas, who had flown to Oklahoma City immediately to be by her 51-year-old daughter's side. Even though they anticipated the worst, Mrs. Massey said, the reality "was pretty much of a shock."
"When the word finally came, it was a relief," Kay said. "I was going to have a body. It looked like I might not. And there was closure. We can maybe get on with life."
In the couple's comfortable, three-bedroom brick house, the reminders of Pete are everywhere, and the pain of an anniversary uncelebrated weighs heavy.
Kay thinks about what they might have done to celebrate, what gift Pete might have given her.
"I anticipated that we would have gone out to dinner Saturday night," she said. "He was a very romantic, sentimental guy - always the dozen roses. I recently started a Victorian slide bracelet, and I anticipated that he would add a slide to that."
So much did she want a last memento to cling to that she had a friend call the family jeweler to see if, just maybe, something was waiting there.
"I think they were being nice to me," she said. "They said it looked like he'd paid cash and, therefore, they didn't know what it might have been. But Pete wasn't a last-minute kind of guy, so I still think that. Isn't that awful of me? I thought that would just be so neat."
Two days before her husband's body was recovered, Kay woke in the middle of night and thought of a friend who is an art teacher. Perhaps, she wondered, it would be worth asking him to do a portrait of Pete to display at a memorial service. Pete's parents would be coming from Sheboygan, Wis., where he grew up, and she wanted any service to be perfect.
She arose that Saturday and began going through family photos - her wedding in 1982, Christmas gatherings with their two children and two dogs, photos of high school proms she attended as both a teacher and assistant principal. Pete always accompanied her, always took part in the children's activities.
For the portrait, she chose a 1991 prom photo. Pete is wearing a gray, pinstriped suit and red tie; she is wearing a peach dinner suit. He has his arm around her waist, and their faces are filled with their usual warmth.
Kay elected to cremate Pete and hold a memorial this weekend because she felt a funeral would be too painful.
"He and I had discussed off and on that we both liked the idea of cremation - and then these circumstances," she said. "That seems most appropriate to me."
Now that the worst is confirmed, there are so many happy memories, and so many fresh opportunities for pain. The shock of seeing Pete's obituary in the newspaper Wednesday sent Kay to bed with another migraine; she was vomiting and nauseous from the stress of arranging the cremation.
She asked her mother if she would ever get over the period of mourning.
"No, you never do," her mother told her. "You just never do."
 Load-Date: May 7, 1995

 

End of Document
