

The Economic News is Good - But the Financial Markets Swoon
The Associated Press
April 1, 1994, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 664 words
Byline: By FARRELL KRAMER, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Once again, the financial markets have turned seemingly good economic news on its head.
Bond traders sent the market for Treasury securities plummeting Friday after the government reported the economy created 456,000 non-farm jobs in March - about twice the expected increase. The report exacerbated the market's nervousness about inflation and higher interest rates.
Many traders are afraid of a similar reaction on Wall Street, which saw the Dow Jones industrial average lose almost 4 percent of its value this week.
But economists say Wall Street's pain could be Main Street's gain.
Expected moves by the Federal Reserve to stem inflation by raising interest rates - an anathema to stock and bond traders - could mean a longer-lasting recovery, they say. Efforts to limit inflation alone have merit, they add, helping keep goods and services affordable.
"It is a striking paradox to see economic recovery finally beginning to gather some staying power in the United States and the financial markets acting like this is a threat to the integrity of everything the marketplace is built upon," said Stephen S. Roach, senior economist at Morgan Stanley & Co.
"I think the financal markets are overreacting, driven by a knee-jerk response."
Whether the reaction was knee-jerk, justified, or something in between, the drop in bond prices Friday was striking. The government's benchmark 30-year bond fell 1 29-32 points, or $ 19.06 per $ 1,000 in face value. Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction, shot up to 7.26 percent.
Shorter maturities also closed lower during the volatile, but thin pre-holiday trading session.
The market's concern over higher interest rates began in earnest on Feb. 4, when the Federal Reserve began to drive up the federal funds rate, the interest banks charge each other on overnight loans. The rate rose that day to 3.25 percent from 3 percent, and it gained another quarter-point on March 22.
Now, following the strong employment report, many are convinced the Fed will nudge the funds rate up another half-point by the middle of next month, said Sung Won Sohn, chief economist at Norwest Corp. in Minneapolis.
That prospect was enough to send the bond market reeling. The stock market, which was closed for Good Friday, will cast its vote Monday.
But for ordinary Americans, many of whom do not trade in the stock or bond markets but care very much about the economy's overall health, the Fed's efforts to cool down the recovery may be a long-term plus.
A slower recovery that continues for some time, Sohn said, will go further toward ensuring long-term employment and security than a blistering upturn that soon runs out of gas.
"It's kind of like driving a car," Sohn said. "You can exceed speed limits every once in a while and get away with it. If you keep exceeding speed limits too long, you are going to be caught."
Kurt Karl, an economist at the Wefa Group, an economic consulting firm in Bala Cynwyd, Pa., says the economy is currently strong enough to handle the slowing the expected interest-rate increase would bring.
Increasing rates, however, will not be entirely painless, he warned. Higher interest rates will increase the costs of home mortgages and credit card payments.
But those troubles will be moderate, he said.
So if the economy is in good shape and the possibility of higher interest rates is not onerous, why are the nation's financial markets reacting as if big trouble is coming?
The answer, economists say, is that markets look forward - sometimes years ahead - and are not always concerned with present-day realities.
For instance, the stock market's surge during the past three years or so came at a time when news was often bad. Layoffs, shrinking profits and slow - or nonexistent growth - were reported often. Now, the news is better, but traders are not happy.
"On Main Street, where the word 'recovery' is just starting to be spoken for the first time in five years," Roach said, "they're probably wondering what the heck is going on."
 Load-Date: April 1, 1994

 

End of Document
