

The New York Post: Back From the Dead
The Associated Press
July 19, 1993, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 5799 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Back from the dead, The New York Post hit the streets July 13 with its old swagger, proclaiming it's "HERE TO STAY."
The nation's oldest continuously published daily went to press after its unions agreed to $ 6.2 million in concessions demanded by Rupert Murdoch - its once and future owner - as a condition for rescuing the money-losing tabloid.
The 192-year-old Post had suspended publication on July 9 after Murdoch failed to come to terms with the unions. But a weekend of calls among Gov. Mario Cuomo, the unions and Murdoch executives yielded a breakthrough July 12.
The crisis was the fourth time in five years that the Post went to the brink.
The decision to publish came after 10 production unions agreed to the reduced costs and The Newspaper Guild, which represents 290 editorial, advertising and circulation employees, agreed to return to work while continuing to negotiate. In all, 725 people work at the Post.
Murdoch's News America Publishing Corp. said it would proceed with negotiations to buy the paper and lift it out of bankruptcy court.
Murdoch - who cleared an earlier hurdle when the Federal Communications Commission said he wouldn't have to sell WNYW-TV, his New York City TV station, if he bought the Post - will manage the paper in the meantime.
George McDonald, head of an umbrella group of newspaper unions, said the unions realized Murdoch was "the last game in town."
McDonald did not give specifics of the agreements but said there would be buyouts and job losses through attrition.
Negotiations with the Guild focused on two issues: Murdoch's demand that the union grant him powers to reshape the staff through firings and rehirings, and his refusal to honor severance obligations.
Murdoch bought the Post in 1976 from Dorothy Schiff but was forced to sell it to real-estate developer Peter Kalikow in 1988 because of FCC regulations against owning both a newspaper and TV station in the same market.
 
 ---
 
 The Asbury Park Press Buys The Central New Jersey Home News
NEPTUNE, N.J. (AP) - The Asbury Park Press has completed its purchase of The Central New Jersey Home News. The new owners said the 114-year-old Home News will remain an independent newspaper focusing on Middlesex and Somerset counties.
The Asbury Park Press, the state's second-largest daily and Sunday newspaper, announced last January that it would acquire The Home News from the Boyd family.
However, the agreement was not signed until July 13, according to E. Donald Lass, president of New Jersey Press Inc., the parent company, and editor and publisher of The Asbury Park Press. Lass will be the publisher of The Home News.
"The Home News is a natural fit for The Press because it is in a contiguous market," Lass said.
"We will capitalize on the synergies between the two organizations, but The Home News will be a distinctive product dedicated to Middlesex and Somerset counties."
Press spokesman Tim Zeiss said most of the Home News assets were included in the purchase, excluding the Home News building and property in New Brunswick and the presses. The newspaper's new headquarters is in East Brunswick.
Of the Home News' 260 employees, about 114 are former employees of the Boyd-owned newspaper and the rest are new hires, Zeiss said. He added that the Press had offered jobs to 130 employees of the old Home News. Others, including about 15 veteran newsroom employees and 65 production employees, were not offered jobs.
More than 160 employees in the editorial, advertising, human resources, circulation and marketing departments along with Home News senior management will work at the headquarters that opened July 14 in East Brunswick.
The Home News will be redesigned and printed on new Urbanite offset presses at the Press satellite printing plant in Freehold and on its Metroliner presses in Neptune. Lass said all editions will eventually be printed in Freehold.
The Home News was founded in 1879 and bought by Hugh Boyd, an ancestor of William Boyd, the former chairman of the board who sold the newspaper. The Home News has a daily circulation of 47,490 and 56,674 on Sunday. The Sunday Home News dates back to 1786.
The Asbury Park Press has a daily circulation of 164,465 and 229,736 on Sunday. Its parent company, New Jersey Press, owns Press Broadcasting Co. Inc. which operates WKXW-FM and WBUD-AM, two Trenton radio stations.
The company also owns and operates WKCF Channel 18, an independent television station, and radio station WTKS FM, in Orlando, Fla.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.
 
 ---
 
 Phoenix Newspapers PLans New Building
PHOENIX (AP) - Phoenix Newspapers, Inc., plans to build a new office building across the street from its current location. Phoenix Newspapers publishes The Phoenix Gazette and The Arizona Republic.
Publisher Louis A. Weil III said the building will be 10 to 20 stories with about 250,000 square feet of space. Construction on what is now a parking lot will begin in about six months, he said.
The current three-story office building, which also has two basement floors, will be sold, Weil said.
The new building will house newsroom, advertising, circulation, business and some production employees. The newspapers still will be printed at the company's plants in Mesa and Deer Valley.
 The images flashed one after another: Holes in the Berlin Wall. A Sarajevo street scene. An orphanage in Somalia. The last image was of the man who took those pictures: Slain Associated Press photographer Hansi Krauss.
"His images stand as his autobiography," said Vin Alabiso, AP executive photo editor. "He was a risk-taker, but careful and sensitive. He was never satisfied with looking at life from a distance."
The 30-year-old German was remembered by friends and co-workers July 15 as a top-notch journalist who brought his smile to some of the world's saddest stories. Krauss was recalled as fearless, upbeat and friendly, the first on the scene, his trademark baseball cap in place.
"I'll never forget that, the enthusiasm he brought to the job," said an emotional Kevin Costelloe, the AP's news editor in Berlin and a close friend.
Some wept, while others rubbed their eyes or hung their heads during a memorial service at AP headquarters that featured Krauss' touching and revealing photographs of Bosnia-Herzegovina and Somalia. Costelloe met Krauss when Krauss began work for the AP as the Berlin Wall came down in 1989.
Krauss died July 12 at the hands of an angry crowd in Mogadishu, Somalia, after a U.S. helicopter attack on Somali militia targets. He was the 16th AP reporter or photographer killed in the line of duty since 1938, and the second in three months.
Islamabad bureau chief Sharon Herbaugh died in an April helicopter crash in Afghanistan.
"When you do what we do, there's a tendency to get used to violence. We take pictures of it, and we describe it," said Louis D. Boccardi, AP president and chief executive officer.
"But once in a while - too often recently in this family - violence strikes home as it did earlier this week in Somalia."
Kathy Willens, an AP photographer who worked with Krauss in Somalia, remembered losing all her equipment at knifepoint during a night of violence. Krauss was the lone AP photographer; with the pressure on, he came up with every shot needed.
"I couldn't have asked for a more devoted co-worker," she said.
Photo editor Madge Stager had a telephone relationship with Krauss, handling his pictures in New York. She remembered how he could make her smile in calls from war-torn countries.
"I remember his laugh quite well, because we laughed a lot on the phone" she recalled. "He was just a joyful person."
The 30-minute service ended with a tribute to Krauss from two German colleagues, followed by a minute of silence. Axel Kull and Rainier Klostermeier wrote eloquently about their departed comrade; their message was read by Alabiso.
"You had such a lust for life. You could get charged up quickly and infect others with your enthusiasm," they wrote. "Your life was much too short. Yet it was intense and extraordinary - extraordinary like everything about you."
Besides Krauss, the Somali mob killed two Reuters photographers and a Reuters sound technician and wounded two other journalists.
 
 ---
 
 Landmark Sells California Publications
NORFOLK, Va. (AP) - Landmark Communications Inc. said it has sold a California newspaper and several other publications to Kendell Communications Inc. of New York.
The asset sale of Landmark's Californian Publishing Co. includes The Daily Californian, a 25,000-circulation newspaper in El Cajon; Senior World, a group of monthly publications in southern California; and Antiques and Collectibles, a monthly in the San Diego area.
Kendell Communications is headed by Paul Zindell, who also was president and publisher of Californian Publishing for the past four years.
Terms of the sale weren't disclosed in the July 13 announcement.
Landmark, which is privately held, publishes eight daily newspapers, including the Norfolk Virginia-Pilot and Ledger-Star, the Greensboro News & Record in North Carolina and the Roanoke Times and World-News.
It also publishes 31 non-daily newspapers and numerous specialty publications.
Landmark also owns and operates two cable networks, The Weather Channel and The Travel Channel; two television stations, WTVF-TV in Nashville, Tenn., and KLAS-TV in Las Vegas, Nev.; and Promotion Information Management, which tracks promotional activity for packaged goods.
 
 ---
 
 Teamsters Approve Contract With Akron Beacon Journal
AKRON, Ohio (AP) - A union representing drivers and other circulation department workers at the Akron Beacon Journal has approved a four-year contract with the newspaper.
The July 15 vote was 96 to 18, said Gordon McGinnis, secretary-treasurer of Teamsters Local 473. The new contract is effective July 1.
The company agreed to withdraw a petition to the National Labor Relations Board to have the 51 district managers in the newspaper's circulation department classified as supervisors and thus ineligible for union membership.
Besides mailroom workers, also covered by a separate Teamsters contract, the Beacon Journal is negotiating with Newspaper Guild Local 7, PhotoEngravers Local 546M and Pressmen Local 42C.
 
 ---
 
 Des Moines Register Recovers from Floods, Expands Distribution
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) - The Des Moines Register expanded its distribution July 14 to include areas of the state outside the metro area for the first time since floods forced the daily newspaper out of its office.
A total of 139,450 newspapers were distributed to central and eastern Iowa, said Diane Glass, vice president of marketing for the Gannett paper. The Register's average daily distribution is 189,885.
The central Iowa edition of the Register was printed at the Wall Street Journal's plant in West Des Moines while the Iowa City Press Citizen took care of the eastern Iowa edition.
 The Tribune Co. plans to start publishing later this year a free weekly newspaper targeted to Chicago's Hispanic community.
Exito! - which means success - will be published primarily in Spanish, with some articles written in English, publisher Mario Aranda said. It will provide local, national and international news, as well as features, sports, celebrity news, consumer information and discussion of personal and family issues.
The publishers hope to tap into the fast-growing Hispanic population in the Chicago area which has buying power of $ 6.8 billion yearly.
Exito! will be printed at the Chicago Tribune's printing plant. The paper will have verified circulation of 65,000 each week and will be distributed from retail locations, newspaper boxes, churches and community-based organizations in metropolitan Chicago.
 
 ---
 
 Ohio Newspapers Seeking Special Information Numbers
COLUMBUS, Ohio (AP) - Three Ohio newspapers are asking state utility regulators to let them more easily provide readers with sports scores, stocks and other information over the telephone.
The Dayton Daily News, The (Cleveland) Plain Dealer and the Springfield News-Sun said they are seeking an "N11" service similar to the 411 directory assistance service.
The newspapers asked the Public Utilities Commission to require Ohio Bell to give them the numbers. They said Ohio Bell and its parent company, Ameritech, have refused the service even though there are no legal, regulatory or technical barriers.
Ohio Bell spokesman David Kandel said the telephone company has received numerous requests for N11 codes - from newspapers, information providers, long-distance telephone companies, the deaf community and others.
"The problem is N11 codes are a very limited resource. The demand exceeds the supply," said Kandel. "And we have significant public policy issues involved in the assignment of N11 codes."
He said Ohio Bell is awaiting guidance from the Federal Communications Commission.
The newspapers said seven-digit numbers and pay-per-call numbers are inadequate for providing customers with convenient and inexpensive access to voice information such as up-to-the-minute sports scores, stock quotes and talking classified ads.
Tillson said the newspapers would pay Ohio Bell for the service and customer payments for use of the N11 number would be collected by the telephone company.
 
 ---
 
 Judge Dismisses Georgia House Speaker's Suit Against Newspaper
ROME, Ga. (AP) - Georgia House Speaker Tom Murphy's $ 5 million libel suit over an editorial in the Rome News-Tribune was dismissed by a judge who said it hadn't accused Murphy of a crime.
Judge Walter J. Matthews granted the newspaper's motion July 13 to dismiss the suit filed by Murphy last February over a year-old editorial headlined "Madame Murphy's House of Ill Repute."
Murphy claimed the Feb. 16, 1992, editorial, which compared the Georgia House to a brothel and the speaker to its proprietor, was written to "falsely and maliciously defame him, to cause injury to his reputation and to expose him to … public ridicule."
Murphy also contended that the newspaper accused him of conspiring to accept a bribe, a criminal offense. But Matthews ruled that the speaker's case hinged on this issue alone, and that the editorial did not accuse him of a crime.
Stewart Duggan, an attorney for the News-Tribune, called the ruling a victory for newspapers in cases where a political official might take exception to an editorial. He had argued the editorial was pure opinion and protected by the newspaper's First Amendment rights.
Murphy and his attorney, Bobby Lee Cook, did not return telephone calls seeking comment on the ruling.
 
 ---
 
 Time Warner Posts Net Loss of $ 80 Million
NEW YORK (AP) - Time Warner Inc. reported a net loss of $ 80 million in the second quarter, but said that on an operating basis the media conglomerate's profits showed improvement.
Interest payments on debt, depreciation and amortization from the acquisition of Warner Communications Inc. four years ago were responsible for the overall loss.
Time Warner's net loss in the quarter came to 22 cents a share. Earnings for the quarter included an extraordinary loss of $ 35 million, or 9 cents a share, for the retirement of debt.
In the second quarter of 1992, the company reported net income $ 9 million, but a per-share loss of 40 cents. The loss applicable to common shares included preferred dividends that reduced earnings by $ 156 million, compared with a reduction of $ 3 million in this year's second quarter.
Operating income in the second quarter of this year increased 9 percent to $ 362 million from $ 333 million in the same quarter a year ago.
Revenue grew 5 percent to $ 3.25 billion from $ 3.1 billion in the year-earlier period.
Gerald M. Levin, chairman and chief executive officer, noted that in the second quarter the company announced a $ 2.5 billion strategic alliance with US West Inc. Also, he said, Time Warner has continued to restructure its balance sheet by redeeming $ 900 million in debt with funds from lower-cost borrowing.
 
 ---
 
 Scripps Reports Marginallly Lower Second-Quarter Earnings
CINCINNATI (AP) - E.W. Scripps Co. reported slightly lower net income in the second quarter, including gains from recently sold businesses.
The media company reported income of $ 22.1 million, or 30 cents per share, down slightly from $ 22.3 million, or 30 cents per share in the year-earlier quarter.
Revenues fell to $ 309.3 million from $ 326.5 million.
Scripps said its broadcast and cable television divisions posted double-digit profit increases. But the gains were more than offset by a drop in publishing operating income of 30 percent, excluding the profits from sold businesses.
The company blamed the publishing division's problems on increased newsprint prices and sluggish retail advertising in newspapers, start-up costs for a Denver production plant and expenses for consolidated operations and new editions of the company's Ventura County, Calif., newspapers.
Scripps sold The Pittsburgh Press and its television listings business in the last quarter of 1992. In February, the company completed the sale of its Pharos Books and World Almanac Education divisions. The company sold its Ogden (Utah) Standard-Examiner newspaper in March, its Tulare (Calif.) Advance-Register newspaper in April and completed the sale of book publishing operations in June.
 Gannett Co. said second-quarter earnings increased 16 percent from a year ago, helped by strength in its television operations and flagship newspaper, USA Today.
The company earned $ 113.7 million, or 78 cents a share, compared with $ 97.8 million, or 68 cents a share, in the second quarter of 1992. Revenue increased 5 percent to $ 937.8 million from $ 892.1 million.
Newspaper advertising improved 5 percent, but that reflected the January purchase of the Honolulu Advertiser, the company said. Gannett said ad revenue would have been up 3 percent if compared only with newspapers owned the year before.
Ad revenue at USA Today increased 6 percent, the company said.
Broadcasting revenue rose 12 percent. Revenue from the company's outdoor-advertising business fell 4 percent, in part because a Phoenix, Ariz., unit was sold off.
Gannett publishes a total of 83 daily newspapers, including USA Today, and USA Weekend, a newspaper magazine. It operates 10 television stations, 15 radio stations and an outdoor-advertising company.
 
 ---
 
 Pulitzer: Second-Quarter Earnings Down 11 Percent
ST. LOUIS (AP) - Pulitzer Publishing said its second-quarter earnings were down 11 percent, but only because two nonrecurring tax adjustments boosted earnings in the second quarter of last year.
Net earnings for the St. Louis-based company were $ 7.9 million, or 68 cents a share, compared with $ 8.9 million, or 77 cents a share, in the second quarter of 1992.
A favorable tax adjustment and a writeoff related to feature-film production added about $ 2.5 million, or 22 cents a share, to earnings in the year-ago period, the company said. Not including those items, net earnings were up 24 percent in the second quarter.
Revenue in the quarter increased 2 percent to $ 104.3 million from $ 102.1 million a year ago.
Broadcasting revenue rose 7 percent, while publishing revenue was essentially flat.
 
 ---
 
 Park Communications: Second-Quarter Earnings Grew 10 Percent
ITHACA, N.Y. (AP) - Park Communications said second-quarter earnings for the quarter grew 10 percent to $ 5.4 million, or 26 cents a share, from $ 4.9 million, or 24 cents a share, in the same period a year ago.
Revenues were up 8 percent to $ 44.2 million from $ 40.9 million.
Roy H. Park, chairman and chief executive officer, attributed the increases to improved broadcasting revenue.
 
 ---
 
 BROADCASTING:
 
 CBS Earnings Up 56 Percent
NEW YORK (AP) - CBS Inc. reported that earnings for the second quarter increased 56 percent to $ 107.4 million from a year ago, as the No. 1 prime-time network built on its popularity with viewers.
Laurence A. Tisch, chairman and chief executive officer, said the company's earnings were helped by its continuing efforts to contain costs.
Earnings for the quarter totaled $ 6.73 a share, compared with earnings of $ 69 million, or $ 4.46 a share, in the second quarter of 1992. Revenue improved 7 percent to $ 835.8 million from $ 779.9 million.
The earnings included a pretax gain of $ 14.2 million from the sale of securities and pretax income of $ 10.7 million related to insurance settlements, the company said.
In addition, in 1992 CBS adopted required accounting changes for health care benefits for retirees which reduced CBS' first-half 1992 earnings by $ 5.29 a share.
Profits rose at CBS's television stations division, aided by lower operating costs, the company said. Also, CBS Radio saw profits increase in the quarter, due mostly to a cost-control program.
Operating costs at CBS overall fell 2 percent from the year-earlier period.
 
 ---
 
 Continental Cablevision Signs Transmission Deal With ABC, Hearst
BOSTON (AP) - Continental Cablevision Inc., the nation's third largest cable operator, has agreed to carry signals from all TV stations owned by Capital Cities/ABC Inc. and The Hearst Corp.
The agreement stems from a new federal law that requires cable companies to negotiate with broadcasters for use of their programming.
Under the deal, Continental will be able to carry broadcasts from Capital Cities/ABC's stations in New York (WABC), Los Angeles (KABC), San Francisco (KGO), Chicago (WLS) and Fresno, Calif. (KFSN), plus Hearst stations in Boston (WCVB) and Dayton, Ohio (WDTN).
Continental also agreed to carry a new channel, ESPN2, on a "substantial" number of its systems nationwide.
ESPN2 is a second national sports programming channel to be launched this fall by ESPN, which is owned by Capital Cities/ABC and Hearst.
Under the new law, if a cable company refuses to compensate broadcasters, the stations face the option of providing service for free or withdrawing from the cable lineup.
 
 ---
 
 Public TV Needs Better National Programming, Report Says
WASHINGTON (AP) - Public television needs more money for national programming if it is to stay alive among the many channels that cable companies promise, a research group said.
Money could be freed up for national programming by eliminating federal subsidies to local public stations, the report by the Twentieth Century Fund, a New York research foundation, suggested July 13.
Funds also could come from imposing a fee on commercial radio and television stations, cellular telephone users and others who use the broadcast airwaves, according to the report by a panel of academics, business executives and policy experts.
"The goal of the national and instructional programming should be to compete against commercial networks through superior quality," the report said.
Public television needs about $ 250 million more than its $ 1.25 billion overall budget, the task force said. The overall public television budget is only about 4.5 percent of the commercial television networks' budgets, the report said.
Outgoing Public Broadcasting Service President Bruce Christensen has said that one of the biggest challenges facing his successor will be maintaining the public system as cable companies offer an increasing number of channels.
"We're very pleased the fund and the people who worked on the report realized the need for noncommercial television to be a part of American television mix," said Christensen. However, he said the panel did not fully understand the role of local public television stations.
Those stations need to decide how to serve the community best, added the Association of America's Public Television Stations.
Public television's biggest problem is a lack of cooperation among the 351 PBS stations, said Brown University President Vartan Gregorian, who chaired the task force.
Better national programming would help local public stations raise enough money to get by without federal subsidies, Gregorian said.
Stations now get about 16.2 percent of their support from the federal government; 19.3 percent from state funds; 9 percent from colleges and universities; 3.7 percent from local governments; 4.6 percent from foundations; 16.8 from corporations; 21.9 percent from subscribers; 1.7 percent from auctions; and the rest from other sources.
 Boston University is expanding its foray into the broadcasting business by acquiring a Cape Cod television station that shut down two years ago.
BU said July 15 it had agreed to buy WCVX, Channel 58, from Cape Television Inc., based in Hyannis. The price was not disclosed.
The deal comes less than a month after BU announced it would buy an independent, commercial station, WQTV, Channel 68, from the Christian Science Church in Boston.
Boston University President John Silber said the school intends "to provide the people of Cape Cod with commercial television programming of high quality."
Dozens of schools around the country own television stations. But only a handful own commercial stations, and most of them are network affiliates, said Glenn Gutmacher, executive director of the National Association of College Broadcasters.
He said he expects the BU-owned stations probably will operate similar to typical independent stations.
Boston University has not specified what type of programming it will offer.
The Cape Cod station went on the air in 1985, but hasn't broadcasted since June 1991.
Paul Flynn, president of Cape Television, said the station had trouble competing because it wasn't carried on cable television. But he said new laws for cable TV, plus BU's backing, should make it easier for the station to be carried on cable.
 
 ---
 
 Mexican Accountant To Buy Two State-Owned TV Networks
MEXICO CITY (AP) - A group of investors led by a 37-year-old Mexico City accountant will pay almost $ 650 million for two television networks and other state-owned properties.
The group headed by Ricardo Salinas Pliego, president of the consumer electronics chain Elektra, offered the highest bid - $ 647 million, the government said July 18.
The package, which is one of Mexico's last and largest privatizations, includes Channels 7 and 13, a theater chain and a production studio. The two networks have 168 stations nationwide.
However, the government said it decided to remove the newspaper El Nacional from the package because the bid for it was not high enough.
After the 1990 sale of the country's telephone monopoly and last year's privatization of 18 banks, the sell-off is the largest to date by the reformist administration of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari.
The announcement that Salinas Pliego's Radio Televisora del Centro had submitted the winning bid surprised many analysts, since his group has little media experience. The group's bid was also higher than the $ 400 million to $ 500 million figure analysts had predicted.
The U.S. television network Capital Cities/ABC Inc. and production company Paramount Communications Inc. were among the losing bidders.
Salinas Pliego, who is not related to the president, is a member of the Salinas Rocha clan of Monterrey, owners of a nationwide furniture chain.
Mexico's television industry is one of the fastest-growing in Latin America.
Winning the bid may be the easy part. The new owners now face Grupo Televisa, the world's largest Spanish-language broadcaster run by billionaire Emilio Azcarraga, Latin America's wealthiest man.
But there is room for competition, according to Lourdes Castro, a Mexico City media analyst. Viewers complain of mediocre programming on Televisa, and some advertisers complain of high rates, said Castro.
 
 ---
 
 PERSONNEL:
 
 UPI Names New CEO to Lead Reorganization
WASHINGTON (AP) - United Press International named L. Brewster Jackson to serve as its first chief executive officer since shortly after a Saudi company bought the service in June 1992.
Jackson, currently president and CEO of Healthcare Satellite Broadcasting Co., is expected to join UPI in early August, executive editor Steve Geimann said July 15.
Jackson will lead a reorganization plan announced last month that will further streamline UPI.
He succeeds Pieter VanBennekom, who resigned as president and chief executive officer a month after UPI was bought by the Saudi-owned television network, Middle East Broadcasting Centre, in bankruptcy court last year.
The company has been run by a management team from Middle East since then, Geimann said.
Under the reorganization, the service will concentrate on six regional centers, in Washington, Dallas, Miami, Los Angeles, Chicago and New York.
The plan includes buyout offers for about 200 unionized workers, and some bureaus are expected to close, officials said.
The plan also includes multimillion-dollar investments in new computers and digital radio and news picture operations.
UPI has the "vision and resources" to create a major communications company, Jackson said.
A former assistant managing editor of The St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Jackson has held executive posts at Pulitzer Publishing Co., Pulitzer Productions, and Reuters Information Services.
He was president and chief operating officer of Pressnet Systems, an electronic business information service, in 1991-92.
UPI has had four owners since it was sold by Scripps Howard in 1982. The 86-year-old company was once the second largest news service in the United States, behind The Associated Press.
 
 ---
 
 Dunn Named Editor in Chief of New York Daily News
NEW YORK (AP) - Martin Dunn, who worked briefly for Rupert Murdoch at The Boston Herald, will go to work for his former boss's New York competition as editor in chief of the Daily News.
Dunn, who took over as editor in chief at the Herald earlier this year, will start at the Daily News on Aug. 1, said Adrienne Rhodes, a spokeswoman for the tabloid. Murdoch is operating the New York Post.
Dunn will be responsible for long-range strategic direction of the newspaper. Lou Colasuonno, the current editor, continues to oversee day-to-day operations.
Dunn was replaced in Boston by Alan Eisner, the Herald's managing editor since 1986, said Herald Publisher Patrick J. Purcell.
The News also announced the promotion of Debbie Krenek from managing editor to a newly-created post of executive editor. The paper will now have two executive editors, said Rhodes.
Dunn, 38, came to the Herald in March from the Today newspaper in London, a Murdoch property where he was editor.
Eisner, 45, has been at the Herald since 1973, when the paper was called the Herald American. He covered education and City Hall, and served as deputy managing editor before becoming managing editor.
 
 ---
 
 New York Times Announces Senior Editing Jobs
NEW YORK (AP) - Gerald Boyd, the metropolitan editor, and Soma Golden, the national editor, were named assistant managing editors of The New York Times.
In addition, Linda Matthews, a senior producer at ABC News since 1992, succeeds Ms. Golden as national editor. Michael Oreskes, deputy metropolitan editor, becomes the new metropolitan editor.
All four appointments become effective Labor Day.
 Mary G. Berner, associate publisher of TV Guide magazine, has been promoted to publisher of the magazine.
Under her leadership, TV Guide has reclaimed its position as one of the top consumer magazines in terms of advertising revenue, the magazine said July 14. For the first half of 1993, TV Guide posted an 18 percent increase in ad pages.
Berner, who will continue to hold the title of vice president, began with TV Guide in March 1989 as advertising director. She will continue to be responsible for advertising sales, promotion and research.
She succeeds Joseph W. Cece, who was named in May to an executive post in TV Guide's parent, News America Corp., the domestic arm of Rupert Murdoch's worldwide media empire.
Cece was assigned to help develop an electronic version of TV Guide.
 
 ---
 
 Shelton Named General Manager in Marion, Ill.
MARION, Ill. (AP) - Weekly newspaper publisher Sam Shelton has been named general manager of The Marion Daily Republican.
Shelton, 54, replaces Douglas Caldwell, who is awaiting reassignment.
Shelton will remain publisher of Williamson County Life, a free weekly owned by American Publishing Co., which also owns the afternoon newspaper.
 
 ---
 
 The Pantagraph in Bloomington, Ill., Names New Publisher
BLOOMINGTON, Ill. (AP) - The Pantagraph has named Donald R. Skaggs its new publisher to succeed John R. Goldrick, who has retired.
Skaggs began his career at The Pantagraph in 1966 and was last employed as production manager. He left the paper in June 1987 and became president of the Massachusetts operations of The Chronicle Publishing Co., which owns The Pantagraph and several other newspapers.
Goldrick, who joined The Pantagraph in 1984 as publisher, will remain a consultant to the paper.
 
 ---
 
 DEATHS:
 
 Ralph Bell
YOUNGSTOWN, Ohio (AP) - Ralph "Boots" Bell, a longtime disc jockey in the Youngstown area, died July 15. He was 60.
Bell was a disc jockey at WHOT-AM from 1959 until the mid-1970s. He then worked at WNIO-AM, which became WNRB-AM. He had worked at WNRB and WNCD-FM in Niles since 1988, most recently as host of a Sunday morning show.
 
 Yolande Gwin
ATLANTA (AP) - Yolande Gwin, who covered high society in Atlanta for more than 50 years, died July 15. She was 88.
Miss Gwin worked at The Atlanta Journal-Constitution from 1934 to 1975, when she retired.
In 1936, she was the first to report that her friend Margaret Mitchell had found a publisher for "Gone With the Wind."
 
 David C. Hume
SCHENECTADY, N.Y. (AP) - David C. Hume, an owner of The Daily Gazette and The Sunday Gazette, family-owned newspapers founded by his grandfather, died July 14. He was 74.
Hume, who had been associated with the newspaper since 1946, served as treasurer of the Daily Gazette Co., and became the sixth president of the 99-year-old newspaper in 1986.
Survivors include his wife, two sons and a daughter.
 
 John E. Mitchell
FRANKFORT, Ind. (AP) - John E. Mitchell, executive vice president of Nixon Newspapers Inc., died July 18. He was 66.
Mitchell became publisher of The Frankfort Times in 1969 and later became vice president and chief operating officer of the Peru, Ind.-based Nixon group, which operates newspapers in Indiana, Illinois and Louisiana.
Survivors include his wife, two sons and a daughter.
 
 Edmund Stiles
RUTLAND, Vt. (AP) - Edmund Stiles, a reporter for the Providence Journal-Bulletin for 28 years, died July 13. He was 80.
 
 ---
 
 NOTES FROM EVERYWHERE: McClatchy Newspapers Inc. announced the formation of a national advertising network, the Newspaper Network Inc., for newspapers competing with direct mail alternatives. … The July 21 issue of the Chicago Tribune will contain the newspaper's last Style section; some past Style advertisers are out of business and others place advertising in other sections. … Chet Huntley, the late NBC News anchor and Montana native, and pioneer Montana broadcaster Ed Craney have been posthumously inducted into the new Montana Broadcasters Association Hall of Fame.

 

End of Document
