

The Debate on Radio: Politics the Old-Fashioned Way
The Associated Press
October 16, 1992, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 613 words
Byline: By MITCHELL LANDSBERG, AP National Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




When you took away the visual images - the crisp suits, the regal blue backdrop, the hand gestures and winks and nods - the second presidential debate was a much different affair.
On radio, it was less "Oprah" and more "Larry King Live."
No surprise, maybe. But it says a lot about the way American politics has changed in the past half-century to consider the differences between the two debates: The one that people only heard and the one that people saw.
Lost in the hubbub over television coverage of the 1992 campaign has been the fact that radio, which transformed politics long before television, has been a player this year too.
For commuters, especially, it sometimes is the only source of news. And many people, too busy to spend evenings in front of the tube, have tuned in to radio while doing other things.
On television Thursday night, what viewers saw was lots of body language: The marble-eyed stare of Ross Perot, the aw-shucks grin of Bill Clinton, the hand gestures of George Bush.
They also saw the candidates in an unusually casual, intimate setting, slipping on and off too-tall chairs and strolling occasionally to the fringe of the small studio audience to answer questions.
What people heard on radio, without visual accompaniment, were serious, intelligent questions; some one-liners and some detailed prescriptions for the nation's ills; tones suggesting sincerity, less sincerity, and occasional exasperation; and two of the thickest rural twangs this side of Gomer Pyle.
"If you cain't pay the bills, yer dead in the water," Perot said at one point, displaying the cracker-barrel profundity that has made him king of the sound bites he professes to detest.
Would Clinton enter into a binding contract to reduce the deficit? "No, and here's whah," he drawled.
The most famous example of the what-you-see-isn't-always-what-you-hear syndrome is the 1960 series of presidential debates, which Richard Nixon is widely believed to have won on radio but lost on television. Nixon's answers were strong, but his body language was terrible.
Kathleen Hall Jamieson, dean of communications at the University of Pennsylvania, says that on television, viewers get more information from what they see than what they hear. What someone says isn't so important as how they say it.
Watching Thursday's debate, a viewer couldn't help notice that Bush rarely looked straight into the camera, and seemed to scatter his gaze throughout the audience - effective, perhaps, to people who were there, but disconcerting on television.
Clinton, by contrast, appeared to make eye contact frequently with his questioners. And Perot, more than anyone, met the camera head on with a laser-like stare.
Perot's ramrod posture and firm, precise movements leant him stature, even if he sometimes looked like a small boy atop a big stool. Bush sometimes looked awkward, although that vanished when he spoke on topics - such as foreign affairs - that are his strong suit. Clinton occasionally broke into an adolescent's grin, as when moderator Carole Simpson asked Bush if he would veto an urban aid bill.
On radio, there were no such visual signposts to the candidates' demeanor, and it seemed more balanced. The mind's eye filled in the blanks with images from past debates, which didn't quite fit the talk-show style of this one.
But in the void of visual imagery, a listener could hear much more in the tenor of a voice. And on radio there was nothing to listen to but the words and the substance.
There was plenty of substance, certainly more than in the previous two presidential and vice-presidential debates. No matter the medium, the winners were clear: The format, the audience and the voters.

 

End of Document
