

The Message is the Same: No New Taxes … Plus
The Associated Press
August 21, 1992, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 727 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: HOUSTON
Body




Read his lips again and the message is just about the same: no new taxes - plus a bid to cut the old ones when and if President Bush can gain his comeback and win a second term.
The tax offer, a honed attack on "slippery" Bill Clinton, and an effort to tie his Democratic challenger tightly to an unpopular Congress are among the weapons Bush is taking on the road today for the final drive of his last campaign.
In the closing extravaganza of the Republican National Convention, Bush boasted of U.S. achievements abroad, scoffed at Clinton as inexperienced, and said when it came to war in the Persian Gulf, "I bit the bullet and he bit his nails."
The president had been saying for weeks that he'd shift to a campaign mode and come out of the convention fighting. A Bush strategist said that means a more disciplined candidate, sticking to his chosen message, reinforced by television advertising, and more willing to listen to his political managers. Chief among them will be James A. Baker III, who takes over on Sunday as the White House chief of staff.
That's the package. Bush and company have just under 10 weeks to sell it to voters who the president acknowledged were anxious and uneasy.
He started Thursday night, with an Astrodome acceptance speech his campaign hoped would reach perhaps 40 million Americans on television, an audience he won't get again unless there's a second inaugural address.
For 57 minutes, Bush boasted of administration attainments abroad, vowed better times at home, and slapped at Clinton, scorning the prospect of "a rubber check Congress and a rubber stamp president."
He needed a turning point speech, to end his slump from record highs to record lows in job approval poll ratings, and to narrow the gap against Clinton.
There were signs of headway during GOP convention week, surveys that showed Bush whittling Clinton margins that had run to almost 30 percentage points after the Democratic National Convention last month. Bush needed a strong speech and a bounce in the polls. He delivered the first; while it wasn't long on new proposals, he held his Astrodome audience all the way to the shower of balloons and confetti and the burst of indoor fireworks that ended the GOP show.
Even before Bush spoke, Clinton was taunting him for the acceptance speech vows he'd made four years and two nights ago and failed to match.
"He promised 15 million new jobs, no new taxes, the environmental president, an education presidency," Clinton in Battle Creek, Mich. "It was a wonderful speech. But now we don't have to read his lips; we can read his record."
Bush surrendered the tax pledge in a budget deal with Congress in 1990; "It was a mistake to go along with the Democratic tax increase," he told the convention.
The recession and limping economic recovery put the 1988 jobs pledge far from reach. The president said "the gridlock Democratic Congress" made it worse by refusing to approve his 1992 economic recovery plan. He offered no new job goals, simply said he wants to do more.
Taxes were another matter. Bush said Clinton would raise them, "but I won't let it happen." That's neither as quotable nor as dangerously binding as "Read my lips: no new taxes," the vow Bush uttered four years and two nights ago. But the message is the same.
And this time, Bush added a step, saying that after the election, he would propose an across the board tax cut to the new Congress, with spending reductions to offset them. That's a safe promise, too, since it offers a proposal, not an outcome.
And it comes with few details. The president did not spell out the size or cost of the proposed tax cut, and his campaign chairman, Robert Teeter, said there was no evidence the public was insisting on exact numbers now.
By definition, the campaign of an incumbent president is for continuation, for the four more years the Republicans kept chanting about. But every poll shows voters in a mood for change, so the president has to persuade people that they can get it by keeping him for a second term.
"It's time for a change," Clinton said at his convention, in the cliche of all challengers.
"The question is who do you trust to make change work for you," Bush countered.
The answer is 74 campaign days away.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has covered national political conventions since 1964.

 

End of Document
