

The Senate Strikes at the Heart of the GOP Revolution
The Associated Press
March 2, 1995, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 797 words
Byline: By JILL LAWRENCE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Senate has often been a burial ground for grand plans. The balanced-budget amendment was the first piece of the Republican legislative revolution to stall there, but it's not likely to be the last.
"We're not going to allow one or two senators to stand in our way," freshman Rep. Randy Tate, R-Wash., declared just before Thursday's Senate vote on the balanced-budget amendment.
But to the acute frustration of lawmakers over the centuries, that's exactly what the Senate is designed to do.
No one knows that better than the Senate Republicans who watched the foundation of their party's government-cutting drive go down to defeat. In the last Congress, when they were in the minority, the GOP killed two of President Clinton's top priorities: a $ 16 billion economic stimulus bill and a major overhaul of the health-care system.
Even as Republicans vowed to try to pass the balanced-budget amendment again in the 1996 election season, they made no bones about the depth of Thursday's loss. "Of all the issues in the 'Contract With America,' the balanced-budget amendment was the most significant," said Sen. Jim Inhofe, R-Okla.
House Speaker Newt Gingrich, R-Ga., suggested he had underestimated the problems posed by the other chamber. "I thought frankly that the Senate … had a slightly more likelihood of passing the balanced budget," he said.
Still, Gingrich predicted the Senate ultimately will pass about 60 percent of the "Contract With America," the campaign tract he conceived and is pushing through the House.
The Senate already has approved new laws subjecting Congress to the laws it passes and making it harder to impose expensive requirements on states and cities without paying for them. Clinton has signed the first. The second must be reconciled with a different version passed by the House. Clinton has said he intends to sign the completed bill.
But the Senate is likely to balk at such contract items as the line-item veto that the House has already passed - giving the president authority to eliminate specific spending projects approved by Congress - and a constitutional amendment limiting the terms of Congress members.
Constitutional amendments need a two-thirds majority in each chamber before they can be sent to state legislatures for ratification. Senate Republicans were unable to achieve that supermajority on the balanced-budget amendment for several reasons.
Some Democrats and one Republican objected to tampering with the Constitution for an amendment they viewed as unnecessary, potentially disruptive and even trivial. Many Democrats, including a half-dozen who supported a balanced-budget amendment last year, said they feared for the safety of the Social Security trust fund, a motive the GOP attacked as purely political.
The same mix of politics and principle likely will figure in the House battle later this month on the term-limits amendment.
"You are just talking about a very big hurdle to get to 290 votes," Gingrich said. "So I think term limits, frankly, is going to be a very hard slog."
House Republicans are prepared to claim victory simply for getting the term-limit amendment to the floor. If by some remote chance it passes, the even less hospitable Senate can be counted on to perform last rites.
The Senate also will create problems - and perhaps another defeat - later this month for the line-item veto. Like several other contract items, it changes the balance of power among the states, the courts, the White House and Congress. The importance of the principle could prompt a filibuster.
The Senate has been thwarting politicians and their dreams since its inception.
In 1868, after the House had impeached President Andrew Johnson, Senate Republican leaders fell one vote short of the two-thirds majority they needed to oust him.
Twice the Senate rejected the Treaty of Versailles, which ended World War I and established the League of Nations, and had been personally negotiated by President Woodrow Wilson.
The Senate also blocked anti-lynching legislation endorsed by President Franklin D. Roosevelt. "They killed anything that related to civil rights for a very long time," said Senate historian Donald Ritchie. "They didn't want the federal government interfering in states' judicial systems."
Republican senators chafing over their stalled revolution might consider this possibly apocryphal conversation between Presidents Thomas Jefferson and George Washington.
According to Ritchie, Jefferson complained that the Senate was aristocratic and unnecessary. Washington replied, "Why did you pour your coffee into your saucer?" "To cool it," Jefferson said. "That's why we have the Senate," Washington said. "To cool the passions of the House."
 
 ---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Jill Lawrence covers Congress and politics for The Associated Press.
 Load-Date: March 2, 1995

 

End of Document
