

The Search for God in the Lives of the Mentally Retarded
The Associated Press
April 7, 1995, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 885 words
Byline: By DAVID BRIGGS, AP Religion Writer
Dateline: NEW HAVEN, Conn.
Body




When she heard that Michael was enrolled in a service club's equestrian program for mentally retarded kids, his aunt remarked that now special ed children receive not only compensatory programs but elite privileges.
Normal kids were the real disadvantaged, the relative said.
It is at this point that Christine Gudorf, Michael's mother, breaks down with emotion.
"Both Michael and I would have gladly traded 10 years of the equestrian program for an invitation for him to visit with her family for a weekend," Ms. Gudorf said as she choked back tears in the chapel at Yale Divinity School.
Of all the modern sins committed against the mentally retarded, perhaps none are as painful as being ignored. The very people most likely to reach out in loving acceptance of others are often treated as this generation's lepers.
What mentally retarded people want most of all is to be accepted members of the community, especially in churches and synagogues, said speakers at "That All May be Welcome," a Yale Divinity School symposium on the ethical, theological and pastoral issues surrounding mental retardation.
The past three decades have brought massive public policy changes around mental retardation, Gudorf said.
More than 100 pieces of legislation have been passed in support of the retarded. Extensive special education programs in public schools and training and employment programs for mentally retarded adults are among the new services available to those able to navigate the bureaucratic labyrinth that often accompanies such programs.
However, the past decades have also seen a greater mobility and more impersonal communities, cutting off the retarded and their caregivers from traditional supports such as neighbors, friends and extended families.
And, in general, prejudices against the retarded, which in some part can be traced back to earlier beliefs that retardation was a curse from God, have not changed dramatically, according to Gudorf.
"The general attitudes of fear and revulsion have not changed," said Gudorf, an ethics professor at Florida International University.
Letting her own pain show in her voice, Ms. Gudorf tells of the everyday slights her son experiences.
"Store clerks, barbers, movie ushers, neighbors and the police officers he idolizes are put off by the differentness of the mentally retarded," she said.
What of the church - the one place where people should feel they are OK, affirmed and beloved for who they are?
The answer is mixed, said the Rev. William Gaventa, director of community training and coordinator of congregational supports for the University Affiliated Program of New Jersey.
Gaventa says he still hears stories about pastors telling parents of retarded children, "What did you do that God gave you this child?"
After a hurtful comment was made to her in a youth group, a microcephalic child told her mother she was not going back. But her mother insisted on not giving up, saying the church was God's house, Gaventa said.
Her daughter, who was mildly retarded, replied, "Well, it may be God's house, but he's not home."
At the other extreme, he said, is the tendency to idealize mentally retarded individuals as God's special people, or holy innocents.
But there are also a number of churches who neither exclude the mentally retarded or view them solely as objects of ministry, according to Gaventa.
In these houses of worship, he said, the mentally retarded are welcomed into the life of the community and given positions of responsibility such as being ministers of hospitality.
"One of their gifts is, they see a stranger and there's a potential friend," Gaventa said.
In a society that isolates them, a church or synagogue that welcomes them and affirms their gifts can become the fundamental community in their lives, Gaventa said.
Sometimes, he said, it just takes a different way of looking at the world to overcome stereotypes of the disabled and help see the image of God in all human beings.
Gaventa remembers one skeptical pastor asking him, "How do you expect people from a group home to listen to a 25-minute sermon?" After thinking it over, his response was: "How do you expect ANYONE to listen to a 25-minute sermon?"
Neither Gaventa nor Gudorf would say mental retardation is a blessing. That would be an easy sentimentality, and would ignore the tragedy that prevents Michael from doing all the things he wants to do - such as drive a car, become a policeman or marry and have children.
"We must agree. It is not fair. It is not just," Gudorf declared.
But that does not mean the mentally retarded do not possess special gifts, or that their dignity and worth as human beings should be any less respected.
Among Michael's special qualities are a great joy for many things in life, his mother said.
"Every day is an adventure for Michael. He thanks us for everything - for breakfast, for every trip to the ice cream parlor, every movie he goes to see … every night he gets to stay up late, every visit to a relative - even for letting him wash our cars or ride his bike. He is a good reminder that life is filled with good things," Gudorf said.
"Michael is a gift to us, but he would be a gift whether or not he was mentally retarded," she said. "It is not his mental retardation that is the gift; the person who shines through the mental retardation is the gift."
 Load-Date: April 7, 1995

 

End of Document
