

The Media '92: Will Campaign Coverage Ever Be the Same?
The Associated Press
November 9, 1992, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 9200 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




After the 1988 presidential campaign, the news media looked back with a shudder and collectively declared, "Never again." They had no idea how right they were.
The 1992 presidential campaign transformed the way Americans conduct politics and the way the press covers it. For better or worse, coverage of the 1996 campaign will stand on the hastily built foundation of this one.
The campaign was reshaped by Larry King and Ross Perot, MTV and Arsenio Hall, morning shows and town halls and infomercials. The entertainment industry discovered the allure of politics, and left the traditional titans of the news on the outside looking in.
"The traditional press corps has been marginalized," said Marvin Kalb, once the epitome of the traditional network correspondent, now a professor at Harvard.
"The boys on the bus are at the back of the bus. And people like Larry King and Phil Donahue are up front," Kalb said.
There have been other changes, some less obvious than others:
- The news media paid more attention to issues this year and less to the horse race. Statistics compiled by the Washington-based Center for Media and Public Affairs bear this out: Through Labor Day, 60 percent of network news stories were about issues, 40 percent about the candidates' standing in the race. In 1988, the figures were almost exactly the reverse.
- Television networks tried to avoid manipulation by candidates posing in front of pretty or symbolic pictures. They also tried, at least briefly, to lengthen the "soundbites" of political speech.
- The media tried harder than before to keep the candidates honest by checking the truthfulness of their claims, charges and countercharges. They covered political advertising as an integral part of the race.
- Newspapers, especially, made more of an effort to find out what voters were thinking. In some cases, this "citizens' agenda" determined how the press covered the campaign.
The press "proved they were educable" in 1992, said Stephen Hess, a scholar at the Brookings Institution.
Jon Wolman, Washington bureau chief for The Associated Press, said, "I thought that the coverage was a great deal better than in 1988 when the campaign was often dominated by sideshows like Boston Harbor and the flag factories. The shift from rallies to TV talk shows had one great benefit - the candidates couldn't help but focus on issues that might actually matter over the next four years."
Everette Dennis, director of the Freedom Forum Media Studies Center, said he was "encouraged that both the quantity and quality have really soared this year in a way I wouldn't have expected."
Not everyone agrees. For instance, S. Robert Lichter, the director of the Center for Media and Public Affairs, said, "The coverage was more aggressive, more substantive and less balanced than in '88."
Lichter, who sees a liberal bias in the media, said the coverage was tougher on President Bush than on Bill Clinton.
And Marion Just, a political science professor at Wellesley College in Massachusetts who has been conducting interviews with voters in four states, said many people found the coverage to be better but still flawed.
"Many people object to the reporters offering their own, off-the-cuff opinions, especially about things that are obvious or that the voters can determine for themselves," she said.
Without being able to interview candidates regularly, evening news shows turned more to issues and analysis. And the contact between candidates and voters raised, not lowered, the tone of the campaign.
E.J. Dionne, who covered the campaign for The Washington Post, said the serious mood set by voters "created a tone for the campaign that affected what we reporters did. … The whole mood of the country pushed us, and the candidates, in the right direction."
 
 ---
Free Press Front Page Exhorts Readers To Vote
DETROIT (AP) - The Detroit Free Press had no news on its front page on Election Day.
Instead, the newspaper devoted the space to a message urging readers to go to the polls.
It featured a drawing of the Statue of Liberty, her torch-wielding right arm drooping and a forlorn expression on her face. "Don't vote today and she stands for nothing," the message said.
It's the first time the Free Press has devoted its front page to an advertisement urging people to vote, Executive Editor Heath J. Meriwether said.
"Most papers are saying 'vote today' and have various ways of conveying the message, but this seemed like a bold statement in keeping with the theme we've had this year," Meriwether said.
The previous four days, the Free Press had similar full-page messages on the front page of inside sections.
Each message featured a different U.S. symbol, such as the bald eagle, the Lincoln Memorial and Mount Rushmore.
On Saturday, the sports section front showed a drawing of the Iwo Jima flag-raising, with the Marines hoisting a flag at half-staff. "Don't vote Tuesday and they struggled in vain," that message said.
Earlier this fall, several dozen of the newspaper's staffers participated in a registration drive that signed up 1,000 voters.
 The Los Angeles Times said Nov. 6 it was folding its San Diego edition and asking 500 of the newspaper's 5,200 full-time staffers to take voluntary severance because of tough economic times.
In a memo to the staff obtained by The Associated Press, Times Publisher and Chief Executive Officer David Laventhol blamed Southern California's deep recession for declining advertising revenues.
The recent merger of two large department stores, May Company and Robinson's, "could further depress our advertising base in the future," he said in the employee memo.
"Profit margins are the lowest in modern history and as we look to next year, we are concerned they could plummet further."
Most of the San Diego staff will be moved to the San Fernando Valley edition where "we will be able to use our resources in a more focused way against a key primary market competitor," he said in the memo.
The Times' competition in the Valley is the Daily News, which recently reported circulation gains for the 18th consecutive industry auditing period. Other local papers, including the Times, showed circulation losses.
"It's always sad news to hear jobs are being eliminated," the Daily News said in a statement. "On the other hand, the refocusing of some of the Times' resources to the San Fernando Valley is a true measure and acknowledgement of our strengths and gains against the Times in the last five years."
The San Diego edition, started in 1978, will close Dec. 18, but the Times will keep five editorial and 25 advertising personnel there, the Times memo said.
The balance of its 107 full-time San Diego staffers will be offered other positions, Laventhol said, primarily in the San Fernando Valley. Members of the San Diego staff also will be offered enhanced severance if they choose to leave.
Laventhol issued a news release Nov. 6 that said: "Faced with a very limited base in San Diego and current economic pressures, we must focus on investments closer to home, such as the San Fernando Valley."
He said because of the edition's distance from Los Angeles and a dominant competitor there, "the overall economics of producing a separate daily edition just haven't worked for us."
The San Diego edition's circulation is 61,653 daily and 71,246 Sunday. Laventhol said the paper hopes to retain its readers with the regular edition of the Times.
Gerald L. Warren, editor of the San Diego Union-Tribune, the Times' chief competitor in the area, said, "The Los Angeles Times has been a vigorous competitor in this market and I'm very proud of the staff of this newspaper because we have met the challenge."
Times management executives will forgo raises in 1993 and no management bonuses will be paid, Laventhol's memo said.
It said the severance program or buyout was open to all staff members except those with less than a year of service and could be accepted between Nov. 10 and Jan. 8.
Depending on seniority, employees will be offered up to two years' pay as well as the option to take all pension benefit payments in a lump sum. The memo said each department would have limits on how many can accept the buyout.
 
 ---
Chardon Newspaper Stops Publication
CHARDON, Ohio (AP) - The Geauga Times Leader has ceased publication after 26 years.
The northeast Ohio daily newspaper ended with its Nov. 7 edition, Michael W. Johnston, president and chief executive officer of the Thomson Newspapers Corp., announced. It had a circulation of 8,700.
"In recent years, we have made tremendous investments in the Chardon newspaper," Johnston said. "Unfortunately, despite gains in readership that have been made by the paper, poor financial success and limited prospect for improvement have forced the decision to close."
The newspaper had 44 full-time and part-time employees. They were told of the decision Nov. 6.
Some of the staff will be transferred to other Thomson newspapers. Job workshops and career counseling was scheduled for other employees.
"This is a sad day for all of us here, as I'm sure it is for our loyal readers and advertisers," said Pamela A. Stricker, the publisher.
The Times Leader was the only daily newspaper in Geauga County, one county east of Cleveland.
 A computer glitch hampered production at 21 newspapers when some Tandem CLX System computers misread their internal clocks.
Tandem Computers Inc. said the failure on Nov. 1 affected the CLX 600, 700 and 800 model-based systems, used primarily by publishers, financial institutions and retailers. Tandem wouldn't say how many such systems exist.
The failure - first reported by an Australian company - caused computers to misread their internal clocks as if the date were Dec. 1, 1983, Tandem spokesman Tom Waldrop said. The problem was corrected by shutting down and restarting the affected computers, he said.
The glitch affected 21 metropolitan dailies with Tandem systems from Sacramento-based System Integrators Inc., SII spokesman Roger Peterson said.
Since newspaper computers are programmed to keep certain files only a short time, all news agency copy entering the system was automatically killed out. The computer falsely believed the stories were 9 years old.
The Harrisburg (Pa.) Patriot-News was forced to put out a single edition Nov. 2 instead of its usual three, Executive News Editor Bob Vucic said. The problem also rendered the paper's pagination system useless, Vucic said.
The failure slowed down the editorial and advertising sides of the Valley News Dispatch of Tarentum, Pa., said Todd Brinker, who is in charge of the paper's production system. Brinker said the newspaper managed to publish on time by carefully planning when to shut down the system.
Other affected newspapers included the Peninsula Times Tribune of Palo Alto, Calif., the Santa Cruz (Calif.) Sentinel, The Post and Courier of Charleston, S.C., The Morning News Tribune of Tacoma, Wash. and The Des Moines (Iowa) Register, SII spokesman Peterson said.
 
 ---
 
 Oakland Tribune Gets Go-Ahead for Move to Waterfront
OAKLAND, Calif. (AP) - The new owners of the Oakland Tribune are closer to moving the paper's newsroom and other departments to a new building.
The Alameda Newspaper Group, which bought the paper last month, plans to lease the third floor of the old Port of Oakland headquarters. It will be used for executive offices and the Tribune's news room, editorial and circulation departments. Nearly 200 of the newspaper's 250 staff members will work there.
The Port Commission on Nov. 3 approved renovation of the old Port of Oakland headquarters.
The newspaper group bought the Tribune from Robert and Nancy Maynard in a deal that excluded its offices and plant at the Oakland Tribune Tower Building.
The group said it expects to move the staff into the new offices by Nov. 20 and begin publishing the new Tribune Dec. 1.
 
 ---
New York Times To Open New Color Printing Plant in Queens
NEW YORK (AP) - The New York Times will build a $ 280 million high-speed color plant in Queens rather than move the operations to New Jersey.
Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, chairman and chief executive officer of The New York Times Co., said the plant will be built on 31 acres leased from the city in College Point.
New York Mayor David Dinkins said the city and state had offered $ 29 million in tax and energy cost reductions.
The Times had considered moving printing and distribution operations, now employing about 1,000 people, from its Manhattan headquarters to an existing plant in Carlstadt, N.J.
Arthur Ochs Sulzberger Jr., publisher of The Times, said it was not known whether the move to College Point would result in a net gain or loss of jobs.
He said union agreements had already been reached but the earliest construction could start is 1994.
 
 ---
Union Wins Right to Speedy Appeal of Voided Contract
NEW YORK (AP) - The Daily News typographers' union has lost a bid to block the sale of the newspaper to Mortimer Zuckerman but won the right to a speedy appeal.
U.S. District Court Judge Milton Pollack on Nov. 5 refused to grant the union's request for a stay of the sale, saying it was a request that could be made again when a judge is formally assigned to the case.
But he granted the New York Typographical Union Local 6 an expedited appeal. Arguments were tentatively set for Nov. 23.
U.S. Bankruptcy Judge Tina Brozman last month approved Zuckerman's offer to buy the newspaper for $ 37.3 million.
The typographers union is appealing the decision, which wiped out its existing contract with the paper, including lifetime job guarantees worth $ 10 million a year.
The union represents 167 composing room workers at the News.
Andrew Irving, a lawyer for Local 6, argued before Pollack that Brozman did not have the authority and did not follow proper procedure in eliminating the union's contract.
Lawyers for the News and Zuckerman agreed Nov. 5 to give the typographers union two days advance notice of the closing of the sale, which is expected to be before the end of the year.
Lawrence Gottesman, a lawyer for the News, said the earliest the sale could close is Nov. 20.
 
 ---
The Orlando Sentinel Cuts 100 Jobs
ORLANDO, Fla. (AP) - The Orlando Sentinel eliminated the jobs of 100 employees amid declining advertising revenues caused by the lingering economic downturn, the newspaper said.
Harold R. Lifvendahl, president and publisher, said The Sentinel is profitable but its revenues have fallen below 1988 levels.
Lifvendahl would not estimate how much money would be saved by the layoffs, which included employees from the newsroom and most other departments. The layoffs account for 6.4 percent of The Sentinel's work force of 1,450.
The paper is owned by the Tribune Co., which also owns The Sun-Sentinel of Fort Lauderdale and the Chicago Tribune.
The Sentinel's circulation has climbed in recent years and months to 271,384, but advertising revenue, which represents about 75 percent of total revenue, has declined, Lifvendahl said.
Meanwhile, Tribune Media Services said it would decrease its Orlando work force by 32 by March. Some of the workers will be transferred to Chicago and others will lose their jobs, said Tribune Media spokesman Michael Silver.
The changes result from the parent company's decision to eliminate its TMS Cabletext products in January and move its Voice News Network to Chicago, Silver said.
 
 ---
California Newspaper Up For Sale
CHICAGO (AP) - The Tribune Co. said it is selling the Peninsula Times Tribune of California and nine community weeklies.
Also included in the sale will be the Times Tribune's headquarters in downtown Palo Alto and California Services, an inserting and printing company in Fremont.
Tribune Co. bought the six-days-a-week Palo Alto Times and Redwood City Tribune in 1978 and merged them into the Peninsula Times Tribune.
Originally an afternoon-only paper, the new Peninsula Times Tribune became an afternoon paper Monday through Friday and a morning paper on weekends. It has a weekday circulation of 39,000.
Tribune Co. owns five other daily newspapers, including the Chicago Tribune. It also owns the Orlando (Fla.) Sentinel, Fort Lauderdale (Fla.) Sun-Sentinel, the Daily Press of Newport News, Va., and the Times Advocate of Escondido, Calif.
 Conrad Black has bought a nearly one-quarter stake in Southam Inc., Canada's largest newspaper group.
Black's holding company, Hollinger Inc., announced Nov. 8 that it paid $ 259 million for the 23 percent of Southam owned by TorStar Corp.
Southam publishes 18 daily newspapers across Canada, as well as trade magazines. It also owns the Coles bookstore chain. TorStar is publisher of the Toronto Star, the country's largest single daily, among other media interests.
Hollinger's properties range from the London Daily Telegraph to the Jerusalem Post to scores of small dailies in Canada and the United States.
The transaction will be completed by the end of the year, Hollinger said in a statement.
Beside Canada, Black owns newspapers and magazines in the United States, Australia and Israel.
 
 ---
 
 Gannett Rejects Investor Group's Bid
HONOLULU (AP) - A group of investors headed by financier Stuart Ho dropped its bid to buy The Honolulu Star-Bulletin from Gannett Co., which rejected the undisclosed offer as "unacceptable," the newspaper reported Nov. 7.
Ho, the Star-Bulletin's chairman and a Gannett director, said he found out about Gannett's rejection of the offer through a third party he declined to identify. The group withdrew its bid Friday.
He declined to disclose his offer or Gannett's asking price for the afternoon daily. Gannett must sell the paper by Jan. 31 under a $ 250 million deal to buy the morning Honolulu Advertiser from Persis Corp. Antitrust laws prohibit Gannett from owning both papers.
Advertiser publisher Philip Gialanella, who is trying to buy the Star-Bulletin with Ho, said they had not ruled out the possibility of bidding again. Ho said his group has twice revised its offer since early October, but decided against raising it a third time.
Douglas McCorkindale, Gannett vice chairman and chief financial and administrative officer, declined comment.
Gialanella said Gannett has rewritten the joint operating agreement under which the two papers are published to reduce the Star-Bulletin's profit share annually to bottom out at 20 percent in 20 years, when the agreement expires. Currently, the Star-Bulletin receives 60 percent and the Advertiser gets 40 percent of the papers' net income.
 
 ---
 
 Newspaper Employees Protest Lack of Contract
DAYTON, Ohio (AP) - About 30 union members representing reporters, printers and other workers at the Dayton Daily News picketed the newspaper to protest the lack of a contract for some workers.
Paul Stewart, chairman of the Unity Council, which includes unions at the newspaper, said management had been unwilling to negotiate.
"We just want to let people know we're not happy with the way things are going," Stewart said during picketing Nov. 6.
Publisher Brad Tillson said it is "patently untrue" that the newspaper has been uncooperative.
"We've spent probably hundreds of hours negotiating," Tillson said.
Tillson said eight of 13 unions have contracts and that the remaining five are being negotiated. He said four new labor contracts have been negotiated this year alone.
Rob Modic, president of the Dayton Newspaper Guild, said his union's contract expired more than three years ago. The guild represents 180 newsroom employees.
Tillson said newsroom employees received a $ 50-a-week pay raise last December.
 Union leaders at The Pittsburgh Press have begun meeting with officials from Blade Communications Inc., which hopes to buy the paper.
Blade, of Toledo, Ohio, must agree to contracts with 10 unions at The Pittsburgh Press Co. by Nov. 30 to complete a sales agreement with Press owner E.W. Scripps Co.
Blade Communications also owns the Press' rival, the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
Both sides are trying to meet the deadline, said Joe Molinero, president of Teamsters Local 211. The local, which represents delivery drivers, went on strike at the Press Co. on May 17, shutting down both papers.
Molinero said he is optimistic a settlement can be reached.
Scripps will obtain The Herald newspaper of Monterey, Calif., from Blade if the deal goes through.
 
 ---
Alamosa Gets Second Daily Paper
ALAMOSA, Colo. (AP) - The weekly Alamosa News has expanded to daily publication, putting it in competition with Alamosa's other daily, the Valley Courier.
Ray James, news editor of the News, said the newspaper will publish Tuesday through Saturday. The News, founded in January 1991 by SLV Publishing, has about 450 subscribers - twice as many as a year ago, James said.
Valley Courier editor John Hill said he was "glad they've done it." He said the News focuses exclusively on Alamosa, while his newspaper also carries state, national and international news. The Valley Courier has a circulation of 4,700.
"It's a unique situation, a small community this size with two daily newspapers," said James. "But if Denver can survive with two dailies, then surely Alamosa can."
 
 ---
McDonald's Offers 'McMagazine' With 'McMeals'
OAK BROOK, Ill. (AP) - McDonald's is offering a free glossy magazine to patrons at 500 of its restaurants.
The magazine, called McMag, is distributed at outlets in Chicago's western suburbs and in Orlando, Fla.; Denver; Milwaukee; Portland, Ore.; and Newburgh, N.Y., spokeswoman Ann Connolly said Monday.
The magazine is geared to parents and children and includes articles on health, money and leisure. The October issue, the second one published this year, is 42 pages. The circulation is 150,000.
Advertisers range from Mattel to Coca-Cola Co. and Polaroid. The magazine is written and published by Quad Creative Group of Milwaukee.
 
 ---
Meredith Sells Metropolitan Home to Hachette
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) - Meredith Corp. said it is selling Metropolitan Home magazine to French publisher Hachette Magazines and will focus on hearth-and-home publications like Better Homes and Gardens.
Metropolitan Home is aimed at affluent city dwellers. Meredith said it would fit well with such Hachette magazines as HOME and Elle Decor.
Terms weren't disclosed. The deal is expected to be completed by Nov. 13.
Meredith's home and family magazines include Better Homes and Gardens, Ladies' Home Journal, Country Home, Midwest Living and Traditional Home.
Metropolitan Home debuted in 1969 as Apartment Ideas, became Apartment Life in 1973 and Metropolitan Home in 1981. It was redesigned in 1986 to target more affluent, upscale city dwellers interested in home and apartment design.
The monthly has a circulation of about 700,000. Hachette said it will be cut back in 1993 to publishing six times a year and its circulation would be reduced to 600,000.
Hachette Magazines is a unit of Hachette Publications, a subsidiary of Hachette S.A., the world's largest magazine publisher. Hachette Publications magazines include ELLE, Car and Driver, Road & Track, Popular Photography and Women's Day.
 
 ---
Fax Paper to Fill Gap of Failed Daily
AUCKLAND, New Zealand (AP) - A newspaper delivered by fax may fill the void left by last year's demise of New Zealand's only afternoon daily.
The three-page Star NewsFax will reach subscribers early each workday afternoon, providing a summary of the news with an emphasis on business.
The publication will cost 1 Australian dollar, or 55 cents, a day.
"Star NewsFax will provide up-to-the minute news, and will include information that the electronic media do not give, such as the details of the morning's share trading," said Alan Hitchens, general manager of News Media (Auckland), which publishes the Sunday News and Sunday Star.
The publication's news will come from New Zealand Press Association, the national news agency, which will supply local, national and international news.
The afternoon Auckland Star folded in August 1991, leaving the morning New Zealand Herald as Auckland's only daily newspaper.
 
 ---
News Corp. Reports Higher Profit for First Fiscal Quarter
NEW YORK (AP) - The News Corp. Ltd., the global media and entertainment conglomerate led by Rupert Murdoch, said its profit climbed 70 percent in its first fiscal quarter despite an 8.7 percent decline in revenue.
It cited improved performances at its television and magazine operations in the United States, higher newspaper profits in the United Kingdom and a profit rather than loss on its investment in a British satellite TV channel.
The Sydney, Australia-based company said it earned $ 141.2 million in the three months ended Sept. 30 compared with $ 82.9 million.
Revenue for the quarter fell 8.7 percent to $ 1.89 billion from $ 2.07 billion a year ago.
The company said profits were up considerably at its Fox Broadcasting television network and its seven television stations in the United States. It said advertising was ahead of last year at both the network and the stations.
Profits were also up more than 10 percent at its TV Guide magazine and the division that provides free-standing inserts for newspapers.
Results were off 20 percent at its HarperCollins book division, mainly due to lower results in the United States where the educational market was described as soft.
Newspaper profits were up 35 percent in Great Britain, and the company had a profit on its 50 percent stake in Sky Television, the satellite TV channel, in contrast to a loss last year.
 A federal appeals court ruled a jury's $ 650,000 compensatory award to an Arkansas woman who was falsely identified by a supermarket tabloid as a 101-year-old pregnant newspaper carrier was "shockingly inflated."
The three-judge panel of the 8th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals on Nov. 4 ordered the U.S. District Court in Arkansas to substantially reduce the award. But the appeals court upheld the lower court on the issue of liability and the $ 850,000 awarded in punitive damages.
The ruling stemmed from a case in which a photo of 96-year-old Nellie Mitchell of Mountain Home, Ark., was published in a 1990 article in the Sun newspaper. The photo identified her as a 101-year-old Australian newspaper carrier who had quit her route because she had become pregnant by a millionaire customer.
An editor of the newspaper said during the trial that he had selected Mitchell's picture because he assumed she was dead.
The picture originally had appeared in 1980 in another publication owned by the Sun's parent company, Canada-based Globe Communications Corp. Then it had accompanied a feature article about Mitchell's newsstand in Mountain Home.
"Though we are convinced that sufficient evidence exists to sustain a compensatory award for damage to Mitchell's reputation and her mental suffering, we also conclude the amount of the award is shocking and exaggerated," wrote Circuit Judge Pasco Bowman, for Senior Judges Gerald Heaney and Donald Ross.
 
 ---
Libel Action Against Troy Record Dismissed
ALBANY, N.Y. (AP) - A $ 5 million libel lawsuit against the Troy Record was dismissed by a state appeals court.
The ruling Nov. 5 by the Appellate Division of state Supreme Court reverses a lower state court decision that declined to dismiss the case against the newspaper.
Robert Becher, an attorney who represented a man accused of raping his stepdaughter, was alleged in 1987 to have pressured the woman into recanting a sworn statement that she was raped, according to court papers.
Becher maintained his innocence and the charges against him were eventually dropped.
However, Becher claimed articles appearing in the Troy Record at the time made it look like he was involved in an earlier bribery incident related to the rape case.
The woman had earlier been accused of taking a bribe from her mother and another attorney to take back the allegations about her stepfather, court papers said.
Becher contended the articles, which appeared under headlines such as "Bribery Case Defendants," didn't always make clear he was not actually charged with bribery, but with two lesser misdemeanor counts.
But the Appellate Court ruled that the Troy newspaper consistently described the charges against Becher accurately when he was named in articles.
"In our view, the articles and headlines (Becher) complains of fell well within the standard of a fair and full report," read the court's unanimous decision.
 
 ---
Reporters Face Threats in Liberia Conflict
MONROVIA, Liberia (AP) - Liberian guerrilla leader has accused journalists of filing biased reports about Liberia's civil war, and some reporters fear retaliation from Taylor's forces.
Charles Taylor said in a radio broadcast that one Liberian journalist, Klon Hinneh, had been shot and killed. He didn't say who killed Hinneh, but journalists took the comment as a threat.
Hinneh, 35, managing director of the independent daily The News, also reported for The Associated Press and the British Broadcasting Corp. Hinneh's family doctor, Varsey Sirleaf, said he died from tetanus on Oct. 19.
Hinneh's common-law wife, Octrin Worjroh, was with him when he died and said, "There certainly was no shooting."
Taylor's radio station had often attacked Hinneh, accusing him of biased reporting against Taylor's National Patriotic Front. The radio also has attacked other Monrovia-based journalists. On Saturday, Taylor broadcast threats against John Vambo, a local reporter who is Hinneh's replacement for the BBC Africa Service.
The New York-based Committee to Protect Journalists has written Taylor, who is president of the National Patriotic Front of Liberia, asking him to halt intimidation of reporters. It expressed worry that "the NPFL's statement about Mr. Hinneh's death serves as a threat to all journalists who have been critical of NPFL activities."
"I feel intimidated," said Emmanuel Abalo, the acting president of the Press Union of Liberia and an assistant director general of the Liberian Broadcasting System. Taylor's radio also has criticized Abalo's reports.
Taylor has admitted his forces killed two Nigerian journalists captured during fighting in 1990, but said it was a mistake.
 
 ---
Three Journalists Elected To Press Club Hall Of Fame
CLEVELAND (AP) - Three people will be inducted into the Cleveland Journalism Hall of Fame on Nov. 19.
Sportswriter Chuck Heaton of The Plain Dealer, sports announcer Ken Coleman and journalist-novelist Don Robertson were elected by members of the Press Club of Cleveland.
Heaton is in his 50th year as a sportswriter for The Plain Dealer. His beat has been professional football for 40 years, including 29 years as a columnist and 24 years as the Browns beat writer. He is one of the 33 electors for the Pro Football Hall of Fame.
Coleman was the voice of the Cleveland Browns on television and radio from 1952 to 1966. He also broadcast Cleveland Indians games from 1952 to 1966, then spent two years announcing Cincinnati Reds games and 22 years behind the microphone for the Boston Red Sox.
Robertson was noted for his writing and commentary for The Plain Dealer, the now-defunct Cleveland Press and Cleveland magazine. He also is a novelist whose works include "Praise the Human Season" and "Paradise Falls."
 Ratings were good for two West Coast television stations that pre-empted CBS election coverage to avoid carrying an early projection of the winner in the presidential race, the stations said.
Critics say voters in the West are discouraged from going to the polls late on Election Day when networks have already projected presidential winners based on exit polls in the East.
As it was, Democrat Bill Clinton was not projected as the winner Nov. 3 until about 7:50 p.m. PST, just 10 minutes before polls closed in Oregon and California.
The station's executives said their decision was driven primarily by their sense of civic responsibility.
"It wasn't about ratings and we were ready to get annihilated and we didn't," said Jan Allen, news director at KXTV in Sacramento, Calif. "I think it certainly made it perfectly clear in my mind that we'll do this again."
KXTV received about 100 calls from viewers who praised the station's action, she said.
KXTV and KOIN in Portland used local anchors and analysts, relying on CBS only for live coverage of developments such as President Bush's concession speech and Clinton's victory address.
Allen said overnight ratings had KXTV second in Sacramento, behind the local NBC affiliate and ahead of the local ABC station.
KOIN news director Peter Maroney said his station also was second, behind the local ABC affiliate and ahead of the NBC affiliate and CNN.
KVAL in Eugene carried entertainment programs and brief local election reports before switching to CBS a half-hour before the polls closed in Oregon. But the smaller station won't receive ratings until mid-December, news director Paul Riess said.
Rep. Ron Wyden, D-Ore., an advocate of delaying the broadcast of projections on the West Coast, said the good showings by KXTV and KOIN were encouraging.
 
 ---
BBC World Service Television Launches Transatlantic Service
LONDON (AP) - The British Broadcasting Corp.'s World Service Television plans to expand into the United States, Japan, Australia and New Zealand in the next 14 months.
Chief executive Christopher Irwin on Nov. 2 said the company plans to broadcast worldwide by the end of 1993.
"We are midway through a period of rapid expansion which has… put our news and information channel within reach of potentially 85 percent of the world's population," Irwin said.
WSTV on Nov. 2 launched its first trans-Atlantic service with transmissions to Canada.
Canadian Broadcasting Corp. will broadcast WSTV's news programming both on its Newsworld cable channel and on its regular network.
WSTV was established in March 1991 as a wholly-owned BBC subsidiary. It is a commercial venture funded mainly by advertising and subscriptions. It receives no government money.
A year ago WSTV launched a 24-hour news and information channel in Asia. It also has a satellite entertainment channel in Europe and Africa.
A spokesman said talks were under way for programming in Japan and Australia.
 
 ---
NAACP Flunks Pittsburgh Radio, TV on Black Hiring
PITTSBURGH (AP) - Radio and TV stations in the city don't hire enough black people, and the ones they do employ are seldom in well-paying jobs, the NAACP said.
"We are extremely disappointed," said Eugene C. Beard Jr., an executive committee member of the Pittsburgh chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
He said there has been "no real progress" for blacks in the news media in Pittsburgh since the NAACP last examined minority hiring in the industry four years ago.
He supplied figures indicating that in 1992, 11.8 percent of workers in the area's broadcast companies were black, down from 12.4 percent in 1988.
According to the 1990 census, blacks comprise 26 percent of the population in the city and 11 percent in Allegheny County, the primary viewing area for the stations.
When blacks hold broadcast jobs, they are usually clerks, not on-air professionals or managers, Beard said.
"It's always been a gripe with us that we don't have any African-American anchors in Pittsburgh," in prime time, he said.
Beard also announced the NAACP has dropped a petition asking the Federal Communications Commission to deny license renewals to two radio stations, WJAS-AM and its FM affiliate, WSHH, because of their records on minority hiring.
In exchange, the stations agreed to notify the group when jobs open up, Beard said.
The NAACP is considering petitions against other radio stations, which he declined to name.
Among TV stations, Beard singled out WQED, a public station, for lacking blacks in its top management.
WQED-TV spokesman Russ Martz said that in the past year, a black executive rejected an offer to become a vice president at the station. He said 7.2 percent of the station's managerial, professional and technical workers are black, more than the FCC requires.
Beard praised KDKA-TV, a CBS affiliate, for leading in black employment with 15.6 percent but criticized its weekly news segment on Pittsburgh's most-wanted. Random checks over a six-month period found 80 percent of the suspects featured on "Crimestoppers" were black, he said.
KDKA spokesman Dane Topich said the feature tried to fairly represent the city's street crime.
"It's stopping crime in those neighborhoods that are most apt to suffer from it," Topich said.
The NAACP didn't report on the city's newspapers, which have been strikebound since May 17.
 
 ---
San Francisco Station Lays Off 37 Staffers
SAN FRANCISCO (AP) - KRON-TV has laid off 37 employees, including two television personalities, because of declining revenues, officials said.
Lloyd Patterson, a co-anchor on the morning and noontime news programs, and Dominique di Prima, host of the youth-oriented show, "Home Turf," were among those terminated Nov. 5, said program director David Salinger.
The layoffs left the station with 240 employees.
"The reorganization is a result of the changing economic structure of the broadcast industry that has been exacerbated by the California recession," said Amy McCombs, KRON president and general manager.
KRON is owned by the Chronicle Publishing Co., which publishes the San Francisco Chronicle.
 The Justice Department is refusing to defend one section of the new cable television law against cable industry lawsuits because President Bush considers the provision unconstitutional.
The bill re-regulates cable TV rates, but also imposes business restrictions on cable operators that the industry is going to court to try to stop.
The Nov. 5 announcement brought angry reaction from groups that had lobbied in favor of the law passed in the waning days of Congress over the president's veto.
"We've known all along the Bush administration opposed the cable act but we are dumbfounded its Justice Department would refuse to defend the law of the land," said Edward O. Fritts, NAB president and chief executive officer.
The provision in question requires cable operators to reserve up to a third of their channels for local broadcast stations such as affiliates of ABC, CBS, NBC, Fox, PBS and independent stations.
Cable programmers oppose this "must-carry" provision because they say it restricts their access. New cable networks are rapidly being created, from all-news channels to all-cartoon channels, and programmers say the law would give broadcasters unfair advantage for space on the cable dial.
Assistant Attorney General Stuart Gerson said in a letter to the Senate that the Justice Department had advised the president before he vetoed the bill that the section was unconstitutional and "could not ethically take a different position at this time."
Gerson said, however, that Justice would defend against challenges to another section of the law that requires cable companies to negotiate with local broadcast stations before carrying their signals.
This provision was sought by broadcasters to give them power over where their stations show up among the cable channels and to enable them to seek payment.
Coincidentally, the Justice Department letter was sent on the same day the Federal Communications Commission began making rules for implementing the law. The FCC is operating on a timetable that puts various parts of the law into effect over the course of several months beginning in April.
It also coincided with the filing of two more lawsuits, by Time Warner Entertainment Co. and the National Cable Television Association.
Both were filed in U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia and challenge the so-called "must carry" and "retransmission consent" provisions of the law.
 
 ---
Beaten Newsman Released from Hospital
SANTA MONICA, Calif. (AP) - Gary Shepard, a veteran ABC newsman whose skull was fractured during a robbery at his Malibu home, left the hospital over the weekend.
Gary Shepard, 53, was discharged on Nov. 8 from Santa Monica Hospital Medical Center, where he underwent surgery last week, hospital spokesman Ted Braun said.
"He was discharged in a good condition and good spirits, and he asked that I tell his fellow journalists that he felt great," Braun said.
Shepard, who covered both the Vietnam and Persian Gulf wars, was attacked at his home on Tuesday.
Five homeless men were arrested on Wednesday near the Santa Monica Pier for allegedly trying to sell Shepard's 1987 Toyota Celica to an undercover policeman.
Three pleaded innocent Friday to charges of attempted murder and robbery. The two other men face charges of robbery and burglary.
 
 ---
Supreme Court Rejects NBA Attempt to Limit Televised Bull Games
WASHINGTON (AP) - The Supreme Court on Nov. 2 rejected the National Basketball Association's attempt to limit the number of Chicago Bulls games televised over superstation WGN.
The court left intact rulings that labeled the NBA's attempt an illegal restraint of competition.
The NBA case stemmed from the league's imposing a rule in 1990 capping the number of games any one team could televise nationally at 20.
The cap, along with other NBA rules, was challenged by the Bulls and WGN, which has its broadcast signal picked up by satellite and retransmitted to cable television systems serving 34 million homes nationwide.
The NBA limit was set so such broadcasts would not compete with the league's national network contracts, signed with NBC and Turner Network Television for $ 875 million over four years. Teams remained free, however, to telecast all their games in their home markets.
The NBA issued a statement saying it was disappointed and was exploring its options.
 
 ---
Tom Capra Takes Over Fox Los Angeles Station
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Former "Today" show executive producer Tom Capra has been named vice president and general manager of KTTV, Fox Broadcasting Co.'s Los Angeles station.
Capra, 51, replaces Greg Nathanson, who left in June to become general manager of independent Los Angeles station KTLA.
Before taking the Fox job, Capra had been an executive producer with NBC Productions in Burbank. The 20-year news veteran served as executive producer of NBC's morning "Today" show for two years before moving to the network's entertainment division.
Capra served as news director of NBC's owned-and-operated Los Angeles station, KNBC, for five years beginning in 1985.
Before joining KNBC, Capra was a segment producer for CBS' "60 Minutes" and a West Coast producer for ABC News.
He is the son of the late legendary film maker Frank Capra.
 
 ---
Bierbauer Named CNN Senior Washington Correspondent
WASHINGTON (AP) - Charles Bierbauer, CNN's senior White House reporter for the last nine years, has been named the network's senior Washington correspondent.
Bierbauer, who will continue to be host of the Newsmaker Saturday program, will assume his new duties in early December, the network said Nov. 6.
No successor was named to Bierbauer at the White House.
Bierbauer, who joined CNN in 1981 after working overseas for ABC News, became CNN's senior White House correspondent in 1983. He was the network's podium reporter at three Republican and Democratic conventions.
He is a recipient of the Overseas Press Club Award for his coverage of the Yom Kippur War in 1973 while working for Group W. He worked for ABC News in Moscow and Bonn before joining CNN in Washington as a defense correspondent in 1981.
 
 ---
Rhoades To Leave KCCI After 37 Years
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) - After 37 years of anchoring a Des Moines television newscast, KCCI-TV anchor Paul Rhoades is retiring.
Rhoades served as the station's managing editor for 25 years, then took over as news director for nine years. He has been working part-time for three years.
Reporter Steve Karlin will take the 6 p.m. spot when Rhoades leaves the station in December.
 Pearl Stewart has been named editor of the Oakland Tribune, the first black woman to hold such a post on a major U.S. daily.
Stewart, 41, was appointed by David Burgin, editor in chief of the Alameda Newspaper Group, which last month bought the Tribune from publisher Robert Maynard and his wife, Nancy. It was the only major black-owned daily in the nation.
Stewart, whose appointment was announced Nov. 2, was a reporter for the San Francisco Chronicle for 11 years. Before that, she was features editor of the Tribune for two years.
The 118-year-old Tribune has a circulation of 121,000. The Alameda group publishes four other area dailies.
 
 ---
Two Detroit Free Press Editors Promoted
DETROIT (AP) - Two managing editors for the Detroit Free Press have been promoted, one to Knight-Ridder Inc. headquarters in Miami and one within the newspaper.
Marty Claus, Free Press managing editor for features and business, has been named vice president/news for Knight-Ridder, the Free Press parent company. Robert McGruder, Free Press managing editor/news, becomes the newspaper's managing editor.
Claus was at the Free Press for 15 years and begins her Knight-Ridder job in January. She replaces Bill Baker, who said he is "semiretiring" to the Detroit area to do consulting work. He had worked at the Free Press for 27 years.
McGruder joined the Free Press in 1986 from the Cleveland Plain Dealer. He now will be in charge of the Free Press newsroom departments, still reporting to Executive Editor Heath Meriwether.
Claus will oversee the news quality of 17 of the 29 daily newspapers Knight-Ridder publishes in the United States. The 17 are: the Aberdeen American News in South Dakota; The Sun Herald of Biloxi, Miss.; The News of Boca Raton, The Bradenton Herald and the Tallahassee Democrat, all in Florida; the Daily Camera of Boulder, Colo.; the Columbus Ledger-Enquirer, The Macon Telegraph and The Union-Recorder of Milledgeville, all in Georgia; the Duluth News-Tribune of Minnesota; The News-Sentinel of Fort Wayne and the Post-Tribune of Gary, both in Indiana; the Grand Forks Herald in North Dakota; the Lexington Herald-Leader in Kentucky; the Press-Telegram of Long Beach, Calif.; The Sun News of Myrtle Beach, S.C., and the Centre Daily Times of State College, Pa.
 
 ---
 
 Managing Editor Named General Manager at South Idaho Press
BURLEY, Idaho (AP) - Kary Miller has been promoted from managing editor to general manager at the South Idaho Press.
Miller, who has been with the paper since 1980 as a correspondent, reporter and city editor, replaces Ralph Beringer, who resigned.
Michael Call, a reporter at the paper, was named managing editor, replacing Miller.
The daily paper, owned by Park Communications Inc., has a circulation of 5,700.
 
 ---
Ritchie Named Publisher of Lake Havasu City Herald
LAKE HAVASU CITY, Ariz. (AP) - Linda Ritchie has been named publisher of the Lake Havasu City Herald.
The Herald, which publishes three times a week., is owned by Western Newspapers Inc.
Ritchie replaces Gene DeVol, who will take over Ritchie's former position of publisher of Western's Desert Foothills Newspapers. Foothills Newspapers publishes the Foothills Sentinel, a home-buyers guide and another publication.
Since joining Western in 1985, Ritchie has served as publisher of the Flagstaff Times, Lake Powell Chronicle and Navajo-Hopi Observer and as editor of the Prescott Valley Tribune and Mayer Tribune.
 
 ---
New Publisher Named for Southern California Thomson Papers
WEST COVINA, Calif. (AP) - J. Scott Schmidt was named to the new position of senior publisher for Thomson newspapers in Southern California.
Schmidt, 55, will be based at the San Gabriel Valley Tribune in West Covina. Publishers of each of the Thomson newspapers in Southern California will report to Schmidt.
Schmidt formerly held positions with Chicago Today and the Chicago Tribune. He also oversaw the conversion of the four-times-a-week Valley News and Green Sheet into the Daily News of Los Angeles.
Most recently, he was publisher of the National College Newspaper, an insert used by 300 campus newspapers.
In addition to the Tribune and Desert Dispatch of Barstow, Schmidt will oversee the operations of the Whittier Daily News, the Press-Courier of Oxnard and 13 Highlander weeklies.
Thomson Newspapers is based in Des Plaines, Ill.
 
 ---
Michael J. Sexton, Dubuque Telegraph Herald Publisher, Resigns
DUBUQUE, Iowa (AP) - Michael J. Sexton, publisher of the Telegraph Herald in Dubuque and vice president-newspapers for Woodward Communications Inc., has resigned.
Sexton became publisher in February 1989 and a WCI vice president the following May. He resigned, effective Nov. 3.
Sexton will be a consultant for selected special projects through the end of the year.
Mike Gile, operations manager, will handle day-to-day activities of the Telegraph Herald until a successor is selected.
WCI also owns radio stations in Dubuque and Appleton, Wis., and a group of shopper newspapers in northeast Iowa, northwest Illinois and southern Wisconsin.
 
 ---
Muddiman Named Editor in North Carolina
MONROE, N.C. (AP) - Harold J. Muddiman, weekend editor at the The News & Observer in Raleigh, was named managing editor of The Enquirer-Journal in Monroe.
He succeeds Mike Kozma at the 14,000-circulation daily paper owned by Thomson Newspapers.
Muddiman began his newspaper career in 1969 as a reporter with The Progress-Index in Petersburg, Va. In 1971, he moved to The Morning Herald in Hagerstown, Md., as a reporter. He became regional newspaper and assistant managing editor there.
In 1974, he went to work for The Raleigh Times. He served as assistant city editor and city editor.
He joined The News & Observer of Raleigh in 1987 as metro editor and later was named weekend editor.
 
 ---
Ernest Named Publisher of Lancaster News
LANCASTER, S.C. (AP) - David L. Ernest has been appointed publisher of The Lancaster News and regional manager for the Chester News & Reporter.
Ernest, currently vice president of marketing for the Citrus County (Fla.) Chronicle, will assume his new job about the middle of November, Landmark Community Newspapers Inc. said.
He succeeds Van King, who has become publisher of Landmark Communications' News & Record in Greensboro, N.C.
Ernest was news editor, district circulation manager and key accounts executive at the News & Record before moving to The Chronicle in August 1986 as advertising director.
 
 ---
 
 Mike Burbach Named New Editor Of Minot Daily News
MINOT, N.D. (AP) - Mike Burbach, managing editor of the Aberdeen (S.D.) American News, has been named editor of the Minot Daily News.
Burbach, 33, worked at the Grand Forks Herald and its sister publication, Agweek magazine, for eight years.
He has been managing editor at the American News for 2 years.
The Herald and the American News both are Knight-Ridder newspapers, while the Minot Daily News is owned by Buckner News Alliance.
Burbach replaces Steve Buttry, who resigned.
 The president of Mead Data Central Inc., under pressure to increase earnings, has quit as head of the electronic publishing company, the parent Mead Corp. said.
Rodney L. Everhart, who is Mead Corp.'s controller, will serve as acting president until a successor to Jack W. Simpson is in place.
Simpson, during a 10-year tenure, helped increase Mead Data Central's revenues from $ 47 million in 1981 to $ 470 million in 1991.
But Steven C. Mason, Mead Corp.'s chairman and chief executive officer, said: "Even with all the growth and success we have experienced at MDC, we believe we must do better."
Mason said he expects improvements in product development, marketing and meeting needs of customers.
Mead Corp.'s businesses include forest products and electronic publishing.
 
 DEATHS
 
 Paul LeBar
ST. LOUIS (AP) - Paul LeBar, an Associated Press sports writer who covered the St. Louis Cardinals for 24 years, died Nov. 8 of liver cancer. He was 60.
LeBar, who also covered the Cardinals in three World Series, began his AP career at Des Moines, Iowa, in 1968, transferring to St. Louis the following year.
He covered the Cardinals baseball team as well as the St. Louis Blues hockey team and the St. Louis Cardinals football team before the latter moved to Phoenix.
He was a past president of the St. Louis chapter of the Baseball Writers Association of America.
LeBar, who grew up in Hastings, Neb., began his journalism career at The Grand Island Independent in 1958 and a year later moved to The Lincoln Star. From there he went to the Omaha World-Herald, working eight years before joining the AP at Des Moines in 1968.
He is survived by two sons, a sister, his stepmother, and two stepbrothers.
 
 Richard F. Beirne III
COVINGTON, Va. (AP) - Richard F. Beirne III, president of Covington Virginian Inc. and publisher of the Virginian Review, died Nov. 1 after a lengthy illness. He was 82.
Beirne had been publisher of the Covington Virginian since 1950. It was renamed the Virginian Review in 1989.
He moved to Covington in 1913 when his father, Richard F. Beirne Jr., purchased the weekly Covington Dispatch newspaper. He founded the Covington Virginian in 1914.
Beirne was the third generation of his family in the newspaper business. His grandfather, R.F. Beirne Sr., was editor and publisher of the Richmond State.
He is survived by his wife and four sons.
 
 Bill Frame
LEBANON, Tenn. (AP) - Bill Frame, retired editor of The Lebanon Democrat and a former president of the Tennessee Press Association died Nov. 4 at age 90.
Frame was editor of The Lebanon Democrat for 26 years. He was president of the Tennessee Press Association in 1963 and 1964.
Frame started his career at the Manchester Enterprise and the Manchester Times before starting at The Lebanon Democrat as a linotype operator in 1923. He was named editor in 1938, a tenure interrupted only by World War II.
He is survived by a daughter, two sisters, three granddaughters and five great-granddaughters.
 
 William Weber Johnson
SAN DIEGO (AP) - Journalist and historian William Weber Johnson, who headed the UCLA journalism department and wrote books about Mexico, died at age 82.
A Time-Life correspondent and bureau chief for 20 years, Johnson authored 11 books.
Johnson worked for The Associated Press in Detroit and Chicago before joining Time-Life.
He was sent to London as a war correspondent by Time-Life and traveled with British troops in the Allied invasion of France. Johnson became Time-Life's Mexico bureau chief in 1946, then moved the following year to Argentina.
He resigned in 1961 to teach journalism at UCLA. He later served as chairman of the journalism department until retiring in 1971.
He is survived by his wife, a daughter, a son, a stepson and six grandchildren.
 
 Erwin D. Okun
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Erwin D. Okun, Walt Disney Co.'s top spokesman, died Nov. 1 after a brief illness at age 58.
Okun worked at the Burbank-based entertainment company since 1981.
Before joining Disney, he spent 15 years as a top IBM Corp. spokesman before becoming director of communications at DiscoVision Associates, a joint venture of IBM and MCA Inc.
He was a newsman for The Plain Dealer in Cleveland and the New York World-Telegram and business editor for Newsday before joining IBM.
He is survived by his wife, three daughters and a brother.
 
 ---
NOTES FROM EVERYWHERE:
The Bridgeport, Conn.-based publication Quayle Quarterly, which chronicled the gaffes of the vice president, is shutting down because Quayle is leaving office. The magazine was started three years ago and built a circulation of 12,000 … Ross Perot's presidential campaign was not successful, but his television "infomercials" were. The programs averaged a 9.1 rating, which was just below the average for regular shows on the three main networks.

 

End of Document
