

The Health Plan's Out, Now For The Number Crunching
The Associated Press
September 26, 1993, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 896 words
Byline: By MARIANN CAPRINO, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Like white smoke wafting from the Vatican, the final signal came, for all Americans, with the eruption of applause in the House of Representatives' chamber.
We have a universal health reform plan - or at least the framework for one.
When President Clinton went before Congress last week to officially outline what had been insinuated, leaked and hinted at for months, he made an impassioned plea "to write a new chapter in the American story" - to pen the promise of health care for all.
Indeed, Clinton is well on his way to a place in history texts as the president who accomplished what many others before him failed to accomplish. But now the questions turn to how it will be done.
"It's an opening bid in a bridge game, and we've got a long way to go before the game is over," said John Erb, a principle with the employee benefits consulting firm A. Foster Higgins & Co., referring to the arduous political process ahead. Senate Minority leader Bob Dole, R-Kan., predicted that passage of whatever evolves into the final health care bill could take 10 months, if not longer.
"I don't think anybody is taking (the proposal) at face value," said Gary Donner, a partner with the health care consulting group at Deloitte & Touche. But that hasn't stopped the number crunchers from snickering at perceived flaws in Clinton's plan, a hybrid of free market competition and government controls. Forget cutting $ 238 billion from Medicare and Medicaid over the next seven years. Many think that's a political impossibility. Another area of hot debate will be the richness of the benefits package.
But for the employers who will bear the brunt of responsibility for providing medical coverage, experts are concerned that Clinton's numbers are much too optimistic.
For one thing, the plan envisions the annual cost for family medical coverage at $ 4,200 a year; $ 1,800 for an individual. That means an employer, who's responsible for 80 percent of the premium, would pay $ 3,360 for a family plan and $ 1,440 for an individual.
"Employers are really skeptical of this, as we are," Erb said.
He figures that by 1995, the average employer will have to pay about $ 5,361 for family coverage and $ 2,281 for an individual health plan if all elements of Clinton's benefits package are included.
In addition, Clinton says employers who participate in regional health alliances - the government-linked bodies that negotiate health premiums and sanction health plans - will have to pay no more than 7.9 percent of their payroll for health insurance.
According to Erb's poll of 2,500 companies of all sizes, employers are now paying an average 10.8 percent of payroll to cover their workers. At General Motors, the cost can go as high as 20 percent of payroll.
Something's got to give. The theory is that the more people in the pool managed by the health alliance, the cheaper the premiums will be, since more people mean more clout negotiating with providers. But it is likely that either costs will go up or benefits will be scaled back into the affordable range.
"We're going to see the numbers rise," Erb predicted. "Either (Clinton's) got some secret plan we don't know about, or the numbers are unrealistically low."
The idea is to create an incentive for people to choose the cheapest plan. But Americans, who have long enjoyed high-quality care of their choosing, may well be willing to pay more. When it comes to health care, consumer behavior is not motivated by price alone.
A recent survey of more than 1,400 employers conducted by Coopers & Lybrand showed about half believe reform will diminish the quality of care their employees receive, and 64 percent believe Clinton's plan will hurt their own efforts to manage costs.
Still, whatever the plan, whatever the price, Deloitte's Donner said, "It's amazing Clinton's been successful in getting everyone to agree we should have universal access and universal coverage." At least he may be remembered for that.
 
 TICKER
Primerica Corp.  is acquiring The Travelers Corp.  for $ 4.2 billion deal … Beer-maker Anheuser-Busch Cos.  will trim its salaried workforce by 10 percent and take a $ 565 million charge in a cost-cutting restructuring … Value Health Inc.  will acquire
 
 Preferred Health Care Ltd.  in a $ 425 million stock-swap deal, creating a major provider of mental health and substance abuse services … The Federal Communications Commission opened the floodgates for a surge in wireless communications, announcing rules for an auction of the nation's airwaves … General Electric's GE Capital offered $ 1.35 billion for 45 jets from GPA Group PLC of Ireland, the world's largest aircraft leasing operation, and offered to manage GPA's assets … Housing starts bounced back in August from an early summer slump to the highest level in 3 years … Viacom Inc.  sought to block QVC Network Inc.  in its bid for media-entertainment giant Paramount Communications Inc.
 
 COMING UP
The Conference Board releases results of its monthly consumer confidence survey, and the International Monetary Fund-World Bank annual meeting opens on Tuesday ; second-quarter gross domestic product and corporate profit figures from the Commerce Department on Wednesday ; weekly jobless claims, new home sales and personal income for August on Thursday; and the National Association of Purchasing Management reports its monthly survey of manufacturing strength Friday.
 Load-Date: September 26, 1993

 

End of Document
