

The Story of the Indecency Czar and the Decency Czar
The Associated Press
May 6, 1992, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 436 words
Byline: By DEBORAH MESCE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




John Frohnmayer was called the "indecency czar" by his critics. Now, his successor at the National Endowment for the Arts, Anne-Imelda Radice, is being called the "decency czar" by hers.
Radice is responding to conservatives who said Frohnmayer was using federal money to finance pornography exhibits.
"We're talking about public money, taxpayer's money," Radice, acting NEA chairwoman, told a House Appropriations subcommittee Tuesday. "This is the rub."
"A project may come from a serious curator or performance artist but has difficult subject matter … that particular project is best funded by the private sector," she said.
Radice said that "if we find a proposal that does not have the widest audience," if its sexual content "is the only thing that leaps out at you … we just can't afford to fund that."
Arthur Kropp, president of People for the American Way, a civil liberties group, said Radice has "cast herself as the NEA's decency czar, a role her predecessor was fired for refusing."
"If Radice and the Bush administration are campaigning for the support of the religious-right crusaders assailing the NEA, they've taken an enormous step today," he said.
Radice said that the artist review panels and the NEA's advisory National Council on the Arts must "consider the broad mandate of the agency." Otherwise, she said, she will have to overrule their recommendations on grant awards.
"Those decisions are going to be watched under a microscope," said Radice. "It's important for us to be very careful with this federal investment."
Rep. Sidney Yates, chairman of the Appropriations subcommittee on interior and related agencies, said Radice's approach to federal arts funding was "a change from the free and openness of John Frohnmayer and his predecessors to a restrictiveness."
But, he said, "it may be necessary in view of the temper of the times. … Apparently she thinks it's necessary to preserve the NEA, and it may be."
Radice's first test may come with a proposal from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's List Visual Arts Center for a $ 10,000 grant for an exhibit of works by four artists that portray body parts, including sexual organs, in various ways.
The council voted 11-1 with one abstention last Friday to recommend approval of the project and earlier a peer review panel voted 6-4 to recommend approval.
Radice has said she will decide within a month whether to fund the project, but she has also said she may have to disqualify herself because of a possible conflict - the curator of the MIT exhibit used to work for her.
In fiscal 1991, the NEA awarded 4,239 grants totaling $ 153.4 million.

 

End of Document
