

The $ 1.2 Trillion Question: Does the Budget Get Balanced This Year?
The Associated Press
April 9, 1995, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 943 words
Byline: By ALAN FRAM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




One of the many lingering mysteries surrounding Congress centers on whether majority Republicans can produce a balanced budget and tax cuts as promised - and whether President Clinton would sign such a package into law.
When lawmakers begin returning from their Easter recess late this month, they'll commence a budget war that will dominate the rest of the year on Capitol Hill. And the outcome is likely to play a major role in whether Republicans capture the White House next year and retain control of Congress.
The GOP's goal will be to find a record $ 1.2 trillion in savings, enough to eliminate the deficit by the year 2002, and also throw in some tax cuts. The House has already approved $ 188 billion in tax cuts for families and businesses, Clinton wants a $ 64 billion cut, and the Senate is likely to fall somewhere in between.
Ultimately, outnumbered Democrats will have to decide whether to fight Republicans or - with leverage from Clinton veto threats - join in producing a compromise.
"We'll have a package that gets us to a balanced budget in seven years" and cuts taxes, vowed House Majority Leader Richard Armey, R-Texas, in an interview. It's a measure he predicts Clinton will sign "because he wants to be president another four years. It's always hard for a president not to get credit when good things happen."
At the White House, Clinton aides are still debating strategy.
For how long does he watch Republicans piece together a plan, hoping they fall on their faces, before joining in the budget process? And does he sign a GOP package because it finally tames the deficit, or veto it because it will rely heavily on cuts in Medicare, Medicaid and other domestic programs Democrats have long protected?
Just to cover themselves, however, White House aides have begun inviting key GOP congressional staff members to get-to-know-you lunches.
"Certainly there would be some negotiations," White House budget director Alice Rivlin said in an interview, although she added that Republicans must first produce a plan of their own.
Ultimately, she said, she can imagine agreement on a smaller tax cut than Republicans have proposed, health care reforms that produce deficit reduction, "and we could end up with a budget that everybody is reasonably satisfied with."
The politics are already apparent, based on the fights over smaller packages of spending cuts during Congress' first 100 days.
Republicans say the deficit must be eliminated to ensure a healthy economic future, and the task can be done by weeding out unneeded programs and slowing the growth of others. Democrats say fine, but lawmakers should not slash initiatives for the poor, seniors, children and programs that nurture long-term growth like education and technology, and use the savings to lower taxes for the rich.
No ones knows which argument will sell with the voters. But whatever happens, the rest of the year will make legislators' grueling first three months look like a frolic in the park.
Congress has never produced a package of cuts even half so large. Nearly one dollar of every 10 expected to be spent over the next seven years would be slashed. That might not sound jarring, but in fact it would mean dramatic reductions in the services and benefits the government could provide - and the numbers of people who receive them.
First will come Congress' budget resolution, which plans the tax and spending cuts lawmakers envision. Senate Budget Committee Chairman Pete Domenici, R-N.M., and his House counterpart, Rep. John Kasich, R-Ohio, have been working on their own plans for months. Domenici's panel will begin working on his budget in late April, while the House committee starts work in May.
The budget resolution does not require the president's signature. And though the exercise of identifying which programs will be cut is painful for lawmakers, few doubt the measure will be approved. Domenici and Kasich hope Congress will complete it by mid-June.
Then comes the harder part: a huge bill embodying most of the spending cuts, along with the tax reductions, that will probably engage Congress most of the autumn.
The measure is likely to make major changes in Medicare, Medicaid, welfare, farm aid, veterans and students' benefits, and many other programs that many lawmakers of both parties defend fiercely. If the Republican effort falls apart, short of producing a bill, this is where it would happen.
"In my experience, specific negative criticism overwhelms generic positive support," Senate Finance Committee Chairman Bob Packwood, R-Ore., said in an interview. "A lot of people have said, 'I'm for a balanced budget.' I want to see if they're still for it when they see it."
Congressional Democrats are plotting their own moves, but won't decide what to do until after their April break.
But already, they seem forlorn. Asked his strategy, ranking House Budget Committee Democrat Martin Sabo of Minnesota said, "It's not of great relevance."
Eventually, Republicans are likely to produce a huge package of cuts and some tax reductions, in part because it would be politically disastrous if they fail.
Clinton's decision on signing or vetoing the bill could depend at least in part on the public's mood as well as what the measure contains. There could be several vetoes, and at some point the two sides could try to craft a deal.
Adding to the suspense will be a must-pass bill to extend the government's authority to borrow money. Since the alternative to its enactment is an unprecedented federal default, Congresses have long loaded items onto it that presidents would otherwise reject. Look for the budget-cutting bill, at some point, to end up on this measure.
 Load-Date: April 9, 1995

 

End of Document
