

The Battle of the Budget
The Associated Press
June 29, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1113 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




No agency in New York City is being spared as city leaders try to close a $$3.5 billion gap in a $$29 billion budget before midnight Sunday. More than 10,000 workers are losing their jobs, taxes are being raised and services are being cut drastically. Meanwhile, several states face deadline layoffs and cost-cutting measures. Here is a look at some of those states.
 
 California
California's new fiscal year begins July 1. Both houses have passed a $$55 billion budget, but the spending plan hasn't been signed because it needs several companion bills to balance it. The Assembly Friday approved Gov. Pete Wilson's proposals to raise the 6-cent statewide sales tax by 1 1/8 cents and cut welfare benefits to erase an unprecedented $$14.3 billion deficit. The lawmakers also approved budget-balancing proposals to tap state pension funds for more than $$1 billion and raise liquor and vehicle taxes. The tax measures, most of which would take effect July 15, and the pension measure were sent to Wilson's desk. Welfare cuts to save an estimated $$450 million require a final vote by the state Senate, which is expected to approve them Sunday.
---
Connecticut
The General Assembly is in special session trying to get a budget passed by midnight Sunday. Lawmakers are hung up on the issue of whether the tax side of the budget should include a personal income tax, as independent Gov. Lowell P. Weicker Jr. wants. Connecticut is one of 10 states without an income tax. The state faces a $$942 million deficit in the current budget year and a gap between spending necessary to maintain current services and revenues from existing taxes of about $$1.8 billion for 1991-92. Those totals are regarded as the worst in the nation, amounting to more than 35 percent of the current budget of $$7.5 billion. Weicker has threatened to shut down non-essential state services at midnight Sunday if a budget hasn't been passed.
---
Illinois
Lawmakers are struggling to close a budget gap that Republican Gov. Jim Edgar's administration places at $$850 million. Edgar disclosed Wednesday that the administration's deficit estimate had grown from $$500 million since March. Both figures are on a budget base of about $$13 billion. Edgar has proposed closing the gap primarily by cutting welfare benefits and reimbursement rates to health-care providers that treat Medicaid patients. Democrats have opposed the welfare cuts. The question is whether they can be restored and the budget balanced without cutting education funding. Edgar had proposed a small increase for schools. There is no serious discussion of tax increases; the big tax issue is whether the state will extend a 20 percent income-tax surcharge set to expire Sunday.
---
New Jersey
Democrats control both the Statehouse and the Legislature in New Jersey but that has not stopped them squabbling over how to balance and pass the budget for the fiscal year beginning Monday. Gov. Jim Florio has said he needed $$280 million in concessions from state employee unions in order to balance his $$14.3 billion budget for 1991-1992. Florio threatened the unions with up to 6,000 layoffs if they balked. They did. But the Assembly Democrats approved a $$14.7 budget that avoids the need for union concessions. Florio now says the contracts will be honored but the price will be layoffs, perhaps as many as 6,000 but probably half that. The leader of the Democratic-controlled Senate agrees with the governor. The Senate is scheduled to resume deliberations Sunday morning.
 
 North Carolina
House and Senate budget negotiators have deadlocked for two weeks over a tax increase package of more than $$630 million - the largest in state history. Both sides have agreed to a one-cent sales tax increase, but the House wants to give half of that increase to local governments. The Senate also has refused to accept House proposals for a permanent increase in corporate income taxes from 7 percent to 8 percent, an increase in personal income taxes for couples with net incomes over $$100,000 and a five-cent increase in cigarette taxes.
---
Ohio
The House passed and sent to Gov. George Voinovich on Saturday a temporary state budget that will allow government operations to continue uninterrupted when the new fiscal year begins Monday. Voinovich later signed the measure. The one-month spending plan that calls for reducing spending 3 percent below current levels was approved 85-8 during a rare weekend session. The Senate had approved the temporary budget Friday night. The interim state budget bill was prepared after it became evident the Legislature needed more time to come up with a two-year, $$27 billion measure by a midnight Sunday deadline. Delay in adopting a budget document already had pushed back the scheduled delivery Monday of about 275,000 welfare checks statewide.
---
Pennsylvania
The Legislature is faced with enacting a tax increase of nearly $$3 billion. The state is expected to run a deficit of between $$475 million and $$900 million when the books close June 30 on the 1990-91 fiscal year. A 17 percent increase in the state's 2.1 percent personal income tax and a 166 percent increase in the 18-cent-a-pack cigarette tax are among the proposals being considered. Gov. Robert P. Casey's administration already has laid off more than 1,400 workers from the state's 78,000-employee executive branch workforce. The state courts blocked his plans for cutting pay 10 percent for 10 weeks for 3,000 first-level supervisors and nearly 10,000 management employees. More than $$500 million in state aid to senior citizens, medical providers, counties, school districts and universities has been delayed by the budget squeeze. House members met for less than 30 minutes Saturday before scheduling another session at 8 p.m. Sunday, only four hours before the state's budget expires. The Senate did not meet at all Saturday and is scheduled to return to the Capitol at 3 p.m. Sunday. Lawmakers say they doubt they can meet the June 30 deadline, when the state will lose its spending authority, cutting off all aid and state employee pay checks.
 
 Maine
Lawmakers planned to work through the weekend in an attempt to approve a two-year budget of more than $$3 billion before the new fiscal year begins Monday. Failure to enact a budget before midnight Sunday would force a shutdown of all state services except those that protect public health and safety. Although key committees have struck deals on the budget and nearly $$300 million worth of major tax increases to finance it, the budget also hinges on tens of millions of dollars in savings and new revenue from separate bills to realign state pension funds and to legalize video gambling in bars.

 

End of Document
