

The Old Man and the Mountain
The Associated Press
February 18, 1993, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 885 words
Byline: By RICK HAMPSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Like many older Alaskans, Norman D. Vaughan is planning a trip back south - with a few differences.
He's going south to Antarctica. To dogsled and ski 500 miles. To reach a mountain named in his honor. A 10,302-foot mountain that's never been climbed. A mountain on which he hopes to celebrate his 88th birthday.
Isn't that all a bit much for an octogenarian with a fused ankle, an artificial knee and several square inches of frostbite scars?
"Of course it's difficult!" he says on a frigid morning in Manhattan, as wind batters the windows of the great hall of The Explorer's Club. "That's why it's a story."
Vaughan is in the midst of the most arduous stage of his expedition: raising $ 1.5 million to pay for it. But he does, in fact, have a good story.
In 1928, while serving in the polar expedition of Adm. Richard E. Byrd, he became the first American to drive a dog team in Antarctica. This November, if all goes well, he will be the last man to drive dogs there before a new treaty banning the animals takes effect to protect the fauna from canine distemper.
Aided by 22 dogs pulling two supply sleds, Vaughan and four companions - his 50-year-old wife Carolyn, a physician, and two climbers - hope to reach and climb the mountain, which is about 250 miles from the pole, in 40 days.
Vaughan fits right in at The Explorer's Club, whose wood-paneled walls are covered with mounted animal heads and other trophies of adventure. He is enthusiastic and vital as he chats with admirers and corporate sponsors; his toothy smile, powerful chest and close-cropped white beard evoke Hemingway.
But as he moves around the room, he looks slightly stooped and just a little bit … creaky.
Can he ski, or even ride, 500 miles in temperatures that average between 5 and 20 degrees below zero? If so, can he make the final 2,000-foot climb up Mount Vaughan?
Vaughan says he doesn't really know: "No one's ever tried it before." Bradford Washburn, the famed mountaineer who has known Vaughan for years, says he's not sure, either, but adds: "He's a very tough guy. … When he's out there, nothing bothers him. He just keeps going."
Although Vaughan has endured great suffering in search of adventure, he was raised in the comfort of his family's estate outside Boston, where he discovered dog sledding at the age of 12.
In 1927, after reading of Byrd's plans to become the first man to fly over the South Pole, he talked his way onto the admiral's team and dropped out of Harvard. After a year in New Hampshire without pay learning to train dogs, he found himself en route with 93 dogs to the last place on Earth.
Upon arrival in Antarctica, Byrd said, "Vaughan, get your dogs!" and they headed inland to found the outpost that became Little America.
The following year Vaughan went on a 1,300-mile, 77-day expedition into the interior, where he and his companions explored uncharted terrain and watched Byrd fly over on his way to the pole.
For Vaughan, it was only the beginning of an adventurous life. He and his dogs raced in the 1932 Olympics, rescued the wounded from battlefields in Europe and Korea, helped salvage airplane wreckage in Greenland and ran in three inaugural parades. In 1981, Vaughan gave Pope John Paul II his first dog sledding lesson.
Above all, Vaughan has participated in 13 runnings of the Iditarod, the grueling, 1,200-mile dog sled race between Anchorage and Nome. He has finished the race six times, most recently in 1990, and is in the Musher Hall of Fame.
Compared to the Iditarod, he says, Antarctica isn't so bad.
"Am I scared? If I was, I wouldn't be doing it," he says. "Am I scared of a crevasse? One hundred percent!"
As Vaughan sees it, he has only two problems: "I'm old and I'm slow. And, as they say, you can't go faster than the slowest dog." Since the expedition plans to cover 18 miles a day, Vaughan will ride on a sled if he can't keep up.
This month the five members of the Mount Vaughan Antarctic Expedition will train at the Vaughans' one-room log cabin in the wilds of Alaska. Carolyn, who became Vaughan's fourth wife after moving to the state in 1986, says that "training" often means simply surviving: getting the generator started, clearing the dog trails, shoveling snow drifts, fending off an intrusive moose.
Despite his age, Vaughan will have some advantages on this trek.
Instead of bulky caribou furs, he will wear lightweight synthetic clothes with zippers for easy venting; instead of evening meals of "hoosh," a fatty stew made from dried food cakes, he will enjoy the likes of spare ribs and carrot cake; instead of a hand-cranked radio, he will have a battery-powered telephone; instead of a sextant, he will have a computerized, satellite-linked navigational device that gives exact distances and headings.
Even the dogs will have it better, including "doggie booties" for cut or frozen paws. And, because supplies will be airdropped along the route, Vaughan and company shouldn't have to kill some dogs to feed the others. In 1929, only half the dogs were spared.
After reaching Mount Vaughan, the party will be met by a plane and flown to Chile. Following a brief rest, they'll join an Antarctic cruise for seniors organized by one of Vaughan's sponsors, Grand Circle Travel.
There, he will no doubt repeat his favorite admonition to the elderly: "Throw away your armchairs."

 

End of Document
