

The Reality of Politics in the Confirmation Process
The Associated Press
October 26, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 833 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Whatever the Senate and the White House decide to do to about the system for confirming Supreme Court justices and nearly 900 other federal appointees, there's one change they can't make - the process cannot be divorced from politics.
Nor should it be. As the chairman of the committee that struggled through the mishandled Clarence Thomas case observed, the system may be lousy but nobody ever devised a better one.
There will be some post-Thomas reforms. Chastened by the adverse public reaction to the televised hearings on sex harassment charges leveled and then leaked against Thomas, the Senate will settle on some changes in the system.
But there also will be a next time, another explosion over another nominee, perhaps not as seamy or sensational as the confrontation of Clarence Thomas and Anita F. Hill, but with stakes as high.
Tinkering with the process won't change that. It's been tried. More than a decade ago, after disputes involving Cabinet confirmations, Democrats said there ought to be a law requiring that fitness reports on nominees go automatically to the Senate, not only to the White House. There also was a proposal to set up a new, politically independent Senate agency to deal with major nominations. When the controversies died, so did the reforms.
In the Thomas aftermath, Democrats demanded an opportunity to provide more advice to the Republican White House before they are asked for consent on nominations.
Offering his reform ideas, along with a political sting for the Democratic Congress, President Bush said Thursday that he tries to consult and welcomes advice.
But that would be a courtesy, not a commitment.
"...I will not give a group of senators veto power over a nominee," Bush said. "...I will not surrender presidential authority or powers any more than Congress will surrender its powers."
During the Thomas hearings Bush had said there was no problem with the system by which he chose nominees. "Our process is fine because we've selected a very, very good man," he said then.
The Democrats say that Bush bears part of the blame, that he raised credibility questions when he insisted that Thomas was person most qualified to go on the court, and that race had nothing to do with his nomination of a conservative black man.
They argue that Thomas and his advisers made things worse by dodging Senate questions about policy and philosophy at his initial hearings, to the point of insisting that he had no personal view on the right to abortion and hadn't discussed the matter even in private.
At the harassment hearing, Thomas denied the accusation, saying it had been concocted by interests opposing him, and adding that it would have been fine with him had people tried to block him because of his views or because they didn't like the conservative trend on the court. In the initial hearings, Republicans had insisted that was not fair game, and that qualifications, not philosophy, were the proper question.
Bush's proposed changes in the process concentrated on disciplining the Senate, and include new strictures on the handling of FBI reports on nominees. From now on, Bush said, only senators can read them, and only in the presence of FBI agents. "No FBI reports will stay on Capitol Hill," he said.
Bush said the Senate should have a special prosecutor find out "who leaked what and for what reasons" in the Thomas case, and report by Jan. 3. That echoes a Republican proposal; the Democratic majority is broadening the inquiry to cover other leaks, including those that damaged Democrats in the Keating Five investigation.
The president coupled that with a call for action by the end of the year to eliminate Congress' exemptions from employment, discrimination and other laws it passes for everyone else, saying that has made Congress into "a privileged class of rulers who stand above the law."
That sounded like a tryout for a 1992 campaign line, Republican president versus Democratic Congress.
While the Thomas nomination is the issue now, Supreme Court confirmations are rare; executive branch nominees are the everyday business. More than 550 executive branch and agency jobs require Senate confirmation, plus more than 140 ambassadorships, plus 166 U.S. attorneys and marshals. And that doesn't count tens of thousands of confirmations to the military and the foreign service.
Bush complained that too many appointments are stalled for too long. He said he has 180 nominees pending now, and they've been waiting an average of 80 days.
Senate Democrats have four committee chairmen looking at confirmation reform, with recommendations due by the end of the year on such questions as public versus private hearings, early warning systems on charges that get personal, and other steps that might turn down the heat of the Thomas case.
At least until another confrontation that turns it up again.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 25 years.

 

End of Document
