

The Real World vs. The Way It Should Be
The Associated Press
October 25, 1991, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 670 words
Byline: By JOHN CUNNIFF, AP Business Analyst
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




There are mysteries within mysteries for the ordinary person trying to understand the current economic mess and the beliefs of some of the important players in it.
Such as how government and industry economists could have believed that consumers would lead the way up from recession when statistics showed consumers slogging through a slough of debt, unable to save and fearful of losing jobs.
And how Congress, knowing this, could have raised taxes, adding financial burdens for taxpayers, further slowing the economy and, as a direct consequence, reducing revenues needed to run the government.
It is difficult also to understand how banks, struggling to survive, can peremptorily cut the credit lines of solvent, creditworthy customers, mainly small businesses, while making easy payment deals with insolvent developers.
And it is almost impossible to explain the reasoning of automotive leaders who sought to correct their negative earnings by raising prices amid some of the worst days their industry has ever endured.
These confusing and incredible actions and reactions took place under the auspices of intelligent people who should have known the consequences, some of whom are only now beginning to recognize the damage. The carmakers are offering discounts and rebates again, for example, and Congress is talking tax cuts.
Others involved in the misinterpretations, however, are stonewalling the issue. One of the amazing performances in this regard is enacted by economists expressing anger that consumers don't understand that the recession is over.
Some of these are the same ones who declared in the summer of 1990 that there would be no recession, denied in the fall that it had begun, declared in the winter that it was almost over, and finally conceded it in the spring.
They were hardly good sports about it, however, grumbling that it was a minor recession and that it would be over in the early summer in spite of the dullard consumer. And then, fed up, they simply declared it over.
The current condescension toward consumers can only be explained by saying that there are two realilties, one that is explained in terms of complicated statistical equations and the other by the pocketbook.
Statistics and equations are the tools of those with an academic, detached approach to the economy; the pocketbook is the measure by which more than 90 million households judge whether the economy is improving or deteriorating.
The split between the groups has existed throughout the recession, but may be at its widest now. Two different realities with little interaction. The former are frustrated with the latter; the latter are furious at the former.
Viewing the scene, the chief economist of a brokerage house headlines his analaysis, "Feeling Versus Reality," a pontifical putdown of those who feel the recession but who are not endowed with his perception and understanding.
"Many Americans believe that the recent recession was one of the worst ever and is still in effect," he admonishes. They, the consumers, are wrong, of course. "The recession has ended," he states, despite "public and media perceptions that differ from the reality."
He explains that "although the economy may still be creating anxiety for some people, it is behaving normally for the early stages of a business expansion. Gross national product is consistent with typical behavior ..."
Dissenters from that view are dismissed with the admonition that "the reality is quite different" than what they percieve - which is to say, different from what their debts, savings, paychecks and job insecurity tell them.
It's all in the consumer's mind, according to that thesis. Uninformed consumer perceptions that defy statistical abstractions cannot be trusted. Reality is in the statistics, not the experience.
The uncrowned hero has become the goat. In theory, consumers were supposed to have led the charge up from recession. They couldn't; they didn't have the wherewithal, and they just didn't understand their duty.
A confused bunch, those consumers.

 

End of Document
