

The $ 7.1 Trillion in the Budget's Fine Print
The Associated Press
February 13, 1994, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 623 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Tucked away in the back of the budget, there's a $ 7.1 trillion commitment in government credit and insurance that reaches almost every corner of American life.
And unless the guaranteed loans go bad or the insurance is revoked, it stays in the fine print.
Until the $ 215 billion savings and loan bailout, credit and insurance programs were all but invisible in federal budgets. That made them politically inviting, since Congress could vote to bestow benefits indirectly, without adding to the deficit.
The loans and insurance programs are for home buyers, students, farmers, veterans, retirees, small business. The constituencies are broad, the needs real, the aims worthy, the programs politically unassailable.
So the government has become the largest underwriter of financial risk in the United States. Directly or indirectly, the government assists more than 35 percent of private domestic borrowing.
In a change prompted by the S&L bailout, the administration and Congress are now required to take account of credit and insurance programs, with a budget and appropriations to cover direct costs, and with projections to provide an early alert to potential liabilities.
The new budget is the fourth to do so; it shows savings and loan and bank insurance moving down the risk list, while federal pension guarantees have moved up.
There's also an estimate of potential future costs from losses in the credit and insurance programs, but such estimates cannot be precise since the costs are driven by disasters that can't be foreseen and economic circumstances that can change.
So the cost estimate is a range: $ 180 billion to $ 300 billion.
With the economy stronger and banking business improving, the potential cost of insuring deposits is down. But falling interest rates and inadequate funding by businesses have increased the future costs of insuring pension benefits by $ 15 billion.
The administration is pushing a reform bill to reduce that risk.
The gap between guaranteed pensions and the funds available to pay them in business with underfunded plans has been increasing, to $ 53 billion in the latest accounting. That's due in part to declining interest rates, which reduced pension fund earnings, and company payments that fall short of promised pension benefits.
The Clinton bill would stiffen funding requirements, force employers to begin catching up with their commitments, and strengthen the hand of the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp. to monitor that process.
The corporation, backed by the government should it run short of funds, guarantees benefits up to about $ 2,600 a month for retirees whose pension plans fail. It is financed by premiums collected from employers, but the administration says it is underpriced.
According to the budget, the situation could become comparable to the savings and loan crisis.
That's a warning, not an answer. But forewarned, the government can act before a problem becomes a costly bailout. That's the point of the annual accounting of what once were hidden liabilities.
"… Lack of timely information often transfers the cost of a program away from current beneficiaries to later generations of taxpayers," the Clinton budget says. Few taxpayers would have chosen to see government money spent on things like the S&L bailout, but the wave of failures left no option.
The aim now is to manage the risks, and to require that they be taken into political account in advance. In budgetese, that means "forcing policymakers to recognize the costs of federal programs at the time commitments to underwrite the program's risks are undertaken."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.
 Load-Date: February 13, 1994

 

End of Document
