

The Terror of the South Pole: Fire on Ice
The Associated Press
February 9, 1995, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 598 words
Byline: By PETER JAMES SPIELMANN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: AMUNDSEN-SCOTT SOUTH POLE STATION, Antarctica
Body




During supper at the South Pole base cafeteria, several diners edged up to the cook and quietly spoke the word that strikes terror in Antarctica: fire.
They didn't want to cause a panic, but they told the cook - who is also the fire marshal - they heard the fire alarm tootling under piped-in soul music.
Marshal Emily Buesser was out of the kitchen in a flash, raising the alarm with other volunteer firefighters among the 140-some people at the polar base.
Buesser, from Putney, Vt., and several other firefighters investigated the kitchen, then realized the tootling was no alarm, but a flute playing the background of a Marvin Gaye tune. A huge sigh of relief went all round.
When the nearest fire department is 840 miles away, you can't call in professionals in an emergency. This South Pole station depends on volunteers.
The humidity at the pole is perpetually zero, and many of the buildings under the geodesic dome at the U.S. base are insulated plywood, without any drywall fire protection.
"This place is a tinderbox," said Johnny Smith of Winnsboro, Texas, a plumber who is one of the polar firefighters. "You could probably light one of these buildings by touching a match to it."
That's why the polar fire crew practices often, including the day after the kitchen fire scare, when there was a drill: "They had everything there within two minutes; they could have charged Hell with a bucket of water," Smith said.
"We have to take fire seriously, it's probably our biggest danger here," said J.P. Parland, the station manager at the U.S. National Science Foundation research station. "Most of the buildings under the dome are plywood, so they would go up real quickly."
And what if the buildings under the dome burned in the polar winter, when the runway is snowed in and there are no flights in or out from late January through late October to relieve the few dozen staff?
"We'd be living in the summer camp out by the runway on K-rations they'd airdrop to us," Smith said.
The fire crews at the South Pole, all support staff hired by Antarctic Support Associates of Englewood, Colo., get a week of intensive training together in conjunction with the Englewood and Aurora fire departments.
They learn how to use emergency breathing devices, helmets and face masks, and overcome their fear of entering a building so choked with smoke that you can't see as far as your feet. At the end of a week, they are a cohesive team.
South Pole base has four fire response teams. The first scrambles to the fire site without equipment to see if they can contain or extinguish the flames, while the second unit suits up in protective gear and joins them. The third team handles heavier equipment, chemicals and other specialized problems; the fourth is an emergency medical technician team that trains with the station's doctor.
Down at McMurdo Station, 840 miles away, the 1,200 residents are protected by a more conventional professional department that has 41 certified firefighters for building or aircraft fires.
Three regular fire trucks are parked in the station house at McMurdo, and tracked vehicles are out on the ice runways in case of a crash.
Serious fires have been rare. The old chapel burned down at McMurdo in May 1991; the last notable fire was Sept. 30, when an electrical fire burned some equipment in a cold storage building.
Engine pumps and tanks are heated.
"If you stop throwing water on a fire, there's a good chance the nozzle will freeze solid," said Lt. Pete Parker of Colorado Springs, Colo.
"We're totally surrounded by water, but it's ice. We're the driest continent on Earth."
 Load-Date: February 9, 1995

 

End of Document
