

The Man is Mightier than the Word
The Associated Press
March 12, 1995, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 1017 words
Byline: By ANDREW FRASER -, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




In trying to nudge up the dollar, Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin got a reminder this past week that the power to move currency markets wasn't in the spoken word - but who spoke.
With the U.S. currency sinking rapidly, Rubin stepped up to offer the Clinton administration's strongest words in its defense.
But in attempting to jawbone the dollar higher, Rubin found out he's no match for Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board.
Rubin's comments this past Thursday did not stop the U.S. currency's plunge against the Japanese yen, and barely stemmed its erosion against the German mark. A day earlier, the dollar rebounded when Greenspan offered some ambiguous statements about a U.S. response to continued weakening of the currency.
Lynn Reaser, chief economist at First Interstate Bank in Los Angeles, said the contrast illustrated the enormous power Greenspan is perceived to wield.
"Jawboning it is a policy that is very limited to a point if you don't have the ability to back it up," Reaser said.
If anything, Greenspan has the ability to support the dollar by engineering higher interest rates. Rubin's ability is limited to monetary intervention, or purchasing dollars in the foreign exchange market. Its effects are shortlived - and there were some halfhearted efforts last week that failed.
Analysts said currency investors were unmoved by Rubin because they have lost confidence in the administration's monetary policy. "In the past, they seemed to suggest that a falling dollar was not important," said Larry Wipf, an economist with Norwest Corp. in Minneapolis.
There was a general feeling that the immediate solution to the dollar's plunge rested with the U.S. central bank, which could raise interest rates to make dollar-denominated assets attractive and bring back some investors. Higher rates elsewhere have caused investors to dump the dollar.
After going into a near free-fall for four straight days, setting record lows against the mark and the yen, the dollar recovered following Greenspan's testimony before the House Budget Committee on Wednesday.
Greenspan told the committee the dollar's sharp decline on global currency markets was "unwelcome and troublesome."
His carefully chosen words promised no specific action. He offered no hints that higher interest rates were looming. But he did seek to undo damage ascribed to some previous testimony, which was widely viewed by currency markets as signaling the central bank was finished raising rates.
The fear of lower rates prompted investors to move their funds to other markets like Germany and Japan in search of better returns.
"International currency investors are a coldblooded lot," said Hugh Johnson, a vice president at First Albany Corp. "They want to invest where they could get the biggest bang for their buck - or mark, or yen."
While Greenspan' comments gave the dollar a brief lift, currency traders shrugged off Rubin's comments, which seemed aimed at dispelling the perception that the administration was not too supportive of a strong currency.
In comments before the National Newspaper Association on Thursday, Rubin said that he wanted to be "absolutely clear" in the administration's view that "a strong dollar is in America's national interest."
The United States twice last week, once alone and once with other countries, tried intervening to buy dollars and sell yen and marks in an effort to break the bearish sentiment.
While those efforts had little impact, Rubin said Thursday that the United States would not hesitate to intervene again.
"Jawboning it isn't going to help. Merely saying we want a stronger currency isn't going to help," said Chris Iggo, an international economist at Chase Manhattan Bank. "Those comments only come out when the dollar is in trouble."
Although Rubin's remarks did not help the currency Thursday, it bounced back Friday largely on strengthened economic numbers - which can prompt higher interest rates. Also helping the recovery was an economic plan unveiled by the Mexican government to help end that country's economic crisis. The dollar has been hurt by the crisis in Mexico, a big buyer of U.S. products.
But some analysts said the dollar's recovery was only temporary because the underlying fundamentals that have caused the crisis remain unchanged: huge trade and budget deficits, a slowdown in U.S. growth that can keep a lid on interest rates, and expanding economies in Europe that will have the opposite effect there.
"I would consider what's happened (Friday) as a recovery from emotional extremes - a temporary stopover on the way to a weaker dollar," said First Albany's Johnson. "I don't think that the fundamentals have suddenly swung back in favor of the dollar."
 
 COMING UP:
The Commerce Department reports February retail sales and the fourth-quarter current account Tuesday … Labor Department reports February producer prices, Federal Reserve reports February industrial production and regional economic conditions, and Commerce Department reports January business inventories on
 
 Wednesday … Labor Department reports weekly jobless claims and February consumer prices, and Commerce Department reports February housing starts Thursday .
 
 TICKER
TheLabor Department said the unemployment rate dropped to a 4 -year low of 5.4 percent last month after jumping to 5.7 percent in January as businesses created nearly a third of a million new jobs … The Dow Jones industrial average soared 52.22 points to a record 4,035.61 as financial markets rallied strongly on the employment news and positive reverberations from Mexico's plan to mend its economic problems … Woolworth said it will cut 2,000 jobs and sell several businesses … IBM won a jury verdict in a case attempting to link computer keyboards with repetitive-stress injuries … USAir Group said it will cut almost 10 percent of its current daily flights by July in a bid to return to profitability … Barings PLC resumed operations under its new owner, Internationale Nederlanden Groep, which said it would immediately inject $ 1.08 billion to ensure the collapsed investment bank's continued operations.
 Load-Date: March 12, 1995

 

End of Document
