

The Citadel Faces Challenge At The Gate
The Associated Press
September 26, 1993, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 630 words
Byline: By BRUCE SMITH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CHARLESTON, S.C.
Body




Shannon Faulkner wants to attend The Citadel for the same reasons many other students do: good education, regimented living and 151 years of military tradition.
The only problem is the all-male college won't take her.
Miss Faulkner, 18, said keeping her out just because of her gender is unconstitutional because the school gets state funds. But some on campus said they have a right under federal law to single-gender education.
"It's just human nature. A woman is a distraction," said Chris Parker, a junior from Myrtle Beach as he sat in the college's mess hall.
Junior Rob Cauthen of Houston was more blunt: "I'd probably consider quitting if a woman comes here." He is the third member of his family to attend the military college.
A federal judge last month ruled Miss Faulkner could enroll in classes this year, but not join the Corps of Cadets. The Citadel appealed and the 4th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Richmond, Va., stayed the judge's order until it can hear more arguments Monday.
Miss Faulkner originally was admitted by deleting references to her gender on her high school transcripts. She was rejected before arriving at the campus when Citadel officials discovered she is a woman.
"I chose it because of the prestige, the alumni networking, the education department and the military structure," Miss Faulkner said.
For now, she attends the University of South Carolina at Spartanburg.
The Citadel is one of two all-male, state-supported military colleges in the nation. The other, Virginia Military Institute, also is the target of a court challenge.
The 4th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals ruled VMI must admit women, provide parallel programs for them or go private. VMI also will be back in court on Monday to present a plan, devised Saturday, to create a program for women at a private college to comply with the order.
Last week, The Citadel won a different battle when the federal judge who said Miss Faulkner should be admitted rejected an attempt by three female veterans to get into the college's day classes. They did not want to join the corps of cadets as Miss Faulkner does.
The Citadel eliminated a program that allowed male veterans to attend the classes with cadets after the women sued. The judge said that made the case moot. The women's attorney said they would appeal.
Life at The Citadel remains highly regimented and devoid of privacy in spartan, wood-floored barracks with no air conditioning and doors that are never locked.
Cadets eat together, sleep together and live by a simple code: one doesn't lie, cheat or steal, nor tolerate those who do. The desire to keep the college all-male runs deep.
Citadel supporters, including the state Legislature, said the college's students should be allowed to learn without women around.
"I don't say a female could not go into the barracks and comply with our regulations. The issue is the single-gender education," college President Claudius Watts III said.
The issue is difficult for some of the two dozen female faculty members and administrators.
Librarian Betsy Carter said women should have equal opportunity. But as a graduate of Agnes Scott College, a women's school in Atlanta, Ms. Carter said she realizes some people do better in a single-sex environment.
"The issue is not the bathrooms. The issue is not whether they (women) could do it. The issue is whether single-sex education is important enough for the government to support it," she said.
Psychology professor Julie Lipovsky is just getting used to wearing the uniform required of all faculty members.
Before arriving this semester from the Medical University of South Carolina, she felt women should be allowed to attend The Citadel. Now she's not so sure.
"Change is always real difficult, especially in a place with a 150-year history," she said.
 Load-Date: September 26, 1993

 

End of Document
