

The Long Goodbye: Poets Recover from the Cease-fires
 The Associated Press
October 15, 1995, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1217 words
Byline: By RON KAMPEAS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GARRON TOWER, Northern Ireland
Body




The night of the IRA cease-fire, Belfast poet Medbh McGuckian searched for a way to say goodbye to her lover, the troubles.
 
 "Tonight, when the treaty moves all tongues,
I want to take the night out of you,
The sweet Irish tongue in which
death spoke and happiness wrote."
 
 It was a long goodbye. Six months later, lost without her violent muse, she suffered a nervous breakdown.
It was an extreme reaction to a wider poetic plight. In recent interviews, McGuckian and other Northern Ireland poets spoke of losing the muse they hated: the violence that wracked the British-ruled province from 1969 to 1994.
The generation of Northern Ireland poets that emerged from the "troubles" - led by Seamus Heaney, this year's winner of the Nobel Prize for literature - has been acclaimed as the leading school of poets writing in English.
"The walls collapsed, everything was different," McGuckian said of her breakdown, speaking in hesitant, nasal tones that belie the fierceness of her poetry. "There was a loss of situation, a loss of tension, a blurring,"
Calling the troubles a "lover," she said: "If you live with someone for 25 years, it's a part of you going, even if it's for your own good."
Ciaran Carson - like McGuckian, a Catholic - guiltily discovered he had been attracted to the spectacle of war.
"The armored vehicles, the helmets, the surveillance cameras, the way that you can't see what's going on because it's so elaborately controlled by technology," he said. "That in itself is a language."
This summer, McGuckian and Michael Longley starred at a poetry school in the Glens of Antrim, and fans came from as far as Hungary and the United States, undaunted by the two-hour bus ride from Belfast and the trek up a cliff-hugging road overhanging the Irish Sea.
Sue Roberts, the chief literature producer for the British Broadcasting Corp., said Northern Ireland poets were represented among the best contemporary English-language poets far out of proportion to the province's 1.5 million population.
"It's certainly where the energy of writing has been in recent years," she said. "It's a combination of having a subject to write about, and a wonderfully rich (Irish) poetic tradition."
Far from being isolated in ivory towers, Irish poets regularly are published in newspapers, book shops stock extensive local collections and local news broadcasters seeking commentary will as soon call up poets as politicians.
A subtler form of poetic expression is specific to the northern part of the island, according to Patrick Crotty, the editor of an anthology of Irish poetry published this month.
"Northern poetry is wry and indirect, tentative, because of the conversational strategies people learn in order to negotiate," Crotty said. "Southern poetry is less ironic, it has different virtues."
Along with the traditions, political factors set the stage for a blossoming of Northern Ireland poetry long before the troubles began.
In 1947, the government made further education more accessible to the Catholic minority; that led to emergence of a Catholic intellectual class. On the Protestant side, such midcentury poets as John Hewitt and Louis MacNeice were influenced heavily by European liberalism, and sought a Northern Ireland identity beyond sectarianism.
In the early 1960s, heeding Hewitt and MacNeice, an ecumenical group of young poets - most of them studying at Belfast's Queens University - started to meet regularly. Among those sharing their first attempts were Longley, Heaney and Seamus Deane - poets who now enjoy international standing.
By the time they were publishing their first volumes, in 1966, the first rumblings of a return to violence were being heard; by 1969, there were almost daily street clashes.
"We live in a tense society, and it is that tension which has to some extent shaped the poetry from here," Longley said.
Part of the pressure was from the community, McGuckian said. "I was accused by my own side of not taking issue, of not quoting them and escaping. I began feeling conscience-stricken."
Poets could hardly ignore what was happening around them, said Edna Longley, the doyenne of Northern Ireland critics, and Michael Longley's wife.
"Civil war implicates everybody, everybody's complicities and evasions," she said. "Poetry is a subtle movement of getting at the hiding places."
The problem was how to address the troubles without propagandizing.
Heaney wrote in 1980 that Northern Ireland poetry needed to "encompass the perspectives of a humane reason and at the same time to grant the religious intensity of the violence its deplorable authenticity and complexity."
It proved a fine line, one captured by the fascination and revulsion Carson expresses in the first stanza of "Bloody Hand," published in the 1992 anthology, "A Rage for Order":
 
 "Your man, says the Man, will walk into the bar like this - here his fingers
Mimic a pair of legs, one stiff at the knee - so you'll know exactly
What to do. He sticks a finger to his head. Pretend it's child's play -
The hand might be a horse's mouth, a rabbit or a dog. Five handclaps.
Walls have ears: the shadows you throw are the shadows you try to throw off."
 
 Others obliquely addressed the troubles. Some writers used Irish history; others used Greek and Irish myth. In Paul Muldoon's work, barbed wire and concrete intruded into serene childhood memoryscapes.
It wasn't an easy relationship. The poets harbored a resentment that the troubles held their work hostage. In one poem, McGuckian writes that "the facile hand that braided the barbed wire forgot the murmur of roses."
"Artists in Northern Ireland have from the word go been reluctant to hitch a ride on yesterday's headlines," Longley said.
When the Irish Republican Army announced its cease-fire effective Sept. 1, 1994, the poets' first reaction was elation.
Longley was the first to register his relief with a poem. He had written "Ceasefire" in the weeks of rumors that preceded the announcement, and he mailed it to the Irish Times in Dublin on the day of the IRA announcement.
In it, he imagined the thoughts of the Trojan king Priam as he begs the Greek warrior Achilles to hand over the body of his son Hector for burial:
 
 "I get down on my knees and do what must be done
And kiss Achilles' hand, the killer of my son."
 
 On the day of the cease-fire, stand-up comic Owen O'Neill correctly anticipated the creative crisis: "There goes 15 minutes of material."
Longer than 15 minutes: For months, the usually noisome Northern Ireland poets did not publish.
"Right away, you could sense it," the BBC's Roberts said. "In an area where tension has invaded everyone's lives, where do poets go next?"
A year later, some poets are exploring new topics. Carson has written 26 love poems, based on the alphabet. "Also, I've got interested in rhyme," he said.
Others say that, despite the lack of violence, the stultified peace process has shown there is still much tension to work through.
"It's going to take 25 to 50 years to mend the wounds of what was a civil war," Longley said.
As a sound man set up the recording mikes for a panel discussion on the BBC's poetry program "Stanza," Longley, the Protestant, whispered to McGuckian, the Catholic: "I don't know if I have anything to say about the troubles anymore."
She touched his hand. "So say that, say that we're exhausted."
 Load-Date: October 15, 1995

 

End of Document
