

The WWII Generation: Recalling the Best Years of Their Lives
The Associated Press
April 11, 1995, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 2603 words
Byline: By MITCHELL LANDSBERG, AP National Writer
Body




On March 4, 1944, in the chill of an English winter, the crew of the B-17 bomber Worry Wart was rousted from sleep hours before dawn for its 25th and final mission over Nazi-occupied Europe.
The American fliers had hoped for a relatively easy "milk run" over France or the fringes of Germany. What they got, when the briefing officer pulled a white sheet off the wall map of Europe, was an assignment to the heart of the Nazi empire: Berlin.
They consoled themselves; it was a fitting last mission. They hoped bad weather would scrub the flight; it didn't. Before the sun rose through the Suffolk mist, a wave of B-17s - part of the 8th Army Air Force's 388th Bomb Group - had lifted off from the base at Knettishall and was in formation for the flight across the English Channel to "Adolf's Palace."
The night before, the crew's 22-year-old radio operator, Larry Goldstein, had written in his diary: "One more to go. God be good to me on the next one!"
His prayers would be answered - but barely.
Fifty-one years later, Larry Goldstein sits in the booth of a diner in the New York City borough of Queens. He is sipping coffee and eating ham and eggs, all the while talking like a cabbie in overdrive.
"It brought me out," he says of the war, his words sharp with the accent of his native Brooklyn. He is 73 now, a handsome man with sweptback gray hair and a trim build. His profile bounces off the mirrored walls of the diner.
Before the war, he says, he was an underachiever, never following through with anything. His combat experiences helped steel him for the rough-and-tumble world of life insurance, where follow-through is everything.
He still sells insurance, but also spends time heading the local chapter of the 8th Air Force Historical Society. "They know me in New York as the nut job with the memorabilia," he jokes.
Goldstein admits that he once rolled his eyes at the stories veterans told of World War I. Still, he wants to keep the memory of this war alive. He is proud of his role in the war - but not too proud.
"I wasn't a brave man," he insists. "Nobody was brave in those days. But I guess I was strong."
---
They had a job to do and they did it. They were Americans and there was a war on, and they fought it. It was as simple as that.
As if anything were ever that simple.
It wasn't, but to speak to Americans who came of age during World War II, for whom the war was almost a rite of passage, a blood trial, is to believe for a moment in a world - not so long past - of sharp contrasts, unquestioned loyalties and choices that were obvious if rarely easy.
This is a story about that generation.
More specifically, it is a story about one group of men and women who were brought together by the war, flung apart after it, and for whom it remained a central and defining part of their lives.
They were born in the shadow of World War I, raised in the Roaring '20s and plunged into the Great Depression as adolescents. Then, when many were fresh out of high school, their world was darkened by the greatest war in history.
That's when it came time for this generation to grow up. That's when, as Hollywood had it, they spent the best years of their lives.
---
It was a diverse crew. They were all-white, of course, but then the Army was a segregated institution in those days.
There was the co-pilot, Cliff Conklin, a jock from New Paltz, N.Y.; waist gunner E.V. "Pete" Lewelling, a good ol' boy from Zolfo Springs, Fla.; the tail-gunner, Robert Miller, a lunk from Chicago; the engineer, Edward Kozacek, an immigrants' son and farm boy from Coxsackie, N.Y.
There were two Jewish guys from Brooklyn, Goldstein and navigator Phil Brejensky. And there were two country boys - Kent Keith, the bombardier, a sheep rancher from near Ekalaka, Mont., and Jack Kings, the other waist gunner, a poor kid from West Virginia - who'd never met anyone Jewish before.
And then there was the pilot, B.J. Keirsted.
He was from Uniontown, Pa., a tough coal town, and had a dark, brooding look about him. Keirsted hadn't needed the Army to help him escape his roots: He and his sister, Dorothy, had toured the country before the war as the ballroom dance team of "Jan and Janis." ("Belford and Dorothy," apparently, lacked pizazz.)
When Conklin was assigned to Keirsted's crew, during training back in the States, he was crestfallen. "I thought, 'I don't want to be with this crew - we've got a ballroom dancer for a pilot!"'
But Keirsted proved he had more on the ball than a set of twinkletoes. Quiet, reserved, he exuded a calm authority that was universally respected and admired. More than that, the men liked Keirsted. "He was just a nice guy, period," Conklin would say. "He never had a bad thing to say."
After the war, Keirsted would go to work as a safety engineer for Procter & Gamble, where his father-in-law was an executive, and spend nearly 30 years there. He never flew as a pilot again; he never danced professionally again. He took the job at P&G because "it was all I could find."
He is 78 now, and lives alone in Asbury Park, N.J., in a nine-bedroom home where his mother once lived. Sitting at his dining room table now, a shaft of light beaming in through big bay windows, he shuffles through old photos and flight reports and comments laconically.
Like most men of his generation, B.J. Keirsted doesn't wear his heart on his sleeve. He reveals it, though, in a quiet and understated way. It isn't hard to sense the depths of emotion when the subject turns to his wife, Barbara - "Bobbie" - who died in 1976. Asked if the war changed him, he reflects sadly for a moment.
"I think it brought Bobbie and me pretty close, the war," he says. And then he changes the subject.
The years have not all been easy for B.J. Keirsted, but he doesn't complain. It seems true, what Cliff Conklin says: He never has a bad thing to say.
---
Conklin can laugh now about the near-fatal decision that turned the Worry Wart's last flight into a nail-biter. "I take full credit for that dumb idea," he says.
The flight to Berlin had been scrubbed somewhere deep into Germany. Too many clouds over the capital. The squadron was told to return to England.
Conklin was too gung-ho for that. "I said, 'Let's just drop the bombs - leave them here in Germany. Why take them back to England - this is our last go-'round."'
Keirsted took a vote. It was unanimous: The Worry Wart would leave the formation and go find something to bomb.
Maybe this was the kind of freewheeling spirit that won the war. It's hard to imagine the disciplined German fliers making a similar decision. Still, it wasn't the most prudent move.
In the security of a formation, with its escort of fighters, B-17s were - well, if not safe, at least considerably less vulnerable. Alone, a Flying Fortress was little more than target practice for the Luftwaffe.
As bombardier, it was up to Kent Keith to find a target. It took a while, but he finally found a railroad line and let loose.
"At that time, I was looking over my wing and I saw what appeared to be ice crystals," Conklin recalled. "Except ice crystals are supposed to go from the front to the back, and these were coming from the back to the front. I immediately shoved the stick forward and put it in a nose-down position. … And I hollered, 'There's a fighter on us!"'
---
It wasn't a bad life, in some ways. Aviators aboard the Flying Fortresses, as B-17s were known, lived relatively well, compared to their counterparts in the infantry. But they died with alarming frequency.
Nearly one in three crews in the 388th Bomb Group was shot down in the course of the war.
Ernie Pyle, the war correspondent, described the life of an airman this way: "A man approached death rather decently in the Air Forces. He died well-fed and clean-shaven, if that was any comfort."
It wasn't, really, but the surviving members of the Worry Wart say they never gave it much thought. Jack Kings summed up the feeling: "If you got hit, you were hit. If you didn't, you made it. I could never see any point in worrying about it."
If there is a distinguishing characteristic of this group of men, and of their generation, it might just be that sort of pragmatism.
Jack Kings learned it early, and like many others, he learned it out of necessity.
Kings is 76 now, and lives in retirement in his native Huntington, W.Va. He fishes for sport, as he has all his adult life. It was different when he was a child.
Then he fished for food - something to eat besides rice and beans. Back then, he remembers, in the depths of the Great Depression, his family was too poor to afford new shoes; they stuffed cardboard soles in the old ones.
"We kind of came up the hard way," he says.
For Kings and millions of other Americans, the military offered a way out of poverty, and a way to see some of the world. After the war, he tried various jobs - sales clerk, pawnbroker, traveling salesman - but it was no good.
"After where I'd been and doing what I'd been doing, it didn't interest me too much."
It wasn't an uncommon thought. The United States was still a predominantly rural nation in 1941. For many country boys, the war provided a glimpse of the outside world they might never have seen. And for some, like Jack Kings, there was no going back.
When war broke out in Korea, Kings was back in uniform - this time, for good, until he retired in 1968. Along the way, he'd gotten married and had two children. But that is a story in itself.
---
The war was on the home front for Jeanne Kings and Harriet "Cubs" Conklin. But they felt it - they felt it hard.
Jeanne Kings had been married to a young flier early in the war. He was a B-17 gunner, much like Jack Kings. But unlike Jack Kings, he never came home.
Jeanne was working in a lumber yard the day the messenger came to her house. "My mother answered the door, and of course she went all to pieces," she remembers. But at that point, all they knew was that her husband had been shot down. He was listed as missing in action.
It would be more than a year before she found out the full story: The plane had been shot down all right, and he had bailed. He was shot to death as he floated toward earth. He was 24 years old.
"I was very green, very miserable, very unhappy," she recalls. Then she met Jack Kings, home from the war. "The more we knew each other, the better we liked each other. … It gave me something to live for."
Cubs Corwin was a senior in college when she married Cliff Conklin, then home on leave from flight training. She taught school for a time, but eventually quit to make a home. She has vivid memories of the war years - the food and gas rationing, the censored letters, the waiting and worrying.
The Conklins had four children, and she followed him all over the country - in fact, all over the world - while he pursued a career in the Air Force. Eventually, they settled down near Kansas City. He got a job as a golf pro, and she went to work in a department store, a job she still holds.
Still, like most women of her generation, she spent her children's early years at home. She doesn't regret a minute.
"No, I never felt that way," she says. "It just seemed that life was so complete. And I always think now that we always had dances after the basketball games, and proms, and it was such a fond time. You just don't seem to have that anymore."
---
Conklin and Keirsted struggled with the controls a bit before sending the plane into a nose dive. The Worry Wart had been hit; no one was quite sure how badly.
Keirsted maneuvered the plane into the clouds and kept it there, hidden from the German fighter, while Brejensky, the navigator, struggled to figure out a path home. The joke about Brejensky - and there were lots of them; he inspired humor - was that he was a wiz with celestial navigation, but had no sense of direction.
Back in training, Kent Keith had given him the nickname "Bloodhound," joking that there was a dog on his Montana ranch that could find his way home better than Brejensky.
This time, Brejensky found his way home. By the time Keirsted pulled the plane out of the clouds, they were nearing the English Channel; soon enough, they would be over the fields and villages of Suffolk.
---
They were an unusually close-knit crew. They knew each other by the nicknames they bestowed: Goldstein was "Goldie," Keith was "Montana," "Conklin was "Ace." They liked each other, they respected each other and they spent their free time together. All except Miller, whom the others recall as a loner.
Then the war ended, and they went their separate ways. They promised to stay in touch, and some did, sporadically. For others, it would be more than 40 years before they renewed their bonds.
Pete Lewelling, who returned home to run a gas station, is dead now; so is Phil Brejensky, who became a television repairman. No one knows what happened to Miller. The others have held two reunions, both at B.J. Keirsted's home.
Cliff and Cubs Conklin became the godparents of Keirsted's oldest son. A half-century after the war, Cubs Conklin tells a reporter, "If you speak to B.J., tell him we love him."
The men are more circumspect, but they manage to telegraph their feelings for one another in less effusive ways. This was, after all, the generation of men whose emotional reserve helped send baby boomers into the woods to bang on drums.
---
The Worry Wart touched down and Keirsted hit the brakes. The plane began to slow. He hit the brakes again. Nothing. The crew would later discover that the German fighter had hit them in four places, and one of them was the brake line.
Jack Kings was watching through an open bomb bay as the concrete runway sped by. "All of a sudden, we ran out of concrete."
The plane bounced into a field, then into a ditch. And there the war ended for the Worry Wart and its crew.
---
Maybe they were typical, maybe they weren't. If Hollywood had gotten hold of them, it would have changed the name of the plane - something with a little more verve, like the Memphis Belle - but probably not the makeup of the crew.
Nor did their postwar lives lack for drama. But it wasn't the big screen spectacle of combat over Germany; it was the small-scale stuff of everyday lives. Larry Goldstein went through a divorce, then remarried. Jack and Jeanne Kings lost a child. B.J. Keirsted did too.
They are grandparents now, most of them, and the war is deep in the past. They see big differences between their generation and their sons' and daughters', but they speak of the younger generation with love and approval. Things are just so different.
Few generations have lived through so much change. Few, it might be argued, have given so much of themselves to their country.
And what did the war do for them? For Jack Kings and Cliff Conklin, it meant fulfilling careers in the military. For Kent Keith, it meant a chance to see life outside his Montana ranch. For Larry Goldstein, it meant a new sense of self-confidence.
For B.J. Keirsted? Maybe it was a chance to be a leader. Or maybe it was just four years out of his life.
And Edward Kozacek? He would spend the rest of his life as a municipal maintenance man in his hometown in upstate New York. He is the oldest of the group, at 84, and says the war didn't change him one whit.
"I came home and went right to work just as though nothing happened," he says. He is not without sentiment - his mantel is chock-full of war-related memorabilia, including a photograph of the Worry Wart and its crew - but he offers a suitably unsentimental epitaph for the war and its place in the lives of this generation:
"I wouldn't say they were good times; I wouldn't say they were bad times. I got through them all right - that was the main thing, right?"
 Load-Date: April 11, 1995

 

End of Document
