

The Business of Crossing the Border Is Up Against The Wall
The Associated Press
November 10, 1994, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 599 words
Byline: By SUSANA HAYWARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TIJUANA, Mexico
Body




Her gray hair shining in the light of a butane lamp, Esperanza Medina hugs her two grandchildren as she sells food to a handful of men waiting by a fire to climb a steel fence.
Under her green tent, business is down.
It has to do with California's passage of Proposition 187, which cuts benefits to illegal immigrants, as well as with the "militarization" of the border: a fence derisively called the Berlin Wall, Border Patrol agents armed with infrared goggles, the National Guard, floodlights and helicopters.
"There is such injustice for poor Mexicans who want to find work in the United States," she said. "It looks like they don't want us."
Her sentiments are echoed throughout this nation of 80 million following Tuesday's vote approving the measure, which could cut welfare benefits to illegal immigrants, including schooling and health care.
Medina sells instant soup, cigarettes, soft drinks and even plastic bags - to be worn as boots - to Mexicans who flock to the fence and cross into California, a long, perilous journey that is becoming harder every day.
Medina isn't making much money these days. She used to sell 50 ham sandwiches a night. Now she can't even sell 10.
Although illegal immigrants can still be seen climbing fences and running across canals, canyons and ravines, their numbers are distinctly down.
The Border Patrol says that more than 1 million were apprehended in fiscal 1993, compared with about 861,000 in fiscal 1994, which ended in September.
"Before, I took people across the border every night," said "Muffler," a so-called coyote, or smuggler, who charges up to $ 200 a person for a ride to Los Angeles.
Fidgety, with a toothpick in his mouth, "Muffler," who says his real name is Juan Coronado, has been a coyote for five years. Now he's helping build a Chinese restaurant with a friend. He's a little bored.
"I'll just wait for things to calm down and go back to my old business," he said. "I know how to do it. It's better than stealing."
Not many here believe Mexicans will stop going to the United States just because of Proposition 187. Even though they often work for less than the U.S. minimum wage, they still make more money than they would at home. Common jobs for the illegal immigrants are picking fruit, working in construction or restaurants, mowing lawns or cleaning houses.
They do anything, anywhere, from California, to Nevada, Oregon, Utah and even the East Coast. And many pay taxes and social security, money they never claim.
About half of the 1 million illegal Mexican immigrants estimated to be in the United States use Tijuana as their crossing point. But the border is 2,000 miles long, with other opportunities for dashing across.
"If it gets too hard to cross through Tijuana, they will find other smaller border towns to go across," said Victor Clark, an anthropologist who heads the independent Binational Center for Human Rights. "Besides, we still have to see if 187 will actually be put into action."
The motion is to be appealed.
What worries most Mexicans about the proposition is that it may increase discrimination against Hispanics and Mexico in general.
Atop the desk of Antonio Garcia Sanchez, the attorney general for Human Rights in Baja California, are anti-Mexican pamphlets, courtesy of skin heads, the Ku Klux Klan and other racist groups.
One pamphlet reads: "If it ain't white, waste it." It shows a drawing of an illegal immigrant being shot by a machine gun, blood pouring out of his stomach. That's just one.
"We are very worried that 187 will generate a climate of violence and a big rejection of Mexicans," said Garcia.
 Load-Date: November 10, 1994

 

End of Document
