

The Wearing of the Green and The Waving of the Red, White and Blue
The Associated Press
March 17, 1991, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 538 words
Dateline: BOSTON
Body




Gaelic bagpipes wailed and military bands boomed Sunday as about 500,000 revelers gathered for the St. Patrick's Day wearing of the green and the waving of the red, white and blue.
Mayor Raymond Flynn dedicated the 90th annual St. Patrick's Day parade through South Boston to troops who served in the Persian Gulf War.
"We're very glad to welcome them home," Flynn said before the two-hour parade began. "This was the most enthusiastic crowd response since President Kennedy marched in the parade."
Military bands and a float decked out in yellow ribbons and flowers drew strong applause from spectators forming a four-mile line of green sweaters, jackets and hats under sunny skies.
A bagpipe company from Ireland was among 25 bands in the parade, which also marked Evacuation Day, a holiday commemorating the ouster of British troops from Boston in 1776.
The crowd, treated to temperatures in the high 50s, was generally well-behaved and police reported no serious problems.
"It's probably been one of the best parades we've had," said police Officer Thomas Lema. "We try to make it more of a family event than a drunken event, which it probably was a few years ago."
A strong Pacific storm system rained on San Francisco's parade, but after five years of drought, many considered it the luck of the Irish.
"Today, if it's really raining on me I'm going to enjoy it," said Lar Caughlan, a yoga teacher at San Francisco State University and a drummer in The Irish Pipers Band of San Francisco.
Paraders marched about a half-mile up Market Street to the steps of City Hall. The floats, mainly cars with banners plastered to their sides, featured politicians, including Mayor Art Agnos.
Those who withstood the occasional downpours saw parade units that ranged from dance teams to Irish wolfhounds.
About 100,000 people turned out in the rain for Chicago's South Side Irish Parade. Among the marchers were about 400 veterans, including 10 who recently returned from the Persian Gulf.
"We pray, parade and party," parade organizer George J. Hendry said of the day's activities.
Philadelphia and Kansas City, Mo., were among other cities to hold St. Patrick's Day parades Sunday. About 150,000 people, many wearing green ponchos and carrying green umbrellas, stood in the rain for the Kansas City march. Several cities hosted parades Saturday.
Several small celebrations were held Sunday around New York City, one day after Mayor David Dinkins was booed as he marched with a gay organization in the St. Patrick's Day Parade.
Ireland, W.Va. - population 50 - celebrated Sunday with jigs, a parade and a 10 kilometer race. The town about 75 miles northeast of Charleston was named Ireland in honor of resident Andrew Wilson, who lived to be 114 years old, said King.
"We do this to celebrate our heritage and to celebrate the coming of spring," said Denton King, an organizer of the 10th annual Irish Festival. "We're a little rural community and the sunshine is always an inviting thing after a cold, muddy season like we just had."
The community's post office used to be swamped with requests for postmarks, he said.
"It used to be we would get letters from all over the country wanting the cancellation stamp for St. Patrick's Day cards," King said.

 

End of Document
