

The Battle of the Budget
The Associated Press
June 27, 1991, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1083 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




No agency in New York City is being spared as city leaders try to close a $$3.5 billion gap in a $$29 billion budget before Monday. More than 10,000 workers are losing their jobs Friday, taxes are being raised and services are being cut drastically. Meanwhile, several states face July 1 deadlines, which if not met could mean layoffs and cost-cutting measures. Here is a look:
 
 California
Both houses have passed a $$55 billion budget, but the spending plan hasn't been signed because it needs several companion bills to balance it. Those are all stalled in the Legislature. Gov. Pete Wilson and the Legislature's leaders have been meeting daily to negotiate. Among unresolved issues: $$7 billion in tax increases, including a 1 1/8-cent increase in the 6-cent statewide sales tax, increases in alcohol and motor vehicle taxes and imposing the sales tax on candy, snack foods, newspapers and magazines; Wilson's proposals to withhold $$1.6 billion in state contributions to the employee pension plan and to cut welfare benefits 4.4 percent. His plan also would freeze state salaries and allow layoffs of up to 10,000 state workers and unpaid furloughs for thousands more.
Connecticut
The General Assembly is in special session trying to get a budget passed by Monday. Unresolved: whether the tax side of the budget should include a state personal income tax, as independent Gov. Lowell P. Weicker Jr. wants. Connecticut is one of 10 states without an income tax. The state faces a $$942 million deficit in the current budget year and a gap between spending necessary to maintain current services and revenues from existing taxes of about $$1.8 billion for 1991-92. Those totals are regarded as the worst in the nation, amounting to more than 35 percent of the current budget of $$7.5 billion. Weicker has threatened to shut down non-essential state services at midnight Sunday if a budget hasn't been passed.
 
 Illinois
Lawmakers are struggling to close a budget gap that Republican Gov. Jim Edgar's administration places at $$850 million. Edgar disclosed Wednesday that the administration's deficit estimate had grown from $$500 million since March. Both figures are on a budget base of about $$13 billion. Edgar has proposed closing the gap primarily by cutting welfare benefits and reimbursement rates to health-care providers that treat Medicaid patients. Democrats have opposed the welfare cuts. The question is whether they can be restored and the budget balanced without cutting education funding. Edgar had proposed a small increase for schools. There is no serious discussion of tax increases; the big tax issue is whether the state will extend a 20 percent income-tax surcharge set to expire Sunday.
 
 Maine
The $$3.2 billion budget for the two-year cycle that starts Monday remained unresolved. Among the issues: workers' compensation reforms that Gov. John R. McKernan is demanding as a condition for his approval of the budget.
Lawmakers have signaled support for nearly $$300 million in higher income, sales and gasoline taxes, a level the Republican governor had proposed, but those levies also are stalled amid the budget impasse.
McKernan has warned that he would shut down all but the most essential government services Monday unless a budget is approved before then.
 
 New Jersey
Democrats control both the Statehouse and the Legislature in New Jersey but that has not stopped them squabbling over how to balance and pass the budget for the fiscal year beginning Monday. Gov. Jim Florio has said he needed $$280 million in concessions from state employee unions in order to balance his $$14.3 billion budget for 1991-1992. Florio threatened the unions with up to 6,000 layoffs if they balked. They did. But the Assembly Democrats approved a $$14.7 budget that avoids the need for union concessions. Florio now says the contracts will be honored but the price will be layoffs, perhaps as many as 6,000 but probably half that. The leader of the Democratic-controlled Senate agrees with the governor. Both also say that the Assembly Democrats overestimate state revenue by as much as $$95 million.
 
 North Carolina
House and Senate budget negotiators have deadlocked for two weeks over a tax increase package of more than $$630 million - the largest in state history. Both sides have agreed to a one-cent sales tax increase, but the House wants to give half of that increase to local governments. The Senate also has refused to accept House proposals for a permanent increase in corporate income taxes from 7 percent to 8 percent, an increase in personal income taxes for couples with net incomes over $$100,000 and a five-cent increase in cigarette taxes.
 
 Ohio
A four-month interim state budget bill is being prepared in the event the Legislature cannot come up with a two-year, $$27 billion measure by Monday. Legislators involved said they doubted the temporary bill would be needed. Among issues facing House-Senate negotiators: whether to convert state-run liquor stores into private businesses; spending all or part of a $$300 million rainy day account; reducing or ending $$109 million in payments to merchants for collecting the state sales tax. There are no general tax increases in the comparatively tight budget, which would result in layoffs of an estimated 3,100 to 7,100 employees out of a government work force of about 55,000 people. Without spending authority provided by the budget, the state will not be able to pay its employees, send out welfare checks or meet other obligations as of Monday.
 
 Pennsylvania
The Legislature is faced with enacting a tax increase of nearly $$3 billion. The state is expected to run a deficit of $$475 million to $$900 million when the fiscal year ends June 30. A 17 percent increase in the state's 2.1 percent personal income tax and a 166 percent increase in the 18-cent-a-pack cigarette tax are among proposals being considered. Gov. Robert P. Casey's administration already has laid off more than 1,400 workers from the state's 78,000-employee executive branch workforce. The state courts blocked his plans for cutting pay 10 percent for 10 weeks for 3,000 first-level supervisors and nearly 10,000 management employees. More than $$500 million in state aid to senior citizens, medical providers, counties, school districts and universities has been delayed by the budget squeeze. Lawmakers say they doubt they can meet the June 30 deadline, when the state will lose its spending authority, cutting off all aid and state employee pay checks.

 

End of Document
