

The Year the Games Stopped.
The Associated Press
December 30, 1994, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 664 words
Byline: By RONALD BLUM, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Money finally got bigger than the games in 1994.
A players' strike wiped out the World Series for the first time since 1904. An owners' lockout canceled the first half of the NHL season and threatened to eliminate the rest.
Basketball nearly had a work stoppage. Baseball umpires were told they'll be locked out starting Sunday.
"What you're seeing here is an industry making adjustments to the same kind of economic changes that have every other industry in the country," Bud Selig, baseball's acting commissioner, said Thursday.
Selig and NHL commissioner Gary Bettman want the type of deals the NBA and NFL have: salary caps that fix the percentage of revenue going to players. Baseball owners are upset their players earn an average of $ 1.2 million; hockey owners are angry their players earn more than $ 500,000, on average.
"It's no coincidence that the two most successful leagues and the two that are operating have a salary cap," Bettman said earlier this month. "Salary cap is not a dirty word."
Baseball's strike - its eighth work stoppage since 1972 - began Aug. 12. when players struck to avoid a salary cap. NBA players agreed to accept 53 percent of defined revenue as part of a cap deal that began with the 1984-85 season. NFL players get 64 percent of defined revenue as part of a cap that began this year.
"A cap is just the vehicle to deliver the money," NBA commissioner David Stern said one day last August as he walked past baseball's offices in New York.
The baseball strike canceled the final 52 days and 669 games of the season and threatens to destroy 1995, too. By unilaterally implementing a salary cap on Dec. 23, owners caused players to file a challenge with the National Labor Relations Board. Teams are starting to prepare to start spring training with replacement players - even though Toronto can't use replacements at home and Baltimore says it won't use them at all.
"I am reasoanbly certain the owners will come to regret it - sooner than they think," union head Donald Fehr said moments after the decision to implement was announced.
While there was little negotiating in baseball, there was color. Fehr called management negotiator Richard Ravitch "a hatchet man" for the owners. Ravitch, the owners' sixth labor chief since the free agent era began in 1976, departs baseball Dec. 31 when his $ 2.25 million, three-year contract expires.
Hockey, too, had little talking between the sides. The sport, which endured a 10-day strike in 1992, appeared ready for a breakthrough following the New York Rangers' Stanley Cup victory on June 14. Although the players offered a no strike-no lockout pledge, owners turned it down and on Sept. 22 announced a lockout would begin Oct. 1, when the season was scheduled to start.
"We want a season without distraction, without interruption," Bettman said then.
Now they're might be none at all. Bettman said all along that the season would not be worth playing if it were less than 50 games. And on Dec. 29 he said the season must start by Jan. 16 in order to get in 50 games.
The NBA came close to joining baseball and hockey on the sidelines. Only on Oct. 27 - eight days before the season openers - did players and owners agree to a one-year no-strike, no-lockout deal.
"You cannot be in our industry without being impacted by the venom that seems to be flowing in the baseball negotiations," Stern said.
Baseball umpires join the ranks of the unpaid this Sunday. The American and National leagues announced Wednesday that paychecks will stop after the umpires' four-year contract expires Dec. 31.
"They can take a hard-line position as long as there's snow on the ground," said Richie Phillips, head of the umpires' union. "But come April, they're going to need the umpires."
There's a good chance the only men on the field who aren't replacements will be the managers, coaches, trainers and security people.
At the end of 1994, the only certainty about professional sports in the United States is that ticket prices will go up.
 Load-Date: December 30, 1994

 

End of Document
