

The Modern Noah and the Boxy Boat That Won the War
The Associated Press
June 3, 1994, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 456 words
Byline: By JANET McCONNAUGHEY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW ORLEANS
Body




Hitler called him the new Noah. Ike said he helped win the war. The GIs who rode his boxy, flat-bottomed boats to the beaches of Normandy cursed him.
"That SOB Higgins - he hasn't got nothing to be proud of, inventing this boat!" historian Samuel Eliot Morison quoted one drenched, seasick soldier as saying.
The man so described was Andrew Jackson Higgins, a New Orleans boatbuilder who designed and built the now-familiar boats that ferried troops from ship to shore for the D-Day invasion, June 6, 1944.
The Higgins landing craft jounced with every wave, the spray slapping the standing, gear-laden troops in the face. Not all the seasick men got their heads over the side in time.
"It was a floating cigar box … (that) could carry a platoon of thirty-six men or a jeep and a squad of a dozen men. … Even in a moderate sea it would bounce and shake while swells broke over the ramp and sides," historian Stephen Ambrose wrote in his new book "D-Day."
"But it could bring a rifle platoon to the shoreline and discharge the men in a matter of seconds, then extract itself and go back to the mother ship for another load. It fit the need perfectly."
When Higgins designed his first flat-bottomed boats, it was for trappers, oilmen and timbermen who worked the bayous of Louisiana. They needed something that could zip over logs and through heavy weeds.
In all, Higgins built 20,094 landing craft and PT boats for the Allies in World War II, said Jerry E. Strahan, whose biography of Higgins was recently published by Louisiana State University Press.
Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower brought up Higgins when Ambrose visited Eisenhower in 1964 in Gettysburg, Pa., to talk about writing the former president's biography.
Eisenhower asked Ambrose if he had known Higgins. No, he said. Higgins died in 1952, the year before Ambrose moved to New Orleans.
"Well, that's too bad - he's the man who won the war for us," Eisenhower said.
Without the landing craft, Eisenhower explained, "We could never have landed over an open beach. The whole strategy of the war would have been different."
In 1992, Congress approved $ 4 million in funding for National D-Day Museum in New Orleans, where Ambrose heads the Eisenhower Center at the University of New Orleans.
Ground was broken May 21. The museum is not expected to open until 1997, but it is sponsoring a D-Day re-enactment this Sunday.
As many as 150 mock soldiers using Higgins landing craft will storm the shores of Lake Pontchartrain, where Higgins built and tested his boats.
Ambrose was dumbfounded when Eisenhower offered his assessment of the boat's role in the Allied victory. Does Ambrose now think the great general was deliberately exaggerating?
"It seemed to me that he was deadly serious," Ambrose said.
 Load-Date: June 3, 1994

 

End of Document
