

The Artists: The Passion of Preserving Old Buildings
The Associated Press
September 6, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 855 words
Byline: By KELLEY SHANNON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN ANTONIO
Body




It all started around the turn of the century when someone wanted to tear down the Alamo and build a hotel.
Ever since, as more people link history with charm, saving old buildings has become a citywide passion.
"History really walks everywhere here," said Pat Osborne, city historic preservation officer. "We have a great feeling for the way we live and the river and the customs and for the way we've come along."
From a cluster of Spanish missions to ornate homes erected by European settlers to early 20th century office buildings, antique architecture is everywhere. But its modern-day presence is no accident.
The Alamo, the most famous old structure in town, was completed in 1727 as a Spanish mission and in 1836 became the site of the famous battle between Texans and the Mexican army.
Later, after repairs by the U.S. Army and then a conversion to a store, the Alamo's "long barrack" went up for sale in 1903 as a hotel site. Clara Driscoll, a member of the Daughters of the Republic of Texas, bought the property to postpone the hotel plan.
In 1905, the state bought it from her and handed over the building and adjoining church to the organization, which operates the shrine for the public.
The preservation movement marched on.
In 1924, a group of teachers, artists and others formed the now-powerful San Antonio Conservation Society to save an old stone building called Market House from being razed.
The society was unsuccessful but undaunted. They stayed with their work and, in 1926, rescued a downtown bend of the San Antonio River from being cemented over for a storm sewer and parking lot. Today, the area is known as the River Walk, the city's downtown heart.
The Conservation Society in the late 1920s and early '30s embarked on another big project: preserving Mission San Jose, where weeds were rampant and vandals lassoed old statues. They gradually purchased pieces of the mission property, then trudged around in hats and gloves supervising the fix up work.
The organization helped restore dozens of old structures, including the Espada Aqueduct, the Old Ursuline Academy and the home of writer O. Henry.
"I think that we're important because if we hadn't been doing this, it probably wouldn't have been done," said Bobbie Roberts, a vice president of the Society. "It's been a cooperative thing between the community and the society."
Each year the group raises money through the four-day Fiesta event "Night in Old San Antonio," where revelers taste ethnic foods and drinks and listen to live music.
The local chapter of the American Institute of Architects also gets involved in historic preservation and publishes a guide to San Antonio architecture. Chapter president Randy Hohlaus said Spanish colonial architecture is evident around town, although many historic downtown buildings date to the late 1800s and early 1900s, when San Antonio was the largest metropolitan area in Texas.
As some cities tore down old buildings in the '60s to build new ones in urban renewal projects, Hohlaus said, San Antonio held on to its old structures.
"I think that has a lot to do with what people call the charm of the city," he said.
Significant historic architecture can be found throughout the downtown area. The Municipal Auditorium, built in 1926, illustrates Spanish colonial revival with its domed towers, carved limestone details and decorative tiles.
The octagonal Tower Life Building, dating to 1929, commands attention with its unusual shape, detailing on smaller upper levels and orange lighting at night. Its clear visibility from several major streets allow for a "surreal" view, said Steven Tillotson, the AIA's urban affairs committee chairman.
Worshipers still gather daily at San Fernando Cathedral. Spanish Canary Island immigrants started building its oldest section in 1738. Its Gothic Revival style was incorporated in 1868.
San Antonio captured international attention in 1985 with the preservation of the Fairmount Hotel. The 1906 building was moved five blocks in six days to its current site where it operates as a luxury hotel.
With an emphasis on preservation, the sudden unauthorized demolition of the century-old Finck Cigar Co. building earlier this year caused an uproar, and resulted in state legislation to crack down on those who destroy historic property.
According to Osborne, San Antonio was an early leader in the national preservation movement.
In the 1920s, at the urging of the Conservation Society and other groups, the city bought the Spanish Governor's Palace, a building dating to 1749. Citizens approved a bond issue to pay for its restoration.
In 1967, a city ordinance was approved to establish the city's Historic Review Board. La Villita, an old village downtown near the river, and the King William residential area south of downtown were declared historic districts.
Now there are 10 historic districts. Construction and other projects that would change the buildings in those areas must be approved by the 11-member review board.
"I think the real philosophy of the city is to protect the history," Osborne said. "I'm always amazed at some of the people who fought so early for this."
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto

 

End of Document
