

The Spotted Owl: The Bird At The Heart Of The Battle
The Associated Press
July 1, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 376 words
Byline: By SCOTT SONNER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The northern spotted owl has been at the center of the controversy over the Northwest's old-growth forests because the U.S. Forest Service considers it an indicator of the health of the entire forest ecosystem.
The threatened owls nest on branches and in cavities of the largest trees, using the multilayered canopy of the centuries-old forests to escape from flying predators, especially larger horned owls.
Scientists say the spotted owls indicate the presence of small rodents, which help fertilize the damp, mossy floor of the only temperate rain forests in North America.
Since the Fish and Wildlife Service declared the owl a threatened species in June 1990, three Northwest salmon species and a coastal sea bird that nests in old-growth forests, the marbled murrelet, have been granted protection under the Endangered Species Act.
President Clinton unveiled an administrative plan Thursday because Congress has been unable to strike a compromise that would allow for some continued logging without jeopardizing the survival of the estimated remaining 3,500 pairs of owls in Oregon, Washington and northern California.
Sen. Bob Packwood, R-Ore., led an effort to bypass the Endangered Species Act to allow for some Oregon logging in the owl habitat two years ago. But Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell, D-Maine, and then-Sen. Al Gore beat back Packwood's amendment.
Under the Bush administration, Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr. and the Bureau of Land Management won a small exemption to the act last year on the grounds that the logging ban caused severe economic hardship in Oregon timber towns.
But a federal appeals court ordered a new hearing after allegations that the Bush White House illegally lobbied members of the exemption panel. The BLM under the Clinton administration said this year it would not pursue logging in the exempted area.
The closest Congress came to approving a comprehensive protection plan for the owl came last year when Rep. George Miller, D-Calif., chairman of the House Interior Committee, offered a sweeping proposal backed by environmentalists.
But House Speaker Thomas Foley, D-Wash., persuaded several Democrats on Miller's committee to oppose the plan because it didn't allow enough logging, and the measure died.

 

End of Document
