

The Press' Angst Has Become Part of the Story
The Associated Press
April 13, 1994, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 786 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




When he was mayor of New York, Ed Koch used to go around the city taking his political temperature. He'd ask voters, "How'm I doing?"
The press has been doing much the same about its coverage of Whitewater, a term encompassing anything from Vincent Foster's apparent suicide to Hillary Rodham Clinton's margin calls from her broker.
While Whitewater is getting intense attention these days, there's also been a spate of stories about whether all that attention is warranted.
The New York Times took editorial-page notice Sunday of what it said was the press' questioning whether all the coverage "could lead to the ritualistic destruction of yet another presidency."
Stick with it, was the Times' advice: "Experience suggests that every time the press lays off a story, for whatever reason - official pressure, public dismay, professional angst - it has been the wrong thing to do."
Lars-Erik Nelson, columnist for the New York newspaper Newsday, sees Whitewater as "a witch hunt, pure and simple" and the angst as an inevitable result of the media's enhanced importance in Washington.
"We're not just observers, we're participants," he said. "Once you get that kind of power you become subject to the scrutiny of the press."
A student-run daily newspaper, published at this week's meeting of the American Society of Newspaper Editors, also took note of the coverage-of-the-coverage phenomenon.
"Whitewater: Hard facts vs. media fixation," said a front-page headline. "Is the press playing it safe or overplaying the issue?"
The story comes to no conclusion, but the public seems to have. A recent Times Mirror poll said 73 percent of those who voted for Clinton felt the press was paying too much attention; only 40 percent of George Bush voters thought so.
"The press is more self-conscious than ever," said David Shribman, Washington bureau chief of The Boston Globe.
"It may be in part because of the public's skepticism about what we do and in part because this (story) is truly a mystery, and it is mysterious to all of us how it will end up."
For journalism, the lesson left by Watergate 20 years ago is that the press mostly missed the story, leaving it to two young Washington Post metro reporters to uncover. The savings and loan scandal was almost over before reporters delved into it. A determination not to let that happen again may account for journalism's zeal this time.
At the ASNE convention, Ed Grimsley, who writes for the editorial page of the Richmond (Va.) Times-Dispatch, said he suspected that many in the White House press corps felt in philosophical sync with the Clintons "and feel a little remorse at having to have a go at it." So they gnash their teeth in public about writing about it, he said.
To Robert Haiman, former executive editor of the St. Petersburg (Fla.) Times, Whitewater presents a dilemma for the press.
"If they fail to go after it vigorously and it turns into another Watergate they will be, legitimately, faulted," he said. "If they go at it like World War II and it turns out to be a smaller skirmish, it looks like they were overzealous."
Nicholas von Hoffman, a former newspaper columnist, doesn't share the bedevilment. He thinks the press has written too much about too little.
"In due course," he wrote recently in the Los Angeles Times, "this excess will be followed by a great trooping to the journalistic wailing wall, where we shall see editors and reporters look at their handiwork and cry out, 'Forgive us, we have sinned!"'
That view is shared by Deborah Tannen, author of the best-selling book, "You Just Don't Understand: Women and Men in Conversation." She believes Whitewater is the result of a journalistic search "for something - anything - to provide the exposure of errors that our public discourse now requires." The investigations, press and otherwise, she concludes "are a graver threat to the country than any conceivable effects of the behavior they are examining."
In a Wednesday luncheon appearance before the editors, President Clinton joined in the analysis. He said the press is "under more competitive and other pressures today than ever before," suggesting that was why it was unwilling to quit writing the story.
He also called the editors' attention to Garrison Keillor's speech the previous night in which the radio storyteller lectured the Washington press.
"When you slip into the field of fiction and entertainment, you will be required to be fascinating," Keillor warned them.
"This is going to shorten your careers. Nobody on God's green earth can be fascinating for very long. But people can be accurate and responsible all of their lives."
Said Clinton: "It was a stunning speech. I have never heard anyone speak that way to a group of media people."
 Load-Date: April 13, 1994

 

End of Document
