

The Voice of the People
The Associated Press
July 15, 1992, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 570 words
Byline: By JOHN CUNNIFF, AP Business Analyst
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Events of the past couple of years suggest that candidates for public office would be better informed about the economy if they paid heed to the public, not just the economic statistics.
The economic statistics show a slow ascent from recession, and that is proof enough for certain candidates. If gross national product is growing, even barely, they believe, the public should be happy.
That the public is not happy is quite clear, and they have conveyed their message through the consumer sentiment polls that have sprouted during the past few years of economic discontent - no matter what statistics say.
Economist Lacy Hunt makes the point succinctly: "The economy does not exist to create statistics for analysts to study, but to raise the standard of living by providing rewarding job opportunities."
In other words, accurate as the statistics might be, they may measure an economy other than what the public perceives. While the economy might have grown, for example, the public perceived that job opportunities did not.
And while the statistics might suggest people should be out buying, they are not. Instead, they have resisted the lure of lower interest rates, discounts and rebates.
In effect, they have been telling the candidates, government officials, business people and academics that the statistics by which they measure the economy do not necessarilly measure public feelings about it.
The public does not react reflexively. The late George Katona, a psychologist, economist and pioneer in consumer behavior studies at the University of Michigan Survey Research Center, established clearly, for example, that consumers do not automatically respond to low prices.
Before a consumer purchase is completed, he found there must be not only the ability to buy but the willingness to do so. The former is dictated by income, savings, debts and the like. The latter is more subjective.
Willingness to buy might be affected by many psychological factors, such as uncertainty about the economic future, the threat of unemployment and perceptions about the quality of political leadership.
Such considerations are as important in whether or not a consumer buys as price, credit terms, rebates and the like. The consumer is complex, and doesn't respond like an automaton to the promptings of economic statistics.
In fact, there are indications that consumers place more faith in their own perceptions than in official economic reports produced and read in Washington and elsewhere.
"The average American consumer is well informed about prevailing economic trends," Katona wrote in his classic, "The Mass Consumption Society."
Said Katona: "Although he doesn't follow business statistics or read technical reports on the state of the economy, he knows whether business activity is improving or deteriorating."
One day, unexpectedly, the professor received confirmation of this observation when a friend sent him a chart of annual percentage changes in industrial production for the period 1954 through 1963.
Superimposed on the chart were the percentage changes to a question asked regularly in the Survey Research Centers interviews: "Would you say that at present business conditions are better or worse than they were a year ago?"
Year to year, angle to angle, the two lines were almost exact.
The lesson: It may be smarter to rely on the voice of the people than the dictates of the statistics. People vote, statistics do not.

 

End of Document
