

The Treaty, 'The Five,' and the 21st Century
The Associated Press
April 20, 1995, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 648 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




They call it a "Treaty Review and Extension Conference." But the debates in hushed halls here beside the East River might just as well be dubbed a Constitutional Convention for the 21st century.
It's not just that the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, up for renewal, clearly outlaws nuclear weapons for 173 nations. Just as importantly, it vaguely approves them for five.
And with a permanent treaty in hand, "The Five," in the decades to come, may begin acting more and more like a global executive branch. In other words, if it's a New World Order you want, check out the simple 2,400-word document known as the NPT.
That ultimate meaning is not lost on Third World participants in the debate.
From the U.N. rostrum this week, Indonesian Ambassador Izhar Ibrahim complained that the U.S. proposal for indefinite, unconditional extension of the NPT would allow the "five privileged powers" - the United States, Russia, Britain, France and China - "to keep their nuclear arsenals while others are barred forever from acquiring them."
That would "ratify inequity in international relations," declared the man from Indonesia, the world's most populous nation without atomic weapons.
Old agreements and recent history combine to put The Five in an unassailable position:
-The U.N. Charter endowed them alone with veto power in the Security Council, giving them effective control of a United Nations that has begun intervening more and more actively in the world's conflicts.
-When it took force in 1970, the NPT conferred international legitimacy on the nuclear arsenals of The Five - today an estimated 23,000 operational warheads - and obliged all other signatory nations to forswear atomic arms.
-The Cold War's end has brought America, Russia and China closer together. The Five still argue over such issues as trade and aid, but explosive antagonisms have given way to something closer to nasty squabbles within a family, the nuclear clan.
The NPT, which had a guaranteed term of only 25 years, stipulated that in 1995 the member nations would have to decide whether to extend it indefinitely, or for a fixed period or periods.
No one at the month-long U.N. conference wants to scrap the treaty, since that would invite a nuclear free-for-all. But many in the Third World want to extend it for only limited terms, making each renewal contingent on concrete progress toward total nuclear disarmament in the world.
It's a goal embedded in the treaty's own Article VI, which calls for "negotiations in good faith … on a treaty on general and complete disarmament."
Vice President Al Gore on Wednesday reaffirmed the U.S. commitment to that lofty objective. As he appealed for indefinite treaty extension, Gore told the U.N. gathering that disarmament "remains our ultimate goal."
But he presented no new plans to reach that goal. And another U.S. official may have offered a more candid look at the underlying attitude in Washington and other nuclear capitals.
"Countries are not telling the truth if they really think that we can have a serious negotiation about getting to a nuclear-free world. It is not possible under any foreseeable circumstance," Thomas Graham Jr., chief U.S. negotiator for the NPT conference, told an arms-control newsletter.
The Five have tried to reassure the nuclear "have-nots" they will never be the target of the nuclear powers' doomsday weapons. But thus far their declarations and U.N. resolutions have not satisfied the Third Worlders, who want instead a binding treaty tying the hands of the nuclear powers.
If they feel a need to build up their defenses in such an "unequal" world, at least the have-nots know where to go - to The Five.
Led by the United States, the "legitimate" nuclear powers control 91 percent of the global trade in arms - non-nuclear, that is.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Charles J. Hanley has covered international events for The Associated Press since 1976.
 Load-Date: April 20, 1995

 

End of Document
