

The Artists: Eccentric Art Exhibit Offers Glimpses Into the Apocalyptic Mind
The Associated Press
October 21, 1994, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 856 words
Byline: By ROBERT SAIZ HOLGUIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SEATTLE
Body




There lurks in the unexplored depths of our communities a bizarre assortment of obscure organizations, teeming with zealots and fanatics.
They revere such people as serial killer Charles Manson. Others hope to overthrow the federal government and some even worship the cast of the TV show "The Partridge Family." Secretive and sometimes highly organized, the one thing binding this myriad of Americans together is their staunch belief in the Apocalypse - and their numbers are growing.
Or at least that's what the latest exhibit at the Center on Contemporary Art, entitled "Cult Rapture," would have us believe.
"I would definitely say there has been a surge in the population of such things," says curator Adam Parfrey, who has written books and a variety of articles on apocalyptic phenomena.
"I don't see a horror in it, not necessarily," he says. "I see it more as a realignment of society."
Parfrey convincingly conveys this notion in the amazingly eccentric collection of artwork on exhibit at COCA. Some of the pieces include paintings by Dr. Jack Kevorkian, a signed Manson self-portrait, pagan altars and the sinister canvasses of noted Brooklyn artist Joe Coleman.
"Certainly, a cult can be malignant," Parfrey says. "But what I'm seeing more often is simply autonomous groups banding together for newfound alliances, while conventional religious affiliations and communities decline."
In offering what he calls an unbiased examination of these subversive groups and individuals, Parfrey has assembled a fascinating array of material for the exhibit.
There's neo-Nazi propaganda on display alongside ranting literature from religious sects such as the Branch-Davidians or the Christian Patriots. Anarchist imagery and survivalist how-tos counter satanic paintings and evangelical depictions of salvation on Judgment Day.
COCA's latest show comes at a time when David Koresh's Ranch Apocalypse in Waco, Texas, is embedded into the contemporary American psyche and the Northwest's reputation as a haven for white separatists has gained momentum in light of the deadly standoff involving Randy Weaver's family and federal agents in northern Idaho in 1991.
"This is very real," says Parfrey. "I'm trying to open people's minds to a reality that they don't ordinarily face, but is quite present and active."
Exacerbating the collective dread, Parfrey says, is the fact that the end of the second millennium is only six years away.
"Historically, the end of every 1,000-year cycle throws visionaries of doom into a fever pitch," says Parfrey, who has written the books "Apocalypse Culture" and the upcoming "Cult Rapture."
"I think its a regression to medieval attitudes, a need for scapegoats and a need to explain the absurdity of existence," he says. "The time crunch with the year 2000 is occurring so quickly that people will latch on to that as a moment of apotheosis."
These cultic visions of apocalypse and its aftermath have gotten far more sophisticated than the days of placards emblazoned with: "The End Is Near." Now, several believers are linked through the information superhighway or fax-machine networks, as demonstrated at the exhibit.
Some groups have even gone so far as to engineer a map of what the country will look like after a devastating global "polar shift." (Incidentally, all of Washington state would be underwater.)
The most engrossing part of the exhibit is the wide selection of Joe Coleman's larger-than-life cataclysmic panoramas. Rendered in the tradition of 16th-century Dutch painters, Coleman's work pulls the viewer into intricate worlds filled with despair and personal demons.
"A show like this is an important way to let people see what's going on out there," says Coleman, who saw his trilogy of horror, "Crucifixion Tryptic," displayed together for the first time at the exhibit.
In looking at cults of personality are the works of Kevorkian, the Michigan physician notorious for his pro-active stance on euthanasia, and Rodney Vanworth's huge canvasses painted in collaboration with bystanders outside the Los Angeles courthouse during O.J. Simpson's pre-trial proceedings.
On the lighter side are pieces assembled by the Los Angeles-based Partridge Family Temple, who regard the defunct television show not as 1970s camp, but as an oracle of wisdom and guidance.
"We have no rules other than clearing your heart of guilt and pity," says Partridge in a Pear Tree, a temple member who was on hand for the opening two weeks ago.
"We're all on that Partridge Family bus traveling at 88 miles per hour into the great abyss on the horizon," says Partridge. "So we're trying to have as much fun as possible while we still can."
But Parfrey's message, on the whole, is a serious one, even if it's not altogether palatable.
"My biggest concern would be that people would see some sensational material and react to that, rather than try to understand the depth of the issue," he says. "I don't share the view of several things here, a few even repel me, but hopefully people will be thoughtful and educated enough to know that neo-Nazism is not a nice thing to get into and that the exhibit can actually be educational."
 Load-Date: October 21, 1994

 

End of Document
