

The Mall of America/America the Mall?
The Associated Press
August 16, 1992, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 891 words
Byline: By MARGARET CRAWFORD
Body




Is the Mall of America the ultimate mall?
In addition to an encyclopedic collection of shops, restaurants, nightclubs and movie theaters, America's first megamall also contains a swimming pool, police station and theme park, and even has its own ZIP code.
However, in spite of its claims to have reinvented shopping, the Mall is just an oversized version of the superregional malls found on the outskirts of virtually every American city. Its developers origionally designed the Mall as a more superlative version of Canada's West Edmonton megamall, an ambitious attempt to synthesize the entire world inside a mall. But a recessionary economy, department store bankruptcies, and protests from the real town outside its walls have forced them to significantly scale down their plans.
Thus, many observers see the Mall both as the last of a breed and as an indicator of the future of the mall.
Moreover, the hype surrounding the new Mall of America obscures a far more important phenomenon - the "Malling of America." Over the last 40 years, malls have become ubiquitous, offering not only shopping, dining and entertainment opportunities, but furnishing many people with their only experience of public space and collective life. Americans now spend more time in shopping malls than in any place other than home and work.
So, even if you're not planning a trip to Bloomington, statistics show that you will visit at least one of the United States' other 38,500 malls during the next six months. And since more than half the purchases are made in malls, you will probably buy something while you're there.
Malls operate on the principle of "adjacent attraction" - juxtaposing products with activities and images so that their noncommercial values can enhance the merchandise. As customers grew increasingly jaded, retailers constantly reinvigorated the shopping experience with sumptuous interiors, soaring atriums, symphony concerts, movie theater and ice skating rinks.
The Mall of America pushes "adjacent attractions" to the limit. To transform the mall into a tourist destination, its developers upped the ante, merging the mall with an equally popular attraction: the theme park. Diverted by roller coasters or minature golf, shoppers will stay longer, and ultimately spend more.
If the contrived packaging and obvious calculation of these malls turns you off, there are always "festival marketplaces," malls incorporating genuinely historical and scenic places. Inspired by Faneuil Hall or South Street Seaport's successful packaging of "authenticity," developers now routinely mix historical settings and tasteful renovation with recreational shopping, repackaging unused factories, warehouses or piers into profitable marketplaces.
If actual historic places are not available, thay can easily be manufactured; Americans regularly browse through fantasy malls with themes lifted from Disney: Main Street, the New England fishing village, the Tuscan Hilltown. These malls reduce the complexity and messiness of real places to a homogenous "image." The demands of marketing have erased the uniqueness of place. Still, it works: the combination of familar products and unexpected settings enlivens the process of consumption.
Once suburban malls moved downtown, they also altered the character or urban space, privatizing and controlling activities that once took place on public streets.
In crime-conscious cities, heavily patrolled urban malls serve as public safe spaces. Despite Justice Thurgood Marshall's arguments that since the mall had assumed the role of traditional town square it should also assume its public responsibilities, the Supreme Court defined malls as private spaces. This allows them to prohibit picketing, petitions or anything else deemed a threat to carefree shopping. Malls are explicitly designed to discourage the poor, but if young blacks or homeless enter, armed guards and video surveillance enforce a strict code of behavior.
This blurring between public and private works to the detriment of anyone who is unwilling or unable to consume, equating public participation with purchasing power. This is ironic, since malls increasingly depend on taxpayers for financing. Hoping to attract malls and cash in on their success, cities now court developers with public funds and HUD grants. The Mall of America, for example, might not have been built without the $ 200 million it received in local subsides.
Once most Americans accustomed themselves to automatically connect shopping with diversion and pleasure, the mall format could expand to fulfill virtually any function. Hotels, office buildings, cultural centers and museums all duplicate the layouts of shopping malls.
However, all this may be coming to an end. For a decade, industry analysts have predicted that America is approaching a saturation point. Economic uncertainty, shrinking incomes and desires for simpler lifestyles suggest that the golden age of unbridled consumerism is over.
Malls no longer automatically function as symbols of local pride; the citizens of Bloomington recently voted their mayor, an enthusiastc supporter of the Mall, out of office. Perhaps the failure or success of the Mall of America will tell us the future of the American mall.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Margaret Crawford is a professor at the Southern California Institute of Architecture.

 

End of Document
