

The Old FmHA Keeps Rolling With the Punches
The Associated Press
June 15, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 916 words
Byline: By DON KENDALL, AP Farm Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Farmers Home Administration has always taken a bashing from someone. But given the nature of the agency and its Great Depression roots, that shouldn't be surprising.
Some critics say the FmHA is too tough, that it tries to run itself like a commercial bank and isn't helping enough to keep poor families on the farm.
Others complain FmHA constantly loses huge amounts of money, throwing loans at people who never stood a chance of staying on the farm and never will.
In the midst of all these pushes and pulls, the FmHA is almost always under pressure from someone in Congress who wants the agency to change or improve its services.
For example, a bill was introduced last month to require the FmHA - an Agriculture Department agency - to make down-payment loans so beginners can buy land. It's called the Beginning Farmer and Rancher Credit Act.
The General Accounting Office, USDA's own Office of Inspector General, and various committees of the House and Senate, not to mention public interest and advocacy groups, all take shots at FmHA from time to time.
It's also appropriate occasionally to look at FmHA's structure and financial situation. And the GAO provides a new window in a financial audit report for the 1989 and 1988 fiscal years.
The audit findings were sent to Agriculture Secretary Edward Madigan on May 6. The GAO report made a number of recommendations to improve financial management within the agency. Mostly inside stuff, computers, bookkeeping and such.
But the auditors also found that FmHA had "complied in all material respects with those provisions of laws and regulations" in which the agency was tested. Nothing terribly illegal.
Meanwhile, the report described FmHA as "a lender of last resort" for rural Americans who "are unable to obtain credit from other sources at reasonable rates and terms."
In 1978, FmHA held 7 percent of the outstanding farm debt in the United States. By Sept. 30, 1989, it increased to 15.6 percent.
"When the agency began in 1935, its original function was to make loans and grants to depression-stricken families that would help them regain self-sufficiency on family farms," the report said. "In more recent years, the Congress has created additional programs to benefit families and communities in rural areas."
A brief history published in 1985 noted that the agency began as the Resettlement Administration 50 years earlier, developed into the Farm Security Administration before finally becoming the Farmers Home Administration in 1946.
From the beginning, FmHA has been a costly operation. The GAO report said the agency "will consistently operate at a loss" because of its character.
"First, as a lender of last resort, FmHA makes many loans which are not repaid," it said. "Second, FmHA lends money to farmers and rural residents and enterprises at a lower rate than its cost of funds from the Treasury, resulting in a net interest expense to FmHA."
Thus, even if FmHA borrowers made their loan payments on time, the agency would still lose money. For example, in fiscal 1989, FmHA interest expenses exceeded interest income by about $$5.8 billion.
But 1989 saw some overall improvement over fiscal 1988, when the agency's total net losses declined to $$6.9 billion from $$13.8 billion. In fiscal 1987, the report showed, total net losses were $$22.1 billion, fed by loan writeoffs and other credit losses.
In all, FmHA losses since its inception stood at $$40.6 billion by the end of the 1989 fiscal year.
Last February, agency administrator La Verne Ausman told the House subcommittee on conservation, credit and rural development that agricultural credit generally was in better shape and available to borrowers.
Ausman said the improved condition applied to agricultural banks and to most of the institutions in the cooperatively owned Farm Credit System.
It's time, he told the panel, for the FmHA to concentrate on its traditional role.
"By this, I mean FmHA as a source of temporary, supervised credit in modest amounts for a limited time for the farmer who does not qualify for commercial credit but who has a reasonable chance for success," Ausman said.
Today, the FmHA's scope is far beyond the programs to help small, family farmers stay on the land.
In 1989, the GAO report showed, the agency's total loan portfolio was $$54.5 billion, down from $$58.2 billion in 1988 and $$60.9 billion in 1987. Less than half - $$22.5 billion in 1989 - was in farm loans, with the larger portion in rural housing and rural development.
Pressures continue to grow in Congress to help rural communities develop, for more rural housing and other facilities.
Thus, the bid by sponsors for a new Beginning Farmers and Rancher Credit Act is still another example of interest in expanding FmHA functions. And supporters have reasons they say are just as valid as those of the mid-1930s.
"If something isn't done now to stem the tide towards older and fewer farmers, in the next 10 years we'll see a massive and unwanted change in the structure of American agriculture," says Nancy Thompson of the Center for Rural Affairs in Walthill, Neb.
The 1987 census of agriculture showed that since 1982 the number of farmers younger than 25 dropped by 43 percent, while those 25 to 34 declined by 17 percent, she said. The average age of farmers increased 3 percent, to 52 years, between 1982 and 1987.
Moreover, Thompson said USDA's own Economic Research Service estimates that almost half the nation's farm assets are held by farmers likely to retire in the next 10 years.

 

End of Document
