

The Man Who Will Be Third in Line for the White House
The Associated Press
November 28, 1994, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1139 words
Byline: By JILL LAWRENCE, AP Political Writer
Dateline: MARIETTA, Ga.
Body




The threat of a wedding without relatives and banishment from the family home might have discouraged most 18-year-olds from marrying their high school math teacher.
Not Newt Gingrich.
Maybe his parents had a point when they said he was too young to get married. But he was sure he was right. Nothing was going to stop him.
Now the Republican Party's bad boy - the one who brought down Speaker Jim Wright on ethics charges, sabotaged President Bush's budget agreement with Congress and called President Clinton the enemy of normal people - is about to fulfill a 20-year ambition to become speaker of the House.
Most Americans know the pudgy, gray-thatched Georgia congressman as a strident partisan, a man who says compromise is anathema, who rails against the "counterculture" and the welfare state and wants a school-prayer amendment to the Constitution.
But Newt Gingrich is not as simple as that. And his speakership may not be, either.
This symbol of fiery conservatism has a gay sister and a pro-choice daughter. The crusader for radically downsized government has several relatives on the public payroll - including a sister who's a Medicaid administrator. The man who made his career by going for other people's jugulars weeps, friends say, at some of the personal attacks on him. The history professor is also a futurist who envisions a computerized country with states in space.
Republicans view Gingrich as a hero whose master planning and 10-point "Contract with America" catapulted them to House control after 40 years in the minority.
Democrats and liberals attack him as cold-blooded and hypocritical - a self-appointed ethics watchdog with questionable practices of his own, a family-values promoter who ditched his first wife as soon as he was elected to Congress, a man who would cut off cash to young unmarried mothers and build orphanages for their kids.
Yet Gingrich's tactical skills, honed as a campaign manager from high school to graduate school, are giving Democrats a bad case of what one newspaper called "Newt envy."
He used to declaim to an empty House chamber after hours, witnessed only by a few C-SPAN viewers. Now he has the opposite problem. His wife told him last week that he was overexposed. "'I said, I agree with you, and I'm live on CNN in about 10 minutes,"' an exuberant Gingrich told Republican governors.
Along with the publicity comes scrutiny, and Gingrich doesn't like that part. But as he said in launching his campaign against Wright in 1988: "He's the speaker, and everything he could have done all his life as a backbencher becomes self-destructive when he becomes third in line to be president of the United States."
Gingrich's life is dense and textured, a series of family and political dramas riddled with conflicts and reconciliations.
Back in Georgia he is remembered variously as the good father, the callous ex-husband, the energetic professor, the sensitive friend, the political turncoat, the smalltown boy who made good. He is a person who moves on - a pattern that began in childhood.
Gingrich's mother, Kit, was divorced early from his father. At 3 he was adopted by her new husband, a taciturn military man with whom she had three daughters. The family moved often, the children making friends only to leave them behind a year or two later.
Newt was a boy who grabbed his opportunities. At 10, he told his mother he was going to the library but he actually went to lobby the mayor of Harrisburg, Pa., for a zoo. The meeting yielded his first headline. A few years later his uncle gave him a tour of a new TV station. Within moments young Newt was on the air, spinning records and making patter.
Gingrich, 51, has said the turning point of his life was a visit to the French battlegrounds at Verdun. The family walked on fields shattered by ferocious World War I battles, looked through a building filled with the bones of the dead. His father, Bob, told him that "politics could have kept this from ever happening," recalled Kit Gingrich.
It was in Fort Benning, Ga., that the teen-age Newt fell in love with Jackie, a geometry teacher seven years his senior. His parents were devastated. They expected their bright son to attend West Point or an Ivy League college. They did persuade him to leave for Emory University in Atlanta. It didn't work.
"The young lady's aunt had a very high job in the school district and got her a job in Atlanta," Mrs. Gingrich recalled tensely during a recent interview at her home outside Harrisburg. His father told him, "If you marry her, you're not coming home."
Bob Gingrich refused to come to the wedding. "Can you imagine me going into the wedding with my husband waiting in the car?" said Mrs. Gingrich. She and her daughters stayed home.
The voluble mother and son now talk at least weekly. He calls before he's on TV, and then again afterward to ask how he's done. She keeps four huge albums of Newtiana, presidential paeans and victory speeches alongside accounts of his 22 overdrafts at the House bank and the current House ethics query on whether he used a teaching position to promote conservative GOP ideas.
His father - a former Democrat - is also a convert to his son's career. But for years there were strains, emotional and financial.
Newt and Jackie had two daughters within three years, and little money. After Emory the family moved to New Orleans, where Newt attended Tulane University and earned a Ph.D. in history.
He got a deferment and didn't go to Vietnam. He demonstrated against censorship. He worked for moderate Republican Nelson Rockefeller's 1968 presidential campaign. That same year he used marijuana once "at a party late at night in New Orleans. It didn't have any effect on me … so I never went back and revisited it."
Gingrich was hired as an assistant professor at West Georgia College in Carrollton, a rural, blue-collar area 50 miles west of Atlanta. His specialty was European history, and he also coordinated the school's environmental studies program. He attended First Baptist Church two to three times weekly. He was a deacon and taught Sunday school. The family home was modest, too small even for entertaining.
Gingrich made his first congressional race from this comfortable base. He presented himself as a progressive populist; he was endorsed by the League of Conservation Voters and the Communications Workers of America.
"He convinced me he was going to build a reform Republican Party that was going to be attractive to blacks and women. He was very much a moderate back then," said Lee Howell, a liberal who worked for Gingrich's losing campaigns in 1974 and 1976 but more recently has helped his opponents.
The literature in Gingrich's controversial third campaign, in 1978, featured pictures of his wife and children. He accused his opponent of planning to break up her family by moving alone to Washington.
 Load-Date: November 28, 1994

 

End of Document
