

The Gays' Side: No Regrets Despite the Heat
The Associated Press
January 27, 1993, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 663 words
Byline: Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Gay activists are undaunted by the beating President Clinton is taking on their behalf. The cause is just and the storm will pass, they said Wednesday.
"Can you think of any issue that's more important than the freedom of 10 million people?" asked David Mixner, a Los Angeles consultant and civil rights veteran who has known Clinton for 24 years. "We have nothing closer to an apartheid law than this military ban."
Key Democrats, Republican rivals and the Joint Chiefs of Staff are among the groups that have come down on Clinton since it became clear he was serious about lifting the ban on homosexuals in the military.
But Clinton will formally revoke the ban within six months, Defense Secretary Les Aspin said Wednesday night. He indicated that in the interim, the Pentagon would be ordered to cease asking recruits about their sexual orientation and halt prosecutions and ousters of homosexuals in uniform.
The interim arrangement was endorsed by a gay rights group, the Human Rights Campaign Fund. "I think it is the necessary first step in keeping his promise," spokesman Tim McFeeley said. "The ban would be lifted."
The public, once solidly supportive of lifting the ban, now appears to be split. And Senate opponents plan to yoke a popular family leave bill to an amendment putting the military exclusion in law.
Despite the uproar, gay activists say they've no regrets about pressing the battle.
"It's very important for America to move toward ending prejudice. You never make any progress if you don't try," said Rep. Barney Frank, a gay lawmaker from Massachusetts.
"The gay and lesbian community certainly is not responsible for the controversy," added Robin Kane, spokeswoman for the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force. "There's no regret that we are attempting to end discrimination. There's no regret in fighting for civil rights."
The backlash, most gay activists concede, has been worse than expected. Some blame senators for trying to obstruct the new president. Others cite the unusual involvement of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, particularly chairman Colin Powell.
"We didn't anticipate how effective Colin Powell's outspoken opposition would be. He has given legitimacy to some of the arguments that the religious right has been using. We're very disappointed at that," said Gregory King, spokesman for the 75,000-member Human Rights Campaign Fund.
While the military paints Clinton's impending move as a morale blow that could erode the nation's ability to defend itself, the gay community compares its cause to earlier movements on behalf of blacks and women.
"What we're really seeing is the last major chapter in the 200-year-old story of civil rights … the last major unfinished business in that struggle," said Rep. Gerry Studds, D-Mass., another gay congressman.
The president-elect and his advisers "got a real education in the last couple of months" on the inflammatory politics of gay civil rights, said Mixner, the Los Angeles consultant.
King said Clinton's resolve has sent a message not only to gays but to Capitol Hill. "Once it was clear he was standing firm, we began building more support," he said. He predicted a Senate vote at this point would go Clinton's way.
Gay activists contend that Republicans proved with their convention last summer that voters don't like intolerance. And they say Clinton's stand on principle will win him points in the end, even from people who disagree with him.
They also predict the outcry will subside the instant Clinton delivers his economic plan to Capitol Hill. And they point to history, particularly the racial integration of the military and the 1960s civil rights movement, as proof that they'll prevail.
"I've seen the most hostile, ugly reaction in the South to just registering one voter. Twenty years later you go to the same counties and see blacks holding office," said Mixner. "You keep a perspective, you become a long distance runner. A year from now, people are going to wonder what the big deal was."

 

End of Document
