

The Energetic, Eclectic New Head of the National Park Service
The Associated Press
November 4, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1157 words
Byline: By CONNIE CASS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




He speaks in the mellow tones of a TV newsman. He drops a scholar's ten-dollar words. He knows money like a banker, spins stories like a historian.
And he dresses like Smokey Bear.
Roger Kennedy, the new director of the National Park Service, has a theatrical flair. He has often attracted the limelight during an eclectic career as a Washington journalist, congressional candidate, Eisenhower administration bureaucrat, banker, lawyer, museum director and book author.
But rejuvenating national parks that are short on cash and long on controversy may prove an unglamorous mission.
"Disaster averted - you don't get prizes for that," said Kennedy, 67.
He wears the olive ranger's uniform to show his solidarity with the Park Service's staff of 25,000, Kennedy said.
He oversees 367 national parks, battlefields, monuments, seashores and more, from the Statue of Liberty to Mount Rainier. Almost 275 million people visited them last year. And that's part of the problem.
The Park Service budget has not increased to match the number of visitors, which climbed 25 percent between 1983 and 1990. Park resources are stretched past their limits; trails, campsites and roads have been closed.
"The crisis may be insurmountable," said Paul Pritchard, president of the National Parks and Conservation Association, a citizens group. "But if anyone can turn it around, Kennedy can."
Always on a tight schedule, Kennedy strides into his office 10 minutes late for an interview, signs a stack of papers held out by an aide, then plunks down on the sofa, obviously impatient to get back to work.
He ticks off a list of problems: underpaid rangers, overcrowded parks, dilapidated chalets, shabby visitors centers, threatened wildlife, pollution that kills trees and enshrouds vistas.
There is a backlog of $ 2 billion in urgently needed repairs. Some parks may be closed because there is no money to take care of them, he said.
"It's a national disgrace," Kennedy said. Yet he never loses his air of Midwestern, can-do optimism. There's a job to be done.
"By gosh, we've got to bang it!" he said.
On the wall above his head, simple black figures dance across a red American Indian rug, a remnant of Kennedy's childhood in Minnesota.
Taken in trade at the family sporting goods store in St. Paul, the rug rested on his grandfather's floor for years. "That rug probably came in for a case of shotgun shells or something," he said.
The youngest of three brothers, Kennedy grew up hiking and fishing. During summers he guided canoe trips in what is now Voyageurs National Park. He also edited his high school newspaper.
He left for the Navy during World War II, serving as a radar technician in the Pacific. The GI Bill of Rights put him through Yale and he earned a law degree from the University of Minnesota in 1952.
He promptly challenged Eugene McCarthy for his House seat, running as a Republican. Kennedy lost, but he made it to Washington nevertheless.
He worked for President Eisenhower's Justice Department, then the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, then Labor. Between posts, he reported for NBC radio and television.
In 1958, while delivering a guest lecture at Southern Methodist University, Kennedy met Frances Hefren, an American studies major. They were married that same year, and tramped over Colorado trails on their honeymoon. Now Frances, 56, works to preserve Civil War battlefields. They have one daughter, Ruth.
After the wedding, the couple moved to St. Paul where Kennedy could, as he puts it, "learn a trade." He became a bank executive.
"When I was a banker, making calls in innumerable dusty towns along the Iowa and Missouri border led to a natural curiosity about those humongous banks that were built in those small towns - they were astonishingly beautiful," he said . "And you start asking when they were built, and you start writing things down, and that's eight books ago."
Kennedy kept writing as he moved through financial pots, ending up a vice president of the Ford Foundation. Colleagues there joked that he had an "edifice complex" - he loved to tear things down and rebuild them his way.
The habit caused a stir at the National Museum of American History, where Kennedy arrived in 1979.
He soon changed the name from the stuffier National Museum of History and Technology. He redesigned the interior. He added jazz concerts and installed an old-fashioned ice cream parlor.
"When he spotted things he didn't like, you soon heard they were going," said curator emeritus Margaret Klapthor. "It was sort of, 'Off with the head!"'
In 1987, he tore down one of the most popular exhibits: the first ladies' gowns. The gowns were gone so long - almost five years - that people feared Kennedy had mothballed them for good.
Some of the gowns returned last year in an exhibit that shifted the focus from clothes to the changing role of the president's wife.
"There were people who didn't like his style," curator David Allison said. "But he was able to convince a lot of people to do things they might not have done otherwise."
It will be tougher for Kennedy to leave his mark on an empire as vast as the Park Service.
Touring a park almost every weekend, he's already spotted things he doesn't like - from the rangers' synthetic socks ("they don't dry") to part-time workers deprived of health and retirement benefits ("a national outrage").
Change hinges on money. Kennedy wants more from Congress, even if it means higher taxes. The Park Service's 1994 operating budget is 1 billion - up only 9 percent from this year - a meager start on what Kennedy believes needs fixing.
Kennedy also wants to raise entrance fees, charge senior citizens who now enter parks for free, and entice more from private donors. And he wants more money from concessionaires who run restaurants, airplane tours and other businesses in the parks.
But in longstanding arguments about how to run the parks, Kennedy has yet to take a firm stance. Environmentalists want to curtail public access to protect wildlife and plants. Other groups want more roads, paths for horses and snowmobiles and mountain bikes, and generally more opportunity for businesses to profit from the parks.
Critics say Kennedy has failed to put forth his own agenda.
"That means he essentially has taken the reins off of the bureaucracy and said , 'OK boys run any ways you want,"' said Ron Arnold, vice president of the Center for Defense of Free Enterprise, which wants to expand commercial use of the parks.
In office since June, Kennedy already is weary of sniping from competing interest groups.
"I really am so bored with people telling me 'Why don't we do this. Why did you do that?,' as if they can walk away from it," he said .
It strikes him as unpatriotic.
Kennedy asks: Instead of complaining, why don't they adopt one park and make it better? Don't they realize they could be the answer?
With a sly grin, he adds: "Maybe next time they start we should hold up a mirror. Maybe that would do it."
 Load-Date: November 4, 1993

 

End of Document
