

The Word From the Epicenter of Quebec Nationalism
The Associated Press
February 8, 1995, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 767 words
Byline: By JEFFREY ULBRICH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CHICOUTIMI, Quebec
Body




This blue collar town hugging the south bank of the Saguenay River is the epicenter of Quebec nationalism, home to some of the fiercest defenders of Canadian Frenchness.
The region around Lac St. Jean, long isolated from the rest of Quebec by distance, forest and ice, is the last outpost of civilization before the vast wilderness of what folks here call "the great north."
Between Chicoutimi and Quebec City, a single road slashes south through 125 miles of thickly forested parkland. To the north, only forest, then tundra, inhabited by bands of Indians and Inuit.
This splendid isolation has preserved Quebec's French culture in its purest form. Here, 99.9 percent of the population is francophone, most unilingual. It is a quiet, rural society largely unsullied by immigration and "Devil English."
The Lac St. Jean-Saguenay region is home to 300,000 of Quebec's 7 million inhabitants. About 63,000 of them live in Chicoutimi.
The separatist Parti Quebecois sends the area's five deputies to the provincial legislature in Quebec. The Bloc Quebecois, a separatist party that contests federal posts, sends the four representatives to the federal Parliament in Ottawa. The Liberals, generally viewed as the "federalist" party, get no joy on election day.
This is the only region that recorded a majority "yes" vote in a 1980 referendum on sovereignty, which lost by a 60-to-40 margin. People here will vote strongly in favor of separation again in a referendum later this year.
The date of the vote has not been set. Speculation is Premier Jacques Parizeau will call it for sometime between April and June.
"If we want to enrich not only the French fact, but have a social and cultural life that reflects what we are, we must have a sovereign government," says Marc-Andre Bedard, a Chicoutimi lawyer who helped found the Parti Quebecois.
"We send money both to the provincial and federal government, why not just send it all to Quebec so that we can be properly administered," says Jean-Francois Caron, a student leader at the University of Quebec at Chicoutimi.
Ever since British Gen. James Wolfe sneaked up on the Marquis de Montcalm at Quebec in 1759 and defeated his army on the Plains of Abraham, French Canadians have felt misunderstood and poorly governed.
Surrounded and vastly outnumbered by English-speakers, French Quebecois once feared for their language and culture. Great strides have been made in the past 30 years and the language is no longer threatened with absorption, but Quebecois still feel the pressures of being a minority.
"Canada has the mentality of a majority, and we are a minority, and we feel it," Bedard said over a glass of California red. "It's a matter of respect. When somebody is in the majority, he speaks to you differently, treats you differently. I think the referendum will pass, not because there are so many sovereigntists but because many believe there must be a shock for Canada to rethink itself."
There are federalists here, of course. Based on election results, they represent 35 percent to 40 percent of the vote. But few speak out.
Since April 1838, when a group of investors known as "the 21" sailed up the Saguenay to exploit the resource-rich region, the people of the area have been fiercely independent.
Most of the important Saguenay families today bear the names of the original 21 pioneers - such as Simard, Tremblay, Bouchard.
The standing joke, chuckles criminal lawyer Jean-Claude Beaulieu, is if you step outside and shout "Hey, Tremblay!" half the heads will turn. The other half will be Simards.
"As a result of this enforced isolation, the region has always had a larger autonomy," says Rejean Simard, director-general of the school board.
Simard heads the regional Committee on the Future of Quebec, one of 18 such committees that began fanning out across the province Monday to seek public comment on the question to be asked in the referendum.
Anglophones in Canada's other nine provinces are weary of what many feel is Quebec's constant whining and demands for more authority to run its own affairs, particularly those that directly affect people such as health, welfare, immigration, taxation.
"I'm not sure that the rest of Canada is taking Quebec seriously," says Simard, watching an icebreaker plow to the docks of the Alcan aluminium factory at La Baie, 6 miles east of Chicoutimi. "They talk about a more flexible federalism, but that's contrary to what I see."
Bedard says independence, if it comes, means everything will be done according to Quebec priorities, from education to culture.
"It will be what's good for us, not what's good for Canada."
 Load-Date: February 8, 1995

 

End of Document
