

The Price of War: Americans on the Home Front Also Feel the Pinch
The Associated Press
February 22, 1991, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 770 words
Byline: By LESLIE DREYFOUS, AP National Writer
Body




Sometimes lost amid the billions spent arming and outfitting U.S. troops abroad is the daily price also being paid much closer to home.
Take H.D. Phillips, a veteran skycap who figures 70 percent of his salary in tips. "This is the emptiest I have ever seen this airport in 16 years," he said after surveying Denver's Stapleton Airport. "People are scared to fly."
Those willing to travel have found curbside luggage check-in banned. To airport officials, it's a practical anti-terrorist tactic. To skycaps, it's a war cost that has nothing to do with armaments.
Many Americans have made sacrifices and adjustments to keep things going smoothly on the home front. Profit margins are narrower, security tighter, budgets somewhat looser and shifts often long.
"The least we can do is work around our small problem," said Police Chief James Hutchinson, who has been juggling schedules since six members of his Dover, Del., force were called to duty in the Persian Gulf.
Most people don't seem to mind tightening their belts or working a swing shift. It's a way of contributing to the war effort, supporting the 513,000 U.S. troops pitted against Saddam Hussein.
But city and town officials, already battling budget cuts, are also familiar with the bottom line. They know the costs of overtime and special security. And they know how little money there is to spend.
Demonstrations during the conflict's first week cost San Francisco $$1.5 million - more than the 1989 earthquake cost - in police overtime. Public works had graffiti to whitewash and trash-can fires to extinguish. The legal system is still processing 1,900 arrests.
Debt-burdened New York City has spent $$704,682 in overtime to police war demonstrations and another $$118,350 to monitor more than 1,800 bomb scares and other terrorist threats.
The Odessa City Council created a $$250,000 emergency fund last month just in case Gulf War-related costs crop up in the West Texas oil city.
Airlines, too, have taken precautions. U.S. carriers will likely spend $$750 million to $$1 billion this year on security, the Air Transport Association in Washington, D.C., said.
Northwest Airlines, for example, cited increased security costs in reporting a $$121 million fourth-quarter loss, which may also have been exacerbated by war-related fuel hikes and a slump in overseas travel.
Ask Lacey Donofrio of Travel Consultants Inc. in New York. She's seen business fall off by about 30 percent since the war started. And, she said, among those still flying the rules of the market have changed.
"Nobody wants to fly American carriers," said Donofrio, who recently had a group of students opt for a SwissAir flight to Rome rather than a much cheaper package deal on Pan Am.
Airport budgets are also squeezed.
Heightened security at San Antonio Airport ran $$30,000 in the war's first 10 days. In Tulsa, Okla., airport officials say they're spending about $$4,000 a week on extra security. In Lubbock, Texas, they say it's $$4,000 a day.
Those who make a living at concession stands inside the airport terminals pay a price too. Business has in some cases dropped by 15 percent since officials began roping off "secure zones" in which only ticketholders are allowed.
"It hurts," added Jake Jackson, who manages several food concessions at the Raleigh-Durham Airport in North Carolina. "But I'm not going to cry the blues, because I'm not the only business affected."
Indeed, business is off everywhere along America's main streets.
Just ask the merchants on B Street outside Fort Carson in Colorado Springs, Co., where more than 2,000 soldiers have left for the Middle East.
"Business has never been this bad," said Charlie Cavins, who figures revenue at C.C. Auto Sales is down by more than 50 percent over the past few months.
At Aikahi Park Shopping Center in Kailua, Hawaii, shops have been empty since 7,000 Marines shipped out from a nearby air station. In Pierce, Neb., Grandma Polt's canned beef was set to start exporting to the Soviet Union, Nigeria and Poland.
Then came Operation Desert Storm: The young canned beef company's processor was drafted to can meat for the troops in Saudi Arabia and expansion plans were put on hold for the war's duration.
Perhaps the steepest price has been paid by the thousands of husbands, wives, parents and children whose domestic routines have been disrupted and, sometimes, destroyed.
Rebecca Schultz of Kansas City, Mo., has taken a job as a live-in nanny since her husband's reserve unit was called up.
"We have a mortgage on our house, a loan for his truck," she said. "There's all these bills coming in, and I'm sitting here trying to manage it.

 

End of Document
