

The Awful Truth About the Budget Deficit
The Associated Press
February 17, 1991, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 914 words
Byline: By MARTIN CRUTSINGER, AP Economics Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Bush administration is finally admitting the awful truth.
This time last year, administration officials were trooping to Capitol Hill to defend the president's first from-scratch budget and its projected deficit of $$63.1 billion for the 1991 fiscal year.
But that deficit estimate was off - way off. Off by a factor of five.
Instead of a $$63.1 billion deficit, the administration now expects the 1991 deficit to total $$318.1 billion. That deficit, an all-time high, means the country is adding to the $$3.2 trillion national debt at the rate of nearly $$1 billion a day.
How could the administration have been so wrong?
Therein lies a tale of cunning, intrigue and, some would say, more than a little deceit.
The administration last year was working under the restrictions of the old Gramm-Rudman deficit reduction law. That law required that the administration meet a series of descending deficit targets, leading to a balanced budget in 1993.
The Gramm-Rudman target for the 1991 fiscal year, which began in October, was $$64 billion. The administration dutifully submitted a 1991 budget that met the target - at least on paper.
It projected government revenues of $$1.17 trillion and spending of $$1.233 trillion, leaving a deficit of $$63.1 billion.
Even at the time, critics charged the deficit was wrong. They complained that its assumptions about the economy were overly rosy, that Congress would never go along with the administration's proposed budget cuts and that the administration had low-balled spending needs in certain areas.
The Congressional Budget Office estimated the 1991 deficit would be $$138 billion. While that was more than double the administration figure, the CBO was a long way off as well.
The reason for the big miss is that the CBO and the administration both erred in their assessments for economic growth and the amount of money needed to resolve the savings and loan mess.
Struggling to meet the Gramm-Rudman deficit target while honoring the president's no-new-taxes campaign pledge, the administration included a token amount for rescuing failed S&Ls of $$7.3 billion for 1991.
In the president's new budget request, the estimated spending for deposit insurance payouts is now put at $$111 billion.
The other big miss involved the strength of the economy.
The administration last year didn't forecast the current recession. An economic slump cuts into tax revenues and boosts government spending on such programs as welfare and unemployment insurance.
In July, with evidence of economic weakness mounting, the administration stuck to its assessment that the country would be able to avoid a recession. It put the 1991 deficit at $$231.4 billion, higher than $$63 billion but still below $$318 billion.
Even as late as October, when Congress and the administration finally agreed on a 1991 spending plan, that blueprint didn't contain the recession that most economists believe started between June and September.
The fall budget package, which projected deficit savings of $$500 billion over five years, put the 1991 deficit at $$294 billion.
However, with its new budget request, the administration has upped the deficit projection to $$318 billion, reflecting what the administration now concedes is a full-blown, although mild, recession.
With so many changes, one could be forgiven for wondering whether the administration will still be far from the mark once the budget year finally ends Sept. 30.
One major uncertainty stems from the Persian Gulf War. The administration included a "placeholder" budget amount of $$8.2 billion to cover the U.S. share of the costs of the fighting in 1991, contending the remainder would be picked up by allied contributions.
On Thursday, the administration said it would ask Congress for $$55 billion in additional spending authority to cover the costs of the war through March 31. It still insisted U.S. allies would pick up the lion's share of those costs.
But critics charge the administration is being overly optimistic in its assessments of allied contributions.
And the recession means uncertainty.
The administration budget includes a section detailing what could happen to the deficit if its assumptions for a short, mild recession are too optimistic.
Under what the administration terms a "lower growth" scenario, the deficit would increase by another $$25.5 billion this year and $$40.4 billion in 1992, a year the administration is forecasting a deficit of $$280.9 billion.
Even with the downside risks, the 1991 deficit is in line with the assumptions being made by many private forecasts, although they have major reservations about estimates for 1992 and beyond.
"Incredible as it may seem, we think that the administration may have exaggerated the 1991 deficit," said Bruce Steinberg, an economist at Merrill Lynch.
His own forecast puts this year's deficit at $$305 billion. The difference stems from Steinberg's belief that the S&L bailout agency won't be able to spend as much as the administration is projecting because of congressional delays in authorizing the outlays.
However, Steinberg's assumptions project that the 1991 deficit will be topped by a new record of $$340 billion in 1992, $$59 billion higher than the administration's current forecast.
The administration's new deficit estimates do contain one characteristic common to past presidential assumptions: It forecasts a balanced budget in the distant future.
Under Bush's projections, that feat, last accomplished in 1969, will happen again in 1996.

 

End of Document
