

The Capitol Will Still Be the Capitol, Even Under Labor Laws
The Associated Press
January 6, 1995, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 541 words
Byline: By NITA LELYVELD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Endless days, ever-changing schedules - they go with the territory for Capitol Hill workers. Chances are, they always will - even if, as expected, Congress subjects itself to many of the labor and workplace laws it imposes on the nation.
While congressional employees would get some very significant new rights - such as the right to sue their employer and get a jury trial - many of the hard facts of congressional life will remain.
The bill to place Congress under the very laws it passes was approved without dissent by the House early Thursday, but the Senate is moving more slowly on the measure.
In some cases, the very culture of the institution will assure that regulations have only limited effect. Discriminatory or not, no equal opportunity law, for instance, will change the practice of Republicans hiring mostly Republicans, and Democrats favoring Democrats.
As one congressional aide put it, "This bill was written with an understanding that we are not IBM."
Often, too, the regulations that exist do not address the peculiar circumstances of the congressional workplace.
Take, for instance, working conditions. While top lawmakers may find themselves in large, airy offices overlooking the Mall, most junior-level employees are herded into tiny, packed offices.
One might think that would change if Congress had to abide by the regulations of the Occupational Safety and Health Act.
But OSHA regulations say nothing about how much space a typical office worker should get, said spokeswoman Cheryl Brolin.
"The perceived problems - overcrowded offices, repetitive stress injuries, things like that, we don't have any regulations for those," Brolin said.
Another key question is congressional pay, which has never been high for the average worker. Both House and Senate versions of the Congressional Accountability Act would put Congress under the jurisdiction of the Fair Labor Standards Act - which, with some exceptions, requires employers to provide minimum wage, equal pay and time-and-one-half pay for work in excess of 40 hours a week.
But while the House imposed the act on itself in 1989, most House employees still do not get paid overtime. That's because House administrators exempted most of the employees who work the most overtime from the overtime provisions.
The same could be true this time around as Congress aims to apply laws to itself the way the laws are applied to the private sector.
In the private sector, hourly workers generally get paid overtime, while managers do not. In Congress, many of the employees who work the longest hours are not paid by the hour.
In fact, the Congressional Budget Office, analyzing a similar bill last summer, found that the entire compliance effort would be relatively cheap, likely costing Congress only about $ 1 million annually the first two years and $ 4 million to $ 5 million in the years thereafter.
Rep. Christopher Shays, R-Conn., who authored the House bill and has made compliance his cause, says the real benefit of the effort will be for Americans at large.
"The biggest impact is related to James Madison's admonition that a democratic body needs to be subject to the same law that it imposes on the people. That is the great restraint on the abuse of power," Shays said Thursday.
 Load-Date: January 6, 1995

 

End of Document
