

The Artists: The Rafters' Perspective on the Cuban Refugee Crisis
The Associated Press
May 12, 1995, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1035 words
Byline: By NICOLE WINFIELD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MIAMI
Body




When tens of thousands of Cubans launched a flotilla of innertube and tin-can rafts last summer, the world saw desperate people risking their lives to come to the United States.
Now that most of them are in refugee camps at the U.S. Naval Base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, the world sees them milling aimlessly around dusty tents, caught behind concertina wire under a tropical sun. The images are quick clips of newsreel - maybe a sound bite - and then they are gone.
But what do the rafters see? What do days lost at sea, months wasted in detention and lifetimes spent under a dictatorship look like?
"Hope From Guantanamo," a new exhibit of painting, sculpture and sketches by Cuban artists being held in the detention camps, gives a first look.
It's the refugee crisis from the perspective of those still living it - and it's not particularly pretty.
"So many of the faces have tears in their eyes," said Carol Damian, assistant professor of Latin American art at Florida International University. "It seemed more depressing than angry. They've given up being angry. They've been angry for months."
For years, actually.
While much of the show concentrates on the Guantanamo experience, many works are blatantly critical of Fidel Castro, the communist island's dictator and the reason many of the rafters fled.
One piece, "The Two Faces of Castro," shows Castro's face half as a realistic sculpture, half as an empty skull.
Despite the hopelessness of many works in the show, the 25 artists, many of whom were professionals in Cuba, are not lacking in creativity.
Limited by their resources - all the materials were donated by civilians and the military at Guantanamo - the rafters developed a new lacquer-type plastic for carving, sculpting and molding.
The plastic is melted down from the packaging of M.R.E. meals, the high-calorie, ready-to-eat military food they eat once a day. It's practical, yet it also lends a poignancy to their situation.
"All I could think of was German concentration camps," Damian said, stressing she was not trying to equate the two. "I looked at the works, then I looked at the labels. It makes you realize these are people, living in tents. It's desperate and disturbing."
In "Disillusion," a medium-size acrylic painted on a bedsheet, Dixie Gutierrez Miguez paints a U.S. flag whose stars have fallen into a heap. Her stripes are rolls of concertina wire, wound tight and prickly with razors. Behind them loom faded beige tents, laundry strung between them.
In a companion piece, "Prisoners," Gutierrez - identified only by her name, Camp McCalla, Tent A-16 - hangs her flag horizontally. An androgynous figure behind it pulls the stripes apart as if they were bars on a jail cell.
There is little subtlety or abstraction in these works; she is painting betrayal.
At the height of the rafter crisis, the United States changed its 28-year-old policy of freely accepting Cuban refugees, opting instead to detain them at so-called safe havens - camps in Guantanamo and Panama.
Of the 32,000 taken to Guantanamo, some 11,000 children and their parents, the sick and elderly have been allowed to resettle in this country. But about 21,000 single men and women and families with no young children remain.
The exhibit was staged before the Clinton administration again changed its policy regarding the Cubans held at Guantanamo. Now virtually all will be allowed to resettle in the United States in the coming months.
"The statement of the show is political," said Dr. Nunzio Mainieri, the curator and a member of the Miami Medical Team, the private foundation that treats the refugees at Guantanamo and co-sponsored the exhibit with The Miami Herald. "But it is also very strong in art. It's a double motivation for us."
Mainieri, a plastic surgeon and former president of Miami's Cuban Museum of Art and Culture, will curate a more extensive show of Guantanamo art in October at Miami's main public library.
The intent of both is to stress that the rafters are political refugees, not migrants as the military classifies them, and deserve to come to the United States, he said.
"Hope From Guantanamo" is the first exhibit of its kind, he added.
Andrew Connors, assistant curator of the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of American Art in Washington and a specialist in Latino art, cautioned against placing too much artistic importance on such highly politicized art.
"The important thing to realize is that not all art has a long-term life, particularly art based on political experience," he said. "There are some works that speak to a human condition that is much larger than the current reality about which they are commenting."
Nevertheless, Connors, who did not see the Guantanamo show, said exhibits like it historically can occupy a significant place.
"All you need to do is look at other horrific movements in history - the Holocaust," for example, he said. "The people who stayed in the camps created tremendous things. Most of it is important in that it captures a moment in time. It might have been better expressed in poetry or prose, but in terms of documenting a period, it can be significant."
In "Physs," and "Cotman," Carlos Aulet, Camp Kilo, Tent A-9, documents the everyday reality for Cubans at Guantanamo.
In both works, figurative faces of young men float around an olive-drab tent background, staring blankly straight ahead.
Below their faces, none have anything resembling a body. Torsos melt into cots, thighs melt into table legs. Innertubes appear and disappear in the shadows.
This is the toll that a life-threatening flight and months of inactivity have taken on the body and soul, Aulet seems to be saying.
Not all of the works in the exhibit are so dark. In Filiberto Pena's tongue-in-cheek cartoons, a shark contemplates an innertube sandwich, wondering "To devour or not to devour?"
And Victor Calderon paints an embarrassingly accurate image of Miami in his huge, pink "Untitled."
The piece shows two bulbous Cuban figures in the camps imagining their futures. One has a bird soaring out of his head. The other has a collection of cigarettes, a stack of cards, Lite Ice beer, a shiny new Cadillac, a newspaper, and a naked woman.
He probably saw "Scarface" before he left.
 Load-Date: May 12, 1995

 

End of Document
