

The Wealthy Don't Live On Death Row "One searches our chronicles in vain for the execution of any member of the affluent strata of this society," U.S. Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas, writing in 1972.  ---
The Associated Press
September 6, 1994, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 861 words
Byline: By BOB EGELKO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN FRANCISCO
Body




It is a pretty good bet that if O.J. Simpson and Erik and Lyle Menendez are convicted, they will not wind up on Death Row.
It is not a place for the rich.
In California, every one of the 384 men and four women awaiting execution as of July 1 was poor enough to qualify for a lawyer at state expense, said Lynn Holton, spokeswoman for the state Judicial Council.
Nationwide, no one seems to have made a systematic study of the finances of the executed, or of the 2,700 condemned prisoners. But veteran practitioners and scholars agreed they'd never heard of a wealthy person on Death Row.
"I don't know of any affluent people who have been sentenced to death," said Walter Berns, a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington, D.C., and author of the 1978 book "For Capital Punishment."
"The death penalty is for poor people," said Stephen Bright, director of the Southern Center for Human Rights in Atlanta and a defense lawyer in capital cases for 15 years.
Wealthy people have faced capital charges:
-Richard Loeb and Nathan Leopold, young sons of wealthy families and the "thrill killers" convicted of murdering a young boy, were spared the death penalty in 1924 after an epic defense by Clarence Darrow that focused on their mental states.
-Texas oilman T. Cullen Davis, charged with seriously wounding his estranged wife, Priscilla, and murdering her lover and her 12-year-old daughter in 1976. Although his wife and two other eyewitnesses identified Davis as the gunman, he was acquitted after a defense by prominent lawyer Richard "Racehorse" Haynes, who attacked Mrs. Davis for her drug use and extramarital affairs.
-Joe Hunt, leader of a group of wealthy youths called the Billionaire Boys Club, convicted in 1987 of murdering a Beverly Hills con man whose body has never been found. A jury rejected a death sentence and chose life without parole for Hunt, who is seeking a new trial.
Like Simpson and the Menendez brothers, those defendants could afford to hire good lawyers. That's the chief explanation offered by defense attorneys and organizations for the absence of the rich on Death Row.
"If you have money and can afford adequate counsel, you don't end up on Death Row," said Kica Matos, capital punishment research director for the NAACP Legal Defense Fund.
"Trying capital cases is the legal equivalent of brain surgery," said Bright. In the South, he said, court-appointed death penalty lawyers are paid barely enough to cover costs, are usually inexperienced, and often don't put up much of a fight.
"I see cases tried with no experts for the defense, no investigator at all, and seldom one who knows how to investigate the life and background of the defendant," Bright said.
One Georgia case he described in a Yale Law Journal article was a striking contrast to the battles over evidence in the Simpson case.
Gary X. Nelson, sentenced to death in the 1978 rape and murder of a 6-year-old girl, was represented by a lawyer who had never tried a capital case, was paid $ 15 to $ 20 an hour and had no investigator or experts. His closing argument was 255 words long.
Later, new lawyers, working at their own expense, found that crucial prosecution evidence, a hair on the victim's body, could not be validly compared to Nelson's hair - a fact mentioned in an FBI report that had never been disclosed. Nelson was freed after 11 years on Death Row.
But in California, for example, defense lawyers exaggerate the extent of ineffective representation in death cases, said state Deputy Attorney General Dane Gillette, death-penalty coordinator in San Francisco.
Probably the chief reason rich people aren't sentenced to die, Gillette said, is that "they, for the most part, don't commit these kinds of violent crimes."
Maybe so. Capital crimes are mostly street crimes - a killing during a robbery or burglary. But some defense lawyers say they've seen wealthy defendants spared despite evidence that would doom a poor person.
Bryan Stevenson, a lawyer with the Alabama Capital Representation Resource Center for 10 years, described the case of two wealthy sisters charged with killing one sister's spouse. The prosecutor, who sought the death penalty in other cases, asked only for life imprisonment despite considerable evidence, Stevenson said.
"Much of their (district attorneys') support comes from affluent members of the community who want someone who will protect them from the criminal element," Stevenson said.
"People with no redeeming features, those whose lives have no purpose or meaning, it's easier for us to say, 'Let's kill 'em.' "
Bright said he knew of several cases where prosecutors declined to bring capital charges against lawyers accused of poisoning their wives. He also said mob boss John Gotti and other organized-crime figures could have been charged with capital crimes, but haven't been.
"Unlike most of my clients, whose IQs are in the high 60s or low 70s, you're talking about people (rich defendants) who have their lives together, who have the ability to make money," Bright said. "You would think those would be the cold, calculated murders most fit for the death penalty. But the death penalty is for poor people."
 Load-Date: September 6, 1994

 

End of Document
