

The Man Who Will Be Third in Line for the White House
The Associated Press
November 27, 1994, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 2381 words
Byline: By JILL LAWRENCE, AP Political Writer
Dateline: MARIETTA, Ga.
Body




The threat of a wedding without relatives and banishment from the family home might have discouraged most 18-year-olds from marrying their high school math teacher.
Not Newt Gingrich.
Maybe his parents had a point when they said he was too young to get married. But he was sure he was right. Nothing was going to stop him.
Now the Republican Party's bad boy - the one who brought down Speaker Jim Wright on ethics charges, sabotaged President Bush's budget agreement with Congress and called President Clinton the enemy of normal people - is about to fulfill a 20-year ambition to become speaker of the House.
Most Americans know the pudgy, gray-thatched Georgia congressman as a strident partisan, a man who says compromise is anathema, who rails against the "counterculture" and the welfare state and wants a school-prayer amendment to the Constitution.
But Newt Gingrich is not as simple as that. And his speakership may not be, either.
This symbol of fiery conservatism has a gay sister and a pro-choice daughter. The crusader for radically downsized government has several relatives on the public payroll - including a sister who's a Medicaid administrator. The man who made his career by going for other people's jugulars weeps, friends say, at some of the personal attacks on him. The history professor is also a futurist who envisions a computerized country with states in space.
Republicans view Gingrich as a hero whose master planning and 10-point "Contract with America" catapulted them to House control after 40 years in the minority.
Democrats and liberals attack him as cold-blooded and hypocritical - a self-appointed ethics watchdog with questionable practices of his own, a family-values promoter who ditched his first wife as soon as he was elected to Congress, a man who would cut off cash to young unmarried mothers and build orphanages for their kids.
Yet Gingrich's tactical skills, honed as a campaign manager from high school to graduate school, are giving Democrats a bad case of what one newspaper called "Newt envy."
He used to declaim to an empty House chamber after hours, witnessed only by a few C-SPAN viewers. Now he has the opposite problem. His wife told him last week that he was overexposed. "'I said, I agree with you, and I'm live on CNN in about 10 minutes,"' an exuberant Gingrich told Republican governors.
Along with the publicity comes scrutiny, and Gingrich doesn't like that part. But as he said in launching his campaign against Wright in 1988: "He's the speaker, and everything he could have done all his life as a backbencher becomes self-destructive when he becomes third in line to be president of the United States."
Gingrich's life is dense and textured, a series of family and political dramas riddled with conflicts and reconciliations.
Back in Georgia he is remembered variously as the good father, the callous ex-husband, the energetic professor, the sensitive friend, the political turncoat, the smalltown boy who made good. He is a person who moves on - a pattern that began in childhood.
Gingrich's mother, Kit, was divorced early from his father. At 3 he was adopted by her new husband, a taciturn military man with whom she had three daughters. The family moved often, the children making friends only to leave them behind a year or two later.
Newt was a boy who grabbed his opportunities. At 10, he told his mother he was going to the library but he actually went to lobby the mayor of Harrisburg, Pa., for a zoo. The meeting yielded his first headline. A few years later his uncle gave him a tour of a new TV station. Within moments young Newt was on the air, spinning records and making patter.
Gingrich, 51, has said the turning point of his life was a visit to the French battlegrounds at Verdun. The family walked on fields shattered by ferocious World War I battles, looked through a building filled with the bones of the dead. His father, Bob, told him that "politics could have kept this from ever happening," recalled Kit Gingrich.
It was in Fort Benning, Ga., that the teen-age Newt fell in love with Jackie, a geometry teacher seven years his senior. His parents were devastated. They expected their bright son to attend West Point or an Ivy League college. They did persuade him to leave for Emory University in Atlanta. It didn't work.
"The young lady's aunt had a very high job in the school district and got her a job in Atlanta," Mrs. Gingrich recalled tensely during a recent interview at her home outside Harrisburg. His father told him, "If you marry her, you're not coming home."
Bob Gingrich refused to come to the wedding. "Can you imagine me going into the wedding with my husband waiting in the car?" said Mrs. Gingrich. She and her daughters stayed home.
The voluble mother and son now talk at least weekly. He calls before he's on TV, and then again afterward to ask how he's done. She keeps four huge albums of Newtiana, presidential paeans and victory speeches alongside accounts of his 22 overdrafts at the House bank and the current House ethics query on whether he used a teaching position to promote conservative GOP ideas.
His father - a former Democrat - is also a convert to his son's career. But for years there were strains, emotional and financial.
Newt and Jackie had two daughters within three years, and little money. After Emory the family moved to New Orleans, where Newt attended Tulane University and earned a Ph.D. in history.
He got a deferment and didn't go to Vietnam. He demonstrated against censorship. He worked for moderate Republican Nelson Rockefeller's 1968 presidential campaign. That same year he used marijuana once "at a party late at night in New Orleans. It didn't have any effect on me … so I never went back and revisited it."
Gingrich was hired as an assistant professor at West Georgia College in Carrollton, a rural, blue-collar area 50 miles west of Atlanta. His specialty was European history, and he also coordinated the school's environmental studies program. He attended First Baptist Church two to three times weekly. He was a deacon and taught Sunday school. The family home was modest, too small even for entertaining.
Gingrich made his first congressional race from this comfortable base. He presented himself as a progressive populist; he was endorsed by the League of Conservation Voters and the Communications Workers of America.
"He convinced me he was going to build a reform Republican Party that was going to be attractive to blacks and women. He was very much a moderate back then," said Lee Howell, a liberal who worked for Gingrich's losing campaigns in 1974 and 1976 but more recently has helped his opponents.
The literature in Gingrich's controversial third campaign, in 1978, featured pictures of his wife and children. He accused his opponent of planning to break up her family by moving alone to Washington.
When he won, college and church friends showered the Gingriches with money, clothes and furniture. They believed they had elected "a humble fellow, a brilliant political strategist, a wonderful father and husband," said the Rev. Brantley Harwell, Gingrich's former pastor.
Within a few months came the stunning news: Newt wanted a divorce. Perceptions hardened as Jackie struggled for money pending a settlement, and Newt tried to discuss terms with her while she was recovering in the hospital from cancer surgery.
"It shocked the town because he was our Horatio Alger. We were so proud," said Floyd Hoskins, a retired West Georgia history professor who was Gingrich's close friend and office-mate. The general reaction, he said, was "You mean I helped buy the furniture for their house and now he's throwing her out? A lot of people just said, 'Boom, we don't like Newt anymore."'
The couple had gone through counseling, and friends and relatives say Gingrich was in great pain. He told his mother he would have a nervous breakdown if he didn't get a divorce.
"I have to be myself. I have to be me," Hoskins said Gingrich told him in an agonizing late-night phone call. Hoskins believes the couple never transcended the original teacher-student relationship.
His ex-wife declines to talk to reporters.
Political opponents have used the divorce story to depict Gingrich as heartless and cruel. Jackie Sue Zyla, his younger daughter, was so angered by such attacks in 1992 that she made a campaign ad defending her father.
Gingrich's older daughter, Kathy Lubbers, owner of a Greensboro, N.C. specialty coffee company, took a different path that year. She held a pro-choice press conference with Republican moderates. Gingrich said his family and his party were healthy enough to weather a debate on abortion.
Gingrich's daughters and wife all are refusing interview requests. But Jackie Sue, an accountant, gave her father a heartfelt introduction last month at an Atlanta fundraiser. "He, like the rest of us, has conflicting traits and opposing forces in his life," she said. "Most of all, I think of him as human."
Nowhere are the opposing forces more apparent than in Gingrich's attempts to balance his stands on gay rights.
His much younger sister Candace, 28, has not previously discussed her sexual orientation publicly, but it's no secret in her family. She said Newt's reaction, when her mother told him, was that "I have every right to live my life the way I want to. Basically, that was it - there wasn't any, no, tell her not to say anything."
Gingrich, who did not respond to an interview request, recently compared homosexuality to alcoholism. Commenting this year on a Cobb County, Ga. resolution against "the gay lifestyle," he said that "supporting traditional families is important" but "you can do that in a way that is tolerant of other people."
A Gingrich aide was implicated several years ago in a scheme to convince major newspapers to publish allegations that House Speaker Tom Foley was gay. Gingrich took flak for not firing her or requiring her to apologize. This year he campaigned for Rep. Steve Gunderson, a Republican from Wisconsin who acknowledges having a male companion.
Early in 1992 Gingrich said there was no reason to expel people from the military "for purely private behavior that's sexual." But a year later, after the military brass said ending the ban on gays would destroy troop morale, Gingrich switched sides. "I've decided to go with the guys who won the wars in Panama and the Gulf," he said.
The congressman's competing instincts on gay issues offer glimpses of a moderate persona Gingrich left behind at the dawn of the Reagan era, when he married a new, more conservative wife and adopted a matching political philosophy.
By 1983 Gingrich had gathered several activist colleagues into a loose group called the Conservative Opportunity Society. They were known mainly for inflammatory after-hours floor speeches in an empty chamber.
A series attacking Democratic foreign policy provoked then speaker Tip O'Neill to thunderingly accuse Gingrich of "the lowest thing that I have ever seen in my 32 years of Congress!" Gingrich reveled in the publicity.
The headlines came in spades several years later when Gingrich accused Wright of multiple violations of House ethics rules. The House atmosphere became poisonous. Republicans elected Gingrich to GOP whip, the No. 2 leadership position. Wright was forced to resign.
The next year, Gingrich led a revolt against his own president, prompting the House to kill a bipartisan deficit-reduction agreement that would have raised taxes. The setback led to a new agreement more appealing to Democrats.
Marlin Fitzwater, Bush's press secretary, recalls Gingrich as "a burr under the saddle." Barbara Bush singled him out in her latest book as a troublemaker who contributed to her husband's downfall.
Like him or not, Gingrich was gaining clout. But he was having trouble getting re-elected at home. Bad feelings from the divorce lingered. Old allies resented his new politics. Then came the Eastern Airlines strike of 1990.
Gingrich, who represented the area around the Atlanta airport, angered his union constituents by refusing to support federal intervention to resolve the strike. Six thousand people lost their jobs; Gingrich kept his by 972 votes.
Reapportionment probably saved his career. By concentrating Democrats and blacks in certain districts, the Democratic legislature unwittingly crafted out of the remains the perfect district for Gingrich: suburban, affluent and overwhelmingly Republican. He didn't live there, but he moved there. After a close call in his 1992 primary, he appears comfortably settled.
"This district fits him like a glove. There are fewer Eastern machinists here. There are more college graduates, more intellectual pursuits," said Allan Lipsett, Gingrich's Georgia press secretary. "That district was the airport. This district is the people who go to the airport."
Gingrich and his wife Marianne, a business consultant, lived in a townhouse until a month ago when they bought a larger detached home. The purchase reflected a confidence that wasn't always there.
The two told The Washington Post in 1989 that they didn't know if their marriage would last. Gingrich said his "habit of dominance" contributed to their problems and said he'd found "frightening pieces that related to … my own life" in the book "Men Who Hate Women and the Women Who Love Them."
Gingrich said it was a weepy period for him personally. But his political rhetoric was as aggressive as ever - even after he rose to second in command of the House GOP. Harwell, the Georgia pastor, goes so far as to call his former parishioner "politically amoral." "He's gotten real mean," Harwell said.
Some Republicans are exhilarated by Gingrich's attention-getting remarks. They like him just the way he is. But the speaker-presumptive, in a humble post-election mood, said on television that he needed to be "30 percent less pugnacious and 50 percent less negative."
Back in the old district, his friends and former friends say they have great hopes Gingrich will accomplish this last transformation - from flame-thrower to statesman.
"The one thing that Newt wants is to go down in history as a very good speaker of the House of Representatives," said Richard Dangle, retired dean of arts and sciences at West Georgia College. "In order to be that, Newt's going to have to change again."
 Load-Date: November 27, 1994

 

End of Document
