

THE MOVEMENT: The Enigmatic Religious Right, On The Rise
The Associated Press
September 5, 1993, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1671 words
Byline: By JOHN KING, AP Political Writer
Dateline: CHESAPEAKE, Va.
Body




In the ashes of George Bush's defeat, a young political organizer named Ralph Reed saw the seeds of revival. "For Christians," he says, "without a crucifixion there is no resurrection."
Insurrection may be a more fitting word to describe Reed's ultimate political goal for the Christian right, but the Biblical metaphor is fitting: His is the business of mixing religion and politics.
The movement is one of the country's most intriguing and controversial political forces. Still young, its potential in elective politics has barely been tested.
This year, in virtually every state, Christian conservatives are using evangelical and fundamentalist churches - along with direct mail and television fund-raising appeals - as bases for a sophisticated organizing effort that merges eager activists with state-of-the-art training and communications.
The primary target is local politics - typically school and library boards, state legislatures, precinct and county Republican Party organizations. Already, conservative Christians can claim significant political success:
-Effective control of Republican Party operations in a handful of states, including Iowa, Virginia, South Carolina, Minnesota and Oregon. They hold considerable sway in many more, including California, Texas, Pennsylvania and much of the South.
-Majorities on a small but growing number of school boards.
-Top dollar fundraising. The movement is reaping tens of millions of dollars, fueled by opposition to President Clinton's policies.
-The sympathy of an expanding network of churches that distribute voting guides and encourage political activism.
-Carefully cultivated voting lists, which help boost voter turnout and can make the difference in low-profile local races.
The explosion of political activity by religious conservatives helped Ronald Reagan to two landslide presidential victories. One of the movement's own, broadcaster Pat Robertson, bid for the 1988 GOP nomination - and in the process awakened more activists.
The most militant activists are blamed, in part, by moderate Republicans for President Bush's defeat last year, because of their high profile at last year's GOP convention. Religious right leaders dispute that, but many still believe a broader agenda is the path to a softer image.
"The pro-family movement has limited its effectiveness by concentrating disproportionately on issues such as abortion and homosexuality," Reed wrote recently in the conservative Heritage Foundation's Policy Review. His prescription: Recruit minorities, mainline Protestants, Catholics and conservative Jews to the Christian Coalition by spending more time - and money - on health care, taxes, crime, and other issues.
Some religious conservatives are wary of the approach, worried the shift in emphasis will offend the movement's most loyal followers. Said Martin Mawyer of the Christian Action Network. "Our supporters want groups out there to protect them on the social issues."
This debate over the movement's long-term course comes in a year in which the Christian right's immediate agenda is packed with state efforts to limit homosexual rights, restrict abortion access and reshape America's public schools.
These skirmishes are being waged in precincts and tiny congregations across America with the help of thousands of field workers cultivated from evangelical and fundamentalist churches. People like Russ Hepler, pastor of a tiny congregation in rural Pennsylvania; Roberta Combs, an aggressive Christian Coalition leader in South Carolina; and Carol Griffin a "pro-family" lobbyist in Florida's capital, Tallahassee.
"For some reason, about 40-50 years ago, the Christian church kind of backed out of the political arena," said Hepler, who has about 50 people in his congregation at the New Hope Fellowship Church in Pottsville. "Average churchgoing folks need to get involved again, and the church is a good vehicle to encourage that involvement."
Seventeen hundred miles away in Salem, Ore., another hotbed of Christian right activity, Deanna Fuller is one of those average churchgoing folks. She gives the Christian conservative movement a sympathetic ear and a reliable vote.
"I'm a Christian first, a conservative second and a Republican third," says Fuller, a grandmother of seven.
Democrat Clinton has given the movement fresh impetus, with his advocacy of abortion rights and his proposal to allow gays in the military.
"We can't let a misguided army of liberals and homosexuals make a mockery of our country, a mockery of moral values, a mockery of God's laws," reads a fund-raising letter from one televangelist allied with the Christian right, James Kennedy of Florida's Coral Ridge Ministries. "God's people will not be locked into silence by Satan."
It is such entwining of God and politics that angers, and frightens, the Christian right's critics.
"They intend to take their Bible-based religious beliefs and make them our civil laws," said Susan Glickman, who heads the liberal People for the American Way chapter in Florida. "They believe they are doing God's work."
Her views are common among the Christian right's opponents: liberals who argue the movement wants to erase any separation of church and state; moderate Republicans who believe their party is falling under its control; and even many religious groups and clergy who accuse religious conservatives, in their zealous condemnation of abortion and homosexuality, of preaching intolerance in the name of God.
To movement leaders, their role is no different than the AFL-CIO is to union members or the Chamber of Commerce to businesses.
"This whole angle and tone of using the religious right, in a negative way, is very bigoted," said Tom Armstrong, a state legislator in Pennsylvania. "Some people say we shouldn't legislate morality. That is ridiculous. Every single piece of legislation has some moral impact."
At issue in this debate is the public soul-searching over the most divisive of political issues - abortion, homosexuality, sex education, censorship, pornography, school prayer.
"It is quite clear that religion and especially the salience of religion to people makes a big impact on how they vote," said James Guth, a Furman University political scientist who has studied the religious right and its evolution from the Rev. Jerry Falwell's Moral Majority into the more sophisticated movement of today.
"Organizing is their life," Guth says of the new movement leaders. "They have the money they need and in the long run they have something that is even more important than money - dedicated people."
Ralph Reed, 32, is Robertson's top political lieutenant, directing the Christian Coalition from a modest office in a southern Virginia industrial park. The offspring of Robertson's 1988 presidential campaign has chapters in every state, more than 400,000 contributing members and the names of another 300,000 people who have corresponded with the Coalition or taken part in some of its activities, Reed said.
The Coalition is considered the leading political force in the Christian conservative movement. It has a national budget of about $ 22 million, and state chapters that lobby local governments, build voter lists, prepare voter guides and jam congressional and legislative switchboards.
Reed directs the coalition's "leadership schools" - 75 this year alone to train roughly 7,500 activists to run campaigns and influence public policy. Robertson is the organization's spiritual leader, promoting his views through Christian Coalition publications and his Christian Broadcasting media empire.
Besides the Christian Coalition, the movement has dozens of organizations with their own leaders and agendas.
Robertson's influence is rivaled by a man unknown to most Americans, James C. Dobson. He is a child psychologist whose Focus in the Family organization - and nationally syndicated radio program of the same name - is a growing force.
Dobson eschews the spotlight and generally steers clear of the polarizing rhetoric that often brings attention to less powerful movement leaders. But his reach is enormous. Nearly 1,800 radio stations broadcast his daily program, which Dobson often offers as a platform for other Christian conservatives. Focus on the Family magazine and other Dobson publications reach more than 2 million homes. And the Colorado-based organization has an annual budget approaching $ 80 million.
Another key organization - a spinoff of the National Association of Christian Educators - carries the deliberately benign name of Citizens for Excellence in Education. CEE won national attention in 1990 when it helped candidates win surprise victories in San Diego County school board races, contests in which some candidates seemed to mask their ties to religion.
"Christian control of public schools" and "complete control of all local school boards" are the stated goals of CEE President Robert L. Simonds, whose organization claims 3,000 sympathetic school board members.
A booming voice in the aggressive fight against homosexual rights is the Rev. Lou Sheldon, head of the California-based Traditional Values Coalition, a loosely knit coalition of, Sheldon says, 25,000 churches.
Sheldon has made Clinton's social agenda a fund-raising anchor as he supports efforts to put initiatives designed to curb homosexual rights on state ballots next year, from Florida to California.
Clinton, says Sheldon, "has created nothing short of a reign of social terror." In turn, Sheldon says Clinton has breathed new life into a religious conservative movement that otherwise might have stalled for a bit after 12 years of White House access.
Now, Sheldon has only rosy predictions for the movement's growth and little patience for those who argue the Christian right is intolerant.
"It is nonsense to say because you are absolutist you are intolerant," Sheldon said. "Life is full of basic guidelines that keep you on a narrow path. Jesus Christ himself said, 'The way is narrow and few are going to take it."'
 
 Next: A religious right primer on how to win elections.

 

End of Document
