

THE NEW TEAM: Babbitt Anxious to Revamp the Old West
The Associated Press
March 10, 1993, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 881 words
Byline: By RITA BEAMISH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Bruce Babbitt, the new sheriff of federal lands, left his aides behind as he strode alone into a roomful of cattlemen anxious to head off the loss of an Old West perk - cheap grazing fees.
The new Interior Secretary, determined to raise the outdated fees for public land use, went one-on-one with the ranchers for the better part of an hour. When he left, potential critics were talking his language.
"We liked the secretary's position that we have to have an equitable grazing fee that allows for the survival of the industry," said Joe Etchart of the Public Lands Council, an organization of ranchers and other federal land users that has successfully battled past efforts to raise the fees.
In a post that typically catches little attention from the American public, Babbitt has quickly established himself as a shirt-sleeves, action-oriented Cabinet secretary.
And he hasn't confined himself just to domestic issues, weighing inside the Clinton administration as an environmental voice on international trade and treaty matters as well.
Last week he sat in on the White House National Economic Council's meeting on the free trade agreement with Mexico and Canada - a pact with significant environmental implications.
It's nothing new for the tall, lanky Westerner who has delved into natural resource and public land issues for years as governor of Arizona, an unsuccessful presidential candidate and a noted environmentalist.
"Like a kid in a candy store," Babbitt says, when asked how he likes his new job overseeing the nation's national parks, wildlife refuges and mineral deposits.
Babbitt has made clear that big changes are in store for the Interior Department, which he describes as "a mess." His mission, he says, is to reverse more than a decade of Republican rule.
He said he initially wondered whether the agency's staff would be "bristling with the spiritual descendants of Jim Watt," the Interior secretary who environmentalists often criticized under President Reagan.
Instead, Babbitt is delighting in encounters with staffers anxious for someone to solicit their environmental ideas.
"Virtually overnight the morale of the National Park Service has gone from the depths of Glacier Bay National Park to the rims of the Grand Canyon," Park Service spokesman George Berklacy said when asked about Babbitt's impact.
The Interior Department, steward for 500 million acres of federally owned lands, is plagued by interagency squabbles, low morale and a multibillion dollar maintenance backlog at deteriorating national parks.
Babbitt plunged immediately into changes, starting with plans to substantially raise the outdated fees miners, loggers and ranchers are charged for their use of government-owned lands.
At the same time, he appears intent on tempering his environmental views with a willingness to consider other views, a trait many observers say characterized his tenure as governor.
Babbitt now says he supports the concept of "multiple-use" which permits development, mining and ranching on public lands as well as recreation and wilderness protection.
Industry groups and their congressional allies had bristled at his one-time comments that wildlife and recreation should be the foremost consideration on public lands.
"He's a quick study. He has a good grasp of the issues. He enables people to think they get a fair listen," said Rep. Jim Kolbe, R-Ariz., who has known Babbitt since Kolbe served in the Arizona legislature.
Although Kolbe expects to have sharp differences with Babbitt over western land issues, he called the secretary "a good negotiator."
So far the approach seems to be working. The ranchers for the first time are showing a willingness to accept higher grazing fees.
An attorney who grew up in a wealthy landowning Arizona family, Babbitt is an avid backpacker and cross-country skier who enjoys rafting in the Grand Canyon or spending a solitary night in the backcountry.
He has two teen-age sons. His attorney wife, Hattie, has been nominated as ambassador to the Organization of American States.
Coming to Interior from a stint as president of the League of Conservation Voters, Babbitt displays intricate familiarity with issues ranging from the most parochial - like specific small parks or mines in congressmen's home districts - to broader problems like national park deterioration.
And so far he has been undaunted by the powerful special interests with a financial stake in the U.S. public lands he manages.
In a speech to the American Mining Congress, Babbitt raised eyebrows when he matter-of-factly informed miners they should be prepared to pay new royalty fees for the minerals they've extracted from public lands for more than a century at dirt-cheap prices.
Asked how the conference participants felt about that speech, Joseph Mazur of the Gold Institute said, "We had an extra cocktail."
Even before he took over the Interior Department there were signs that Babbitt, known for his quick wit, would be one of the more colorful Cabinet members.
This, after all, was the man who launched a quixotic bid for the presidency in 1988 by bicycling across Iowa.
Babbitt now regales audiences with the story of how as a college geology student he flunked the test for a U.S. Geological Survey job. Now U.S.G.S. is one of the agencies under his jurisdiction.

 

End of Document
