

The Bush Years: Closing The Book On The Cold War
The Associated Press
November 4, 1992, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 868 words
Byline: By ROBERT BURNS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




When historians dissect the record of George Bush's four years at the pinnacle of power, the most enduring imprint they find may be from his hand in ending Cold War peacefully and halting the nuclear arms race.
The "new world order" was not primarily of Bush's making, but political analysts believe the history books are likely to give him much of the credit.
"It happened on his watch, and he gets credit for that," said Michael Preston, chairman of the political science department at the University of Southern California and a self-described critic of the Bush White House years.
In an odd sort of way, Bush's determination to be identified with the closing of the Cold War era may have helped doom his re-election. It seemed to suggest the time was right to turn the page, to make a fresh start at home, too.
Of Bush's failings, one of the most remarkable was his inability to guide through the Congress his prescriptions for restoring vigor to the economy. That, it now seems, may have been the single biggest reason for Bush's downfall. He blames Congress for the inaction; his critics say he didn't assert leadership.
Possibly the most well-remembered Bush misstep may, in the long run, be his decision in June 1990 to accept a Democratic-led tax increase after having pledged in his 1988 nomination acceptance speech: "Read my lips: No new taxes."
It is generally said that Bush's strong suit is foreign affairs. Bush himself has admitted he takes more interest in dealing with international challenges - whether economic, political or military - than attending to domestic affairs.
In the final weeks of his futile struggle to keep Bill Clinton out of the White House, Bush never missed a chance to remind people of the enduring importance of ending the 45-year Cold War, an ideological struggle that defined not only American foreign policy but kept the world at the brink of nuclear disaster.
"I take great pride in the fact that the young kids go to bed at night without the same fear of nuclear war that their parents had. That is a major accomplishment," Bush told a campaign rally in suburban Detroit last month.
The U.S. government was caught by surprise, as was most of the rest of the world, when the Berlin Wall fell on Nov. 9, 1989, and tens of thousands of East Germans poured across a border than had been closed for nearly three decades.
Bush could take little credit for the stunning events in East Berlin, but he stayed engaged with Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev during the trying times that followed, including the frightening but failed coup in Moscow in August 1991.
Bush recently said Russian President Boris Yeltsin has told him that Bush's support during the coup was "more than anything else" the reason the communist uprising failed and the Soviet Union did not return to totalitarian rule.
The collapse of Soviet communism, in turn, led to the end of the nuclear arms race.
Just before the coup, Bush and Gorbachev held a summit meeting in Washington and signed the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty to cut nuclear arms by one-third. The negotiations were done mostly during Ronald Reagan's presidency, but Bush initiated follow-up talks that culminated this year in an historic agreement - not yet fully implemented - to make deeper cuts in nuclear arms.
Bush also gets credit for having reduced nuclear tensions to their lowest since the dawn of the Nuclear Age by taking U.S. nuclear bombers off alert, removing all U.S. Army nuclear weapons from Europe and scrapping many land-based missiles.
The president also counts among his greatest accomplishments his leadership in organizing an international coalition to defeat Iraq in the Persian Gulf War. He contends the victory restored American pride in its military strength and also cleared the way for the first direct Israeli-Arab peace negotiations.
Bush also will be remembered for "Operation Just Cause," the U.S. invasion of Panama in December 1989 to seize Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega on drug trafficking charges.
Asked recently to name his biggest domestic accomplishments, Bush talked mainly about setting national education goals and getting Congress to pass two pieces of legislation:
-The Clean Air Act of 1990, meant to reduce urban smog, limit releases of toxic pollutants from industry and stem acid rain. Most of the pollution-reduction measures are to be phased in over 10 to 15 years, but environmentalists complain that Bush has been slow to implement even the first set of requirements.
-The Americans With Disabilities Act, signed by Bush in June 1990. It prohibits discrimination against job seekers on the basis of a disability. As of June 1992 it required businesses to make it easier for the disabled to enter buildings. Bush hails the law as a major step in protecting civil rights.
In September 1989, Bush and the nation's governors met in Charlottesville, Va., to map out a national education strategy. With Bill Clinton playing a major role, they came up with six broad goals that Bush incorporated in his "America 2000" project to reinvigorate schools. The goals include ending illiteracy, making schools safe and drug free and making sure children are healthy and ready to learn when they start school.

 

End of Document
