

The Two-Thirds of the Budget that Just Keeps Growing and Growing
The Associated Press
February 11, 1995, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 663 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




While President Clinton's budget team tells Congress that he's got deficits on a downward glide path, nearly two-thirds of government spending is taking off, on automatic pilot.
Those climbing costs are for entitlement programs and for interest on the federal debt.
Entitlements - direct payments to individual Americans who meet benefit formulas - could be changed by law, but at political peril, since the people who get them also vote. Interest has to be paid and the debt is going up, too, even if annual deficits really are curbed.
That's the impasse. Clinton's presidential commission on entitlements and tax reform told him that by the year 2012, projected spending for entitlements and interest would take all the revenues the government collects.
By 2030, the panel projected, federal retirement and medical programs alone would cost as all the taxes the government raises, unless the system is overhauled first.
There's a consensus on the problem; none on the answers. Even the special commission that spent a year on the entitlements issue couldn't agree on the way to avoid it while there's still time. Its 269-page report to Clinton said there must be swift action to head off real trouble over the next 30 years, and offered options on what to do about it.
That panel, headed by Democratic Sen. Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, issued its findings on Dec. 15 and went out of business. It was more than a month before Kerrey could arrange a session with Clinton to deliver and discuss it.
Reforming entitlements, which would involve eventual changes in Social Security, the biggest and most sensitive of all those programs, is not a task most politicians want to talk about.
"It was a political suicide mission. We all knew that," Sen. Alan Simpson, R-Wyo., said of the entitlements commission. "But we believed it was necessary for somebody to step up and give cover to the politicians and the administration as to what's going to happen to the future citizens of this country."
And the topic was unavoidable as Republican-run congressional hearings on the new Clinton budget. "Maybe the president is saying … you go first," said Sen. Pete Domenici of New Mexico, chairman of the Senate Budget Committee. "I'm not against that."
Sen. Bob Packwood, chairman of the Finance Committee, said he was disappointed in Clinton and Congress. "I don't think we have the heart to face up to the problem we all know is the problem," Packwood said.
"The president has said Social Security is off the table. Republicans and Democrats have said Social Security is off the table. Medicare is apparently off the table. Interest has to be off the table."
With major items off limits, Packwood said, "we all know that we've fooling ourselves" with any suggestion that routine trims will deal with the deficit.
Republican leaders pushing the balanced budget amendment have made 2002 their target for what would be the first break-even year since 1969.
"There must be a secret plan somewhere in Washington," scoffed Sen. John Breaux, D-La. He said Americans should be told whether it hits Social Security, cuts Medicare or eliminates highway aid in order to balance the budget. "It must be a hell of a plan if we are going to do that without touching any of these programs," he said.
Republicans see the entitlement crunch coming; their complaint is that Clinton's budget doesn't directly address it. "Basically, two-thirds of the budget is on automatic pilot and the administration ignores two-thirds of the budget," complained Rep. Christopher Shays, R-Conn.
Challenged on entitlements, Clinton's people reply that the first step has to be the one the president already has tried, and lost. "If we are going to control the entitlements we must, as the president has said frequently, focus on health care reform," said Budget Director Alice Rivlin.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.
 Load-Date: February 11, 1995

 

End of Document
