

The Long, Courageous Road of the Achilles Track Club
The Associated Press
October 17, 1993, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 776 words
Byline: By BERT ROSENTHAL, AP Track Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The runners' words are uplifting.
"Have a dream, make a plan, go for it! You'll get there, I promise," says Zoe Koplowitz.
"Lord let me win, but if I cannot win, let me be brave in my attempt," says Bob Neumayer.
"Don't limit yourself to what others think you can achieve. You can do whatever you want," says Ruben Tavarez.
Their challenge is enormous.
Koplowitz suffers from multiple sclerosis. Neumayer has been a paraplegic for 17 years. Tavarez has had a broken spine for 14 years.
They are members of the New York branch of the Achilles Track Club, an international non-profit organization that encourages people with disabilities to participate in running events ranging from weekend competitions to the New York City Marathon.
The club, formed in 1983 by Dick Traum, its president, has 3,500 members and chapters in 24 countries, including South Africa, Nigeria, Yemen, the Dominican Republic, Australia, New Zealand, Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Switzerland, Norway, Yemen, Bulgaria, Lithuania, Kazakhstan, Ukraine, Georgia and Russia.
Of the 3,500 members, 192 will compete in the Nov. 14 New York City Marathon, a formidable increase from last year's total of 148 and a substantial increase from the six who competed in 1983, the first year Achilles athletes were in the race.
Three of the athletes come from Soweto in South Africa, and will stay in New York for more than a week after the race to be fitted for artificial legs. The Harlem Center for Independent Living is making the medical arrangements for the Soweto athletes.
One blind athlete will come from Yekaterinburg, the birthplace of Russian President Boris Yeltsin. The athlete, Vladimir Chemov, is Yeltsin's masseur.
"We also have a chapter in Hanoi," Traum said. "We haven't been able to get them airline tickets to come yet, but if we do, we will have two athletes from Hanoi. That would be a first."
Traum said that in the past, a runner from Trinidad and one from Mongolia, who competed in the marathon, received corneal transplants after the race. The Mongolian athlete competed in the 1992 Olympic marathon.
The Achilles Track Club tries to arrange plane tickets through sponsor support, then puts the athletes up at inexpensive hotels and gives them $ 140 spending money for seven nights in New York. That might seem like a paltry amount, but it's a windfall to many of the athletes.
"Take the Polish athletes," Traum said. "They bring their own food, so they spend only about $ 1.50 a day and go home with about $ 125."
Others, said Traum, are given extra money by their sponsors, and use it to purchase items unavailable in their countries, such as VCRs or computers. "Then, they go home and sell them for a profit," Traum said. "The Russians are very entrepreneurial."
Traum said many more than the 192 athletes who will compete wanted to take part in the New York City Marathon, but he had to limit each chapter.
"Last year in the Warsaw Marathon, for example, we had over 100 athletes - more than 15 percent of the athletes in the marathon," Traum said. "That was too much."
Traum said the athletes who compete consider it a high honor.
"Let's say you're a disabled person in Bulgaria," said Traum, who has no right leg. "Normally, you would want to stay to the side, not be noticed. But if you're competing for one of three slots in the New York City Marathon, it's one of the greatest things that can happen to you."
Neumayer has the same feeling.
"It's good for my self-esteem," said Neumayer, 46, a paraplegic as the result of a 1976 accident from driving while intoxicated.
Neumayer has competed in six New York City Marathons, finishing first in the handicapped runner's class in 1989 and 1990, plus three other marathons in seven years.
"I never look at myself as disabled or handicapped," said Neumayer, who speaks regularly to children on the dangers of driving while intoxicated. "I look at myself as physically challenged. The physical challenge pushes me to be the best I can on any given day."
Completing his first marathon in 1986 was most rewarding for Neumayer.
"When I was a little boy, I used to dream of being up at bat in Ebbets Field in the bottom of the ninth inning with the bases loaded and the count three and two, and then hitting a grand slam home run to win the game," he said. "It was just like that.
"I couldn't take the smile off my face."
Fred Lebow, chairman of the New York Road Runner's Club, organizers of the marathon, knows the importance of having the Achilles athletes in the race.
"It helps make other people aware of the handicapped and the disabled," he said. "It will show that they don't have to give up, that there's hope and life in the marathon."
 Load-Date: October 17, 1993

 

End of Document
