

The Former Mayor, His Angry Wife, The Judge, The House …
The Associated Press
August 30, 1992, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 394 words
Byline: By JOE EDWARDS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NASHVILLE, Tenn.
Body




Let's try to sort this out.
Former mayor Bill Boner and fourth wife Traci Peel Boner are suing each other for divorce.
The judge in the case used to date Boner.
Mrs. Boner claims she photographed her husband's car at dawn outside the condominium of his third wife, to whom he was still married when he announced his engagement to her.
But Mrs. Boner admitted in court she recently flew to Chicago and Milwaukee with an old boyfriend.
Now the judge says the Boners must share their house until a divorce is granted.
The divorce is renewing titillating headlines that began two years ago when Boner, then mayor, revealed his romance with Peel while still married to lawyer Betty Fowlkes Boner.
The relationship fed tabloid TV shows and newspapers across the country. Boner, 47, and Mrs. Boner, 36, also appeared together on "Donahue."
Now they are awaiting the outcome of their separate divorce suits.
Boner, who did not seek re-election last year, and Mrs. Boner have been separated several months. Mrs. Boner is a country music singer who learned Thursday that her contract with Liberty Records is being terminated.
Her current release is "Almost Single."
The two were married in Hawaii in September 1990. Boner most recently has been working as general manager of a pallet company.
Boner, a harmonica-playing former Democratic congressman, filed for divorce Aug. 6 on grounds of irreconcilable differences.
Mrs. Boner, whose marriage to Boner was her first, alleged irreconcilable differences and adultery in her divorce suit Aug. 10.
At a hearing Friday, Boner said he has recently dined and played golf with a Kentucky woman.
Circuit Judge Muriel Robinson Rice said Friday she will ask another judge to hear the case because Boner defeated two of her relatives in past political races, and because she dated Boner twice in 1979 and 1980, when both were single.
But before stepping down, she ordered the Boners to share their 13-room home until a divorce is granted. The judge said Mrs. Boner can occupy the house during the week and Boner can use it on weekends.
"Mrs. Boner may stay or leave at her election" when Boner is present, the judge said.
It could be touchy. When Boner's lawyer asked Mrs. Boner if she recently called the former mayor "every name in the book" when he dropped by the house to pick up clothes, she replied: "There probably isn't enough names to call him."

 

End of Document
