

The Death of a Boss - and the Fall of a Family
 The Associated Press
December 10, 1995, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1837 words
Byline: By RICK HAMPSON, Associated Press Writers and LARRY McSHANE
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Christmas time in the city, 10 years ago. Heart of Manhattan, midst of the evening rush. Four men stand outside Sparks Steak House in matching outfits: black Russian fur hats, pale trench coats, loaded handguns.
They're waiting for Paul Castellano, boss of the nation's biggest Mafia family. They're working for John Gotti, an obscure thug who wants Big Paul's place atop the Gambino family.
Around 5:30, a black Lincoln Town Car pulls to the curb along East 46th Street, ignoring a No Parking sign. Inside is Castellano, 70, a big, hawk-nosed man in a dark business suit. He carries $ 3,300 in cash, but no weapon.
Inside, his table for six awaits. He will confer with a few trusted capos, and enjoy his favorite - prime rib, third cut.
But Paul Castellano has already eaten his last meal.
As he steps from the car, the gunmen greet him with a half-dozen bullets. His driver, Tommy Bilotti, watches through the car's window until he's ambushed from behind. Bilotti's body splays across the street, blood flowing bright red from a half-dozen bullet holes.
One gunman moves close to Castellano's body, slumped against the open door. He aims at the boss's head and fires a final shot, point blank.
As bystanders scream and duck for cover, a car moves slowly through the chaos. John Gotti inspects his gunsels' handiwork through the tinted windows, then drives on.
Sparks' bartender calls 911. Castellano's dinner companions - including the Judas who set him up - get up from their table and slip out, past the bodies.
That was Dec. 16, 1985. So began the rise of the most famous mobster since Capone - and the fall of the Gambino crime family.
"It was a coup d'etat," says Bruce Mouw, who headed the FBI's Gambino squad. "It made John Gotti the nation's No. 1 mobster."
But it also made Gotti the FBI's No. 1 target. That, Mouw observes, "led to the downfall of it all."
Today, the Gambino family has shrunk from 21 crews to 10, and its lucrative monopolies in garbage carting and garment trucking are under siege. Most of the conspirators who seized power are dead or behind bars. Gotti, betrayed by a fellow plotter, is doing life without parole. The rival Genovese family is ascendant.
The Genoveses refuse to even meet with the acting Gambino boss, a 31-year-old known as "Junior." His name, John A. Gotti, is his only apparent qualification for the job.
---
Paul Castellano knew the risks.
"This life of ours, this is a wonderful life," he said two years before his death. "If you can get through life like this and get away with it, hey, that's great. But it's very, very unpredictable."
Particularly among the Gambinos, where murder most treacherous was a family tradition and underboss routinely plotted against boss.
Vincent Mangano conspired in the 1931 murder of "Joe the Boss" Masseria. Mangano's underboss, Albert Anastasia, had him killed twenty years later. Anastasia was shot to death in 1957 while sitting in a barber's chair, his face covered with towels; underboss Carlo Gambino conspired in the plot.
Gambino became boss by sharing power with Aniello Dellacroce, a murderous Anastasia loyalist. When Carlo died in 1976, Castellano - his brother-in-law - took over. Dellacroce stayed on as underboss.
While Dellacroce's crews hijacked trucks, broke legs and handled the other dirty business of organized crime, Big Paul sat in a hilltop mansion on Staten Island, inundated by envelopes of cash from underlings, insulated from the streets and the cops.
By 1985, the Gambinos were a family divided. Castellano cut his soldiers out of deals with other families; he used Genovese gunmen to kill the Gambino capo in Connecticut; he forbade drug deals, a rich racket for lesser wiseguys.
And none were heavier into drugs than John Gotti's crew.
After a member was busted for dealing heroin, Castellano demanded to hear the government's tapes in the case. Gotti wanted to hit Paul before Paul hit him, but Dellacroce urged restraint. When the underboss died on Dec. 2 - and when Castellano failed to attend his wake - Gotti was ready to move.
He began assembling a cabal called "The Fist." There were Frank DeCicco and "Joe Piney" Armone, old-line Gambino capos, and Robert DiBernardo, the family pornographer. Finally, Gotti enlisted the key recruit - a squat, musclebound man known as Sammy Bull.
Salvatore Gravano was an eighth-grade dropout who started small - "armed robberies, burglaries, shylocking," he once said - before graduating to homicide. He had murdered six people by December 1985, and had no qualms about making the boss who inducted him into the family No. 7.
DeCicco scheduled a meeting with Castellano at Sparks, and final plans were made Dec. 15 in the basement of Gravano's Brooklyn construction office. Gotti, Gravano and DeCicco were there, plus the foot soldiers.
As they sat around a big conference table, a key government witness later related, Gotti walked behind them, tapping the shooters: Eddie Lino, Vinnie Artuso, "Fat Sally" Scala, John Carneglia. Backups: Iggy Alonga, "Tony Roach" Rampino, Joe Watts, "Fat Ange" Ruggerio.
Gotti didn't say who they'd whack, just when: the next day.
---
Gotti and Gravano were parked at Third Avenue and 46th Street. Suddenly, Gravano told Gotti to look to his right.
There, stopped at the light, was a car with the dome light on. Sitting in front was Paul Castellano.
Gravano switched on his walkie-talkie. They're coming through, he told the shooters.
About five hours later, two detectives went to Gotti's modest house in Queens. The homeowner answered the door in his robe and pajamas. "Paul got hit?" he said evenly. "That's too bad."
A week later, Gambino soldiers gathered for their annual Christmas party at the Ravenite Social Club in Little Italy. Each one kissed or hugged John Gotti.
They hadn't expected Castellano's murder, but they weren't disappointed. He was greedy, remote, arrogant. In the end, no one cared enough about Big Paul to stand up for him.
No one except Vincent "Chin" Gigante, boss of the Genovese family. Chin had a very personal interest in upholding the Mafia rule that no boss is killed without approval of the bosses of the city's other families.
Within two years, FBI agents were warning Gotti that there was a contract on his head. Gotti's associates were not as fortunate:
-April 13, 1986: Frank DeCicco, Castellano's traitor, is killed by a car bomb.
-Nov. 8, 1989: Eddie Lino, Sparks gunman, is found dead inside his Mercedes with nine bullets in his head.
-April 13, 1991: Gotti's driver, Bobby Borriello, is shot 10 times in his driveway.
Gotti seemed haunted. Even in private, he acted ignorant about the Castellano hit. "Probably the cops killed this Paul," he said.
---
The new boss was a made man's man. He'd made his bones by killing a punk who foolishly kidnapped Carlo Gambino's nephew. Arrested, he kept his mouth shut and did his time. When he got out, he was inducted into the family.
After the Castellano hit, Gotti demonstrated a sensational knack for courtroom escape acts. In five years, he won three criminal trials. They called him the Teflon Don.
Gotti made the cover of Time - an Andy Warhol portrait. He wore $ 1,800 silk suits and held his son's wedding at the Helmsley Palace Hotel. In blatant defiance of the police, he threw an annual Fourth of July fireworks party outside his Queens social club.
The FBI planned one more crack at Gotti. Against all odds, agents had managed to plant a bug in a hideaway above the Ravenite Club. They listened as the boss talked family business with the new underboss, Gravano.
Gotti still was obsessed with Castellano.
He wouldn't be greedy, like Paul. "All I want is a good sandwich," he said. "You see this sandwich here? This tuna sandwich? That's all I want - a good sandwich."
He wouldn't talk into FBI mikes like Paul, and he wouldn't suffer betrayal like Paul.
"Everybody in the city's got rats near them," he told Gravano in January 1990. "But we ain't got 'em near us, these rats."
Wrong.
By year's end, he and Gravano were indicted, on the basis of the FBI bug, for the murder of Castellano and others. Gravano heard Gotti speaking contemptuously of his own bloodthirsty, murderous greed, and saw the future: They would probably go to prison for life - and if not, Gotti would have him killed.
Gravano broke the initiatory oath of silence he had taken before Castellano. He ratted on John Gotti.
In return for testifying, Gravano would receive a five-year sentence - a little more than three months for each of the 19 murders he was admittedly involved in. A strong case became invincible.
It took Gotti's jury 13 hours to reach its verdict: guilty of murder and racketeering. The sentence was mandatory: life without parole.
---
Gotti now tries to run his crime family through his son from one of the toughest lockups in the country: the federal prison in Marion, Ill., 824 miles west of the Ravenite.
He lives in a 7-by-8-foot cell. He is allowed just three visitors a week, and only on certain days. He has limited phone privileges. He spends 23 hours a day in sight of guards. He gets an hour a day for supervised recreation.
Gravano joined the Witness Protection Program after his testimony jailed 37 former associates. He has his millions. As a federal prosecutor noted, Sammy now has only one problem: "The rest of his life he'll be looking over his shoulder."
The other conspirators have not fared well. Joe Piney died in prison at age 74; Robert DiBernardo was murdered by Gravano's men in the same basement where the Castellano hit was planned; Fat Ange died of cancer while awaiting the start of four criminal trials.
John Carneglia and Tony Roach are doing life for heroin dealing. Joe Watts is awaiting trial for the Castellano murder; Vinnie Artuso is behind bars for loan sharking.
Two are at large. Fat Sally Scala drives Gotti's brother, Peter. Iggy Alonga remains free, but with no apparent means of support. Neither has been charged.
The Gambino family remains under the nominal control of John A. Gotti, a muscle-bound lout who heads a crew of other young toughs. In fact, the FBI says, the remaining capos do their own thing and hand Junior a certain amount of tribute.
His father's jailing was only the beginning - New York's mob busters haven't let up since.
Hundreds of mob-linked workers have been fired from the Javits convention center. Mob-linked unloaders have been replaced at the Fulton Fish Market. The mob's 30-year stranglehold on Garment District trucking has been loosened. A giant out-of-town corporation is challenging the mob garbage carting monopoly.
With the Gambinos in disarray, the FBI is focusing on Gigante and the Genoveses. Bruce Mouw, the agent who led the hunt for Gotti, now heads a squad tracking the Bonanno and Colombo families.
For Gotti, who believed he could make the Gambinos the U.S. Steel of organized crime, this anniversary of his ascension will be a bitter one.
"This is gonna be a Cosa Nostra 'til I die," he once blustered. "Be it an hour from now or be it tonight or a hundred years from now when I'm in jail. It's gonna be a Cosa Nostra."
 Load-Date: December 10, 1995

 

End of Document
