

The Mighty And The Small Businessmen; They're All Represented Here
The Associated Press
December 13, 1992, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 799 words
Byline: By MARTIN CRUTSINGER, AP Economics Writer
Dateline: LITTLE ROCK, Ark.
Body




The new administration welcomed on Sunday hundreds of business executives, labor leaders and economists from all 50 states to an economic conference where everyone from the head of Xerox to the owner of a South Dakota flower shop will get a chance to tell President-elect Bill Clinton what is wrong and how to fix it.
The formal sessions for the two-day event don't get under way until Monday, but Clinton was scheduled to meet the participants for get-acquainted discussions at a reception Sunday night.
Clinton and Vice President-elect Al Gore will personally moderate the nine hours of nationally televised discussions that will deal with everything from broad overviews of the domestic and international economy to strategies for cutting the federal deficit and providing better training for American workers.
Clinton's aides insisted that the economic conference, the name they chose over summit in order to lower expectations, will not be a media grandstanding event but a workshop to develop ideas that Clinton can incorporate in crafting the economic agenda for his first 100 days in office.
However, invitations to the event turned into the hottest ticket in America and planners watched the original guest list of 100 triple to a total of 329.
Those invited came from the ranks of America's big labor unions and corporations, including Lynn Williams, president of the United Steelworkers, and Frank Popoff, chief executive of Zerox. But organizers also bragged that 90 owners of small businesses would also be there, including Kathleen Piper, who runs the Pied Piper Flower Shop in Yankton, S.D.
They will take over Little Rock's largest convention center where groups of 32 at a time will sit on a stage with Clinton and his newly named economic team to discuss various topics while the others watch from the audience.
After opening remarks from Clinton Monday morning, the group will hear a panel, led by Nobel prize winning economist Robert Solow, discuss the current state of the economy.
All of the sessions will be televised by C-Span, the cable network that covers Congress, with the commercial networks promising to carry selected events. National Public Radio will be providing gavel-to-gavel radio coverage in addition to periodically offering 15-minute listener call-in programs that will allow Clinton to take questions from across America.
Conference planners believe in this way the format will be much like the town meetings that Clinton conducted during the campaign.
In addition to Clinton and Gore, the president-elect's newly assembled economics team will also be on hand, including Treasury Secretary-designate Lloyd Bentsen, Rep. Leon Panetta, who has been picked as Clinton's budget director, and Democratic National Committee Chairman Ron Brown, who was picked by Clinton Saturday as commerce secretary.
Clinton campaign director Mickey Kantor, the organizer of the economic conference, said the two days of talks would help Clinton's advisers "put meat on the bones" of the new administration's economic program as they make final decisions over the next two weeks.
"This conference will make a difference on how they think about the plan and what they put in there," he told reporters at a pre-conference briefing.
Having Clinton's top economic team present will also allow the participants to lobby for their favorite tax law changes and other programs they would like to see enacted by the new administration.
Bob Cizek, chief executive of Cooper Industries in Houston and the president of the National Association of Manufacturers, said he would make a concerted pitch for an investment tax credit to get the economy moving, something Clinton has indicated he favors.
"I think this conference is a good idea and it would have been an even better idea if the guest list had been kept shorter," Cizik said.
Allen Sinai, chief economist of the Boston Co. and another participant, said he did not agree with critics who were dismissing the event as a media stunt.
"Government is not a closed-door affair. The more heads involved in thinking about a problem, the better the solution will be," he said.
Conference organizers hope that whatever happens, their event doesn't turn into the public relations disaster that befell a similar conference hosted by Gerald Ford at the start of his presidency. None of the prominent economists foresaw the recession that was starting to grip the economy and instead Ford came out with a Whip Inflation Program widely derided for its WIN buttons.
Former federal banking regulator William Seidman, who organized Ford's conference, said he believed the Clinton people had forseen the pitfalls and were now lowering expectations.
"Having had the idea that it could blow up in their face, maybe now they will escape with their lives," Seidman said.

 

End of Document
