

The Human Element: Five People Behind The Civil Rights Bill
The Associated Press
June 8, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1204 words
Byline: By MITCHELL LANDSBERG, Associated Press Writer
Body




They are central players in a great national debate, but only a few Americans would recognize their names.
They have little in common. They are a former credit union clerk, an electronics specialist, a cannery worker, a firefighter and an accounting firm executive. They are black, white and Filipino. They don't know one another.
Yet these five people - Brenda Patterson, Patricia Lorance, Frank Atonio, Raymond J. Fitzpatrick and Ann Hopkins - are bound together by a series of landmark Supreme Court cases that have prompted Congress to consider a new civil rights bill.
Each was a litigant in a lawsuit that came before the Supreme Court. Each considered himself or herself the victim of discrimination. In each case, the Supreme Court's ruling helped shape a new body of civil rights law that put more of a burden of proof on minorities and women.
The civil rights bill that passed the House last week would overturn these five rulings, as well as a half-dozen or so other lesser rulings. Because the bill passed without enough votes to override a presidential veto, the Senate is expected to begin work on a compromise.
But even a compromise bill acceptable to Republicans is likely to tamper with at least some of the Supreme Court cases included in the original bill. Here is a brief look at some of those cases, and the people behind them:
 
 ---
Wards Cove vs. Atonio
Salmon canning in Alaska is hard, seasonal labor. Canners put in long hours in remote places to harvest the summer catch. The work attracts whites, native Alaskans, Filipinos, Japanese. Each has traditionally been channeled into certain jobs, and given separate housing and dining facilities.
Frank Atonio, a Filipino who had been employed by the Wards Cove Packing Co., was among the minority workers who filed suit in 1974, saying they were victims of discrimination in hiring and housing.
The workers tried to show statistically that whites received better jobs and housing. On June 5, 1989, the Supreme Court ruled that statistics alone didn't prove discrimination.
Seventeen years after the suit was filed, Frank Atonio is still in court. After the Supreme Court ruling, a Seattle trial court dismissed the case and the plaintiffs appealed. The appeal is pending.
Atonio? It's not clear what he's doing now. The lawyer for the plaintiffs, Abraham Arditi, noted that cannery work "is migrant, seasonal work, and many of them have moved on to other things."
And not much has changed, apparently, in the canneries. "Basically, we still house people by group," said Alec Brindle, president of Seattle-based Ward's Cove. "If you are a process worker, you live with process workers; if you're a machinist, you live with machinists; if you're a woman, you live with women."
 
 ---
Martin vs. Wilks
"All we wanted was a fair shake," said Raymond J. Fitzpatrick, a white firefighter in Birmingham, Ala.
Fitzpatrick got his fair shake from the Supreme Court in 1989, when it ruled that he and six other whites had a right to challenge an affirmative action plan in court.
The whites had complained that less-qualified blacks had been promoted ahead of them. Lower courts said the whites got into the case too late, and should have complained when the plan was originally approved.
The high court ruling sent the case back to Birmingham, where no trial date has been set. The whites say they just want a chance to advance.
"Saying this is a racist attempt to stop blacks from getting ahead is absurd," Fitzpatrick said. "I wouldn't have anything to do with something like that."
Birmingham Mayor Richard Arrington, who is black, defends the affirmative action plan.
In a city where there were no black firefighters until 1968 and none promoted until after the 1981 consent decree, Arrington said the intent was only "to have discrimination redressed and its effects eradicated."
 
 ---
Lorance vs. AT&T
Patricia A. Lorance, an electronics specialist, is still angry that the Supreme Court threw out her discrimination claim against her employer, AT&T, in 1989. She holds less ill will against the company, although it laid her off the same year.
"They did it based on seniority," she said, "so that was all right."
Ms. Lorance was among three women who sued after they were demoted in 1982 under a new seniority plan; they said it discriminated against women. The Supreme Court said they were too late - that the statute of limitations ran out 300 days after the seniority system was imposed, not, as the women argued, 300 days after they were demoted.
Ms. Lorance, of Aurora, Ill., said AT&T changed its seniority rules on its own to improve women's job rights even before the high court's ruling.
Of the ruling, she said, "I think it stunk. … The judges made their ruling very unfairly. We were not out to get money, just to right a wrong."
Since being laid off, she said she's had a couple of full-time jobs, but has worked only part-time since last September.
 
 ---
Price Waterhouse vs. Hopkins
Ann Hopkins has the job she always wanted. She is a principal - a non-accountant partner - at the giant accounting firm of Price Waterhouse. Some might say she has the job in spite of the Supreme Court, which handed down a highly technical ruling in 1989 in her discrimination suit against her employer.
Ms. Hopkins quit Price Waterhouse after being denied promotion to a partnership in 1983. In court records, her superiors said she was overly aggressive and harsh; one was quoted as saying she needed to be more feminine.
The court sent the case back to lower court, where Ms. Hopkins ultimately won. But in doing so, it said a company can legally deny someone a promotion even when discrimination enters into the decision - so long as there are other, valid reasons as well. That is what the civil rights bill would overturn.
Ms. Hopkins says she's delighted with her job in Bethesda, Md., now. If she's changed the way she looks - pierced ears, red nail polish - it's the influence of her teen-age daughter, not her colleagues, she says.
And slowly more women are joining the top ranks of the company. In 1983, seven of the company's 662 partners were women, according to spokesman Ken Koprowski. As of July 1 of this year, there will be 42 out of 968.
 
 ---
Patterson vs. McLean Credit Union
Brenda Patterson, a former clerk at the McLean Credit Union in Winston-Salem, N.C., sued her employer in 1984, saying she was harassed, denied promotion and ultimately fired because she was black.
Her lawsuit was filed under an 1866 civil rights law that allowed her to seek damages. In 1989, the Supreme Court ruled that the 1866 law didn't protect minorities against harassment.
Ms. Patterson is still in court, still arguing she was unlawfully denied a promotion.
Lee Davis, the attorney for the credit union, said Ms. Patterson was laid off because business was poor. He insisted she doesn't have a case.
Ms. Patterson's lawyer, Harold Kennedy III, said he couldn't discuss her case because of the pending litigation. He wouldn't say what Ms. Patterson is doing now, but did say she's sick of talking to reporters.
 
 ---
This story was reported by Julia Rubin in Anchorage, Alaska, Hoyt Harwell in Birmingham, Ala., Mario Fox in Chicago, Estes Thompson in Raleigh, N.C., and Mitchell Landsberg in New York.

 

End of Document
