

Through the Years: Last Words from the White House
The Associated Press
January 9, 1993, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 727 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




When the time comes for some last words from the White House, they usually include warnings, like President Bush's parting advice against isolationism on one hand and policing the world on the other.
That's hardly as memorable as Dwight D. Eisenhower's farewell alert against undue influence by the military-industrial complex.
But it fits a pattern that holds regardless of the circumstances in which presidents leave office, whether in defeat or in retirement. "There is a great tradition of warnings in presidential farewells," Ronald Reagan said in his.
They tend to be general enough to survive even a change in party control, and the concerns they cover bear striking similarities dating from the parting words of Harry S. Truman.
The Cold War, and East-West diplomacy, link them. In his 1953 farewell address, Truman recalled the American withdrawal into isolationism after World War I and the world troubles that followed, contrasting that with the U.S. stand against communism after World War II.
Bush cited that history lesson in his farewell speech series. He said U.S. leadership and sometimes the use of military force will be essential to a new world order; that a passive America would risk violence, chaos, the rise of dictators and tyrants.
He also recalled the first presidential farewell, George Washington's.
"Two hundred years ago another departing president warned of the dangers of what he described as 'entangling alliances,"' Bush said at West Point on Tuesday. "… But what was entangling in Washington's day is now essential."
Bush tempered that by saying that the United States should not be the world policeman, that "the fact that America can act does not mean that it must" in every case. Bush said military force makes sense when the stakes warrant, it can be effective and limited in time and scope, and the benefits justify the cost and sacrifice.
Formulations like those echo through the farewells of post-World War II presidents.
The departing Truman said the historians who date the Cold War from his term "will also say that in those eight years, we have set the course that can win it. ..." He said communism had a fatal flaw that would yield to the strength and ideals of the West.
Forty years later, the departing Bush celebrated Cold War victory. "In the end, Soviet communism provided no match for free enterprise beyond its borders or the yearning for liberty within them," he said.
Eisenhower sounded the most noted of farewell warnings, saying the Cold War had made a permanent armaments industry and a vast military establishment vital, and that America must beware its impact.
"In the councils of government, we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence, whether sought or unsought, by the military-industrial complex," said the general who became president. "The potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist."
Lyndon B. Johnson, a man of Congress prior to his presidency, chose to leave it in 1969 with a final State of the Union address to the House and Senate. So did Gerald R. Ford, after his 30 months as the unelected president.
As he parted in 1977, he told his former congressional colleagues not to intrude on presidential prerogatives. "There can be only one commander in chief," Ford said. "In these times, crises cannot be managed and wars cannot be waged by committee, nor can peace be pursued solely through parliamentary debate."
Jimmy Carter's farewell included a warning that the rise of single interest politics could distort the national purpose, a disturbing factor, he said, because the national interest is not always the sum of all special interests.
Ronald Reagan said there was a warning on his mind as he left office - "our spirit is back, but we haven't reinstitutionalized it." Indeed, by the time Bush made his unsuccessful bid for a second term four years later, the national mood was bleak and pessimistic.
After two foreign policy farewells, Bush may deliver a final finale from the White House before yielding it to Clinton in 10 days.
For lasting last words, one of LBJ's parting observations will do:
"That phone doesn't ring at 3 o'clock or 4 o'clock in the morning unless there is trouble."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.

 

End of Document
