

Through the Weeks of the Branch Davidian Standoff
The Associated Press
April 25, 1993, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1102 words
Dateline: WACO, Texas
Body




For seven weeks and two days, the Branch Davidian religious cult held government agents at bay. The stalemate ended the 51st day in a blaze that killed 86 people, including 17 children. A recounting of the siege, week by week:
 
 WEEK ONE, Feb. 28-March 6:
About 100 Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms agents set out to raid the Branch Davidian compound, arrest leader David Koresh and search for illegal weapons. But cult members are waiting, and a 45-minute gun battle breaks out. Four agents are killed, and perhaps six cultists. The government claims the cult was tipped, stealing the element of surprise. Agents say they were met with gunfire; cult members say the ATF fired first.
As the day goes on, Koresh calls CNN and local radio stations to talk, and the government asks a Dallas radio station to broadcast a joint statement from the cult leader and the government as part of a deal to get children released; twelve children and two women leave in the first three days.
Tuesday, the FBI and ATF get Koresh to agree to end the standoff if a radio network and local stations play a 58-minute sermon. Though it is played, the standoff continues while Koresh waits "further instruction from God." It is the first of what the FBI says are many broken promises.
 
 WEEK TWO, March 7-March 13:
Angry that their contact with the outside world has been cut off, cultists hang a banner saying: "God Help Us We Want the Press." The next day, another banner appears: "Send in CFA & Don Stewart," a reference to a anti-government group.
Koresh's mother hires Houston attorney Dick DeGuerin to represent her son.
On Friday, a man and a woman leave the compound, the first to exit in a week. They are held without bond as material witnesses, establishing a pattern for those who eventually leave.
 
 WEEK THREE, March 14-March 20:
The man and woman talk with cult members inside and tell them to come out peacefully. None do.
Authorities step up the pressure, shining stadium-style spotlights on the compound at night. Later in the week, they use loudspeakers to blare tapes of the negotiations to the cultists.
The tone changes as Steven Schneider, Koresh's top aide, and Wayne Martin, a Harvard-educated attorney, meet in person for almost an hour with an FBI negotiator and the county sheriff. Optimism that this will be the beginning of the end turns out to be misplaced, even though the FBI says Schneider mentioned as many as 30 cultists were ready to leave.
Two men leave the cult Friday, the first in a week.
 
 WEEK FOUR, March 21-March 27:
In the biggest exodus of the siege, seven cultists leave Sunday, falling far short of Schneider's indication of 30.
The FBI turns up the heat, blasting the compound with chants of Tibetan monks. Agents complain Koresh is allowing to leave only those who would be a liability in a shootout.
Negotiations reach another low point Wednesday as Koresh quits talking, saying the sect is celebrating a "high holy day." And in a bizarre twist, a Houston man described as a "religious fanatic" sneaks into the compound. Another man does the same Friday.
 
 WEEK FIVE, March 28-April 3:
After four days of silence, Koresh talks to negotiators Sunday. The next day, his lawyer is allowed to go inside to talk with Koresh, a conversation he describes as "very good, useful." He returns Tuesday and Wednesday. An attorney hired to represent Schneider also is allowed inside.
Federal officials say those who left the compound noted the significance of Passover and that a breakthrough might occur in conjunction with the religious holiday. As the week ends, however, FBI Special Agent Bob Ricks says the agency will change its tactics if Passover comes and goes without a surrender.
 
 WEEK SIX, April 4-April 10:
The FBI says cult members were on the verge of surrendering during a marathon meeting four days earlier.
One of the men who slipped into the compound leaves after 10 days.
At various times, banners reading "Rodney King We Understand," "FBI God Sees Your Lies" and the Bible verse "Habakkuk 3:14" are hung from a compound window. The FBI increases its use of pressure tactics such as loudspeakers and stadium-style light banks.
Koresh says there is no plan to end the standoff around Passover or Easter, and sends the FBI a letter warning an earthquake will rock the area, cracking open a dam on Lake Waco. In another missive, written as if it were a "letter from God," Koresh describes a powerful and vengeful god "who will smite his enemies." Another "letter from God" is filled with biblical passages and instructions not to harm "my Lamb."
The FBI says Koresh appears to be waiting for a natural disaster before ending the standoff.
 
 WEEK SEVEN, April 11-April 17:
Five hours of phone talks Tuesday between federal negotiators and Koresh fail to break new ground.
Passover ends; the standoff doesn't.
Now, Koresh says, he will surrender after writing a manuscript revealing the contents of the Seven Seals mentioned in the Bible's Book of Revelation. The FBI again is skeptical, and says it won't wait forever. While Koresh claims to work on the manuscript, agents keep blasting noises at night: dentist drills, rabbits being slaughtered, thundering locomotives.
Each day brings another dig at Koresh. On Friday, agents clear debris from the compound, including the leader's prized black Camaro.
One of the men who snuck in exits the compound Saturday, leaving 95 people inside, including 17 children.
 
 THE END, April 18-19:
Sunday is one of the quietest days since the standoff began, but events move quickly Monday.
About 5:50 a.m., agents call the compound and tell members to give up or be gassed. Schneider hangs up, and throws the phone outside. About 15 minutes later, an armored vehicle smashes through a front wall and nonlethal tear gas is sent inside.
At 8 a.m., an armored vehicle with a large battering arm rips into the second floor, sending in more gas. Another hole is punched into the back of compound. The armored vehicles withdraw, only to return an hour later.
During the daily briefing, Ricks says the ramming and use of tear gas is the "next logical step." Cult members shot at the armored vehicles, he says, but agents did not return fire.
The battering continues. Then, at 12:05 p.m., smoke begins to seep from a window, soon followed by roaring flames. The compound burns to the ground in 45 minutes, killing all but nine people.
The FBI says later that cult members could be seen setting the fire, which agents say started in at least three separate places. But the survivors dispute that, contending a tank knocked over a lantern, sparking the blaze and killing the cultists.

 

End of Document
