

Tracking Child Support From the Source: The Hospital
The Associated Press
August 16, 1993, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1264 words
Byline: By MITCHELL LANDSBERG, AP National Writer
Dateline: NORFOLK, Va.
Body




When her parents got their first look at Virginia Leigh Ketterman, all 8 pounds, 1 ounce of her, they saw her mother's ears and nose, her father's eyes and chin.
She was, by equal measure, each of theirs.
When the state of Virginia looked at its newborn namesake, it saw the same thing: two parents, equally responsible. Although the baby's parents are unmarried, they had signed an affidavit in the hospital declaring that John Ketterman, he of the eyes and chin, was Virginia's father.
That simple act put Virginia - both the girl and the state - at the forefront of welfare reform policy in the United States.
Virginia, the child, was pretty underwhelmed by her pioneer status. Not long after her dad signed the papers at Sentara Norfolk General Hospital, she yawned, flexed her pudgy fingers and fell fast asleep.
But to the people responsible for tracking down what President Clinton, among others, calls "deadbeat dads," the 3-year-old paternity program in Virginia is exciting news.
"It's a really hot, trendy issue in child support," observed Mike Henry, Virginia's director of child support enforcement.
It is trendy enough that states around the country have begun mimicking three pioneer states - Washington, Ohio and Virginia - by passing similar legislation to legitimize unmarried dads at the hospital.
And trendy enough, too, that it is among the first welfare reform proposals put forward by the Clinton administration. The budget bill just passed included a mandate for states to allow men to declare their paternity in the hospital.
"It's something that liberals and conservatives agree on," said Pamela Holcomb, a welfare analyst for the Urban Institute in Washington.
The connection between paternity and welfare is oblique but important:
-Roughly one in three American children is born to unmarried parents. Their chances of growing up in poverty - and perhaps on welfare - are far, far greater than for children with married parents.
-Children are better off, obviously, when their fathers contribute economically. Before that can happen, though, the father's fatherhood usually has to be legally established.
Traditionally, paternity has been established in court. The proceedings can be long, expensive and acrimonious. They commonly involve blood tests or DNA tests to establish the child's genetic heritage.
And they often take place only after the mother - or the state - has filed a paternity lawsuit. By that time, quite often, the relationship between the mother and father is rocky or nonexistent.
"The longer you go from the birth of the child … the less likely you are to establish paternity and even have a chance of collecting child support," said Bill Paine, chief of policy for Washington state's child support enforcement division.
It was in Washington state that some officials had a thought a few years ago: Why not try to nab the dads in the hospital?
They inaugurated their hospital-based program in July 1989, and were quickly amazed by its success. Contrary to their expectations, most unmarried fathers were present at the hospital during or shortly after the birth of their children. About half of them were willing to sign forms acknowledging they were the fathers.
The state of Virginia followed in September 1990, beginning at Sentara Norfolk General Hospital. Thirty-four other hospitals in Virginia have followed.
"We see it as another customer service we should have been offering all along," said Adell Robertson-Porter, who until recently was the manager of Sentara's postpartum unit.
Unmarried parents have been enthusiastic about it because about 90 percent of them want the child to have the father's last name. Establishing paternity in the hospital is the quickest, easiest way to do that.
That was the motivation for John Ketterman and the mother of his child, Jennifer King.
"She's my baby," Ketterman said proudly as he gazed at Virginia Leigh. "I don't see why she shouldn't have my name."
No one is calling Ketterman a deadbeat or suggesting he might become one. He and Ms. King - he is 25, she is 24 - have lived together for five years and plan to marry, possibly next spring. Both are employed, he as a carpet subcontractor, she as a data processor. Anyone looking at them and their new daughter would have to say their future looks bright.
But not every story ends happily, and not every one starts as promising as theirs. Ms. Robertson-Porter estimates that 65 percent of the unmarried mothers at Norfolk General are on welfare. And many of the parents' relationships don't survive for long after the birth.
Virginia officials estimate that the average hospital paternity signing will save the state as much as $ 430 in future investigative and court costs. The hospital program is part of an aggressive child support enforcement effort that has increased the rate of paternity establishments in Virginia from about 2,000 a year in 1987 to more than 20,000 a year today. There are about 26,000 births to unwedded parents in Virginia annually.
The hospital sign-ups are not without complication.
Civil libertarians tend to get a bit queasy at the thought of men being asked to sign up for a lifetime of responsibility at what state officials gleefully concede is a moment of weakness.
"The thing about paternity is that uncertainty is built into it," said Stephen B. Pershing, legal director of the American Civil Liberties Union of Virginia. "The question is, what protections are out there for the person?"
One answer is that the fathers are given a brochure that explains the paternity establishment process and includes the answers to some basic questions: "Do I have to pay child support?" (Yes.) "Is having a child such a big deal?" (Very big.)
But it also is true that the system is not infallible.
Just recently, Ms. Porter-Robinson recalled, a man and woman called the hospital not long after going home with their newborn child. The man had signed paternity papers at the hospital after both he and the mother took an oath that he was the father.
But apparently he wasn't. The mother told Ms. Porter-Robinson that she had lied to the man - her fiance. When they got home with the baby, he told her he was having second thoughts about getting married; she told him the truth - he wasn't the father.
The hospital tore up the paternity acknowledgment forms in that case. But if they had been sent to the state by then, the couple would have had to go to court to undo the procedure.
Washington state offers a slightly safer system. The forms men sign in hospitals create only a presumption of paternity. If questions arise later, the men can get a blood test and - if it proves they aren't the father - effectively cancel their parental responsibilities without going to court.
Paine, the Washington state official, said the system has hidden benefits for children. Even if child-support payments never become an issue, the establishment of paternity often qualifies the children for medical benefits. And if the father dies, it can ensure that the children receive insurance money, veterans' benefits and Social Security benefits.
Pam Holcomb of the Urban Institute warns, however, that paternity establishment is not a panacea.
"It's going to help in the future, but it doesn't do anything for the problem we have right now with the existing population," she said. And she worried about what would happen in years to come when young men begin to think twice about what they're signing.
"Because the word's going to get out," she said. "'You sign on that dotted line and you've got 18 years of support payments coming."
 
 Next: Time-Limited Welfare

 

End of Document
