

Translators Finish First Book of Bible In Gullah "She habe boy chile, e fusbon. E wrop um op een clothe wa been teah eenta leetle strip an lay un een a trough, de box weh feed de cow and oda animal. Cause Mary and Joseph beena stay weh de animal sleep. Dey ain't been no room fa dem eenside de bodin house." - Luke 2:7, the Christmas story, from the Gullah translation of Luke.
The Associated Press
November 11, 1994, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 533 words
Byline: By BRUCE SMITH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ST. HELENA ISLAND, S.C.
Body




After 15 years of painstaking work, the Gospel of Luke has been published in Gullah - the language spoken by slaves and their descendants for centuries along the Southeast coast.
"De Good Nyews Bout Jedus Christ Wa Luke Write" is the first complete book of the Bible translated into the language that is a mixture of English and West African tongues. Translators hope to complete the entire New Testament in three years.
"What we are trying to do is let people hear the word of God in our own tongue," said the Rev. Ervin Green, the lead translator. "It's our language. It's just wonderful to come to this."
Green, the pastor of Brick Baptist Church, and a team of 13 other Gullah speakers and linguists labored over the translation.
"What we have also tried to do with this is undo 350 to 400 years of indoctrination that the way we speak is bad and wrong," said Green, in whose brick church slaves were once relegated to the balcony while their masters worshiped below.
Gullah survived in its purest form in isolated black communities of former slaves and their descendants on the sea islands which were once home to massive cotton plantations. But for generations after slavery, blacks were told by their teachers to abandon their native tongue.
"It was drilled into us if you want to get ahead, you must get rid of the Gullah," said Green. He said translation should bring a new respect to the language.
His church is nestled in an oak grove on the edge of the Penn Center which was founded after the Civil War to educate freed slaves. The center now works to preserve the heritage of the sea islands. The new Gospel will be dedicated during a celebration at the center on Saturday.
The book, a 138-page paperback published by the American Bible Society, includes the Gullah text next to the familiar King James version of Luke. The society says at least one book of the Bible is now available in 2,062 of the almost 6,000 languages in the world.
Linguists estimate that 250,000 people from North Carolina to northern Florida can speak Gullah and for about 20,000 of them, Gullah is the primary language.
Gullah is an oral language. Before the Gospel could be translated, the research team had to study its structure and decide how to write it. It draws on Caribbean and West African dialects and a unique alphabet could have been developed.
"But the folks here felt it was wiser to use an alphabet based on English because a lot of people wouldn't spend the time to learn a new alphabet," said Pat Sharpe, a linguist from the Summer Institute of Linguistics who moved to the island with her husband in 1979 to assist with the translation.
Drawing on the original Greek texts, Green and others wrote first drafts in Gullah. The texts were checked for accuracy and read to other Gullah speakers in the community to make sure they were clear.
Fifteen years for a Bible translation isn't unusual, said Mrs. Sharpe who has worked or consulted on over 100 translation projects which can take anywhere from 10 to 20 years.
"The team says it wants to do the Old Testament too," she said. "Now that we've done this, the work should accelerate. It all depends on the team members and their ability to get the drafts done."
 Load-Date: November 11, 1994

 

End of Document
