

Tsongas Weighing Whether to Re-Enter Presidential Race  Paul Tsongas, who quit the presidential race, said Sunday he may re-ignite his campaign, depending on how well he does - and how well Bill Clinton does - in Tuesday's New York primary. In an interview on ABC-TV's "This Week with David Brinkley," the former Massachusetts senator said he will make his decision Wednesday, the day after the balloting. "I think there are two issues," he said. "One, how do I do? But more particularly how does Bill Clinton do? And I think that will be determinative."
The Associated Press
April 5, 1992, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 225 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Tsongas was endorsed by New York Newsday this weekend, which urged him to rejoin the Democratic race. In its endorsement of Clinton, The New York Times said if Tsongas "were to re-enter the campaign, a clear choice would become much harder."
Tsongas quit the presidential race last month because he had run out of money, but he held on to his 439.25 national convention delegates and would be well ahead of Jerry Brown's 164.25 delegates if he re-entered the race.
Tsongas supporters across the country have been pushing for Tsongas to rejoin the race. He won 20 percent of the vote in the Connecticut primary and 9 percent in Vermont's caucuses.
Supporters have also begun airing ads in advance of Tuesday's New York primary to remind people he's on the ballot there.
New York Gov. Mario Cuomo said he believes Tsongas "will do well in New York City and New York state, astoundingly well; he will get double digits at least."
Cuomo said on NBC-TV's "Meet the Press" that Tsongas "will deteriorate the victory for whoever wins; he might even drag it under 50 percent."
Cuomo also said he believes that Clinton, the Arkansas governor and front-runner for the nomination, will "in all likelihood" be nominated on the first ballot at the Democratic National Convention.
Cuomo said he believes it is too late for him or any other late-starter to enter the race.

 

End of Document
