

Two Different Ways to Play the Game of the Foxes
The Associated Press
November 22, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 849 words
Byline: By MARIO SZICHMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




To understand how things can go wrong in the spy business, readers can turn to the novels of John Buchan, Eric Ambler, John le Carre, Ross Thomas - or, failing that, to the works of their non-fiction counterparts.
Two recent books about two different intelligence services, the British and the American, help us appreciate their successes and shortcomings. This is difficult to accomplish since these institutions are self-perpetuated and cloaked in secrecy.
The more captivating of the two books is "British Intelligence in the Second World War, Vol. 5: Strategic Deception" by Michael Howard (Cambridge University Press). Howard has written an official version of one of the lesser known and more fascinating feats of Allied intelligence during World War II: the creation of the so-called "notional war" to dupe the Germans.
The book, whose publication was twice forbidden due to objections of former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, indicates that besides the real war, the Allies fought a phantom war with the help of magicians, double agents, (some of whom seem to have come straight out of a Mel Brooks film), bogus radio traffic and faked battles.
At the beginning of the operation aimed to deceive the enemy, one of the British intelligence officers warned, "We must keep a realist outlook, and not become fascinated by the project as though it were a game." After a while, though, it was hard not to find the strategy of deception alluring.
Consider, for example, two of the cast members involved in the game.
One was "the distinguished conjuror Major Jasper Maskelyne," who helped change the shape of tanks and lorries. According to Howard: "The original dummies, folding models made of steel piping covered with painted canvas, were adapted to fit over motor chassis. … Conversely covers were produced, known as 'Sunshields,' which when fitted over real tanks gave them, from the air, the appearance of lorries. Apparatus was devised both for making and for concealing tank tracks."
Then there was "Garbo," a Spaniard who, after being recruited by the Germans, settled down in Madrid "with a map of the United Kingdom, a Blue Guide to England, a Portuguese study of the British Fleet and an Anglo-French vocabulary of military terms. With these slender resources he concocted, between July 1941 and April 1942, when he finally reached the United Kingdom, nearly forty long reports based on his own imaginary observations or those of equally imaginary sub-agents whom he had notionally recruited."
The Germans believed in the ludicrous tales of "Garbo" because, as Howard points out, "Deception can never be effective either in love or in war, unless there is a certain willingness to be deceived."
At the same time, Howard admits that there were several failures of strategic deception. In some cases, the rival services discovered the deception. In others, the human factor played a role - even though the deception was well-planted, the enemy "did not draw the appropriate conclusion."
"Terrorism and Democracy" by former CIA chief Adm. Stansfield Turner (Houghton Mifflin) is a candid look at the American intelligence service caught in Middle East intrigues. With precision, clarity and plenty of maps, Turner explains what action was taken by Presidents Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan, and by some of their predecessors, when faced with clandestine armies whose main task, either by threats or by terrorist action, was to publicize their causes. (Basically, almost all the presidents made some sort of deal to secure the release of American prisoners - and the originator of the trend was George Washington.)
The book is unbalanced because more than half of it is dedicated to explain the hostage crisis that confronted Carter, which was an exercise in frustration. And although the CIA performed some tasks - like helping in the release of six Americans held in the Canadian Embassy in 1979, and infiltrating agents into Iran in 1979 and 1980 in preparation for the hostage rescue - by and large, its role was to sit on the sidelines while grueling negotiations, backbiting and internal disputes among members of Carter's administration took center stage.
In the second part of the book, Turner shows what went wrong with Reagan's strategy to cope with terrorism, and then outlines his own blueprint to face the threat.
The most provocative of his proposals might be the one that states, "Deals are an option we cannot rule out." According to Turner, "Except for Gerald Ford, every president since Lyndon Johnson has been involved in at least one deal with terrorists. The odds are high that any President will seriously consider a deal when other possibilities have been exhausted and Americans are in trouble" - not an exciting blueprint for anyone interested in outfoxing the foxes.
Howard's book is the better choice for those prone to believe in the romanticized version of the espionage world and who love the novels of Buchan and Ambler. On the other hand, admirers of le Carre and Thomas should stick with Turner's version of the grim facts that surround the business of intelligence.

 

End of Document
