

WALTER MEARS: The Headline Stuff Isn't Always the Toughest Issues
The Associated Press
January 26, 1993, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 746 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




For openers, President Clinton is dealing with difficult social issues - homosexual rights, abortion, hiring diversity - that symbolize change but don't advance the most urgent work of the new administration.
That work is economic. And the instant debate on social issues is no help, only distracting and divisive.
It also was inevitable, given Clinton's campaign promises.
Unlike the tax and deficit proposals he has to get through Congress, his pledges to end the ban on homosexuals in the military, rescind abortion restrictions left by the Republicans, and hire a cross-section of America to run the government all can be redeemed by the White House, without legislation.
But not without headaches, especially over the question of gays in the armed forces. Clinton's position on that collides with the view of Gen. Colin L. Powell and the Joint Chiefs of Staff; they insist the 50-year policy is important to discipline and morale, and shouldn't be rescinded.
The president met with the chiefs for nearly two hours on Monday, and said he intends to keep his commitment. A spokesman said Clinton would take steps to do so within a week.
Public opinion is against Clinton on that one, 53 percent to 35 percent according to a poll conducted for Newsweek Jan. 21 and 22. Other surveys have reflected the same attitudes with varying margins.
Defense Secretary Les Aspin told the president in a Jan. 18 memo that Congress might overrule an abrupt order lifting the ban. Aspin said Senate Democratic leader George Mitchell had estimated there were no more than 30 sure votes for the president's position.
So Aspin recommended that the policy be revised over the next six months. In the interim, there would be congressional hearings and an effort to set terms meeting the two aims set at the White House - an end to discrimination while maintaining the order and discipline of the armed forces.
"… We knew this wasn't going to be easy, but it's something the president believes in," spokesman George Stephanopoulos said Monday. "… Whenever you try to make progress in civil rights, in ending discrimination, there is opposition at the front."
Aspin said Sunday that the question of homosexuals in the military would have come up with or without Clinton's pledge to end the ban. "… It's not just gays, it's sexual harassment … it's the idea of women in combat," he said in a CBS-TV interview. "I mean all of these kinds of social issues are part of the agenda of the military because they're part of the agenda of American society."
While proceeding with caution on that issue, Clinton quickly undid the abortion restrictions imposed by Republican administrations over the past 12 years, just as he'd said he would. He eliminated the rule against abortion counseling at federally aided clinics and all other restrictions a president could rescind without legislation. He's already pledged to seek action in Congress to end other restrictions and guarantee the right to legal abortion.
On that one, there is no political downside to compare with the problem of gays in the military. Public opinion supports the position Clinton described as his, with abortion legal but rare. Opponents of abortion were against him anyhow; with their allies out of power, they now threaten intensified protest demonstrations.
That may turn up the volume in a 20-year controversy. It isn't settled, but it is predictable. "Mr. Clinton isn't the economic president," Rep. Christopher Smith, R-N.J., protested in the House on Monday. "Mr. Clinton is the abortion president."
The diversity commitment has carried a price, the undoing of Zoe Baird as Clinton's nominee for attorney general. Clinton decided belatedly that she would get that nomination; he was determined to put a woman in the job. While his spokesman insisted she'd been thoroughly vetted, the Clinton people missed the significance and misread the backlash over her hiring of illegal aliens for child care.
The whole episode seemed to stem from haste to make a point. It was only grudgingly rewarded; activists said the appointment of four women to 18 top administration and Cabinet jobs was progress but not good enough.
Within hours of the Baird withdrawal, they were demanding another woman be named to replace her. After all, they noted, 56 percent of Clinton's votes were cast by women.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.

 

End of Document
