

WALTER MEARS: The Risks Of Debating, Whatever The Format
The Associated Press
September 17, 1992, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 807 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Great Debates are always preceded with the traditional haggling over format, yet they've been staged under the rules President Bush is seeking. But the forums' most telling moments have had little to do with the staging; instead, they've been matters of image, style or error.
In most cases, that would have happened with or without the panels of questioners Bush insists on preserving in any debates with Democratic challenger Bill Clinton.
In theory, at least, the standard system is the safest. Then again, there are risks in trying to catch up, as Bush must if he is to hold the White House.
This year's debates are at an impasse over format; the proposed leadoff meeting next Tuesday in East Lansing, Mich., already has been canceled because the White House would not agree on terms.
White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said rules and timing should be subject to bargaining between the campaigns, which has been standard. But there's a difference this time; the Commission on Presidential Debates, which is private and bipartisan, set schedule and format, and the Clinton campaign agreed in advance, saying there was no need for bargaining.
So the Bush side doesn't have anybody to bargain with, at least for now. The Bush campaign wants two debates between the presidential candidates, with panels of journalists asking them questions.
That's the way it's always been done. Although ever since the first debates, in 1960, there have been suggestions that the nominees should meet head-on, with a moderator but no questioners. That's the format the commission chose and announced, along with dates and sites for three presidential debates and one between the vice presidential nominees.
The Clinton people said yes. The Bush people said nothing.
Another Republican tried, twice, to have the Bush campaign write the commission before the national conventions and say the president would debate and wanted to discuss terms after his renomination.
Nothing was done until Monday. Then the Bush campaign chairman, Robert Teeter, said the president wants two debates, with panels, and demanded the Clinton camp accept those terms by Friday.
Fitzwater acknowledged the White House delay, saying "we had a change of staff and so forth."
That gets to the point: James A. Baker III, the new chief of staff, has been taking charge of Republican debate terms, and barring changes sought by Democrats, ever since the debates were revived in 1976.
The commission plan matched the terms Democrat Michael Dukakis sought against Bush in 1988; he wanted three debates with only a moderator. Baker said no, two with panels. That's what happened.
One-on-one debates have been proposed by producers and spurned by most candidates - and all incumbents - from the start. Debates usually serve the interest of the challenger, even one like Clinton, leading in the polls. They put him on an equal footing with the president of the United States. Without a panel of intermediaries, that bonus would be emphasized.
In past campaigns, managers and TV advisers also have worried that in direct debate, a challenging, questioning candidate might come on too strong for the taste of the voters, and suffer a backlash for it.
Conversely, an overly cautious candidate could look weak and indecisive.
There have been moderator-only debates in the primary campaigns, usually with multiple candidates. Bush in 1988 and Clinton in this campaign both took part in direct debates, without remarkable results.
Insisting on the Bush terms, Fitzwater said Wednesday that the panel system is proven, focuses on the issues and is fairest to both sides in a presidential debate.
He said the terms should be set by the campaigns because "we ought to have that control over our own destiny."
That puts more faith in the rules than prior debates would warrant. For example:
-When President Ford blundered in 1976 debate and said there was no Soviet domination of Eastern Europe, a questioning panelist offered him a second chance at the question. Ford repeated the misstatement, and it fed the claims of his critics that he was a bumbler.
-In a vice presidential debate that year, Sen. Bob Dole insisted on the rules to the letter, rejecting a change in sequence and, as a result, was asked the question that led him to say all wars of the 20th century were "Democrat wars." That answer plagued him for the rest of the campaign.
-A panel format can help or hurt either side. In direct debate, Dukakis wouldn't have been asked whether he'd favor the death penalty if his wife was raped and murdered, a shocker of a question he answered like an emotionless technocrat.
Aside from that, the 1988 debates were short on drama or memorable exchanges.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 25 years.

 

End of Document
