

WALTER MEARS: What Happens When the Shoe's on the Other Foot
The Associated Press
January 10, 1995, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 689 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




These days, even the hypocrisy is bipartisan.
In the House, Democrats now bemoan the sort of rules they once used to control Republican dissent.
And Republicans boast that their new majorities are at last pushing through legislation to make Congress obey the laws it votes to impose on everyone else, a popular cause blocked on their side of the Senate in 1994.
At that point, it would have been to the advantage of the Democrats and the White House to have a bill for President Clinton to sign and celebrate during the campaign.
With Republicans now in control, the slowdown of four days or so - minor by Senate standards - is Democratic. They are proposing amendments to the Congressional Accountability Act to require that Congress obey 10 employment, job safety, civil and disability rights and other laws required of private employers. They propose to add other reform measures, not change the bill itself.
Congress has been talking about the coverage law for years. There is, as one senator said, no more hot-button topic with voters skeptical or hostile to Congress and its ways.
The House passed the coverage measure 429-0 in its marathon opening session under GOP control. Even the Democrats who protested the restrictive rule under which it was considered didn't differ on the bill itself.
It was done in minutes. "I wish we could do as well in the Senate," Sen. Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, the chief Republican sponsor of the measure there, lamented on Monday.
But it doesn't work that way. Any senator can try to amend anything, on or off the subject at hand. The Republicans already have voted down a half dozen, and there are at least 22 Democratic amendments in the wings, although not all are likely to be forced to votes.
This on a bill the Republicans want to complete tonight, without significant changes, so it can be wrapped up in the House and sent to Clinton to sign. It's a Republican bill now, and they'd like to get it to the White House before the president's State of the Union message, to send their own message on who's setting the agenda.
Democrats could neither risk nor sustain a filibuster stall on a matter so popular as bringing Congress under the rules of the private workplace, although not by the same process that covers private employers.
Congress would have its own compliance office; in private industry, the laws are enforced by administration agencies, but that could breach the separation of powers between the legislative and executive branches of government. The bill would, however, give congressional employees the right of appeal to the federal courts.
All this could have been enacted last year; it had passed the House with only a handful of dissenters. "Unfortunately, it died in the final days of the Senate last year in that scorched earth atmosphere," said Sen. John Glenn of Ohio, the Democrats' chief sponsor, now as then.
Now the measure is popular enough that Sen. Ted Stevens, R-Alaska, insisted that he hadn't meant to block it last time. He said he'd wanted to see it before agreeing to let it pass, but had to have back surgery and never got back to the Senate.
Before it passed the House again, Democrats denounced the closed rule that barred amendments from the floor there, saying Republicans didn't wait a day to break their promise of a new openness. Rep. Joseph Moakley said he'd gone deaf in one ear listening to Republican catcalls over the closed rules adopted when he was Democratic chairman of the Rules Committee, and now they were doing it themselves.
"We not only have a gag rule but we have a choke rule," said Rep. Pat Schroeder, D-Colorado.
The new Republican leaders said they would open the way to amendment proposals on future legislation, unless Democrats use the process to seek changes intended only to delay GOP bills.
Intent, of course, is in the eye of the beholder.
"Just as we have to learn to be the majority," said the new GOP whip, Rep. Tom DeLay, "the minority needs to learn to be the minority."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.
 Load-Date: January 10, 1995

 

End of Document
