

WALTER MEARS: Clinton's Struggles at the Vatican, on the Hill
The Associated Press
June 2, 1994, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 806 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: ROME
Body




President Clinton is encountering the Vatican version of controversy over abortion rights, a subject that's a headache at home and likely to get worse in his quest for health care reform.
Clinton's audience today with Pope John Paul II dramatized their differences. The president supports a woman's right to abortion; the Roman Catholic Church is sternly, vehemently opposed.
The president's own ambassador to the Vatican said in advance that the pope was angry about administration support for abortion rights as part of a United Nations plan seeking to restrain world population growth.
Perhaps because of the strained circumstances, there were no plans for the joint remarks that have been customary when presidents visit popes. At the White House, that was said to be due to concern about the pope's health; he has been recovering from hip surgery after breaking a thigh bone in a fall five weeks ago.
It was Clinton's second meeting with John Paul II. In Denver on Aug. 12, the pope delivered a right to life lecture widely interpreted as a rebuke to the president's position on abortion. Later, with Vice President Al Gore on hand, the pope denounced what he called "the culture of death."
The White House obviously wanted no re-enactment in Rome, on the first day of a European trip centered on Clinton's observance of the 50th anniversary of D-Day.
But there was no avoiding the strains over abortion.
After the meeting, Clinton acknowledged differences on the upcoming U.N.- sponsored conference in Cairo on world population, but said he hoped the two sides could come together.
Trying to put the best spin on what he admitted may be an unbridgeable gulf on contraception, Clinton said, the thrust of the Cairo conference should be "in the context of supporting sustainable development and strong families."
"We will still have some differences on the contraception issue but I think I should be clear, that … we have had big differences with China on this - that we don't support abortion as a means of birth control."
Raymond L. Flynn, U.S. envoy to the Vatican, said in a recent interview that he'd been told the pope never had expressed "more anger about a position and an issue" than on the U.N. plan being drafted for the Cairo conference. The U.S. language isn't final, but the policy is set.
After Clinton met with the pope, White House Press Secretary Dee Dee Myers reiterated the administration's position that abortion should be "safe, legal and rare."
The president believes abortion should be available to women in developing countries, although he does not favor it as a form of birth control. He is pledged to reverse the policies of his Republican predecessors, who denied U.S. funds to international organizations that support or counsel on abortion.
Domestically, Clinton ended the ban on abortions in military hospitals and overturned a policy forbidding abortion counseling in clinics that receive federal help. He signed legislation last Thursday to imprison and fine abortion protesters convicted of illegally blocking access to clinics.
Abortion is one of the questions that will be raised as the Senate considers Stephen Breyer for virtually certain confirmation to the Supreme Court. Clinton had said he'd choose justices who support the basic right to abortion; Breyer is his second.
And the most difficult aspect of the issue is just ahead, on health care. For more than 17 years, Congress has barred federal financing of abortions for most poor women under Medicaid. Clinton tried to undo the ban in 1993, but both House and Senate voted to continue it.
That would end under the Clinton design for health care reform.
Abortion is not a central point in health care legislation, and it hasn't been a focus of the debate so far. But it could become a central obstacle to the compromise Congress is trying to shape.
The original Clinton health reform bill would have made abortion part of the benefits package required of all insurers, although it was under the heading "pregnancy related services," as though the euphemism would ease the controversy. The poor would have had the same coverage, with premiums financed through Medicaid.
A House subcommittee voted May 12 to include abortion in the benefits package. The issue hasn't yet been joined in other panels drafting health care legislation. There's pressure from both sides, and it will intensify.
Clinton said months ago that abortion coverage in health care reform probably would become a political football. It will.
This is a point that won't bend to compromise; it will be in or out when Congress deals with health care. Either way, there will be votes at risk, first in Congress, later at the polls.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.
 Load-Date: June 2, 1994

 

End of Document
