

WASHINGTON TODAY: Forget the Contract, The Revolution Starts Now
 The Associated Press
October 23, 1995, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 761 words
Byline: By JILL LAWRENCE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The "Contract With America" and some of its most fundamental promises seem like ancient history, but that doesn't mean the Republican revolution is dead.
The GOP vision emerges this week in its clearest, most complete form yet: mammoth House and Senate budget bills that would curb federal generosity toward students, veterans, farmers, the elderly, the poor and the disabled, cut taxes and hand vast new responsibilities to the states.
The truest measure of the first Republican Congress in 40 years hinges on the extent to which that vision, shadowed by a Democratic president's veto threat, becomes law.
Both sides view the showdown, at least in their overheated rhetoric, as the most significant philosophical contest of the late 20th century.
"This is a very dramatic, draconian change in priorities," says Senate Minority Leader Tom Daschle, D-S.D. "This isn't just politics. This isn't just another legislative fight. This is the whole ball game."
When the 104th Congress convened last January, all eyes were on the House and its "Contract With America," signed by hundreds of Republican candidates as part of a national campaign in 1994 to retake the chamber.
The twin cornerstones of the contract were constitutional amendments to limit congressional terms and require balanced federal budgets. Other sections promised sweeping legal and regulatory changes, billions in corporate and family tax cuts and a welfare system requiring work. Votes on 10 legislative packages were pledged within the first 100 days if Republicans won the House.
Those first 100 days were frenzied. House Speaker Newt Gingrich and his team did indeed vote on every item in the contract - allowing them to claim credit for delivering on the promise. The problem is, for various reasons, so far they haven't delivered on substance.
Term limits failed in the House. The balanced-budget amendment failed in the Senate by a single vote. Regulatory changes - including a moratorium on federal rules and relaxations designed to aid business - are stalled in the Senate. The Senate also spurned the House's wholesale legal changes, among them a controversial loser-pays rule, in favor of a narrow product liability bill.
In fact the only contract items signed into law so far have been an accountability act requiring Congress to comply with the laws it imposes on others, and an unfunded mandates act making it harder for Congress to impose requirements on states without money to carry them out.
Gingrich, R-Ga., has nevertheless repeatedly declared victory, prompting his predecessor - Democrat Tom Foley who lost re-election - to grumble about the country's new unicameral legislature.
"This session of Congress hasn't done anything yet," summed up Tom Mann, director of congressional studies at the Brookings Institution.
The traditional time for major congressional accomplishments is the last minute. If they can get President Clinton on board somehow, Republicans will end up with a strong - if polarizing - first-year record.
At stake in the next few weeks are huge aggregate reductions in the amount of money that had been projected to be spent for various programs over the next seven years: $ 270 billion less in Medicare, $ 180 billion less for Medicaid, $ 13.4 billion less in agriculture subsidies, $ 10 billion less for student loans. Welfare and Medicaid, now entitlement programs that shrink and grow with need, would become fixed grants handed over to states.
Liberal hand-wringing notwithstanding, one could view the GOP budget plan as evolution rather than revolution. Under the blueprint the Republicans are pushing, the government would keep doing most of what it does, on a slightly smaller scale, with more state bureaucrats and fewer feds. The biggest entitlement program, Social Security, would remain untouched.
Sen. Bob Kerrey, D-Neb., favors systemic changes such as raising the age at which people start getting Social Security benefits. He called on his colleagues in both parties to stop "hyperventilating" about the GOP plan.
As he put it memorably last week on the floor, "We men … have a tendency to exaggerate the size of things sometimes. And that is in fact occurring in this entire budget debate."
But where Kerrey sees a mere trimming of sails, most others see the Queen Elizabeth laboriously shifting course. By this Friday, says Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole, R-Kan., Republicans will have completed "historic action" on "the biggest fundamental change in government direction" in 40 years.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Jill Lawrence covers Congress for The Associated Press.
 Load-Date: October 23, 1995

 

End of Document
