

WASHINGTON TODAY: By the Sounds of the Campaign, the Economy Must Be OK
The Associated Press
May 13, 1992, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 743 words
Byline: By TOM RAUM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The recession must be over. You barely hear the "R" word these days from the leading presidential candidates. Their attention has migrated to the Inner City.
In the flash of the nation's most violent civil unrest this century, the economy has slipped into the election-year shadows.
President Bush now is devoting his days to his "urban agenda." Democrat Bill Clinton is stressing his own remedies for inner-city woes. Even Ross Perot is talking about how to revitalize the cities.
The Los Angeles riots and a lull in political contests have combined to divert political attention away from the overall economy, at least for the time being.
"We're one-ball jugglers," says Stephen Hess, a political analyst at the Brookings Institution who specializes on the presidency.
Not too many primaries ago, the economy was the single issue that consumed the attention of all the candidates - particularly President Bush, who had seen his approval ratings plunge as the economy faltered.
The primary season is winding down now and the economy appears to be cranking up again, if slowly.
Most economists seem to agree that the recession is over. In fact, a consensus appears to be developing that it probably technically ended in mid-1991.
Fewer candidates are left standing to trumpet economic concerns.
And the Bush and Clinton camps are focusing their attention on the fall campaign while casting a wary eye toward the maneuvering of prospective independent candidate Ross Perot.
Tuesday's primaries in West Virginia and Nebraska only served to reinforce the lock that both Bush and Clinton have on the respective Republican and Democratic nominees.
The results showed GOP challenger Patrick Buchanan and Democratic rival Jerry Brown had slipped further into irrelevance.
Bush won roughly 80 percent of the Republican vote in Nebraska and West Virginia. Clinton took 75 percent in West Virginia and nearly 50 percent in Nebraska.
The most interesting numbers, however, were coming from Perot.
Maine today became the fourth state to say it would put Perot's name on the November ballot, joining Tennessee, Utah and Delaware. Meanwhile, supporters in 16 other states said they had collected enough petitions to guarantee him ballot spots in those states.
At the pace the petition drives are going, Perot should have no trouble getting on all 50 state ballots by August.
With the economy seemingly improving, Bush has refashioned the "Message: I care" line he gave in New Hampshire and other early primaries to include promises of solutions to problems of the nation's inner cities.
"When you get to be president you do identify with people's suffering. Today it's here. And yesterday it was another place somewhere in the country, unrelated to riots," Bush told a group of Korean-Americans as he toured riot-scarred Los Angeles last week.
"Tomorrow it will be something else. That's just the way our country is. But I will try to be as responsive as I possibly can.'
And, in commenting directly on the economy, Bush told a political fund-raiser in Philadelphia on Monday:
"I have a feeling this thing (the economy) is beginning to move a little bit. And it's long overdue. And I hope like heck I'm right this time."
Clinton, like Bush, has been spending much of his attention addressing the Los Angeles unrest. On Tuesday, he renewed his attack on administration efforts to blame the riots on liberal Democratic policies of the 1960s. "They have been in too long when they have to go back 25 years for somebody to blame," he said.
The fact that the rioting took place in the state with the final primary and the largest electoral vote must not have been lost on political strategists in either party.
"Ultimately and cynically, one has to say that it plays into the president and the Republican party's strengths," said Hess. "Any way you slice it, this is a nation that's 80 percent white and 20 percent poor."
If the spotlight has shifted away from the economy, voters aren't about to be fooled, said Democratic analyst Ann Lewis.
She said the still-sluggish economy will continue to occupy voters' thoughts right through November, despite what economic indicators or politicians assert.
"They're not on the stage. So they're not worried about the spotlight. They're in their seats."
And, Lewis suggested, most voters "can keep their minds on more than one thing at a time," even if politicians and the news media can't.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Tom Raum covers national politics for The Associated Press.

 

End of Document
