

WASHINGTON TODAY: In the Senate, The More Things Change …
The Associated Press
November 11, 1992, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 694 words
Byline: By WILLIAM M. WELCH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Fresh from his election victory, Russ Feingold came to the Senate this week determined, like each of his 10 new colleagues, to bring change to the tradition-bound institution and aid to the troubled economy.
When was asked at a news conference what has first priority was, the Wisconsin Democrat said: "Atop my agenda is the federal deficit."
What committee do you want to be assigned to, he was asked a few minutes later. "Appropriations," he responded.
You don't have to be a congressional insider to grasp the apparent inconsistency of those two answers.
Everybody complains about the national debt, but in the halls of Congress, everybody also wants to be on the committee that decides how all that borrowed money is spent. The reason, of course, is to grab some of those dollars for your own constituents or your own special causes.
To be fair to Feingold, he was hardly alone in his answers. Many of the Senate's newcomers said they wanted seats on the Appropriations Committee, even though it's a plum rarely granted to freshmen.
There were special reasons, of course. For instance, the first American Indian elected to the Senate in more than 60 years, Democrat Ben Nighthorse Campbell of Colorado, wants an Appropriations seat because federal dollars are what sustain most of the nation's Indian reservations. He sees Native Americans as a national constituency.
But their answers illustrated an important point about the upcoming 103rd Congress: For all the talk of change that voters seemed to demand, real change will come slowly to Capitol Hill, particularly in the Senate.
The voters may have taken a big step toward ending government gridlock by ending the division of government between two parties. But another big cause of gridlock, competing special interests and the competing interests of individual members of Congress, will endure.
Turning the voters' mandate for change into real legislative action will be far more difficult than the campaigning was.
For instance, take health care, another big issue on everyone's agenda.
While President-elect Clinton talked about the issue a lot, the precise outlines of his reform plan remain a mystery to those steeped in the issue on Capitol Hill.
And literally hundreds of interest groups have a financial or ideological stake in the health care system.
Unless Clinton is able to forge a consensus and sell the particulars of that plan to the American public, those groups can be counted on to paralyze Congress.
Still, no one underestimates the potential for change in the new Congress.
Last week's elections sent 11 new members to the Senate, and among them were four women, including the first black woman in the Senate. In the House, the 110 new members will bring record numbers of blacks, women and Hispanics to the Congress.
The appearance of change was striking on Tuesday when California Democrat Dianne Feinstein took the oath of office to immediately fill the interim term to which she was elected.
The scene on the Senate floor was unlike any that veterans could recall: The usual blues and grays of the Senate were overwhelmed by the bright attire of Feinstein and the scores of prominent women allowed the rare privilege of a seat on the Senate floor to watch the ceremony.
"The new Senate clearly will be more representative of the nation as a whole," said Majority Leader George Mitchell, D-Maine. "It's a good and healthy thing that we have six women. We ought to have more, and we will have more."
If the Senate was suffering shock from the new look of its future, however, reality also was sinking in for some of the new members.
Feinstein pointed to the 1,600-page book explaining the Senate's arcane rules. Designed to protect the minority, the rules allow small numbers to thwart or delay the majority's will.
"I'm still trying to understand exactly how the Senate works, and that is probably going to be more of a job than I reckoned with," she acknowledged.
"A lot of things, I can see now, prevent things from getting done rather than accomplish them," she said. "It seems to me the Senate is set up to do the opposite."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - William M. Welch covers Congress for The Associated Press.

 

End of Document
