

WASHINGTON TODAY: The Good, The Bad and the Ugly: Mags Zoom In On Gingrich
 The Associated Press
October 2, 1995, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 784 words
Byline: By JILL LAWRENCE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




His gurus aren't so weird, says the New Republic. His book doesn't cut it, says the Standard. His lesbian sister is the smart one, says George. He thinks his wife is beautiful, says Ladies Home Journal. He's a consummate con man, says The New Yorker.
Only so many magazine covers and pages can be devoted to Colin Powell. Luckily, Newt Gingrich is there to pick up the slack. The House speaker is getting even more than his usual lion's share of attention lately in a wild variety of periodicals.
Apparently, Newt sells.
Last month's Vanity Fair featuring Gail Sheehy's psychological dig sold nearly 31 percent more newsstand copies than the September 1994 issue.
To be sure, the magazine also included pieces on Michael Jackson, Barbra Streisand and Sandra Bullock. But the juicy Gingrich profile generated "an incredible amount of attention," said spokeswoman Anina Mahoney. "We must have gotten over 120 broadcast mentions alone."
The New Yorker that went on sale today screams "Newt" in letters larger than the magazine's name. In a damning 26-page profile, staff writer Connie Bruck labels Gingrich's approach to politics "Rommel at Esalen" - the tactics of the Nazi general with the feel-goodism of California hot tub culture.
She traces his single-minded rise to power, his focus on "marketing" and image, and his yen to abolish the congressional committee system. What she can't get over is his audacity.
Gingrich once railed at Democrats for missing a vote he himself had missed, in her account. He has calculated every move - from seeking a teaching post at obscure West Georgia College because he thought he could beat the local congressman, all the way to engineering last fall's electoral sweep - but told a C-SPAN interviewer he never starts a day by "calculating what I ought to do."
Few Americans haven't heard of Gingrich. The problem is that many people - 54 percent in one recent poll - have unfavorable impressions of him.
Next month, Gingrich and his wife score a modest public-relations coup in what LHJ editor Myrna Blyth calls a "really sweet" piece by longtime Gingrich pal Arianna Huffington.
The magazine's 17 million female readers will learn that the speaker loves nature, he reads while his wife shops, and he helps her decide what to buy. "I always know what looks right on her," he says with typical assurance. For her part, Marianne Gingrich denies her husband is a womanizer (as Sheehy implied) and says they haven't ruled out having a child.
Gingrich is found chatting with John Perry Barlow, a "Republican, Deadhead and cyberspace pioneer," in George, John F. Kennedy Jr.'s glossy new take on politics. Barlow concludes that "half of Gingrich is as scary a caricature as I could imagine," but the whole is "at least a reason to reserve judgment."
The magazine also profiles Heather Higgins, Gingrich's "high-tone policy diva," and Candace Gingrich, his lesbian sister. Her IQ, the author says, is higher than his.
Other sides of Gingrich - in fact virtually every side - are scrutinized in the debut issue of the Standard. Its writers come mostly to admire: his "bold" attempt at congressional government, his "permanent offense" strategy, his Medicare strategy, his fancy footwork on welfare reform.
Theorist David Frum, however, calls the achievements of the GOP Congress "incomplete and disturbingly fragile" so far. And Charles Krauthammer finds that Gingrich's conservative vision in his book "To Renew America" "doesn't hold up." The magazine also illuminates the speaker's hard-line managerial techniques (he calls one of his committee chairmen a liar and shouts at another not to threaten him).
The neo-liberal New Republic put Gingrich on its Oct. 9 cover with a hole in his head. The magazine praised the Tofflers, his futurist mentors, but slammed his Medicare plan ("the most important medical advance since the discovery that ice-cream sundaes cure cancer") and dripped condescension over his interpretation of a study of the Hellenistic Age. (Really).
"I have to ask myself how, as a historian, you can get its message so wrong," wrote Peter Green, author of "Alexander to Actium." He further said he couldn't have finished the book without a grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities - which Gingrich wants to abolish.
That smarts, almost as much as Bruck's conclusion that "one simply does not expect to find so consummate a con artist serving as Speaker of the House."
Still, 'tis probably better to be known and skewered than never to be known at all. Ask former House Speaker Tom Foley, who said recently that people have trouble identifying him and sometimes think he is a senator.
 
 ---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Jill Lawrence covers Congress for The Associated Press.
 Load-Date: October 2, 1995

 

End of Document
