

What Are Americans Thinking About? The Economy, The Economy, The Economy
The Associated Press
December 21, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1059 words
Byline: By HARRY F. ROSENTHAL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




America at Christmas 1991 is at once festive and troubled. The lights glitter as always, the familiar music is in the air. There is peace in the land. But there is an unease.
It is the end of a year in which many things went right - the Gulf War, the vanished Soviet threat, the release of all U.S. hostages held in Lebanon.
Yet much of America is, as San Franciscan Morris Plack put it, "pessimistic, down and depressed."
In telephone interviews, ordinary Americans spoke about the mood that permeates every section of the country. They all knew about the General Motors impending layoffs and it scared them, although few live in communities directly affected.
Most were aware that the Federal Reserve reduced a key lending rate in a desperate effort to jump-start the economy. They knew that in November alone a quarter of a million people just like them lost their jobs.
These are the thoughts of Americans this Christmas.
Tom Doyle, a businessman in Charleston, S.C.:
"It really scares me. Everything is so gloom and doom. Here it is a week before Christmas and the local paper has pictures of people losing their jobs. Their welfare benefits have been cut off. A paralyzed fellow lost his job, his home in a fire and his wife left him."
Actress Sharon Farrell:
"Here I am 40 years old-plus and I'm playing the best role I've ever played in my life. I've been having a ball. I'm having such a good time, I'm afraid to say it because the gods will strike me down."
Chuck Reardon, a stockbroker in Albuquerque, N.M.:
"I thought it was very interesting how the mood of the people went from being very patriotic and proud of what was going on with Desert Storm. Now that is old news. People are not remembering those things. All they are looking at are the day-to-day economic issues rather than the bigger picture. It was like somebody turned the switch off."
Something has turned the switch off.
"As a whole, people seem generally bummed out. It's because of all the bad news about the economy," said Doyle, who runs a horse-drawn carriage tour business in picturesque Charleston. "Those who aren't directly affected by it seem to be just marking time waiting for that moment when it will fall on them."
Doyle says his own business, Palmetto Carriage Works, is doing well. But he can't ignore a constant stream of job-seekers.
"They come saying 'I'll do anything,"' he says.
Actress Farrell, secure in an insecure industry, looks at the world from her own perspective.
"It's the best Christmas I've ever had; I've been having a ball," she says between takes on the hit CBS soap opera "The Young and the Restless."
Happiness in Soapland is a three-year-contract and the fat role of Flo, an ex-alcoholic prostitute whose tortured journey included an affair with her daughter's ex-husband. But off the set, Farrell knows "a lot of very talented people are out of work. I wake up in the morning and look at good things and count my blessings."
Plack, whose Dorman Co. is in downtown San Francisco, says his office furniture business is the worst it's been in 33 years - a 50 percent slide since 1989.
This recession, he says, is unlike any other.
"My sales force is apathetic, not as aggressive as they were," he says. "They use the excuse that the economy is bad. Before, when the recessions were short, they would say: 'We'll go out and work a little harder.' Now they say: 'It doesn't pay to do this. Nobody is buying anyway.' "
In Shelbyville, Ky., tobacco farmer Duncan LeCompte hears about the recession on the television news. Yet he's upbeat.
"Tobacco prices are pretty good and most of the farmers here are in fair condition financially," he says.
The new joke in town is that the recession is only a week old because the president didn't acknowledge it until last week.
Joe Simone, a disc jockey and program director on EZ101 in Philadelphia lives a few blocks from the home of Joseph Cicippio, who was released Dec. 2 after being held hostage in Lebanon for five years. The excitement quickly rose to a peak and plummeted just as quickly, Simone says.
His mood: "I always take adversity as a challenge. I think we are going to come out of this fine. We just need to hang in."
In Athens, Ga., office manager Vicky Brown hasn't gotten more than a 5 percent raise in five years at the Georgia Museum of Art, which is affiliated with the University of Georgia. At the same time, she said, tuition for her daughter - a student at the university - goes up each quarter.
People have to make the best of the bad economy, she says.
"I don't go home depressed every night. You learn to live with it. You learn to make adjustments."
What's required, says Bill Stovall, manager of the Garden City, Kan., airport, is faith that the country's leaders will work things out. People simply are confused right now, hearing about other parts of the country that are depressed.
"I love the interest rates like they are," Stovall says. "I don't know whether that's good for the country, but it's good for the housing market."
The Santa Claus at the Famous-Barr department store in downtown St. Louis finds nothing different in this year's crop of good little boys and girls. But even at his lap, the economy intrudes.
"One little girl wanted $ 2 million and chicken fried rice," he said. Why? "She likes chicken fried rice."
Charlie Schnell used to be an independent logger in Roseburg, Ore., but now he's gone into cabinet making and doing well, thank you. He says the community is optimistic.
"Ever since the wood products industry started on the West Coast in the 1850s, it's been cyclical," Schnell says. "About every 10 years it hits a crash. We were down in 1981. It will crash for one reason or another."
Antone Sabella, the fourth-generation Sabella to operate a restaurant on San Francisco's Fisherman's Wharf says in his business, you fight slowdowns with creativity.
"We changed the menu, improved the food and printed menus in six different languages, including Russian," he says. That turned out to be a clever move, with the Soviet airline Aeroflot making regular flights to the Bay area.
"If I didn't read in the press about the recession, I would say it just seems like a normal winter," Sabella says.
Across the country, in a Broadway ticket office, Hickey Katz was succinct.
"It's bad all over. Bad in our business. The economy was bad. You are asking me? I never even graduated college!"

 

End of Document
