

What's for Lunch?  Test your reading comprehension by reading the story below and answering the questions that follow.
The Associated Press
October 17, 1994, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 834 words
Dateline: PHILADELPHIA
Body



Ole! Students Excited About Alternative Menu Choices
 If public school students never have to choke down another slab of gravy- coated Salisbury steak for lunch again, they may have some Philadelphia high-schoolers to thank.
Twenty students from Olney High School sampled authentic Mexican cuisine this week in a government taste-testing experiment aimed at improving the quality and diversity of school lunches.
The verdict? Mystery meat is out, Mexican is in.
That could mean a welcome change for 25 million pupils at 92,000 schools across America who are served lunch every day.
In its search for interesting, healthy new menu items for public school lunches, the U.S. Department of Agriculture flew in one of Mexico's leading chefs to prepare six meals for the group of honors English students.
The food that replaced the hamburgers, pizza and Tater Tots wasn't nachos, tacos or chimichangas. And salsa, guacamole and sour cream didn't drown the food the way ketchup, mustard and mayonnaise sometimes do.
These were authentic Mexican dishes prepared by Arnulfo Luengas, executive chef of Banamex, Mexico's national bank. Turkey enchiladas, chicken with green sauce, rice and spinach, rice pudding and baked bananas were a few of the taste treats.
Students rated each dish, and additional comments were encouraged.
"I think we were all expecting Taco Bell, but we weren't disappointed," said Tyressa Oglesby, an 18-year-old senior. "I get tired of eating the same boring lunches week after week."
Amber Then, a 15-year-old junior, was pleasantly surprised.
"I thought it was going to be really hot and spicy," she said. "But I was able to try everything. I enjoyed every bite."
Each dish conformed to recent Clinton administration proposals to limit fat, sodium and cholesterol in school lunches by increasing vegetables, fruits and grains.
In light of the positive response, the next step is double-checking the recipes to make sure they meet USDA guidelines. Then the recipes will be standardized and expanded to feed an entire school, and printed and distributed nationally, possibly within a month, said Christopher Martin, regional administrator of the USDA's Food and Nutrition Service, the agency that administers school meals.
Martin said the government chose Philadelphia for the experiment in part because the school district already recognized the link between good nutrition and the educational and athletic achievements of its students. The efforts of restaurateur David Suro also helped bring the experiment to the city.
After attending a Washington hearing on improving school meals, Suro was inspired to make a contribution to the effort.
"I'm a father. I have kids in school. It's not fair to keep exposing them to unhealthy food," said Suro, who owns a Mexican restaurant and helped sponsor the chef's visit. "This is also a way to fight against the stereotypes surrounding Mexican food."
 
What's for Lunch?
Use information from the story to answer the following questions:
 
 1. Why did the U.S. government ask students from Olney High to take part in a taste-testing experiment?
2. About how many school lunches are served each day to students in schools across America?
3. What is the name of the government organization that is responsible for choosing items for school lunches?
4. After tasting the food, what were the honors English students required to do?
5. Who prepared the meals for the high-schoolers?
6. What proposals have the government made in an effort to improve school lunches?
7. Who is David Suro and why did he help arrange for this taste-test?
8. Why do you think that some students might have been unsure about tasting the new menu items?
9. List two ways in which eating healthy food may help students improve school performance.
10. What are some of your favorite food items? Which are nutritious? Which are unhealthy?
 
 Answer Key:
1. The students were asked to take part in the taste test because the government is trying to improve the quality and variety of school lunches.
2. Each day, 25 million students across America are served school lunches.
3. The government organization that is responsible for selecting lunch menu items is the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
4. After eating the food, the students were asked to rate each dish and make comments about the meals.
5. The meals were prepared by Arnulfo Luengas, a bank executive in Mexico.
6. The government has proposed that menu items be lower in fat, sodium and cholesterol. More fruits, vegetables and grains need to be offered.
7. David Suro owns a restaurant in Philadelphia. He thinks it's unfair that so many unhealthy food items are included in school lunches.
8. Answers will vary.
9. Eating healthy foods might help a student to increase both academic and athletic achievement.
10. Answers will vary.
 

 
 PART TWO
 
 SECOND HELPINGS:
Look at the restaurant ads in the entertainment section of your newspaper. Make a list of the different types of food offered. Which kinds of food have you never tasted? Which are your favorites?
 Load-Date: October 17, 1994

 

End of Document
