

Where's the Recovery? Ask the Jobless and Financially Stressed
The Associated Press
August 15, 1992, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 883 words
Byline: By JOHN D. McCLAIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Bob Brown, a plumber-pipefitter in Doraville, Ga., hasn't had a full-time job since he was laid off 2 years ago. And he wants to know where to find the economic recovery he keeps reading about.
So does Steve Jurhs, who lost his job after 24 years as an aerospace engineer for defense contractor Hughes Aircraft Co. in Covina, Calif.
And when the A.E. Staley Manufacturing Co. in Decatur, Ill., announced a 25 percent workforce reduction, skepticism about the so-called economic upturn ran through the huge corn products company.
Economists say the recession's been over for more than a year, but many people interviewed around the country see it differently.
That's because the recovery is less than half as strong as those following other recessions since World War II, growing at an 1.4 percent annual rate from April through June, compared to the typical 6 percent of earlier upturns.
Unemployment edged down to 7.7 percent last month from 7.8 percent in June, but remained higher than it's been for eight years.
The personal experience of Brown, who had worked at a General Motors Corp. assembly plant, leads him to believe the problems are even worse than the figures reveal.
"When I go to the unemployment office, you have to take a number and come back in a few days," he said.
Many of the lost jobs are gone forever as companies such as IBM and GM restructure to cut costs and become more competitive.
Brown said his brother-in-law still works at GM, "but they're still hanging it over their heads every day that they may close the plant."
And the end of the Cold War means the country can't look to defense firms like Hughes Aircraft to provide growth, as in previous recoveries.
Even people who are working are likely to feel the pinch. Income growth didn't budge in June and the Labor Department said Americans' purchasing power declined in July for the second consecutive month.
When consumer spending slows down, job after job is affected.
Richard Johnson, for instance, is a tailor in Atlanta who occasionally can't pay his landlord on time because customers aren't spending enough on new clothes. The last few months have been worse than at the peak of the recession, Johnson said.
Many people thrown out of full-time employment are working part time and retraining. Some have started their own businesses, setting up craft shops in shopping malls, for example. People will move if necessary for work.
Jurhs, whose wife's part-time job has kept the family afloat since he was laid off three months ago from Hughes, has applied for work all over the country.
"I don't see much improvement in the Southern California region," Jurhs said. "They tell me it's better in other areas of the country, but I haven't seen any evidence of it."
Even large companies that have been able to maintain their sales, like Staley, the Midwestern corn-products manufacturer, are cutting back to eliminate waste and duplication.
"Right now, Staley's healthy. We're taking these steps while we are healthy," said Vice President J. Patrick Mohan.
Mohan said business is picking up but is "nothing that we could look at and say it's a trend that would indicate the economy is improving."
Employment opportunities with state and local governments aren't any better. Despite widespread tax increases and cuts in services, more than half of the 620 cities in a National League of Cities survey say they'll likely end the year in the red.
In California, where the government is struggling with an $ 11 million budget gap, state workers are being paid with registered warrants, or IOUs, but banks aren't always cooperative about cashing them.
Carol Thorp, who works for the California Fair Political Practices Commission, said she's taken out a line of credit rather than use her savings during the impasse.
Older people are hurting, too, because lower interest rates mean their fixed-income investments are paying much less than before.
Even the pockets of optimism are laced with restraint.
Lower mortgage rates are expected to spur housing construction, though industry officials say the projected 25 percent increase in starts this year will be far below the 60 percent jump in 1983 after the previous recession.
And Paul Folkman, treasurer of Folkman and Zola Builders Inc., said that while sales have picked up, his suburban Boston company is showing first-time buyers less expensive homes, without the two-car garages, extra bathrooms and hardwood floors that had been standard in the past.
Richard Sconyers, an executive vice president of Dallas-based Centex Corp., the nation's largest home builder, said sales have been improving in the Southwest region he heads.
Recession hit there with the oil bust of the mid-1980s and many areas there are now rebounding.
Nevertheless, Sconyers, Folkman and other builders say they now need buyers before building because banks are reluctant to make speculative loans.
Many communities remain hard hit by the commercial overbuilding of the '80s which will crimp construction of such facilities as office buildings and shopping malls for years to come.
Another area where the economy appears to be improving slowly is the automobile industry.
But as Jeff Rigg, sales manager at Bob Allen Ford in Overland Park, Kan., said, "It's not by any means the kind of boom market that it was in the late '80s."

 

End of Document
