

Where the Candidates Stand on the Issues
The Associated Press
October 23, 1992, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 3031 words
Body




EDITOR'S NOTE - Where do the presidential candidates stand on the death penalty? What about allowing women to serve in combat? How would the candidates alter income tax rates? Throughout the fall campaign, The Associated Press has been asking George Bush and Bill Clinton where they stand on various issues. Independent Ross Perot declined to respond, but his views on many positions have been spelled out in public comments and in his campaign book, "United We Stand." This is a compilation of the candidates' positions on a variety of major issues.
---
By The Associated Press
QUESTION: Should individual income tax rates be adjusted? Should the personal income tax exemption be adjusted? If so, how?
BUSH: "My 'Agenda for American Renewal' calls for across-the-board tax cuts offset by specific reductions in government spending. It also proposes raising the personal income tax exemption by $ 500 per child for families. These policies will allow people to keep more of what they earn, increase their savings and share the American dream with their children."
CLINTON: "I support increasing taxes for those earning more than $ 200,000 per year. These individuals saw their taxes go down during the '80s, and we should ask them to pay their fair share - though they would still be paying less than they were in the '70s. On the other hand, low-and middle-income families, who saw their taxes increased during the '80s, deserve a tax break."
PEROT: "We should raise the marginal tax rate on the wealthy from 31 to 33 percent. In 1993, this change would affect individuals who make over $ 55,000 and joint filers who make over a total of $ 89,250. Therefore, less than 4 percent of the taxpayers in America will be affected, but we will raise $ 33 billion in five years."
 
 QUESTION: Should the tax rate on capital gains be reduced? If so, to what level?
BUSH: "I want to lower the tax on capital gains to a rate of 15.4 percent so capital will be more abundant. Then investment will increase, labor will be more in demand, wages will rise and unemployment lines will shrink. I also want to index capital gains so that - when average Americans sell their homes or farms or small businesses - they are not forced to pay taxes on the amount of increase from inflation."
CLINTON: "I do not support providing a special capital gains tax break for the rich; instead, I support encouraging entrepreneurs who risk their savings rate to create new companies, the main source of new jobs in our economy. Half of the profits from the original investments in new firms will be excluded from tax, so long as the investment is held at least five years."
PEROT: "We need a stair-stepped capital gains tax, decreasing each year over five years, on shares purchased from public companies with the money going into the treasury to build the company. This would provide the proper incentives to industry and to the market."
---
QUESTION: Should parents be able to decide which public schools their children attend? Should they be able to send their children to private school at public expense?
BUSH: "I firmly believe that parents, not government, should make the important decisions in their children's lives. That's why my state and local G.I. Bill for children gives low- and middle-income families $ 1,000 scholarships to help send their children to the schools of their choice - private, public or religious."
CLINTON: "As president I would work with states to develop public school choice programs like the one I created in Arkansas. I do not, however, support using our limited public resources to pay for private education."
PEROT: "We should start by giving middle class and poor parents the same option that wealthy parents have: choice. We should encourage all school districts to allow parents to choose which school within that district their child will attend. … We should also act to remove any federal obstacles to states allowing choice among public, private and parochial schools."
---
QUESTION: Should there be limits on the number of terms served by members of Congress? If so, what limits would you advocate?
BUSH: "Yes, it's time to restore Congress as a citizen assembly representing the people, not a club for career politicians protecting special interests. The presidency has limited terms; so should Congress. Limiting House members to six terms and senators to two terms would make government more responsive to the people's concerns and make it more active in implementing reforms."
CLINTON: "I think we should first try and make the political process work by reforming our government and campaign finance laws. As a start, I would sign the campaign finance bill vetoed by the president to put limits on campaign expenditures."
PEROT: "We need to do the reforms and the term limits. And after we reform it, it won't be a lifetime career opportunity. Good people will go serve and then go back to their homes and not become foreign lobbyists and cash in at $ 30,000 a month and then take time off to run some president's campaign."
---
QUESTION: Should companies be required to give workers unpaid time off for the birth of a child or a family illness?
BUSH: "I am for family and medical leave; the real question is how to achieve this goal. I want to provide a flexible solution in the form of a tax credit for small and medium-sized business that gives them the incentive and the means to address the specific needs of each of their employees."
CLINTON: "Yes. Working parents should not have to choose between the families they love and the jobs they need. I would sign the Family and Medical Leave Act, which George Bush vetoed, to allow workers to take unpaid leave to be with a newborn child or sick family member - a right enjoyed by workers of every other major industrial nation."
PEROT: "All of these things are things that you would like to be able to do, but you've got to have the money to do them. … We don't have any money right now."
---
QUESTION: Should the Constitution be amended to ban abortion?
Bush: "I believe every life is a precious human gift, each human being has intrinsic dignity and worth, and the lives of both mother and child should be cherished and protected. I support a Human Life Amendment with exceptions when the life of the mother would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term, or in cases of rape or incest."
CLINTON: "No. I firmly believe that government has no right to interfere with decisions that must be made by women in consultation with their partners, doctors, friends and clergy. I support the Roe vs. Wade decision and will support the Freedom of Choice Act."
PEROT: "I support a woman's right to have an abortion. It is the woman's choice."
---
QUESTION: Should the government impose a mandatory waiting period before a handgun can be purchased?
BUSH: "I will only support a legislative proposal designed to identify felons who purchase firearms from licensed gun dealers, regardless of whether such a proposal is a waiting period or a point-of-sale system, if it is part of a comprehensive, strong anti-crime package like the one I have pressed Congress to adopt for the past few years."
CLINTON: "Yes. As a hunter, I join Ronald Reagan and many others in supporting the Brady Bill, which would require a short waiting period in order to allow law enforcement to conduct a criminal background check. Almost 15,000 Americans have died since the Brady Bill first passed the House and more than three-quarters of the 69 police officers murdered in the line of duty last year were killed by handguns. It's time to pass the Brady Bill."
PEROT: "On any program, and this includes crime, you'll find we have all kinds of great plans lying around that never get enacted into law and implemented. I don't care what it is - competitiveness, health care, crime, you name it, Brady Bill. I agree that it's a timid step in the right direction, but it won't fix it. So why pass a law that won't fix it?"
 
 QUESTION: Do you support the death penalty? If so, for what crimes?
BUSH: "I support a federal death penalty for the most horrible crimes, with procedures to ensure its fair, colorblind imposition. In particular, I support the death penalty for cop killers, drug kingpins, those involved in drug-related murders, and contract and terrorist assassins."
CLINTON: "Yes. I support the death penalty and, as governor of Arkansas, I have enforced the death penalty on four separate occasions. I support expanding the federal death penalty to other heinous crimes, such as the 56 offenses outlined in crime legislation considered by Congress last year."
PEROT: Perot has said he is in favor of the death penalty.
---
QUESTION: Should homosexuals be allowed to serve in the military?
BUSH: "On this issue, I have followed the advice of our nation's top military leaders and will continue to do so." (The current policy of the armed forces is that homosexuality is incompatible with military service.)
CLINTON: "Yes. I support repeal of the ban on gays and lesbians serving in the United States armed forces, in accord with a Pentagon study which stated that allowing gays and lesbians to serve would have no detrimental impact on our military strength."
PEROT: "I don't think that's realistic."
---
QUESTION: Should women be allowed to serve in combat?
BUSH: "From the Revolution to the Persian Gulf War, women have played valuable roles in our armed forces. The Presidential Commission on the Assignment of Women in the Armed Forces, authorized by the Congress and appointed by me, is currently studying whether women should serve in combat roles. I am awaiting the commission's report."
CLINTON: "In the fiscal year 1992-93 defense authorization, Congress established the Presidential Commission on the Assignment of Women in the Armed Forces. The commission is taking a comprehensive look at this issue and is scheduled to issue a final report no later than Nov. 15. I will consider the commission's report and consult with the appropriate experts before making a final decision."
PEROT: Perot has not taken a public stand on this issue.
 
 QUESTION: What level of defense cuts do you advocate over the next five years?
BUSH: "With the end of the Cold War and the breakup of the former Soviet Union, we can downsize our military forces in a responsible manner without impeding our ability to repel or defeat military attacks that threaten our vital national interests. That's why I have proposed to reduce the defense budget by $ 50 billion over the next five years, in addition to already planned reductions. By 1997, we will have cut defense spending as a share of our gross national product to 3.4 percent, the lowest figure since World War II."
CLINTON: "I support reducing defense spending over the next five years by $ 60 billion more than what the president has proposed in his budget. This is only 5 percent more than what the president has proposed."
PEROT: "Nothing is more important than the security of our country. In the post-Cold War world, however, our well-being depends less on military security than on economic security. … We can save at least an additional $ 40 billion during the (next) five years over the cuts proposed by President Bush."
---
QUESTION: Should the government put new limits on federal spending for entitlement programs such as Social Security, Medicaid and food stamps? If so, what limits do you advocate?
BUSH: "Government is too big and spends too much. I want to cap the growth of all entitlement spending except Social Security. My cap on the growth of mandatory spending would start with current levels for entitlements other than Social Security, and add increases for inflation, larger number of people to be served, and even a little more. Yet even with these increases, we could save $ 294 billion over five years."
CLINTON: "We need to control entitlement costs, especially rising health care costs, which will make up more than half of deficit growth in the next five years. My plan to fundamentally change our health system will include a national health budget that brings all health costs, including Medicare and Medicaid, to rise no faster than wages. A recent study found that this will save $ 750 billion by the year 2000, even after providing full coverage for all."
PEROT: "Better-off Americans stop paying Medicare taxes on income over $ 130,000 a year. We should lift the cap. … Users of the Medicare supplemental medical insurance program should pay premiums of 35 percent of program costs, up from 25 percent today. … All retirees who can afford it should pay taxes on their Social Security benefits just as they do on private pension benefits. … Retirees from federal government service, military and civilian, would have their cost-of-living increases reduced by one-third over the next five years under my proposal. Nobody will receive a penny less than they receive today."
---
QUESTION: Should the government increase fuel economy requirements for the fleets of U.S. automakers from the current level of 27.5 miles per gallon? If so, what standards would you advocate?
BUSH: "Increasing federally mandated CAFE (corporate average fuel economy) standards to 40 to 45 miles per gallon - as my opponent has advocated - will slam the brakes on America's rebounding car industry, resulting in lost jobs, fewer choices for consumers and more highway deaths because meeting these standards would require smaller and lighter cars. Our Clean Air Act, which Congress has enacted, and our energy bill … are far more cost-effective and market-oriented measures for reducing air pollution and enhancing energy security."
CLINTON: "My position on CAFE is to set a goal of achievement for the auto industry of 40 miles per gallon by the year 2000. My administration will work in partnership with the auto industry, not against it, to help it achieve improved fuel efficiency, ensure job security for workers, and promote industry competitiveness."
PEROT: Perot has not taken a public stand on this issue.
 
 QUESTION: Should the government allow oil drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in Alaska?
BUSH: "Yes, to help America reduce our dependence on imported oil, my National Energy Strategy calls for environmentally sound extraction of oil and gas from a small portion of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has determined that oil production can be done safely while protecting the environment, including restoration of the area to pre-existing conditions once production ceases."
CLINTON: "No. In fact, we should expand the wilderness designation to the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to include the 1.5 million-acre Arctic Coastal Plain. We must implement a comprehensive national energy strategy that reduces our reliance on oil and expands our use of natural gas as a transition fuel to renewable and alternative energy resources."
PEROT: Has not taken a public position on the issue.
---
QUESTION: Do you support statehood for the District of Columbia?
BUSH: "I oppose statehood for the District of Columbia as inconsistent with the original intent of the framers of the Constitution and with the need for a federal city belonging to all the people as our nation's capital."
CLINTON: "I support statehood for the District of Columbia."
PEROT: Has not taken a public position on the issue.
---
QUESTION: Should Israel be encouraged to give up some or all occupied territories to the Arabs in return for recognition of Israel by its Arab neighbors and guarantees of peace in the Mideast?
BUSH: "As the United States made clear in Madrid, all parties need to focus on the three key issues of the negotiations: land, peace and security. The United States is prepared to accept whatever the parties themselves find acceptable."
CLINTON: "The root cause of 45 years of unrest in the Middle East has been the refusal of the Arab nations to recognize Israel's sovereignty and her right to exist. To build the feeling of security, I have called for … an end to the illegal Arab boycott of Israel and the establishment of normal relations between Israel and its neighbors."
PEROT: "Israel's long-term security and overall stability in the Middle East depends on the successful resolution of an Arab-Israeli peace agreement from which all parties benefit. We must continue to work tirelessly with all governments of the region to reach a lasting peace."
---
QUESTION: To improve voter turnout, should states be required to automatically register people to vote when they apply for drivers' licenses or for government benefits such as unemployment compensation?
BUSH: "While I strongly support increasing voter participation in the electoral process, I believe requiring states to register people to vote when they apply for drivers' licenses or for government benefits is not the answer. It's critical that states retain their historic freedom to govern their own electoral processes and tailor voter registration procedures to their unique local circumstances."
CLINTON: "I support the so-called motor-voter legislation that would, among other things, allow voters to register when getting their drivers' licenses. Vetoed by the president, this legislation would have helped to increase voter participation. As president, I will sign this legislation."
PEROT: "First, all of us must vote. We need legislation to make voter registration more accessible. How can anyone disagree?"
 
 QUESTION: Should the Electoral College be abolished in favor of selecting U.S. presidents based on the popular vote of the American electorate?
BUSH: "I don't see the sort of clear and compelling need for eliminating the Electoral College that I believe is necessary to propose an amendment to the Constitution."
CLINTON: "The framers of our Constitution deliberately created our current system in an effort to protect the election of the president from local corruption and narrow political perspectives. We should not rush to abandon the system the framers so conscientiously created, but we must listen carefully to those who say it may be time for change."
PEROT: "Eliminate the Electoral College. There's no reason to filter the people's vote. Why shouldn't we let the people directly choose their president and vice president?"

 

End of Document
