

Whither the Weather? For 200 Years, the Answer is Check the Almanac
The Associated Press
September 9, 1991, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 625 words
Byline: By MARGARET LILLARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CONCORD, N.H.
Body




Born the same year as the presidential veto, commercially baked crackers and the New York Stock Exchange, The Old Farmer's Almanac is celebrating its 200th anniversary as it observed the last 199.
Once again, there's no shortage of odd tales, recipes and weather forecasts for the coming year.
Quaint constancy is the endearing feature of the yellow-bound volume that evolved from a slim booklet created in 1792 by Robert B. Thomas, a bookseller, teacher and amateur astronomer from what is now West Boylston, Mass.
Both the original and the 1992 anniversary edition contain "recipes, articles both current and historical, advice, an odd assortment of useful and rather useless information, gardening hints and yes, weather forecasts," reads the forward in the glossy bookstore edition of the newest almanac.
It was being released late Monday.
The new almanac "is once in a lifetime, in our view," said editor Judson D. Hale at his office in Dublin, N.H. "It really is a sweep of the last 200 years and a look at the next 200."
Features includes 200 years of favorite dessert recipes and an article that tells how to set up a 1792 garden.
A book gleaning the best of the 200 editions is being released Tuesday.
The Old Farmer's Almanac isn't the only almanac, however. It isn't even the only one celebrating an anniversary.
In Maine, The Farmers' Almanac, whose 175th anniversary edition just came out, marked the event by venturing into politics, suggesting national elections be changed from Tuesdays to Sundays.
Unlike its New Hampshire rival, with two versions for newsstand and bookstore sales, the 48-page Maine almanac is sold to banks, insurance companies and other businesses that place their imprint on it and give it away.
While acknowledging that the New Hampshire almanac can claim to be first on the scene, the younger rival's editor for 58 years, 81-year-old Ray Geiger, says longevity isn't everything.
"We admit they're older, and we're a Johnny-come-lately. But a Studebaker is older than a Cadillac, and who would buy a Studebaker?" Geiger said last week at his Lewiston, Maine, office.
Hale shrugs his shoulders at Geiger and other competitors.
"There are lots of imitators that have come out," he said. "I can't get too angry at them. I'd much prefer to be us and be imitated than the other way around."
The similarities between the two almanacs are marked. Weather is a staple, and both feature a year's worth of forecasts.
Farmers' Almanac prognosticator Caleb Weatherbee said the coming winter will bring moderate temperatures and more rain than snow. The summer of '92 will be stormy and turbulent, he said.
Richard Head of The Old Farmer's Almanac agrees the winter will be considerably warmer than normal east of the Mississippi River and in the eastern Great Plains. The rest of the country will see below-normal temperatures, he predicted.
Spring, summer and fall will be quite warm, Head said, and drier than usual in most areas.
Despite the space given to forecasts, Hale said The Old Farmer's Almanac's claim of 80 percent accuracy is "a tradition, and we don't take that seriously at all."
In fact, last year's forecast for New England was well off the mark, predicting thick snow in the winter and heavy rain from May to July; neither materialized. It forecast near-drought for August, which actually saw torrential rains and Hurricane Bob.
The competition didn't have much better luck for 1991, and the 1992 edition of The Farmers' Almanac contains a rare acknowledgement that the previous year's forecast - for a cold, snowy winter across the country - was off.
"We say that over a period of years, we've had infinite success," Geiger said. "We've missed a few, and we're not 100 percent accurate. Otherwise, we'd be like the Lord himself."

 

End of Document
