

Who Controls The Convention? The Sound Man And The TelePrompTer Man
The Associated Press
August 18, 1992, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 454 words
Byline: By SCOTT McCARTNEY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HOUSTON
Body




Patrick Baltzell is the one man who must read George Bush's lips at the Republican National Convention. With one hand, he controls all the sound.
"If I make a mistake, everyone knows it," he said.
The podium actually has three different kinds of microphones, although to television cameras it will look like only one, and Baltzell makes an educated guess as the speaker walks out to whichever mike would be best.
"If it's a screamer, I use one type. If it's someone older, more soft-spoken, I use another," Baltzell said. "Reagan would use one type, and for Nancy Reagan, I'd use something else."
And Bush's lips get their cue from Jim Greenfield. He's the one who actually, well, puts the words in the politicians' mouths.
Greenfield runs the TelePrompTer from a chipmunk's burrow inside the podium, directly underneath the speaker, hidden behind a red, white and blue elephant.
"They're on our heads in more way than one. They're standing on top of us, and they're on our minds," said Greenfield.
Greenfield's crew, which worked the Democratic National Convention as well, follows the pace set by each of the 500 or so speakers. The technicians use computers to move words up the two reflective glass panels mounted in front of the podium.
Mistakes are rare - although Rep. Joseph Kennedy, D-Mass., looked up to find his Democratic National Convention speech running upside down. Kennedy resorted to back-up paper text.
"This is sort of their lifeline. They're told to rely on it," Greenfield said.
The TelePrompTer controllers are under strict orders to refrain from trying to speed up a long-winded address, and just to make sure, political aides often sneak into the TelePrompTer room to protect their boss above.
"We have to fend them off to make sure they don't interfere. People will find a way to get in here, even though it's off-limits," Greenfield said.
After approval by the Republican National Committee, scripts are fed into Greenfield's computers. He handles all speakers except for President Bush - who has his own White House TelePrompTer crew and computers.
"It does seem funny sometimes. You sort of ask yourself, Who is that man behind the curtain?" he said.
Baltzell sits in the middle of the Astrodome on a camera platform, controlling the microphones and sound levels, based on his own experienced ears and a handful of professional listeners scattered around the convention floor.
Each microphone in state delegations has two separate wiring systems, and all computers are backed up by manual systems. But there is no "backup" for Baltzell. The system not only supplies sound to the convention hall, but also to the television networks.
"I'm on my own," he said. "You have to know when to pay attention, no spacing out."

 

End of Document
