

WINNING VOTES: A Religious Right How-To, From The Pews Into The Precincts
The Associated Press
September 5, 1993, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1159 words
Byline: By JOHN KING, AP Political Writer
Dateline: VISTA, Calif.
Body




If, as Pat Robertson says, it is time to bring God back into the schools, then once tranquil Vista and its "Policy No. 6019: Teaching Science" are destined to make history.
Inspired by victory in this San Diego suburb, religious conservatives across America are fighting to take over public schools. They are targeting school board elections, demanding curriculum changes, challenging sex education programs, pushing for prayer in the classroom and purging reading lists and libraries.
This is sophisticated politics: state-of-the art fund-raising and mass communications supplemented by old-fashioned, vigilant foot soldiers recruited from evangelical, fundamentalist and other conservative churches.
It offers a revealing look at the strategy the religious right adopted in the aftermath of Robertson's failed 1988 presidential campaign: Pour resources into local politics, from school and library boards to county commissions and state legislatures.
"We're looking for men and women candidates who want to run for office - school board, dog catcher, anything," says Pat Gartland, the Christian Coalition's director in Georgia. "We're getting people from the pews into the precincts."
While low-turnout elections for school boards and other local posts are the immediate target, these groups also hope to develop a pool of candidates for higher offices. Already, the religious right and its allies have made inroads in a number of state legislatures: Pennsylvania, Montana, Idaho, Oregon and Washington among them.
Both the Christian Coalition and another religious right powerhouse, Citizens for Excellence in Education, are encouraging Christians to run for office and teaching them how to campaign.
"The Bible, being the only true source on right and wrong, should be the guide of board members," says CEE's Robert L. Simonds in his handbook on how to elect Christians to higher office. "Government from the president on down should be as permeated with Christians as it now is with secularists."
Citizens for Excellence in Education claims more than 3,000 of its members have been elected to school boards nationwide, but refuses to identify them.
People for the American Way, which monitors Christian activist political activity, believes that figure is inflated. But even this liberal group estimates CEE has elected more than 1,000 of its followers to school boards. It estimated that 40 percent of candidates backed in 1992 by Christian right organizations won.
"The school board stuff is probably the biggest growth industry in the right wing," said Michael Hudson, People for the American Way's Western director.
Vista, a growing middle-class community of 76,000 with a school population of 21,000, has become a battleground for Christian activists and opponents who emerged after Christian right successes in 1990 local elections.
The two camps are bitterly divided over Policy 6019, which the Vista school board adopted last month in defiance of its teachers union and state education guidelines. It requires schools to teach, as an alternative theory to evolution, that God created the Earth and its inhabitants in six days.
To local resident Ruth Steiner, the decision ignores the Founding Fathers and their "wisdom in building a wall between church and state."
The board's majority saw things differently.
"We now have creationism on an equal footing with evolution," said Deidre Holliday, the board president. She is a member of the National Association of Christian Educators, sister organization to Simonds' neutrally named Citizens for Excellence in Education.
Similar efforts abound:
-In New York City, Catholic and black groups joined forces with Christian conservatives this spring to oppose the city's liberal education policies. Together they distributed 500,000 voter guides in 1,200 churches. The Christian Coalition says 66 like-minded candidates won.
-In Duval County, Fla. (including Jacksonville), the school board's conservative 4-3 majority adopted "Teen Aid," an abstinence-only sex education program that does not mention birth control.
-In Lake County, Fla., near Orlando, the religious conservative majority refused to allow a Head Start program in the district, saying 4-year-olds were too young for school. Another proposal would rewrite school rules to guarantee that homosexuality is not taught as an acceptable lifestyle.
-In Round Rock, Texas, the conservative Christian school board majority reinstated prayer at graduation.
In these communities and others, school boards offer a case study of how the Christian right's meticulous organizing capitalizes on low-turnout elections.
Janet Gastil has firsthand experience.
The 13-year incumbent on the La Mesa, Calif., school board found out the morning after the 1990 election that she had lost - to a candidate who never appeared at any public forums.
Gastil's opponent employed a favorite stealth tactic of the Christian right. She eschewed traditional campaigning but on the Sunday before the election she distributed thousands of voting guides at churches.
Candidates backed by Christian conservatives won 52 of 88 San Diego County contests that year.
"Nobody knew it was going on," said Ken Blalack, a Republican who later helped form one of the first opposition groups, Community for Responsible Education, to combat religious activists.
Leafleting congregations is one of the movement's trademark strategies. Another is using church directories to get voters to the polls and establishing "phone trees" - the telecommunications version of the chain letter - to generate a spiral of telephone calls for candidates and causes.
"The job of every precinct captain is to find 10 other people to help," said Ralph Reed, the Christian Coalition's executive director. "It isn't enough just to vote."
This year, the biggest school board battles are likely to come in Colorado, which for the first time will elect 175 local boards on the same day.
But the school fight likely to be most heated has nothing to do with school boards.
In November, California holds a statewide referendum on a "school choice" system that would give parents vouchers to send their children to private schools, including religious schools.
Religious activists see the referendum as a chance to start a national movement, akin to the 1970s anti-tax crusade.
Reed relishes the prospect. So far, the national Christian Coalition has never spent more than $ 20,000 on a state ballot issue but Reed pledges to spend "40 to 50 times that in California."
Other religious right organizations promise to invest heavily in the fight, a test of whether the movement can deliver votes on a statewide level, in a contest with enormous stakes.
"Our voters are going to turn out like spring flowers," predicts the Rev. Lou Sheldon of the California-based Traditional Values Coalition. "Because if California passes, we will do things we never dreamed we could do."
 
 Next: The struggle for control of local Republican Party organizations.

 

End of Document
