

With U.S. Soldiers Across the Border, Iraq Steps Back From the Brink
The Associated Press
October 11, 1994, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1021 words
Byline: By EILEEN ALT POWELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KUWAIT
Body




Iraq declared an end to its menacing five-day buildup and said its troops were pulling back from the Kuwait border only hours after U.S. troops landed.
But President Clinton said Monday night there had been no sign of an Iraqi pullback and that he was sending more than 350 U.S. military aircraft to the Persian Gulf.
"We will not allow Saddam Hussein to defy the will of the United States and the international community," Clinton said in a nationally televised address.
A senior Pentagon official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said Clinton ordered B-52 bombers and F-15E fighter jets to the Gulf. They are to come from various Air Force bases, including those in Germany and Italy.
The tens of thousands of Iraqi soldiers sent to the border had revived memories of 1990, when Iraq swept aside Kuwait's army and seized the oil-rich country. It was seven months before a U.S.-led coalition ousted the occupiers.
This time, Washington was determined to send a firm signal - invade Kuwait and the United States will respond. Washington began amassing a force of nearly 70,000 in the region, 54,000 already assigned plus 15,000 on standby.
The first contingent of 300 U.S. soldiers arrived in Kuwait City on Monday.
Hours later, Iraq's ambassador to the United Nations, Nizar Hamdoon, said Iraqi forces would withdraw from the Kuwaiti border and "are already on the move." He said they would be sent to a site north of Basra.
In Baghdad, Foreign Minister Mohammed Saeed al-Sahhaf said troops would be deployed to "other locations in the rear" to finish military exercises.
He told the official Iraqi news agency the withdrawal was ordered in response to appeals from "friends" and "in view of the fact that the troops' presence might be used as a pretext to maintain sanctions."
The crushing U.N. sanctions were imposed after Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990. Iraq has aggressively sought to have the sanctions eased, particularly a 4-year-old oil embargo that has devastated the economy.
Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein may have conceived the buildup as a warning that he could still cause trouble if the sanctions were not lifted. The Washington Post, quoting unnamed Arab diplomats, suggested Tuesday that Saddam might have moved against Kuwait in anger after an Egyptian-brokered attempt to lift the sanctions failed.
Clinton said the sanctions will be maintained until Iraq complies with U.N. resolutions.
"That is the answer to Iraq's sanctions problem: Full compliance, not reckless provocation," Clinton said.
Earlier Monday, Kuwait's information minister, Sheik Saud al-Sabah, said there was no evidence Iraq had begun pulling back any of the estimated 80,000 soldiers on the border. "We will believe it when we see it," he said.
Vesselin Kostov, spokesman for the 1,100-member U.N. observer mission on the border, told The Associated Press he could not confirm that Iraqi troops were moving but said "the situation within the DMZ remains calm." The 9-mile-wide demilitarized zone was set up after the 1991 Gulf War.
Pentagon officials have not said to what extent Iraq would have to pull back before the United States ended its buildup.
U.S. forces continued to arrive Monday to confront the Iraqi force, which includes 20,000 Republican Guards. An estimated 700 Iraqi tanks and other armored vehicles also were believed at the border.
In Kuwait City, some 300 men from the 24th Infantry Division came aboard a white Lockheed 1011 jet from Fort Stewart, Ga., the first major group of Western ground forces to arrive in the region.
Army Maj. Gen. John Taylor, who will command the force, shook the hand of each infantryman as the unit arrived. All were dressed in olive drab uniforms with full battle packs, including automatic rifles and gas masks.
A veteran of the 1991 Gulf War, Taylor said the arriving troops would man M1A1 Abrams tanks and Bradley fighting vehicles "prepositioned" in the region after the Gulf War.
"Everybody is very confident," he said. "We know what our mission is."
Taylor said some advance American teams were "digging in the desert right now," implying that forces already had been deployed in northern Kuwait. But he refused to elaborate.
The U.S. Embassy confirmed Monday that American warships led by the USS Tripoli arrived off the Kuwait coast over the weekend with 2,000 combat Marines. The aircraft carrier USS George Washington began patroling the Red Sea on Monday, its missiles in striking distance of Iraq.
Britain dispatched the frigate HMS Cornwall to Kuwaiti waters on Sunday. Turkey and Saudi Arabia have offered staging areas for some 180 American warplanes and support craft expected in the region over the next few days.
Earlier, Kuwait's crown prince told an emergency session of Parliament that Kuwaitis have nothing to fear with the Western forces arriving to counter the Iraqi buildup of forces.
"The military situation has changed a lot in Kuwait's favor, and it will continue doing so in the coming hours," said Sheik Saad al-Abdullah al-Sabah, who is also prime minister.
Kuwait has signed 10-year defense pacts with the United States, Britain, France and Russia since the 1991 Gulf war.
Before the Iraq's announcement of a withdrawal, Baghdad accused Washington of pushing the region toward another crisis.
The government-run Al-Thawra daily warned that "preserving international security and peace cannot be attained unless a clear resolution to lift the unjust embargo of Iraq is taken.
"If that is done, there will no longer be either a crisis or a confrontation, toward which the United States is pushing the present situation."
The United Nations was expected to receive a report Monday on Iraq's compliance with weapons' monitoring programs, required under the U.N. cease-fire agreement. But it was put off amid the crisis.
Thousands of civilians, meanwhile, remained camped near the Iraqi side of the frontier, apparently herded there by Baghdad, U.N. officials said.
Iraq maintained they were some of the tens of thousands of stateless Arabs who fled Kuwait or were expelled after the war for allegedly backing Iraq. Kuwait claimed they were Iraqi soldiers dressed in civilian clothes.
 Load-Date: October 11, 1994

 

End of Document
