

'Brenda Starr' Faced Galaxy of Problems in Path to the Screen
The Associated Press
August 6, 1991, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1189 words
Byline: By JOHN HORN, AP Entertainment Writer
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




Nothing comes between Brooke Shields and her blue jeans. Everything has come between the model-actress and her long-delayed movie, "Brenda Starr."
The $ 14 million film, based on the comic strip about a fashionable globe-trotting reporter, was completed more than four years ago. Postponed by lawsuits, contract turmoil and a movie distributor's demise, "Brenda Starr" finally was supposed to come out this August.
Now "Brenda Starr" sits on hold again. It's been shown in Zambia, Norway and Colombia. Audiences in the United States, however, are still waiting.
"I hope it does come out because there's no point in keeping it hidden," said Timothy Dalton, who co-stars with Miss Shields, Charles Durning and Diana Scarwid in the movie. "It's probably the best work (Brooke's) ever done."
Miss Shields, the former Calvin Klein and Colgate spokeswoman whose career has waned in the intervening years, "really is proud of it," said her mother and manager, Teri Shields who was paid $ 120,000 to serve as the film's "executive consultant," according to court records.
Indeed, according to interviews and court records, the movie's quality didn't prompt the delays. Rather, "Brenda Starr" was impeded more by legal and financial considerations.
"This is how movies are made," said Alana Lambros, the film's sales agent. "This could almost be in the Guinness Book of World Records. More people have been involved with this film than with 'Gone With the Wind' and 'Cleopatra."'
Uncertainty surrounded the project almost from the start.
In 1984, a small production company called Tomorrow Entertainment hired James Buchanan and Noreen Stone to write a "Brenda Starr" script. Miss Shields said she would play the role, but she and her mother wanted script rewrites.
Buchanan and Stone eventually were called to the Century City offices of a company the writers assumed represented the movie's financial backer. Known as Mystery Man Productions, the financier was, by all accounts, an unidentified Arab investor.
"They were not people who had ever made a movie," Buchanan said of the representatives. They said things like, 'On page 22, you will introduce a dream sequence.' That kind of thing."
Screenwriter Delia Ephron came in to rewrite portions of the movie. She subsequently removed her name from the film's credits, using the pseudonym Jenny Wolkind instead.
No matter how confused the script - a compilation of all three writers, Mystery Man provided the film's $ 14 million pricetag, and shooting was set for Florida and Puerto Rico. Miss Shields, then one of the world's top models, put on 10 pounds to appear more buxom for the role.
Mystery Man hired Robert Ellis Miller ("Reuben, Reuben") to direct, and Bob Mackie designed Brenda Starr's dresses.
Mystery Man obtained limited rights to the Brenda Starr character from the Tribune Entertainment Co., owners of the comic strip, in April 1986. But somehow, the company failed to obtain television rights, Tribune later said.
Filming began in July 1986. A 1987 "Brenda Starr" release was planned.
"It would have been a hot thing," Miller said. "(Brooke's star) was in the ascendancy. She was 21, just graduating from college and gorgeous."
Said Miss Scarwid ("Mommie Dearest"), who played rival reporter Libby Lips in "Brenda Starr": "It was a blast. It was one of Brooke's finer movies."
By May 1987, Phil Isaacs and Myron "Mickey" Hyman, representing Mystery Man, opened distribution negotiations with New World Pictures, an independent movie company whose films included "Warlock" and "Heathers."
One May evening at a restaurant called Virgilio's, Isaacs and Hyman met with New World executive Bob Cheren. During the course of the 2 -hour meal, Cheren testified, Hyman said "all rights" to the film were available. New World was interested.
Over a quick breakfast at the Westwood Marquis hotel a few days later, a tentative deal was struck. New World planned an early 1988 release, cashing in on the popularity of Dalton, who just had replaced Sean Connery as James Bond in "The Living Daylights," and the impending surge in comic-book movies such as "Batman" and "Dick Tracy."
"NWP Adds 7 Pix to Its Larder," a Daily Variety headline proclaimed on July 7. New World Pictures, the article said, would open "Brenda Starr" on Jan. 25, 1988.
It didn't happen.
New World tried to make prints of "Brenda Starr," but Mystery Man kept the film's negative locked up, claiming New World hadn't signed a contract. New World subsequently discovered to its surprise that Tribune claimed to hold all "Brenda Starr" TV rights.
On July 10, Tribune notified New World that its "Brenda Starr" distribution deal was "unacceptable."
In an August meeting called in Century City, Dr. Khalid Al-Mansour, a lawyer representing Mystery Man, told New World there was no deal.
On Sept. 23, New World sued Tomorrow, Mystery Man and the film's sales agents, claiming fraud, breach of contract and civil conspiracy. On Christmas Eve, Mystery Man sought to block New World from distributing the film and eventually obtained a court order to that effect.
At the same time, Teri Shields said the movie needed repairs.
"We met with the money people and producers and we're still having a problem with the distributor," Mrs. Shields said at the time. "I feel the film's not ready to be released. They need about $ 60,000 more to re-edit."
She also said the billing was wrong. "Brooke's name is not on the top and it's supposed to be. That's in our contract."
The film sold well overseas. New World licensed rights to such countries as Zambia, Japan, Belgium, Colombia, Norway and Swaziland.
In 1989, the film was shopped at the Cannes Film Festival, where other foreign rights were offered for sale. At that time, the film was to debut in the middle of the year by New World, despite the litigation.
But the movie still didn't come out in the United States.
New World was sold in April 1989 in a deal valued at more than $ 120 million, and the company's movie business was quickly folded by its new owner. AM-PM Productions obtained rights to the film in January 1990. The film was cut from 108 minutes to 96 minutes.
The delay eventually began to generate negative publicity. Stories published in 1991 suggested the film had been shelved "after discouraging previews in 1989."
"People always say, 'I bet it's not good,"' director Miller said. "But we've screened it quite a few times and the reaction has been sensational."
After more months of legal wrangling, a new release date was set - June 7, 1991 - and Triumph Releasing (a division of Columbia Pictures) would distribute.
June came and went without "Brenda."
Gossip columnist Liz Smith then got into the act, saying the film would debut on Aug. 30. "There has long been speculation that the reason 'Brenda Starr' never got off the shelf was the poor quality of Brooke's performance," Smith wrote. "Some industry insiders feel that if 'Brenda Starr' clicks, it might well give Brooke's career the little boost it needs."
In mid-July, the film was to open around Labor Day. By late July, the release date was unknown.
Lambros of AM-PM Productions puts it this way: "Nothing has really been signed yet."
 Graphic



 
LaserPhotos NY12, NY13 of Aug. 1

 

End of Document
