

'Hello, the Government Is Out; Please Leave a Message'
 The Associated Press
November 16, 1995, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 592 words
Byline: By KEVIN GALVIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




At federal offices across town, answering machines best told the story of the government shutdown.
"Hello. You've reached the Commission of Fine Arts, which is closed with the general closedown. We will attempt to have a meeting on Thursday, if the government has been reopened."
"Due to the government shutdown," said the message at the Federal Maritime Commission, "your call is going to be recorded and we will get back to you as soon as possible."
After the White House and congressional Republicans failed to reach agreement on a stopgap spending bill, the Clinton administration furloughed about 800,000 "nonessential" federal workers.
But anyone who would say they're glad they sent the clowns home might want to consider what the shutdown means to the greatest show on Earth: Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey said about 20 performers were stuck in Moscow and the former Soviet Union because U.S. embassies had stopped processing visas.
While 60 percent of government employees were still on the job, the shutdown closed many lesser-known agencies and hampered the nation's efforts to control nuclear arms proliferation and track election campaign scofflaws.
Mary Dillon, spokeswoman for the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, said about two dozen of its 250 Washington workers were in Wednesday.
"It puts us at a temporary standstill at our annual compliance report to Congress. This report makes the hard-nosed judgements on whether countries such as Libya, Iran and Iraq are meeting their obligations under various agreements," she said.
A recorded message at the Federal Elections Commission greeted callers: "If you are calling after noon on Tuesday the agency has been closed. When we return from our furlough, we will return your messages." Congress passed a bill Wednesday night that would restore funding for the FEC.
Although personnel required to protect public safety continued to work, 80 percent of the Federal Emergency Management Agency staff was sent home.
FEMA spokesman Morrie Goodman said disaster field offices would continue to assist hurricane victims in the Caribbean and Florida and provide relief from the floods in Palm Beach County.
Despite the shutdown, relief workers were on call in the event of a disaster. "Not a moment would be lost," Goodman said.
Sheldon Hackney, chairman of the National Endowment for the Humanities, said six of the 200 employees were on the job. He feared state humanities councils would suffer most. The endowment awards about $ 28 million annually to state councils, which fund humanities studies, exhibitions and community discussion programs.
Only a fraction of that - "not enough to keep them going for very long" - has been distributed for fiscal 1996, Hackney said.
With the Smithsonian museums closed, the National Mall was quiet. A few foreign tourists tried locked museum doors.
The private Corcoran Art Museum, however, got a boost in sightseeing traffic. "The misfortune of our sisters down on the Mall is our good fortune in the sense that it introduces us to a lot of people," said Susan Rosenbaum, the Corcoran's vice president of public affairs.
Attorney General Janet Reno, who like all presidential appointees was working through the shutdown, decided Wednesday to hold her regular weekly news conference Thursday morning, but without the audio visual support the government normally provides for broadcasters.
Asked if Reno's news conference was an essential government function, Justice spokesman Carl Stern replied, "No, but she's an overachiever. She's here, and she wanted to do it."
 Load-Date: November 16, 1995

 

End of Document
