

'Peace Forever,' They Said, But The Search Continues
The Associated Press
October 23, 1991, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 725 words
Byline: By MIMI MANN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




The Middle East's first recorded peace treaty more than 3,000 years ago ended with an exchange of prisoners and a promise to end the fighting forever.
But in a region known for wars and rumors of wars, the drafters figured more than a promise was necessary to make peace a reality between the Egyptians and the Hittites, who lived in what is now Turkey and Syria.
For enforcement muscle, they added a series of dire curses directed toward those who dared interfere with the peace process. And, as peace reigned more than a decade later, the Hittite king ensured its longevity by delivering his beautiful daughter to the harem of Ramses the Great.
Neither curses nor a princess, beautiful or not, are on the agenda for the next move in the still-unsuccessful search for tranquility in the Middle East, a U.S.-organized peace conference set to begin a week from today in Madrid.
But otherwise, there are haunting parallels between the road to peace then and now.
Secretary of State James A. Baker III organized the coming peace conference during eight trips to the Middle East, shuttling to and fro among Cairo, Damascus, Jerusalem and Amman.
In 1269 B.C., the region's first peace treaty followed a similar flurry of shuttle diplomacy by envoys of Pharaoh Ramses II and Hattusilis, king of the Hittites.
In 1285 B.C., they had undistinguished themselves at Kadesh, a battlefield in today's Syria. The standoff sent everybody limping home, much like the outcome of the 1973 Arab-Israeli War that left large portions of the Middle East in dispute, the Palestinians in limbo and warring factions, warring still.
But with typical Middle Eastern bravado, both kings claimed monumental victory. Ramses II decorated more temple walls in Egypt with his side of the story than with any other battle tale.
In reality, they were sick of territorial wars, wanted to get on with life and their riches and were scared stiff of ferocious invaders, including the Philistines, known as the Sea Peoples.
In the modern version, the late President Anwar Sadat claimed victory because Egypt avoided defeat by Israel for the first time. Armed with new credibility, he negotiated peace in 1979 under terms strikingly similar to those offered the Palestinians going into the Madrid conference.
Ramses had ruled 21 years when Hittite diplomats trekked to Egypt and Egyptians to the Hittite capital of Hatti in what today is Turkey. Both sides wanted peace but neither wanted to be labeled the coward who started the process.
The original treaty probably originated at Hatti with the help of Egyptian ambassadors. The text then headed to Ramses for his input and the terms were sealed on two silver tablets.
Under the treaty, the kings agreed that the Egyptians wouldn't trespass on Hittite land and vice versa. It established a mutual defense alliance and promised to extradite political prisoners, who would be treated humanely.
Borders weren't delineated definitely and much of the land disputed by the ancients, especially Palestine, remains in dispute.
As in other ancient legal documents, the treaty's final section listed witnesses. They were very special indeed: "A thousand gods of the male gods and of the female gods of them of Hatti, together with a thousand gods of the male gods and the female gods of them of the land of Egypt."
And if anybody dared break the treaty, these divine witnesses would "destroy his house, his land and his servants."
But words and threats alone still couldn't secure the peace. Thirteen years later, Hattusilis sent his eldest daughter Puto-Khepa to join Ramses II's already copious harem.
The supposed marriage of convenience became a marriage of love at first sight. The aging Ramses fawned at the beauty of his new consort and honored her with statues.
For 50 years the Middle East was a land of peace and plenty. Travelers could go anywhere without fear. But a new world order was on the horizon.
Egypt and Hittite kingdom grew fat and limp as their neighbors the Assyrians of Iraq and the Persians of Iran prepared for war.
Egypt's days of glory and power in West Asia were finished. The Israelites and the Philistines were entrenched in Canaan. Brigands from Phoenician city-states prowled the seas. The Greeks were coming to glory. The Romans would follow, the Arabs, the Ottomans.
And wars and rumors of war continually would stain Middle East sands.

 

End of Document
