

'Rush Hour' in the Iraqi Desert As U.S. Ground Forces Advance
The Associated Press
February 26, 1991, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 675 words
Byline: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WITH THE U.S. ARMY VII CORPS IN IRAQ
Body




Seemingly endless armored convoys rumbled through the breaches of the desert wall into Iraq in what officials said was the largest movement of U.S. ground forces since World War II.
The U.S. Army's VII Corps, joined by Britain's 1st Infantry Division, has accelerated its battle plan for an anticipated showdown with the Republican Guard, hoping to crush the core of Iraq's military.
Divisions sped forward after they encountered few Iraqi forces on the other side of the man-made, 12-foot-high sand walls that mark the frontier.
Lead units were more than 60 miles past the border. Pockets of resistance firing artillery along the way early Monday were eliminated as Britain's 1st Armored Division advanced.
By afternoon, the convoys moved easily through the first 25 miles of Iraqi territory. Soldiers leaned on their gun turrets, letting the wind whip through their scarves.
Low gray clouds let out occasional raindrops, keeping dust to a minimum.
Sgt. Maj. Martin Shupe flew on two helicopter flights Monday to photograph some of the more than 100,000 U.S. soldiers for military archives.
"When you look down, almost every soldier would give up a thumbs up or wave a small flag," said Shupe, 44, of Palm Springs, Calif. "You see it and there is pride in being an American and in being involved in something so historic."
First across Sunday was the 2nd Armored Cavalry Regiment, followed by the 1st Infantry Division, the 1st Armored Division and 3rd Armored Division.
The VII Corps has not moved out of Europe since defeating Germany in 1945, and many of its supply vehicles are still forest green.
The British division, made up of the 7th Armored Brigade - the famed Desert Rats - and the 4th Armored Brigade, moved north on a flank of the American forces.
It was something of a reunion for the British and American 1st Infantry and 1st Armored Division: They joined in 1942 to defeat Field Marshal Erwin Rommel in North Africa.
At the wall, where only 48 hours before soldiers sweated about the possibility of being killed while moving into Iraq, it was peaceful enough to toss a football while each convoy waited for its chance to move through the breaches.
"It gets your adrenalin going," said Pfc. Mike Kirby, 19, of Bassfield, Miss., as he pumped gas at a forward refueling point.
The thousands of vehicles underscored the size of the effort to destroy Iraqi President Saddam Hussein's military muscle.
At the point of each division were thousands of tanks, artillery, self-propelled howitzers and the armored Bradley Fighting vehicle used to scout for Iraqi forces.
"When you see a moving armored division it's awesome. It takes 30 minutes for it to go by. There are moving vehicles as far as you can see in both directions," said Lt. Col. James Gleisberg, spokesman for the VII Corps.
Convoys behind the main division brought all the logistics material - communications trucks ammunition, fuel, food, water, medical supplies, mobile bridges, ambulances, buses for Iraqi prisoners of war and fire trucks.
Even flying in a helicopter 100 feet above the ground, both ends of the long strings of vehicles could not be seen.
They stretched back, back, back to the horizon like a long line of deadly ants. So many trucks and tire marks criss-crossed the sand that it was almost impossible to see a patch that had not been disturbed by the churning vehicles.
There were some glitches.
Six Army engineers were reported wounded by American ordnance. A truck was bogged down in the sand, a shattered trailer lay abandoned.
There were few signs of conflict. An occasional spent rocket shell lay in the hole it punched in the sand. The artillery could be heard in the distance like the drumbeat for the expected major battle.
Despite the lack of opposition, the question that hung over the operation was when and where the VII Corps would encounter the Republican Guard.
It was unclear how much of the 150,000 strong force was left after the month-long pounding by allied air raids.
"Are we overestimating the Republican Guard? The answer is nobody really knows," said Gleisberg.

 

End of Document
