

50 YEARS ON: Operation Torch, Closing the Vise
The Associated Press
October 14, 1992, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1637 words
Body




EDITOR'S NOTE - This is one of a series of articles that will move periodically, into 1995, looking back on historic events 50 years ago in World War II. It is adapted from the Associated Press book "World War II: A 50th Anniversary History," published by Henry Holt and Company.
---
By The Associated Press
Horizon to horizon, the gray steel of ships covered the sea, an army in transit to war.
Two great convoys, packed with 84,000 American and 23,000 British soldiers, set out for northwest Africa in late October 1942, one sailing south from Britain, the other east from the U.S. East Coast, the shock troops of the first American offensive against Hitler's Nazi war machine.
They also were the second jaw of a gigantic vise. By Nov. 4, 1942, Germany's Afrika Korps, commanded by "Desert Fox" Gen. Erwin Rommel, was reeling westward from Egypt under a relentless British attack that began at El- Alamein. The amphibious invasion would now close in on Axis forces from behind.
For the untested U.S. Army "dogfaces" aboard the convoys, these were days of boredom, seasickness and apprehension. Zigzagging endlessly, blacked-out at night, stacked four high in bunks or canvas hammocks, the GIs could only reread letters and worn-out books, play blackjack, shoot dice, spread rumors: They were headed for Egypt, for Senegal, for Norway.
For their leaders, Operation Torch was a gamble.
The surf on the Moroccan coast, one of three landing zones, was unpredictable in November. If the seas were rough, the Moroccan operation might be scuttled.
And beyond that, as soldiers jammed shipboard religious services the night before the landings, a central question remained unanswered: Would the 14 French army divisions in North Africa resist the invaders?
The seaborne forces would be pouring ashore in territories - Morocco and Algeria - governed by the French regime in Vichy, technically a neutral government that controlled southern France and some French colonies in collaboration with the Axis.
The British and American allies had worked for months to try to line up French cooperation in Africa.
In one secretive mission two weeks before the landings, Maj. Gen. Mark Clark, deputy to Operation Torch's commanding general, Dwight D. Eisenhower, went ashore from a submarine off Algeria and obtained vital information from a French general about French troop positions. Clark then had to scramble to elude French police and make it back to the submarine.
The Allies, meanwhile, enlisted Gen. Henri Giraud, a maverick French officer recently escaped from a German prison camp, as a figurehead around whom the "liberated" French of North Africa could rally.
On Nov. 5, skimming the waves aboard a B-17 Flying Fortress, Eisenhower flew from London to Gibraltar and established his headquarters in the dank, dark corridors within the famous British "Rock."
But even by that night, as he watched some of the 850 Allied warships, troop transports and cargo vessels pass into the Mediterranean, dark shapes on a phosphorescent Gibraltar Strait, Eisenhower could not be sure how the French defense forces would react.
It was "a most peculiar venture," he later wrote. "… We were invading a neutral country to create a friend."
Security had been extremely tight. Although German agents in Spain saw the convoy enter the Mediterranean, Axis intelligence decided it was reinforcements bound for the British-held island of Malta, or possibly a Sicily invasion force. Axis defenses were mobilized far to the east to meet the threat.
Aboard the ships, where the troops were informed of their objective during the journey, months of training came down to the small hours of the morning of Nov. 8, D-Day for Operation Torch.
Some men approached the hour with dread. Cpl. John Moglia of the 1st Infantry Division later recalled that a friend, "Smitty," handed him two cigars.
"Tomorrow I die," he told Moglia. "Promise me that when things quiet down you'll smoke one for me."
In the dim pre-dawn hours, in thousands of squads and platoons, GIs sat among their gear - the new Garand M-1 rifle, bandoliers of ammunition, canteens, trench knife, gas mask, steel helmet - and waited for the loudspeaker to call their unit number.
"Serial 123, muster at sally port No. 1."
"Serial 124, muster at sally port No. 2. ..."
Then out, down into their landing boats, and off toward the shadowy hulk in the distance, Africa. Soon Smitty and hundreds of others would be dead.
For Eisenhower, the Atlantic surf off Morocco remained a deep concern until the end. The weather report on Nov. 7 was bleak, but when the hour came for the landing the seas were reported satisfactory, and the Western Task Force, commanded by his old friend Maj. Gen. George S. Patton, headed for the beaches at three spots south and north of Casablanca.
Torch was the greatest amphibious assault to that point in the greatest war in history, staged over almost 1,000 miles of coastline. Both American performance and French resistance varied from landing zone to landing zone.
At 4:30 a.m., two American destroyers cruised into the Moroccan port of Safi, carrying a small Army vanguard entrusted with seizing the important harbor. But one destroyer promptly ran aground and the other smashed into a pier. The two rifle companies, shaken up, scrambled ashore to begin long hours of fighting against French army positions.
Near Oran, Algeria, where the Center Task Force under Maj. Gen. Lloyd R. Fredendall came ashore, a landing barge disembarked a general's jeep too early, into 8 feet of water. A paratrooper unit, meanwhile, missed its objective, a French airfield, by 35 miles.
But most of the landings took place according to plan, and the Americans encountered some stiff resistance from the French, although the outdated French equipment and poorly trained troops soon began to fall before the invaders.
Divided French feelings were obvious at Oran, where a French motor launch roamed the harbor firing a machine gun at wounded Americans in the water, while other Frenchmen in rowboats were trying to rescue the GIs.
The Allied task proved easiest in the easternmost area, around Algiers, where the U.S. 34th Infantry Division and the British 1st Army came ashore. The French surrendered on the first day.
The resistance was toughest in Morocco. Up and down that coast, French shore batteries opened up on the invaders. The French battleship Jean Bart dueled with the battleship USS Massachusetts in Casablanca harbor, and lost. At Port Lyautey, north of Casablanca, the French held out at the Kasba fortress and even launched an armored counterattack against the Americans.
Giraud was brought to Algiers to order the French to cease fire across North Africa, but he was ignored. The French generals let it be known that they would respect only a "legal" order from Vichy.
Eisenhower had put his money on the wrong horse. But by chance the right one, Vichy armed forces chief Adm. Jean Darlan, was trapped by the invasion in Algeria, where he was visiting his ill son.
Clark, Eisenhower's emissary, quickly negotiated with the opportunistic Darlan, who on Nov. 10 ordered the French military to cooperate with the invaders, in exchange for an Allied pledge not to interfere with the Vichyites' internal administration of the territories. In the end, Darlan did not administer long. He was assassinated by a French "patriot" on Dec. 24 and replaced by Giraud.
The French in Casablanca agreed to the armistice Nov. 11, just as Patton was readying an all-out assault on the city by his 2nd Armored Division. Elsewhere in Algeria and Morocco, the last fighting subsided Nov. 12.
In four days of sporadic combat, the Allies had lost 860 men killed or missing.
The Germans, meanwhile, were airlifting troops from Sicily into Tunisia, to transform that French colony into an Axis bastion at the rear of Rommel's Afrika Korps, then in a slow retreat through Libya.
The swift French capitulation left the Torch commanders with a dilemma. The way was now open to Tunisia, but they would have to race eastward before the Germans could build up their forces there. And the Allied supply lines, dependent on clogged North African ports, probably could not keep up.
The British 1st Army seized the moment, leapfrogging east by sea, by parachute drop and overland into Tunisia, and colliding with German patrols 60 miles west of Tunis. By Nov. 28, advancing through towns littered with land mines, the British stood just 12 miles outside Tunis. Then winter intervened.
The primitive road and rail system of supply, already overwhelmed, was further choked off by rain and mud. The British lost much of their air cover when conditions shut down forward Allied airfields. The Germans, meanwhile, had taken over two all-weather French airfields in Tunisia. In early December, the Germans counterattacked with tanks and Stuka dive bombers, and forced the British back.
Eisenhower wanted one final push before winter took full hold. But after touring the front, and observing a motorcycle become hopelessly mired in the mud, the American commander called off the planned attack on Christmas Eve. The Allies would go on the defensive for the winter.
Rommel flew to Germany to tell Hitler it was time to pull out of North Africa. But an angry Fuehrer refused and sent the Desert Fox back to his command.
And back to debacle. Within four months, powerfully reinforced Allied units were rolling across Tunisia's springtime plain, squeezing German and Italian troops into an ever-tighter pocket. Eventually, an Axis army of 240,000 surrendered.
The vise, Operation Torch, had closed. The green, unsure GIs of November now spoke confidently of marching into Rome, Paris, Berlin. But the first stride in their long march through Europe would have to be taken across the sea, to the shores of Sicily, and that was a 200-mile step into the unknown.

 

End of Document
