

A Bird's Eye View of the Battlefield
The Associated Press
June 22, 1993, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 721 words
Byline: By TINA SUSMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOGADISHU, Somalia
Body




As U.N. forces assaulted the headquarters of Mohamed Farrah Aidid, Daniel Dotson steered his Cobra attack helicopter through a storm of sniper fire before getting the go-ahead to blast enemy targets with precise TOW missiles.
The first missile misfired. So did two more, whirling out of control over the brawling city June 17 as the 30-year-old Apple Valley, Calif., native watched helplessly from 200 feet above.
Dotson, an Army chief warrant officer, returned to base thinking his day was done. Three misfires was more than any pilot should have to live with in a single day.
But minutes later he was ordered back into the air to assist ground troops under counterattack from Aidid's forces.
The Army's Cobras haven't been used in inner-city combat since the Vietnam War.
U.N. spokesmen said 11 TOWs were fired during the assault on Aidid's compound, including Dotson's three misfires. All remaining TOWs in the U.S. Army's arsenal in Mogadishu were replaced with newer models and an investigation was launched into the mishaps.
The Cobra seats two, a pilot and a gunner. Dotson sometimes flies the Cobra from the back, but that day he was up front in the gunner's position. Imagine being strapped into a Volkswagen Beetle with a helmet on your head and your torso wrapped in a 2-inch-thick vest of ceramic and steel.
He aimed his TOWs through a viewfinder at about chest level, accessible only by bending his cramped body forward and keeping his head still enough to peer through an eyepiece the size of a quarter.
Complicating his task was a cacophony of gunfire and explosions, a roller-coaster ride of dips and circles, and the stress of knowing that dozens of lives depended on his ability to keep tiny cross-hairs focused on a target while a missile screamed toward it.
"It's horrible. The worst thoughts go through your mind," said Chief Warrant Officer Tom Somers, 32, of Kerhonkson, N.Y. On June 14, Somers fired a TOW missile that went astray and landed in a city street, injuring several civilians.
Dotson said he wasn't told where his misfired TOWs landed.
One may have flown into the compound of a French humanitarian agency, killing a Somali employee and injuring seven others. Journalists found a 6-foot hole and the remains of the weapon at the site.
Somers and Dotson are part of the 380-member Army task force assigned to provide aerial reconnaisance over the city and backup firepower when needed. All are from the 10th Mountain Division at Fort Drum, N.Y.
Dubbed the "Eyes over Mog," they buzz over the city day and night in a fleet of Cobras, Scouts, Deltas and Blackhawks that slice the air like giant bugs in dizzying loops and spins designed to thwart ground fire.
Perhaps the toughest jobs belong to those in the Scouts and Deltas, unarmed delicate-looking machines used as low-flying lures. The Cobras move in for the kill.
The method is necessary in Mogadishu, where congestion and the urban landscape make it virtually impossible to use the Blackhawks' deadly but imprecise M60 heavy machine guns.
When U.N. forces moved against Aidid on June 17, the Blackhawks were first in the air. Within minutes, Lt. Col. Russ Forshag, the task force commander, requested permission to use Cobras to lessen the chance of civilian deaths.
Even then, the Cobras often had to pass over targets several times before getting close enough to identify an enemy and get a clear shot.
"The Somalis are very good spectators," said Forshag. "Even those not involved in battle are up close watching what's going on."
Pilots like Somers, Dotson, and the task force's senior pilot, Chief Warrant Officer Edward G. Morris of Camden, Wyoming, undergo nearly a year of specialized training before qualifying to fly attack helicopters. They must have perfect vision without corrective lenses and be able to clearly distinguish all colors.
Those who flew in the Persian Gulf War say the conditions in Mogadishu don't compare with the relative ease of a desert landscape.
"Saudi Arabia was a straight-out war. Once the gun pilots crossed into Iraq, it was a free-fire zone. Friendly forces were very clearly marked," said Morris.
In Mogadishu, where militiamen don't wear uniforms and often mingle in innocent crowds, finding the enemy is a nightmare. "It's more like waiting for the target to locate you, and that's how we find the target," he said.

 

End of Document
