

A Brief Look at the Problems in the Horn of Africa
The Associated Press
September 28, 1992, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 326 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Here is a country-by-country outline of the drought and refugee crisis in the Horn of Africa:
SOMALIA - Driven by anarchy and hunger, many of Somalia's 6 million people are on the move. Experts say that is a big reason so many of them are dying. Relief agencies are trying to deliver food directly to villages rather than focusing on centralized aid camps. The idea is to keep people at home rather than waste their energy in desperate, often fruitless, searches for food. Most camps for Somalis outside their country have well-organized operations by now, but the problem is overwhelming. More than 300,000 Somalis are sheltering in Kenya, 400,000 in Ethiopia.
ETHIOPIA - An estimated 1.5 million Ethiopians died during the civil war that ousted a Marxist government in 1991 and from drought and forced relocations of people that overwhelmed the relief system. In addition to caring for 400,000 Somali refugees, Ethiopia's struggling young government must see to hundreds of thousands of its own people displaced first by the civil war and then the unrest in neighboring Somalia. In the Ogaden, nomads afflicted by three years of drought have become wards of relief agencies.
SUDAN - Nobody knows how many people died in a horrendous drought in western Sudan in 1984. By 1988, five years after civil war began, deprivation forced hundreds of thousands of people to abandon their homes to seek food. At least 250,000 Sudanese died; some Western relief workers put the figure at 500,000. Both government and rebels have used food as a weapon, barring shipments for political reasons. Relief planes have been shot down, river convoys, trucks and trains attacked.
KENYA - In little over a year, Kenya's refugee population has skyrocketed from 14,000 to almost 400,000, mostly because of anarchy in Somalia. At the same time, severe drought over wide areas of northern and eastern Kenya have put many Kenyan nomads, mainly ethnic Somalis, in peril for the first time.

 

End of Document
