

A Day Into the Non-Invasion, Haitians Teeter Between Hope and Fear
The Associated Press
September 20, 1994, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 916 words
Byline: By MORT ROSENBLUM, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti
Body




One day into the non-invasion, Haitians went about their usual business: making money in unlikely ways, going to school, instilling terror or quietly starving to death.
"Everything here is peaceful, calm, and you must tell the world that," a leading tour operator enjoined a journalist client, adding: "Don't you dare mention my name."
In a society that has always moved to the sound of its own drums, the American landing is still a backbeat many Haitians barely hear.
New hope is marbled with old fear and a nagging suspicion that a brief occupation by foreign troops will not be enough to change things.
"I got a good night's sleep," said Olivia Celestin, 63, laying out her piles of corn, peas and spices at the Iron Market in the heart of Port-au-Prince. "Maybe we'll have some peace in Haiti."
Still, the moldering market - normally a throbbing warren - was all but deserted. Most vendors and customers were still holed up with out-of-town relatives waiting for the dust to settle.
Not far away at the port, where American ships unloaded troops and supplies, at least 500 angry Haitians gathered to grieve the death of a man beaten to death in a scuffle during a demonstration.
Most uniforms have melted away. Even sentries at the Croix de Bouquet army post outside of Port-au-Prince have changed into jeans and the T-shirts with messages like, "Virginia is for Lovers."
But thousands of young "attaches," in mirror shades and armed to the teeth, lurk in the shadows awaiting events, an eerie reminder of the "technicals" who bedeviled U.S. Marines in Somalia.
On nighttime television, the same old notices announce children's choir concerts, lottery winners and jobs for computer programmers. But a new message creeps across the bottom of the screen:
"Soon a multilateral force will land. Remain calm. This is not an invasion but rather a force to help in delivering humanitarian aide and bring a better life. U.S. Information Service."
In the fetid slums of Port-au-Prince and the dirt-poor interior, however, few families have television sets or even the power to run one. Haitians have learned long ago to trust only what they see.
"I don't expect a major impact on the humanitarian situation," said Chris Sykes of CARE, the largest of voluntary agencies that feed about a million children in this nation of 7 million.
A sampling of opinions suggests the mixed mood leans toward optimism. Haitians who elected President Jean-Bertrand Aristide in 1991 are anxious to have him back after three years of exile.
And many of those who mistrust Aristide and some fanatics who support him are relieved at the prospect of enforced calm.
"I did not hear a single gunshot last night," said France Charles, sitting alone by the dusty machines in his copy shop on the Rue des Miracles. "I believe democracy will return, and we will be the pearl of the Caribbean."
Down the street, a car-parts merchant who was afraid to be named had a different view.
"To be an optimistic you have to see something that shows a change for the better," he said. "We see nothing. We see Clinton arranging his own problems and leaving Haiti in a mess."
In the skies above Port-au-Prince and Cap-Haitien in the north, Black Hawk helicopters swarm like ravens. Massive C-5A transports head for runways long closed to commercial flights.
Down below, it is the same Haiti, the nation which won freedom by humiliating Napoleon, the place where novelist Graham Greene put a dead minister in the Hotel Oloffson swimming pool.
Three years of a strict embargo has increased malnutrition and turned the economy on its ear, but the Haitian beat goes on.
Gas stations are empty museums, but on a short strip known as Kuwait City black marketeers pump smuggled fuel out of steel drums, as carefully as bartenders drawing beer. It costs $ 10 a gallon.
Steel shutters are locked along the capital's main streets, but business thrives out front. Vendors sell Johnny Walker Red Label scotch at $ 40 a bottle. One offers a piece de resistance: kosher Manischewitz red concord at $ 25.
Nassim Mourra, a Haitian of Palestinian descent, has not closed his boutique stocked with electronics, silver ice tongs and Christian Dior socks. His Opium perfume is cheaper than at Paris airport duty-free shops.
During Aristide's brief reign, he said, mobs smashed his windows three times.
"We have never had such good military leaders as now," he said. "This is the safest country in the world. Sure, we have a few bodies in the street, but that is everywhere. Look at the United States."
A woman who sells pharmaceuticals, also reluctant to be named in fear of those attaches, reflected a more prevalent view.
"We are a proud people and do not like foreign intervention," she said. "But we reached a point where something had to happen. All those deaths, overnight terror. I hope it can change."
Americans or not, people are still scrambling to leave.
On Monday, 98 Haitians were bused to the Dominican Republic on their way to the United States, the regular twice-weekly exodus. In the last three years, 63,000 have applied as political refugees. So far, 1,400 have been accepted.
Safely over the border, they sat on benches in their Sunday best, fathers clutching documents and kids sitting upright, too afraid to fidget.
"We had nothing, we were dying there ..." one young man began to say.
Suddenly, immigration officials approached, and he stopped in mid-sentence. He stared ahead, ignoring further questions, in terror that something might cause him to be sent back across.
 Load-Date: September 20, 1994

 

End of Document
