

A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Gulf
The Associated Press
January 24, 1991, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 328 words
Byline: By RICK HAMPSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Five months ago a photograph of a flag-waving Marine boarding a transport ship became an international symbol of American readiness for war with Iraq. But a funny thing happened to Lance Cpl. Bill Sherwin on the way to the Persian Gulf: He wound up in Liberia.
"He never actually made it to the gulf," his mother Barbara said Thursday from the family's home in Chester, N.Y. "After he shipped out he changed ships in the Atlantic and went to protect the embassy in Liberia."
On Aug. 7, The Associated Press distributed a photo of Sherwin, who was based in Camp Lejeune, N.C., boarding the troop ship Nashville. In one hand he held a machine gun, in the other two small flags - the Stars and Stripes and the tricolor of the Irish Republic.
The photo appeared on the cover of the Economist magazine and on the front pages of newspapers in Paris, Dublin, New York, Los Angeles, Chicago, Philadelphia and Baltimore.
Sherwin was ordered to head for west Africa, where he and other Marines had to duck the crossfire of rival factions.
Meanwhile, the photo of his departure had made him a celebrity in absentia.
Each day the mailbox outside the Sherwin family home northwest of New York City was stuffed with clips and notes sent by family, friends and strangers. They learned about relatives they didn't know they had, including the chairman of the Fianna Fail party in Ireland.
His parents gave many interviews, but turned down an appearance on a syndicated talk show. "The moment is our son's, not ours," Mrs. Sherwin told The Irish Voice at the time.
A copy of a front page with Sherwin's photo even found its way aboard the Nashville. He got a lot of ribbing, but the next day his sergeant said, "Good morning, Bill!"
"Bill said it was the first time a sergeant ever called him by his first name," recalled his father, Robert.
Now Sherwin is in the Mediterranean, and his parents are worried that he may yet wind up in battle. "But so are a million other parents," his father said.

 

End of Document
