

A Mid-Century Institution Creaks Toward the 21st
 The Associated Press
October 24, 1995, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 731 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Fifty years later, the U.N. "Class of '95" outshines the "Class of '45" in many ways. It's triple the size, richer, more diverse. It flies supersonically, communicates instantaneously, cooperates on the environment, hunger, human rights.
But today's 185 U.N. member-states still work with the creaking machinery of mid-century. And the makeover that's overdue for the 21st century looks a long way off.
Many governments believe the traditional powers here - the United States and four others with the Security Council veto - will slow reform.
These "status quo" powers "might be able to delay the necessary strengthening and renewal of the U.N.," Sweden's prime minister, Ingvar Carlsson, told reporters on Monday, the second day of the three-day anniversary extravaganza.
Two years ago, diplomats were suggesting the 50th anniversary gathering of presidents and premiers would be an ideal time to modernize the U.N. structure. But the final declaration being adopted today calls only vaguely for expanding the Security Council and strengthening the Economic and Social Council.
So the diplomats now are deftly twisting their phrase, to say the 50th has become a fine time to begin "reform."
In Washington, "reform" of the world organization largely means shutting down U.N. agencies and trimming a "bloated" bureaucracy.
But to most world leaders, it means redesigning the institution to reflect the realities of the "Class of '95." That means getting to the heart of the Security Council, the U.N. "board of directors" that authorizes peacekeeping missions, economic sanctions and even wars - like the 1991 Persian Gulf conflict.
The 1945 model provided for 11 Council members - more than 20 percent of the original U.N. membership of 51. That was later expanded to 15. But the most important number remained at five - those who were permanent members, with veto power, the ability to block critical action.
Now, as then, the "Permanent Five" are the five victorious allies of World War II - the United States, Russia, Britain, France and China.
But times have changed: The British and French have slipped into the second rank of world powers. Germany and Japan have surged to the top. Such onetime colonies as India, Nigeria and South Korea have become major international players. U.N. membership has exploded.
Still, the "holy of holies," as one African president called it here, remains the same: The same five have the final word in the most powerful U.N. body.
"Crucial decisions affecting the destiny of mankind are made by a handful of countries," Prime Minister Khaleda Zia, representing the 120 million people of Bangladesh, complained in her anniversary speech Monday.
A consensus has emerged that Japan and Germany should be made permanent council members. Their enhanced role would probably lead to greater financial support from those two countries.
But then the "reform" argument begins.
The developing world wants some of its major players to become permanent members. But which? Brazil, Nigeria and India to represent three regions? Or a rotating system, anointing various Third World governments for limited periods?
And will the Third Worlders - or, for that matter, Germany and Japan - be endowed with veto power? And should the ability to veto be limited, even for the United States?
Two years ago, a U.N. working group was set up to study these questions. Last January, a summit of the 15 Security Council members was to make authoritative statements on the Council's future, but it was canceled at the last minute. Last month, the working group reported that "important differences continue to exist on key issues." Now, the 50th anniversary has arrived, with no decision.
The vice chairman of the working group, Finnish U.N. Ambassador Fredrik Breitenstein, said Monday he now has a "personal time frame" for a decision: the end of 1996.
But that's beginning to look optimistic, and his working group doesn't even deal with the rest of a U.N. structure that may reflect 19th-century power blocs more than 21st-century realities.
Sweden's Carlsson, a crusader for structural reform, advises patience. But "it's important to have the 50th anniversary as a starting point," he said. "If not, I think it may take many years."
 
 ---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Charles J. Hanley, an AP Special Correspondent based in New York, has reported on international events for The Associated Press since 1976.
 Load-Date: October 24, 1995

 

End of Document
