

A New Arab Battle: Is It Time To Let Iraq Back Into the Fold?
The Associated Press
January 11, 1995, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 572 words
Byline: By SALAH NASRAWI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




Nearly four years after the Gulf War divided Arab nations, the Arabs are embroiled in a new battle over whether it's time to forgive President Saddam Hussein and let Iraq back into the fold.
With Egyptian backing, Arab League chief Esmat Abdel-Meguid is trying to convene an Arab summit to achieve reconciliation with beleaguered Iraq.
Baghdad hopes the move will help break its international isolation and end the oil and economic embargo imposed by the U.N. Security Council after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in August 1990.
The Security Council is scheduled to discuss the sanctions Thursday. Not surprisingly, Kuwait is the chief opponent.
But other Arab nations see reviving Iraq's role as necessary when political changes are giving more sway to Israel and fears are growing that Iran wants to reassert its power in the Gulf region.
"It is clearer than ever before that the only power that would be able to face the Iranian regime would be Iraq," said Labib Kamhawi, a political science professor at the University of Jordan.
Egypt, a chief opponent of Iraq in the Gulf War, is now the main backer of Arab reconciliation. Its troops fought with the U.S.-led force that drove Iraq from Kuwait in the war that erupted Jan. 17, 1991. But now that it faces a rebellion at home by Muslim radicals, Egypt worries about fundamentalist Iran.
Thus it has been praising Iraq's recognition of Kuwait's sovereignty. Last month, President Hosni Mubarak organized a mini-Arab summit with Saudi Arabia and Syria, urging the Arabs to depart "from the fallout of the Gulf War."
"As Arabs we should not remain divided forever," he told the daily Al-Akhbar. "The Arab ranks should be united again in order to protect our national security."
Abdel-Meguid, the Arab League secretary-general, said 14 countries among the league's 22 members support holding an Arab summit.
Still, the oil-rich Saudis and Kuwaitis think it's too early for such a meeting. Kuwait insists that Iraq first free 600 Kuwaiti prisoners - many of whom are believed to have been killed.
"Iraq which is internationally isolated is trying to open a hole in the wall. Talking with Iraq at this time has no political value," Kuwaiti columnist Mohammed al-Rumaihi wrote recently.
But the Egyptian stance had some echoes even among Kuwait's Gulf allies such as Oman, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates.
"We should extend the bridges of care for Iraq, whose people are suffering. We should not forget our history and pan-Arabism," U.A.E. Defense Minister Sheik Mohammed bin Rashed al-Maktoum said this week.
For all the sympathy for the 19 million Iraqis - they are suffering grinding poverty - the U.A.E. and other Gulf countries are motivated more by fear of Iran. On the other side, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia oppose Iraq's re-entry into the oil market when production already is high and prices are low.
Whatever the arguments, the Egyptian writer Mohamed Hassanein Heikal, who often best catches the trend in Arab politics, said he fears Iraq's revival "is now out of the Arabs' hands."
Indeed, Western powers are arguing the issue at the United Nations. France and Russia, one of Iraq's major trading partners, want sanctions eased. The United States and Britain say no.
The United States maintains Iraq must first fulfill all U.N. demands - especially not making weapons for a new war. But the Arabs believe Washington's real intent in keeping sanctions intact is to see Saddam toppled from power.
 Load-Date: January 11, 1995

 

End of Document
