

A Novel Way To Get Carter The Nobel Prize
The Associated Press
December 23, 1994, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 642 words
Byline: By JIM LITKE, AP Sports Writer
Body




When it was first proposed, sending Jimmy Carter to mediate the baseball strike sounded like sending George Foreman to school to deal with the bully that was bothering your kid.
Let's talk overqualified. Even before the former president ventured into Bosnia, he sweated out a hostage crisis in Iran, squeezed out a peace treaty between centuries-old enemies in Israel and Egypt, and smoothed out negotiations between the United States and belligerent dictators in North Korea and Haiti.
Some people would argue that even those experiences have not prepared Carter for the hostility he'll face if he finds himself wedged between the players and owners. But the more you think about it, the more this could out turn out to be a win-win situation.
Having dealt with despots and troublemakers the world over, and having played for much higher stakes, Carter might just bring enough patience and prestige to crack baseball's hardheads wide open. And as a practical matter, he could save them a lot of cash and not a little pain in the bargain.
And Carter's reward? That's a little tougher. Considering his past peacemaking accomplishments, making peace between the players and owners is not likely to nab the Nobel Prize that has eluded him in the past. Then again, if the voters take into account how quarrelsome, greedy, spiteful and downright contemptible this set of players and owners is, you never know …
In any case, the first hurdle Carter faces is getting himself assigned to the case. Several hours before the owners declared an impasse and imposed their salary cap, he called both union leader Don Fehr and acting commissioner Bud Selig to offer his services.
Both men remained noncommittal early today. But as in most matters related to the strike, the players' side sounded more receptive than the owners' to exploring another new avenue.
"He is very gracious," Fehr said from the site of the broken-down talks in Washington.
"I think it is a compliment to him and something we're very appreciative of. Obviously we'll evaluate it and try to come to some conclusions."
Reached at his home in Milwaukee, Selig said, "I had a very constructive and very pleasant chat with President Carter." But, he added at the time, "We are in mediation right now."
Technically, that's no longer true.
Bill Usery, dispatched to the talks by President Clinton, was considered one the best in the business. Carter acknowledged as much in a statement: "We realize that there is a superb mediator providing his services, and we have full confidence that maximum efforts are already being made."
But the statement went on to say the former president "would be willing to assist only if the present attempt to reach an agreement between the players and owners is likely to be abandoned."
We've arrived at that juncture. The preliminaries are over and the only people with the meters still running are the lawyers. Having abandoned negotiations, litigation and legislation are the only routes left open. Both will prove considerably more costly.
When the National Labor Relations Board sided with the players against the owners in the first two complaints resulting from the 4-month-old strike, Atlanta Braves president Stan Kasten's response was arrogance.
"Being 0-2 in exhibition games doesn't bother me, and 0-2 at the complaint stage doesn't bother me," Kasten said. "We are ready to move forward."
They owners did, as his colleague, management negotiator John Harrington made a point of saying, at "12:01 a.m. EST, Dec. 23, 1994."
Someone had better turn them back toward the table, and soon.
The more you think about it, the more Carter seems like that someone. The differences between the players and owners never seemed greater to most of us than they do at this moment. But they still must look tiny compared to some of the gulfs Carter has crossed to get a handshake in the past.
 Load-Date: December 23, 1994

 

End of Document
