

A Year After the Massacres, Rwandans Bury their Dead
The Associated Press
April 7, 1995, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 658 words
Byline: By KARIN DAVIES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: REBERO HILL, Rwanda
Body




They walked for miles up a long, dusty road, then stood silently under a blazing sun. They stood, too, in the downpour that followed, through speeches that lasted for more than seven hours.
It was time to bury the dead.
The remains of thousands of people were reburied Friday at a memorial service held for the 500,000 or more Rwandans who died in the ethnic massacres that began last April 7 and continued for three months.
Bodies were laid to rest, but Rwandans were left with their anger that, a year later, the killers remain unpunished.
"We shall look for these people, whether inside the country or outside the country," said Vice President Paul Kagame, drawing applause. "They must be held accountable, there is no doubt about that."
Kagame also said Rwandans "must be able to understand this sickness" that tore apart their country. "I think it's up to us, all of us … to make sure … that nothing ever happens again like this."
At least 10,000 survivors of the civil war attended the service atop Kigali's highest hill, Rebero.
The gathering was as much a protest as a funeral. Mourners carried protest signs and banners, and wore T-shirts with slogans that showed their anger at the slaughter and the failure of both their government and the international community to punish those responsible.
"To do nothing about the genocide diminishes all of us," said one sign. "Justice delayed is justice denied."
"We need to bury the dead, not to bury the truth," said one T-shirt. The Tutsi who wore it, a man who gave his name only as John, was mourning the loss of his aunt and 11 other relatives.
Their remains may have been among those of an estimated 6,000 bodies that were exhumed from makeshift, wartime graves and placed in 200 plain wooden coffins for reburial at a new cemetery on Rebero Hill.
Purple cloths lay atop the coffins, and on them, green wreaths with lilies and sweetly scented bougainvillea woven in.
One grave was designated to symbolize all those who died in the genocide.
Among those reburied were 13 people whose remains had been identified, including former Prime Minister Agathe Uwiliyingimana and other cabinet ministers, as well former opposition leaders.
Flags flew at half-staff Friday, and there was a moment of silence at the memorial.
"It is a terrible waste of life, of talent, of hope," said Egide Muzunbu, whose friend and leader of the Liberal Party, Landoald Ndasingwa, was killed along with his Canadian wife, Helene Pinsky, and their family.
The slaughter began April 7, 1994, just hours after the death of President Juvenal Habyarimana in a plane crash the night before.
The massacres, many with machetes, were carefully planned by extremists within the former Hutu government, mostly against minority Tutsis but also moderate Hutus.
No one knows how many people died. Some U.N. aid agencies estimate as many as a million perished. The government says it was more. The brutality ended when the Rwandan Patriotic Front, a Tutsi-led rebel group, overthrew the government in July.
"Never should the world have allowed such a tragedy, never should the perpetrators of such crimes be permitted to get away with impunity," U.N. Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali said in a message read by his representative, Shaharyar Khan.
"The task of reconstruction and reconciliation are formidable and demanding, but we must intensify our efforts to that end. This effort would the most fitting and enduring tribute that we can pay in the memory of those who lost their lives."
Roman Catholic, Protestant and Muslim leaders pleaded for reconciliation and peace, while Rwandan leaders said the massacre must not be forgotten.
"Today is a new beginning. There are some people, Hutus in general, who want the genocide to be forgotten. We have to fight against that," said Veniste Karambizi, a foreign office official.
"This is the third time of genocide in Rwanda's history. If we do not remember what happened this time, there will be a fourth."
 Load-Date: April 8, 1995

 

End of Document
