

A Year After the Slaughter, Rwanda Tries Six for Ethnic Killing
The Associated Press
April 6, 1995, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 515 words
Byline: By KARIN DAVIES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KIGALI, Rwanda
Body




A year after Rwandans started killing each other in a tide of bloodletting that didn't stop until at least 500,000 people were dead, five men and a teen-age boy went on trial Thursday for genocide.
Dressed in dirty pink prison clothes, their faces were etched with fear as prosecutor Silas Munyagishali read the murder charges against them. They are among 30,000 people, mostly majority Hutus, the government has imprisoned on suspicion of systematic acts of genocide against the minority Tutsi people.
Those blamed for organizing the slaughter have not yet been brought to trial.
After a 45-minute hearing Thursday, the three-judge panel granted an unspecified delay in the trial because the prosecutor said he needed more time to investigate the cases against the five adults, as did a lawyer representing the youngest defendant, a 17-year-old boy.
Dozens of onlookers crammed into the back of the capital's Nyamirambo courtroom, anxious to see the men prosecuted.
"They should kill all of them … because they killed our parents and our brothers," said Ahmed Jamil, a 21-year-old man born in Uganda to Rwandan Tutsis who fled ethnic hatred in the 1960s. "The people cannot forgive."
The crowd cheered as the accused were loaded into the back of a green pickup guarded by three soldiers and driven back to Kigali's central prison.
The massacres, blamed mostly on Hutu militias backed by the former Hutu regime, began last April 7, just hours after the death of President Juvenal Habyarimana in a mysterious plane crash.
The slaughter ended with the Tutsi-led rebel Rwandan Patriot Front victory in July.
On trial Thursday were Christian Bigidimano, Stanislav Hitimana, Musoro Ndura, Murekarubanze, Patrice Munyazikuwi, and the youngest, Nkulikiyingoma Ngomayubu.
The adults face life in prison or the death penalty. The boy faces 20 years inprisonment.
The 17-year-old Hutu is charged with killing six people and throwing them into a river in his hometown of Gitarama.
Theophile Kazeneza is defending the boy on behalf of UNICEF, a job he admits is risky because most of his fellow Tutsis don't believe the defendants deserve a trial.
"But it is a risk that must be taken in the cause of justice," Kazeneza said.
No one has agreed to defend the others.
The opening of the trial - the first since the civil war - was beset by difficulties. First, the truck that was to deliver the accused from prison broke down, then the military expressed concern about security at the bullet-pockmarked courthouse.
But Francoise Bouchet Saulnier, legal advisor for the Paris-based aid group Doctors With Borders, said the real problem was that the Rwandan judicial system was destroyed by the war.
Many judges were killed or fled and those who remain "are working in a very lonely place and in a terrible atmosphere," she said.
Most of all, judges need a guarantee that they are immune from punishment.
One Kigali judge disappeared after freeing 40 Hutus from prison for lack of evidence and two who were denounced following unpopular decisions are now imprisoned.
"Justice cannout flourish in a place like this," Saulnier said.
 Load-Date: April 6, 1995

 

End of Document
