

Africans Choose to Disbelieve the Bad News About AIDS
The Associated Press
December 2, 1993, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 888 words
Byline: By AMBA DADSON
Dateline: ABIDJAN, Ivory Coast
Body




The news about AIDS is bad. But even on World AIDS Day, the message didn't seem to be getting through to one small West African nation. And, in the Ivory Coast, AIDS is the single biggest killer of adults.
Take the case of Salimata Guindo. A year ago, she learned that she, her boyfriend and their 4-month-old son were infected with the AIDS virus. Even after months of counseling, she says she still doesn't understand how the disease spreads.
Or Marguerite Attoumou, who says she uses condoms only occasionally, although she and her boyfriend carry the virus and she knows he has sex with other women.
"It's a problem of belief. People are not really convinced it exists," said Attoumou, a 25-year-old hairdresser.
That general disbelief, incredible on a continent where more than half the world's AIDS carriers live, where AIDS has wiped out entire villages and where up to 90 percent of prostitutes in some cities are infected, was underlined last week in another African nation, Cameroon.
Legislators who assembled there for a special AIDS education session flatly said they did not believe a woman who told them that she, her husband and their three children were infected with the virus.
Repeating an argument that has blinded many African leaders to the magnitude of the AIDS problem, the lawmakers insisted that diarrhea and easily preventable diseases like measles kill more children on the continent each year than AIDS.
In Zaire, a frightening figure was announced Wednesday by the Program for the Fight Against AIDS. It predicted that AIDS would kill 2 million Zairians in 2004, a single year barely a decade away. The central African nation has a population of 38 million.
The African Development Bank, with headquarters in Abidjan, estimates more than 7.5 million Africans are infected with the AIDS virus and that 1.2 million Africans have already died of AIDS. In seven years time, the bank estimated, 14 million sub-Saharan Africans will be infected.
For perspective, the United States reported 35,341 AIDS deaths in 1992 (204,391 since the disease was detected a decade ago) and estimates that 1 million Americans are HIV-positive.
Here in Abidjan, Guindo and Attoumou go regularly to the Medical and Social Assistance Center, an AIDS counseling clinic funded by the Church of Christ of the United States. Infected people are shown video tapes, graphic charts and pamphlets and discuss their predicament in groups with counselors and translators. Most of the patients are poorly educated and have no prior sex education.
But clinic doctors who overheard the women's interviews with a reporter expressed disappointment at how little they had learned after almost a year's counseling.
It is a sign of dangerous ignorance and indifference in a country that "within the next seven years is going to become a mass graveyard of AIDS patients," according to chief counselor Dr. Mark Ottenweller, who gave up a private practice in Atlanta to open the Abidjan clinic.
The U.N. World Health Organization acknowledges that lethargy about AIDS has stricken many countries. Its slogan for World AIDS Day on Wednesday was "Time to Act," an appeal that, in Africa at least, seems to be going unheard.
"The AIDS message seems to have lost steam," says Abidjan pharmacist Yeboua Konan, who notes that the national AIDS commission no longer brings around posters to drug stores.
Television spots, which included condom ads, educational pitches and an AIDS song by a popular singer, stopped months ago. Because government workers have not been paid since September, calls to the national AIDS hotline go unanswered.
Paul Mette, director of Hope, a U.S. government-funded AIDS support organization in Abidjan, said initial efforts to reach people were too shocking.
"When people saw the AIDS images on TV, they just turned them off. People even stopped coming for tests because they just don't want to know," Mette says.
Recent figures indicate about 12 percent of the Ivory Coast's population of 12 million now tests positive for the AIDS virus, but the actual figure is believed to be higher because few people go to hospitals for the test.
Guindo, 26, who sells food from a street stall, asserts that AIDS "is a disease spread like other diseases."
Although she and Attoumou have suffered diarrhea, fever and other illnesses worsened by their weakening immune systems, they do not seem to understand that AIDS is going to kill them.
Guindo says she doesn't know how she contracted HIV. And she and her boyfriend do not use condoms, she says, because he would never agree.
African customs and religious taboos forbid the use of condoms. And women's inferior social status and economic dependence leave them open to abuse on a continent where they make up half of the AIDS carriers.
Partly due to such stubborn practices, Africans with AIDS are dying faster than people with AIDS elsewhere, succumbing within four years of contracting the disease compared to 10 years in the developed world.
Konan and some other pharmacists say they've noticed more young women coming in to buy condoms. "Ten years ago, that was unheard of," says Konan.
But pharmacist Awa Bamba, who is in her 30s, said men are not the only ones averse to condoms. "I never use them and never have," she says. "My husband may play around, but I expect him to use them on his other women."
 Load-Date: December 2, 1993

 

End of Document
