

After 25 Years, The Ledger Of Suffering Is Full On Both Sides
The Associated Press
June 8, 1992, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 684 words
Byline: By KARIN LAUB, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BETHLEHEM, Occupied West Bank
Body




When Palestinian Ahlam Wahsh was 15 and in prison for making a firebomb, Israeli inmates broke her nose in revenge for a terrorist attack.
Israeli Yonathan Berger, a reserve army lieutenant, was trapped in a hail of stones in a Gaza Strip refugee camp when he tried to rescue the driver of a stranded army truck.
On the 25th anniversary of Israel's occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip, the ledger of suffering is full, and on both sides, there is a growing sense that something has to change.
The endless violence is driving more Israelis to seek a peaceful separation of the peoples.
Palestinians are asking how much longer they will have to suffer the hardships of occupation, and are worried that their uprising against Israel is beginning to devour itself in a wave of fratricidal killings.
The issue will top the agenda in the June 23 election, in which Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir is promising to tighten Israel's hold on the occupied lands, and the Labor party is pressing for territorial compromise and Palestinian self-rule.
Peace talks over seven months have made minute progress and hard-liners on both sides threaten to sabotage any agreement.
Palestinian negotiators will find it hard to settle for less than the promise of an independent state. And it will take a brave Israeli government to concede territory, let alone permit statehood.
Ms. Wahsh and Berger, who as 26-year-olds know nothing but occupation, fear the next generation may be doomed to more of the same.
"If there is still occupation when my children are grown up, they will be even tougher than my generation," said Ms. Wahsh.
A mother of two from Bethlehem, she began throwing stones at soldiers at age 10 to avenge the death of a cousin by army gunfire, and spent two years in prison for making a firebomb.
Berger, an industrial engineering student at Tel Aviv University, has moral qualms about patrolling the occupied lands, but still believes the task is necessary for Israel's security.
"Only nowadays, when the world has changed and strategic distance is not so important, can you speak about maybe giving up some territories," Berger said.
Others are less yielding. They cannot imagine Israel going back to the old borders, when their country was a morning's jog from sea to frontier.
The war began on June 5, 1967 with an Israeli pre-emptive strike against an Egyptian army massed on its borders. Other Arab armies joined the fighting, and in six days Israel captured the West Bank, the Gaza Strip, the Sinai Desert, Arab east Jerusalem and the Golan Heights.
About 300,000 Palestinians fled during the fighting. Over subsequent years, more than 100,000 Jews moved into the occupied territories.
Jordan, the previous ruler of the West Bank, suppressed Palestinian nationalism. Under Israeli occupation it blossomed. The intefadeh, or uprising, that erupted in December 1987 "produced a national feeling, a unique Palestinian identity," says Palestinian journalist Daoud Kuttab.
While many Palestinians now accept Israel's existence and would settle for a state alongside it, Israelis appear permanently split down the middle about whether to yield territory.
Hard-liners say the land is rightfully Israel's and strategically vital. Liberals say occupation is corroding Israeli society.
After 53 months of daily clashes, more than 930 Palestinians have been killed by troops and civilians, tens of thousands jailed, beaten and wounded, 66 deported. On the other side, 94 Israelis were killed and 5,300 hurt.
Among the 1.7 million Palestinians, few families have been spared the violence. Resentment is also fueled by daily harassment such as random ID checks by troops. And more than 575 Palestinians have been killed by fellow Arabs, mostly for alleged collaboration with the Israelis.
Among Israelis, a recent rash of Palestinian stabbing attacks has heightened calls for a separation of the two peoples.
Still, there are glimpses of hope. Ms. Wahsh said Israeli peace activists arranged plastic surgery for her broken nose.
"I don't hate the Israelis as a people," she said. "We are not the only ones who suffered. They also did."

 

End of Document
