

After The Battle: Green Berets Work To Heal Bodies, Win Minds
The Associated Press
October 17, 1993, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 764 words
Byline: AP Photo LON102, By MICHELLE FAUL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOGADISHU, Somalia
Body




The Green Berets loaded their M-16 rifles and snapped on their flack jackets as they drove out of the U.S. military compound on a mission to heal bodies and win Somali hearts.
"Americo! Americo!" kids yelled as they waved thumbs-up signs along the route, past bombed-out villas and two checkpoints manned by Pakistani tanks.
The soldiers' eyes searched the crowd along a sidewalk lined with stalls, but the only sign of hostility came from a veiled woman who gestured obscenely.
The convoy of eight humvees and a truck pulled into a street in Medina, a haven of security in the southern Mogadishu stronghold of warlord Mohamed Farrah Aidid.
Troops unloaded boxes of medicine, tables, chairs and medical instruments and arranged them in an empty clinic once run by the U.N. Children's Fund. That was before Aidid's guerrillas began targeting foreigners and most humanitarian agencies abandoned the city.
Within 20 minutes, nearly 100 people had gathered outside, mainly women and children.
The opening Saturday was the second time the Berets, officially called the Special Forces, had staffed the clinic since Oct. 3, when Aidid's guerrillas shot down two U.S. helicopters that were on a raiding mission to arrest the clan leader's aides.
Some 400 American, Pakistani and Malaysian soldiers fought about 1,000 Aidid backers in the ensuing nine-hour battle that killed more than 300 Somalis, one Malaysian and 18 Americans. It was the highest U.S. casualty from a ground firefight since Vietnam.
The battle marked a turning point in U.S. policy from concentration on force to a search for peaceful means of settling the conflict. Now that Mogadishu is relatively quiet, the Green Berets have been seizing an opportunity to help the injured - and win friends.
Omar Abdullahi Omar was first in line. A man put the 12-year-old boy down and arranged his withered legs under a tree. Omar was caught in cross-fire by a bullet that tore into his left side and and severed his spinal cord.
"There isn't anything we can do for him, medically," said Sgt. Shawn Alderman, a doctor from Rogers, Minn. "When the civil war broke out between the clans, Omar was one of hundreds of thousands of innocent victims."
But Alderman produced a wheelchair, begged from the 46th U.S. Combat Support Hospital. He gently gathered up the boy and, before putting him into the chair, showed him a sign in Somali written on the back.
It said, "Omar, The Kid."
The young boy, who had looked listless all along, appeared dazed. "America - good," his mother, Nura Ahmed Jimale, said in English. Then she broke into Somali.
"She says Omar will have a new life now," an interpreter explained. "For the past year, he has lain on the floor of their home, incontinent, moved only when they have to clean up his mess."
Last week, the Berets scouted Medina, testing the mood with religious leaders and other elders. They decided the area was not hostile and was secured by anti-Aidid militiamen, who call themselves "the Refusers of Wrong."
Maj. Bill Robinson, who was in charge of the exercise, said it was the type of work he preferred to do.
"The focus on (winning) hearts and minds should have been the focus all along," said Robinson, of Lincolnton, N.C. "You are basically driving a spear into your heart with what we were doing before. And if you keep running into resistance and you keeping going (with force), you just keep driving that spear deeper."
Robinson brought 20 Green Berets to the clinic, but not enough doctors. So he called the Swedish Army hospital. "They wanted to go out, but didn't feel safe, so when we said we'd provide the security, they were delighted to come."
A week before, when the Americans first opened the clinic, they could not persuade any U.N. military doctors to join them.
But tensions are easing since Aidid declared a cease-fire and released two captured peacekeepers, U.S. helicopter pilot Michael Durant and Nigerian Pvt. Umar Shantali.
At the clinic, doctors and medics treated everything from diarrhea to tuberculosis.
Robinson said they hoped that as clan leaders see the benefits of clinics and school-rebuilding projects, they will feel pressure to cooperate with the American troops.
It's hard to feel you have an enemy in someone who's caring for you.
On Saturday, a 24-year-old sergeant from Davenport, Iowa, cleaned and dressed two pus-filled holes in the thigh and stomach of Deeko Abdul Mohammed, 16. She also was caught in the cross-fire.
"I don't know why I'm doing this," said the medic, Mark Rausenberger. "Eventually, that leg will have to be amputated. But maybe this will give her some hope."
 Load-Date: October 17, 1993

 

End of Document
