

After Years Out of the Game, South Africa Facing Stiff Tests
The Associated Press
April 7, 1994, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 803 words
Byline: By TINA SUSMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, South Africa
Body




Stop the world - South Africa wants to get on. But some unpleasant surprises may be waiting when it does.
For decades, while other nations competed in everything from business to sports, South Africa had only itself and a few impoverished neighbors to consider. It wasn't hard to look good.
With sanctions gone and South Africa invited back into the world, its backwardness is showing.
Worker productivity is too low and resulting prices too high for South African industries to challenge the world market. Contracts to print ballots and supply ink for the country's first all-race election this month went to British firms.
Domestic companies that venture into exports - considered crucial to reviving the long-isolated economy - are coming up against European and American quality requirements unheard of at home.
"They're totally naive," said Michael Judin, a South African attorney and director of the American Chamber of Commerce. "Their competition has been restricted to each other in South Africa. Now we're thrown into a global village, and it's going to be - as the Americans say - a whole new ball game."
Lack of experience is not limited to business. From sports to health care, South Africans are being shaken from the delusion created by apartheid rulers that they live in a European-style oasis on a dark continent.
-The United Nations says South Africa's children are among the most deprived in Africa and the world in health care.
-Most households have no plumbing or electricity. Illiteracy is estimated at 50 percent, unemployment at 40 percent.
-The per capita Gross National Product in 1992 was $ 2,670 - great for Africa but minuscule compared to the European giants South Africa wants to emulate.
-The population growth in 1992 was 2.27 percent, more than double that of most first-world nations.
It can take months to get a telephone installed, weeks for a letter to travel 350 miles. Except for sports such as rugby and cricket, dominated by whites who received superior training, South African athletes have performed poorly in world competition.
The African National Congress, the expected winner of the April 26-28 election, supports revamping education and instituting affirmative action to give the black majority the boost it needs to rev up South Africa's engines. It has pressured visiting sports stars and artists to work with blacks to give them an idea of how to compete for lucrative international exposure.
The South African Tourism Board is creating a central training body. With tourism being counted on as a major post-apartheid money source, the country must learn to handle visitors accustomed to five-star treatment elsewhere.
"What we lack in South Africa is a service culture," said Spencer V. Thomas, director of the tourism board.
"Because of … apartheid, the serving aspect in business was always left to black people, so there was a stigma attached to it. Black people couldn't take pride in their jobs because they knew they were the leftovers. What we need is to install a service culture in our industry so people can accept their jobs as important and take pride in them," Thomas said.
The tendency in South Africa's white-dominated business world has been to pay barely livable wages to unskilled workers, who are overwhelmingly black. Whites were virtually guaranteed jobs. The result has been inefficiency from both sides - blacks because they got little in return, whites because they got paid for doing little.
The Transitional Executive Council, a multiracial body which is helping run the country until elections, lamented the situation in a statement looking at the challenge of reducing unemployment.
"At present levels of productivity, it will be impossible to absorb the number of unemployed workers at even a modest living wage," said the TEC.
Judin, the attorney, said, "It's not that there's a lack of intellect or will. But if you don't train a man and give him hope, what can you expect of him?"
One business that has adjusted to international standards is Nu-World Industries, a manufacturer of small electrical appliances.
Company director Jeffrey Goldberg said that to break into the European market, Nu-World upgraded packaging, learned the legal requirements overseas, visited foreign trade fairs, improved training, and kept prices competitive by hiring supervisors and foremen to increase workers' efficiency.
Exports now account for 20 percent of Nu-World's business.
Judin said if more South Africans can shake off the xenophobia ingrained by apartheid and learn from foreign examples, the country should be firmly established in the first world within a couple of years.
He points to the speed at which apartheid was dismantled.
"We came from one of the most horrific regimes … and a few years later look where we stand - on the threshold of a workable democracy."
 Load-Date: April 7, 1994

 

End of Document
