

After Saddam, Profound Changes for the Mideast
The Associated Press
January 24, 1991, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 853 words
Byline: AP News Analysis, By DAVID CRARY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NICOSIA, Cyprus
Body




No matter how decisively the Persian Gulf war ends, turmoil and bloodshed are likely to persist in the Middle East unless the anti-Iraq alliance accepts the need for profound political change.
Experts of widely varying viewpoints agree on some basic challenges that will face the United States and its friends, Western and Arab, whenever they complete their onslaught on Saddam Hussein.
These include democratic reform in such countries as Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, redistribution of oil wealth to benefit the Arab world's resentful have-nots and some sort of accommodation for the Palestinians.
"Nothing in the Middle East will return to the status quo," said Egypt's Tahseen Beshir, a former presidential spokesman.
"The key will be whether the Americans and their allies put the same effort into building the peace as they did in launching the war."
To many Arabs and Muslims, the war has elevated Saddam to the status of holy warrior, the only man willing to take on the might of the entire Western world. His defeat may not dilute this sentiment.
"A defeated Saddam, particularly a dead one, will take on a much more favorable image," Robert O'Neill, an Oxford University history professor, wrote in Britain's Financial Times.
"We should be prepared after a gulf war to face a long and uncertain period as a new system of regional security is built."
In Israel, there's hope that a victory over Iraq could lead to a new era of regional harmony, with the United States possibly having more influence due to its alliance with Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Syria.
"I think more opportunities are going to open up," said Itamar Rabinovich, rector of Tel Aviv University. "An American primacy will have been established."
But Rabinovich, a professor of Middle Eastern studies, added in a telephone interview: "There will have to be some redistribution of wealth in the Arab world, and there will have to be political reform. … The coalition should represent the triumph of democratic reform, not the return to oligarchy."
Rabinovich said Israel would have to address the Palestinian question, but not necessarily through talks with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
"It's very important, in the aftermath of war, that those who banked on the wrong side will not be rewarded," he said. "It would be wise to deal with the Palestinians, yes. But the PLO was in the Iraqi camp."
A senior PLO official, Assad Abdul Rahman, says anti-Americanism has become a pervasive ideology in the Middle East and could erupt in widespread violence after an Iraqi defeat.
He said this anger could be defused only if the allies act swiftly on the issue of Palestinian statehood.
"The defeat of Saddam Hussein would create very deep, bitter feelings," Abdul Rahman said. "The more time you give, these feelings would materialize in an organizational and active manner."
If President Bush delayed action on the Palestinians until after the 1992 presidential elections, Abdul Rahman said, "I believe this area would see a lot of bloodletting."
There is widespread concern about a possible post-war power vacuum. Iran, Syria and Turkey all have been mentioned as possibly interested in exploiting an Iraqi defeat, either territorially or politically.
Christine Helms, an American expert on the Middle East, wrote in the journal Defense and Diplomacy that if the allies were to crush Iraq's military, "the result will be a power vacuum, the consequences of which even the Four Horseman of the Apocalypse might shrink from considering."
The pro-Western nations of the Arabian peninsula - Saudi Arabia and the emirates - already are discussing arrangements for post-war regional security after Western forces depart.
Officials in Cairo say Egypt likely would provide most of the soldiers for a regional deterrent force, the Saudis and Kuwaitis the money and the West the technology.
There is doubt whether either Iran or Syria would be asked to participate.
Egypt's Beshir said public opinion, even in moderate Arab countries such as his own, could swing against the United States if the war is long and bloody and not followed by quick action on the Palestinian issue.
"The U.S. position is hypocritical," he said. "They're punishing Iraq for not implementing U.N. resolutions, but they haven't raised a finger to make Israel implement resolutions passed years ago. … No one can accept continued occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip."
One of the biggest uncertainties as the war unfolds is the extent to which anti-Western, pro-Saddam fervor would survive an Iraqi defeat.
Some experts say Saddam's image would be tarnished. Others suggest Iraq and its backers could turn battlefield defeat into political victory.
If Iraq is humiliated, "what are the prospects for the regimes that have stood against Iraq with the West?" asked Kamel Abu Jaber, a University of Jordan political scientist.
"I don't know how their people will be able to look them in the eye," he said. "You (the West) have built instability inside the very regimes you came to protect."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - David Crary is news editor for The Associated Press in Paris. He is in Nicosia to help cover the war.

 

End of Document
