

After The War, Back To Business At Tea Plantation
The Associated Press
September 6, 1994, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 583 words
Byline: By KARIN DAVIES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GISAKURA, Rwanda
Body




Workers deftly pluck tender green shoots at a tea plantation in the mountains of Rwanda, dropping them into baskets lashed to their backs.
"Here, life is getting back to normal," said Anatole Mubiligi, director of the Gisakura Tea Factory.
Mubiligi, a Hutu, resumed production at the plantation this week, even though he has received no funding or instructions from the Tutsi-led government. He's hoping the effort will help him keep his job.
Repairs still must be made at the government-owned factory, which was looted by Hutu soldiers fleeing victorious Tutsi-led rebels and wrecked by squatting refugees, Mubiligi said Monday.
But workers are back amid the tangled tea bushes untended since April. They fall in a varigated green patchwork over 3,000 acres of valleys at the edge of the Nyangwe Forest, 75 miles southwest of the capital Kigali.
Inside the sweetly perfumed factory, piles of wilting tea leaves are drying.
Gisakura is the only one of 11 government-owned tea factories to resume work. Plantations in the northeast have been idle for nearly four years, since the Rwandan Patriotic Front invaded from Uganda.
If the new RPF-run government is to rebuild the tiny Central African nation's economy, then it must resume exports of its internationally known coffee and tea. The two products accounted for 90 percent of $ 66.6 million worth of export income in 1992, according to the CIA World Factbook.
More than 90 percent of Rwandans work in agriculture, and almost 50 percent of gross domestic product comes from the agricultural sector.
About 30,000 people are employed in the state tea business, which produced 11,069 tons in 1992, the last year figures available. Mubiligi said the production was worth the equivalent of $ 22 million at prewar rates.
He dismissed suggestions that former customers, notably England, Kenya and Pakistan, would be reluctant to buy tea from a country that has failed to deliver in recent months and which is not yet stable.
"Our tea is excellent. It is valued because it is grown at a high altitude and we maintain high standards for quality," Mubiligi said.
Last year, Gisakura sold 1,600 tons of tea. This year, because harvests were lost during the war, production will be down by 400 tons.
"No profit this year, we've lost too much," Mubiligi said. "But if we work hard, we will be in profit next year."
Last year, the factory made a profit of 6 million Rwandan francs, or the equivalent of $ 44,000 at prewar exchange rates. Under existing arrangements, a minimum 10 percent of profits goes to the government, and the rest is reinvested in the plant or shared among employees.
Mubiligi said he is the only Hutu director of a tea plantation who stayed put while RPF troops advanced.
Today, U.N. soldiers patrol the factory grounds. Guards posted along the entry road attempt to tame a thousand refugees who are camped at the edge of the plantation.
Mubiligi said he has had to deal with power cuts, a fuel shortage that he resolved by buying across the border in Zaire and a shortage of vehicles. Banks remain closed, which means he cannot get loans he needs to invest in the plant.
Most workers have returned to their jobs. The plant employs 4,000 field workers, 250 factory workers and 80 overseers. Of those, only 13 died in massacres and seven fled to Zaire, Mubiligi said.
Jean Bosco Twagiramungu said he was thrilled to be back at work.
"During the war we were busy protecting our city, building barriers to stop the RPF," he said. "But this is better than fighting."
 Load-Date: September 7, 1994

 

End of Document
