

After the Cyclone, a Dazed Country Tries To Rebuild
The Associated Press
November 30, 1994, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1119 words
Byline: By JOHN DANISZEWSKI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KIGALI, Rwanda
Body




A cyclone of hatred swept this small African nation and left in its wake more than a half-million dead.
Seldom in the annals of human cruelty have so many people been killed so savagely so quickly.
As the dazed country struggles to rebuild, the United Nations considers a tribunal on genocide and up to 2 million refugees contemplate whether to return to an uncertain welcome or to remain in exile.
An unnatural peace has prevailed since a predominantly ethnic Tutsi rebel movement drove out a government dominated by the Hutu majority in July. The question that haunts international observers is whether the calm is permanent or simply a prelude to a new round of death.
"Rapid disintegration" remains a possibility, said Alison Des Forges, a historian who has studied Rwanda for two decades and now is a consultant to Human Rights Watch-Africa.
"The government really does not have the resources to establish its authority in anything other than a military sense," she said. "Meanwhile, the guys on the outside are cocky as hell."
Much of the defeated Hutu army is in refugee camps in neighboring countries. Supposedly they have been disarmed, but observers believe they have arms hidden away.
Hutu leaders are demanding a role in the new government in Kigali and threaten to resume fighting if they are not. Tutsis say they will never work with leaders of a government that U.N. investigators have blamed for unleashing extremist Hutus who massacred an estimated 500,000 people from April into July.
The new government says it has changed the direction of Rwandan politics. Theogene Rudasingwa, secretary-general of the victorious Rwandan Patriotic Front, said it has established the "the first really broad-based government in the history of Rwanda."
The president, prime minister and two-thirds of the Cabinet are Hutus. But Maj. Gen. Paul Kagame, a Tutsi, who is a vice president and defense minister, is still the man with ultimate power.
The question now is how to stop Rwanda's seemingly endless cycles of reprisal, repression, violence and death.
The new government finds itself in charge of a traumatized people and wrecked economy.
The retreating Hutu government looted the national bank, and new Finance Minister Marc Rugenera confesses he does not even have keys to open the central bank's vault. He could blast it open, "but we need that building," he said in an interview.
At the moment, the government cannot pay civil servants or its army, and it depends on handouts from foreign governments and international aid agencies to repair war-ravaged water mains and telecommunications networks.
Ironically, in the refugee camps, the defeated Hutu soldiers are being paid with the purloined national assets. The former government also carried off all Rwanda's reserves of foreign currency.
"With this shortage of foreign exchange the country cannot import anything. Our private sector cannot import spare parts. Factories cannot bring in raw materials, and we have no revenues because income taxes are impossible," Rugenera said.
The country's top priority is stability so that refugees feel safe to return, Kagame said.
The government also seeks foreign help to restart the economy, he said. And it plans an education campaign to teach Rwandans tolerance in hopes that ethnic slaughter will never take place again.
A slaughterhouse in April and May, its streets awash in blood and bodies, Kigali was a ghost town when the rebels finally seized control in July.
As the rebels approached, Hutus ran away by the hundreds of thousands. In a single day in April, more than 250,000 crossed into Tanzania. Within a five-day period before the end in July, 1.2 million people poured into eastern Zaire.
Huddled in miserable camps, lacking clean water and living atop their own body wastes, 50,000 to 60,000 of these refugees died of cholera and other diseases in the three weeks it took Western troops and aid groups to set up basic hygiene.
The refugees have for the most part stayed in exile, cowed from returning both by the armed Hutu militants in their midst and the shadowy reports of Tutsi reprisals back home. Fearful Hutus still trickle out of Rwanda.
By August, a new population had started moving into Rwanda. The children of Tutsis expelled in a wave of Hutu bloodletting in 1959 returned from exile in Uganda and began occupying abandoned houses and businesses.
They were joined by Rwandan Tutsis who hid themselves during the latest slaughter and some Hutus willing to trust the government's promises of reconciliation.
The United Nations estimates there are now about 5 million people in Rwanda, compared to 7.9 million before the war. Tutsis, just 15 percent of the population before the war, may make up half the population of Kigali now.
Returnees and the newcomers are breathing life into the capital.
Electricity is on again, and much of the city has running water, thanks to U.N.-hired contractors. A handful of restaurants and nightclubs are open. The market bustles with hawkers selling bananas, papayas and unplucked chickens. Gasoline stations operate although there are few cars aside from those belonging to the United Nations, aid groups and government troops.
Scars of the fighting remain. But the thousands of bodies are buried, and the dogs that fattened on them are being shot. The stench of death that once permeated the city is now undetected beneath the perfume of the hibiscus. The Hotel Mille Collinas has refilled its swimming pool.
In the countryside, villages also are slowly filling up with people. Without fanfare, U.N. military observers say, workers are returning to their banana groves and terraced hillside fields.
In the eastern hamlet of Bwinsanga, where the new Tutsi head man says 300 to 350 villagers were massacred, there is an icy silence between surviving Tutsis and Hutus.
Leaders of the government have demanded that the former Hutu leaders be tried for genocide.
The U.N. Security Council has not made a final decision on a war-crimes tribunal. But U.N. spokesman Paul Mehu in Kigali said, "It is the intention of the international community to bring to justice the people who are responsible."
There could be thousands, and prosecution would be expensive in time and money for a world organization already preoccupied with other crises.
Prosecuting the guilty is the key to preventing a recurrence, said Des Forges, the historian, but it is still an open question if the world will show the will.
"It's not impossible that we're just going to fink out," she said. On the other hand, "There are a lot of guilty consciences around. … There's this feeling that we let people be slaughtered and did nothing, and now the least we can do is bring these people to justice."
End Adv Sunday Oct. 30
 Load-Date: November 30, 1994

 

End of Document
