

Against The Tide: Some Rwandan Refugees Head Home
The Associated Press
May 19, 1994, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 607 words
Byline: By BRIAN MURPHY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RUSUMO FALLS, Rwanda
Body




For Mundinda Narogo, the choice was clear.
"If I'm going to suffer, I'd rather do it where I was born," she said, after crossing a narrow concrete bridge into her native Rwanda with her baby strapped to her chest.
Narogo was among thousands of Rwandans who have returned home, willing to take their chances in rebel-held areas and ghost towns littered with rotting corpses rather than endure hunger and disease in Tanzanian refugee camps.
The trickle of refugees returning to Rwanda is still dwarfed by the exodus.
The Rwandan Patriotic Front estimates between 1,000 and 2,000 people have returned since the rebel group consolidated its control of southeastern Rwanda earlier this week.
But between 3,000 and 4,000 people flee into Tanzania each day, according to the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees.
Most of the Rwandans returning are Tutsi, the minority tribe that comprises the bulk of the rebel front. A few, however, are members of the majority Hutu tribe.
Returnees said they worried about diseases racing through the Tanzanian camps where the death count is about 10 a day and reportedly rising.
At the main camp - the largest refugee settlement in the world - aid agencies are having trouble feeding, doctoring and sheltering a population that has surpassed 300,000.
A few Tutsis returning to Rwanda said they saw Hutu militia members in the camps and feared reprisals.
"I feel much safer being back in Rwanda," said Mbarago Faustin, who left Rwanda about a month ago and returned with 14 others Wednesday. "When I saw people I know are part of the (government-allied) militia, I knew I had to leave."
But conditions in rebel-held Rwanda are bleak. Many towns are deserted and filled with rotting bodies. Fuel and medical supplies are nearly impossible to find.
Many returned refugees have gathered in a camp just over the Rusumo bridge, which crosses a river that has carried away thousands of victims of the Rwandan slaughter.
Some have built small thatched huts similar to those in the Tanzanian camps. Few have any plans beyond the next meal or the next night's sleep. Most have no idea what happened to their homes or villages since they fled.
More than 200,000 people have died and at least 1 million refugees have headed for the border with Tanzania since Rwanda was plunged into an orgy of bloodletting in early April.
Most of the killings and massacres have been blamed on militias led by Hutu extremists. The vast majority of their victims have been Tutsis.
In recent days, dozens of refugees have claimed they came under attack by rebel bands. At least two have been hospitalized - one with a gunshot wound and machete gash.
UNHCR officials say the attacks appear to be part of a new campaign by the rebels to halt the refugee trek through their area.
Top commanders of the Rwandan Patriotic Front deny any attacks on refugees have been ordered. Yet they acknowledge that armed refugees or members of government-allied militias could have been targeted.
"There is a difference between armed civilians - who we consider the enemy - and ordinary refugees looking for safety," said Tony Kabano, a rebel officer.
An American investigator also doubts the rebels have ordered a systematic campaign against the refugees.
"Personally, I do not think it's true," said Roger Winter, director of the U.S. Committee for Refugees, a private humanitarian agency.
He said "the few reports of RPF attacks on refugees cannot be given the same moral equivalent as the genocide" he says has been conducted by government-supported forces.
Winter and U.N. workers are trying to visit the seven or eight main refugee crossing points to check on the reports of attacks.
 Load-Date: May 19, 1994

 

End of Document
