

AIDS Sufferers Lost in the South African Politics
The Associated Press
November 16, 1992, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 800 words
Byline: By TINA SUSMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, South Africa
Body




On an average day in the black township of Soweto, several men and women and a newborn baby test positive for the AIDS virus.
Young, black and dying, they are the victims not just of disease, but of political turmoil that has allowed the epidemic to spread through black society and, AIDS activists say, set the stage for catastrophe.
Given the country's many problems, AIDS experts worry that black leaders as well as white will rank the deadly disease lower in priority than rewriting the constitution and establishing a multiracial government.
"There are going to be people dying in the street," said Warwick Allan, head of the South African chapter of the AIDS group ACT UP. "There are going to be people dying in the townships, on the pavements, all over. It's going to be mass-scale death, but people don't believe it."
South Africa has about 2,000 cases of AIDS, far fewer than some other African countries, but an estimated 250,000 people carry the HIV virus that causes it and the number is growing by at least 400 a day.
The result could be more than 2.4 million adult deaths from AIDS by the end of the decade, most of them the working-age blacks so vital to the post-apartheid era.
As in most of Africa, social and cultural attitudes make heterosexual blacks more prone to AIDS. Rural blacks consider big families a sign of wealth. Health care and education is limited and many black men live in workers' hostels, where prostitution is rife.
Generations of apartheid compound South Africa's problem. Critics say the government would have done more against AIDS long ago if it affected whites.
The same critics, however, say Nelson Mandela, president of the African National Congress, and other black leaders are neglecting AIDS while trying to resolve political violence and reach a power-sharing agreement with whites.
More than 100 political and health groups, including the government and the ANC, met in October for the first time to discuss the problem. They agreed that education, health care and community programs should be part of a national campaign against the disease.
Some of the obstacles to making such a campaign work were highlighted at the conference.
Apartheid has left a legacy of distrust among blacks, many of whom see condoms as part of a white plot to wipe them out.
"The government does not have the credibility to convince the majority of black South Africans to change their sexual behavior," Mandela said in opening the meeting.
Among whites, puritanical attitudes make frank discussion of sexual issues difficult. In one province, AIDS education was withdrawn from white public schools after complaints from churches and parents.
The Johannesburg AIDS Center, which offers information and counseling, opened in a medical professionals' building two years ago.
Soon afterward, someone mysteriously blacked out AIDS from the sign on the door, said a spokesman, Dr. Clive Evian.
Then the pharmacist downstairs refused to display AIDS education posters. Finally, other tenants, fearing a loss of business, told the center it could not advertise its AIDS connection. The center moved.
Health Minister Rina Venter launched a government AIDS program in 1990, setting up telephone hot lines, information centers and education programs. Critics say the $ 6.7 million budgeted for 1992-93 is paltry, but Venter said it is nearly 62 percent more than in 1991.
A magistrate is investigating allegations that a substantial part of the 1991 budget for AIDS was diverted.
Venter said the government "is to be congratulated" for the priority given AIDS, in view of the other problems facing South Africa.
All groups agree on the need for home and community health care to prevent HIV carriers from flooding hospitals as they become ill. No such programs exist, even in hard-hit areas such as Soweto, and the government has not appropriated funds for them.
The nearest alternative, a hospice system, is a relatively new and controversial idea.
An AIDS hospice in a conservative white town near Johannesburg was forced to close because of community objections, leaving Sacred Heart House outside downtown Johannesburg as the only one still operating.
Roger and his roommate, Steven, a former ANC exile in Zambia, came to Sacred Heart when they needed constant nursing care and had nowhere else to go. With only 12 beds, the hospice turns away dozens of people who simply are not sick enough.
Kathy Trow, a nurse, and Sister Cecelia, a Roman Catholic nun, say they have been unable to find nursing agencies willing to help, so they keep Sacred Heart running by themselves.
At a minimum, that means bringing breakfast to those too weak to leave bed, bathing them, turning the bedridden every two hours, dispensing medication and canvassing for donations.
Even the carrots in the refrigerator were donated.

 

End of Document
