

All-But-President Mandela Meets the Press
The Associated Press
April 29, 1994, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 734 words
Byline: By JOHN DANISZEWSKI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, South Africa
Body




African National Congress leader Nelson Mandela was already hinting Friday about how he will govern as South Africa's president.
Answering foreign journalists' questions like a president-elect, Mandela belittled the possibility of neo-Nazi violence and indicated he would raise taxes if necessary to pay for South Africa's vast development needs.
He said the next Cabinet would have to reflect the racial diversity of South Africa and that among his top priorities was to "heal the wounds of the past."
He promised good relations with big business and suggested he would give police free rein to deal with his supporters if they get out of hand after the election.
Mandela was interviewed by The Associated Press and a host of other news organizations as voting continued in some parts of South Africa. He also gave live television interviews to CNN and the South African Broadcasting Corp.
Working through a stack of requests from the thousand-strong corps of journalists covering the election, Mandela's aides selected a cross-section from the Americas, Asia and Europe - with special attention to those from industrialized countries that can help with South Africa's development.
Mandela planned to continue the interviews Saturday, when vote counting begins. The new parliament is to meet next Friday, and it is considered a given that it will have an ANC majority and will elect Mandela president.
In grey suit, white shirt, bright red tie and and burgundy sweater vest, Mandela said he had left behind his colorful, loose-fitting "campaigners clothes" now that the voting was done. He chuckled at a suggestion he looked "presidential."
With old-world graciousness, Mandela declined to start answering questions until he had shaken hands with each of the small number of photographers and technical workers present. At one point, he apologized for not being able to understand a question, even though almost no one else understood it either.
But showing a glimpse of the toughness that he might bring to the presidency, Mandela said he would not tolerate insubordination within a future coalition government, which is to be made up of all parties that get more than 5 percent of the vote in the election.
As president, Mandela would be in charge of allocating Cabinet portfolios to the various parties.
"If I am the president, I am the president," said Mandela. "No minister is going to do something which is contrary to the decision of the government of national unity."
Asked what happens if the ANC's reconstruction and development plan will - as critics allege - cost more than the 39 billion rands ($ 11 billion) the ANC estimates, Mandela indicated he would raise taxes before he would cut the plan.
"Everybody is bound to pay a fair tax - everybody." he said. At the same time, the ANC's plan - which among other things calls for construction of 1 million new houses within five years - "is the minimum policy which we have to address the basic needs of the people. It is inconceivable that any time we will cut down on that policy."
However, he added that his aim remains "to have a tax system which is fair, which is low, so as to encourage investors."
Mandela's was dismissive of the AWB, or the Afrikaner Resistance Movement, a pro-apartheid extremist group linked by police this week to bombings on Sunday, Monday and Wednesday that killed 21 people and wounded more than 170.
Mandela said it would not be worth the future government's while to ban the group.
"Up to now they've remained a tiny minority, and I think one would be giving them too much importance if you banned them," said Mandela, whose own ANC blossomed into a mass movement during the time it was banned from 1960 until 1990.
"It is better to deal with organizations like that above ground," he said.
He was asked how tough would he be if his own landless supporters begin looting or attempted to illegally take over houses in the celebrations after the ANC's expected win.
"The law must take its course. These are police matters which need not even be reported to the government," he said.
Throughout the interview, Mandela displayed enthusiasm for the tasks ahead.
"Our country is a country of great potential, and we can build it up to be a leader not only of this region but of Africa as a whole," he said. "There is no need whatsoever for us not to be able to raise the position of Africans, colored and Indians to the same level as whites."
 Load-Date: April 29, 1994

 

End of Document
