

American Withdrawal Marked The Limits For Somali Relief
The Associated Press
March 26, 1994, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 809 words
Byline: By TERRY LEONARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOGADISHU, Somalia
Body




The American flag fluttered above a Marine amphibious assault vehicle that withdrew into the sea, lolled like a drunken whale in the surf and puttered slowly back to its ship.
It was the unceremonious end of a mission that began in hope and ended in disillusion.
There are lessons to be learned from Somalia regarding the U.S. role in U.N. peacekeeping and the use of force to provide humanitarian relief.
Washington has time for study and debate. In Somalia, the clock is running down.
American troops, who once numbered more than 26,000 here, were more than the backbone of the U.N. force. They were the symbol of its resolve. President Clinton's order for them to withdraw was followed by similar orders from other Western capitals.
When the last American Marines pulled out Friday they drew the line on how much the richest countries in the world are willing to do for Somalia.
Former President Bush ordered 1,800 Marines ashore on Dec. 9, 1992, as the vanguard of a multinational force to ensure that emergency food supplies got through to the starving.
At least 350,000 Somalis died in the famine that followed civil war and anarchy. Up to a 1,000 a day were still dying when the Marines stormed ashore.
"We are grateful because we remember and will not forget that 250,000 children died in the famine and now they are not dying," Staffan de Mistura, the Somali director for the U.N. Children's Fund, said as he watched the last American troops depart.
"They turned a page and in turning the page we hope the Americans do not forget Somalia."
The mission was never without danger. On Jan. 12, 1993, just over a month after the Americans arrived, Marine Pvt. Domingo Arroyo, 23, of Elizabeth, N.J., was shot dead by Somali gunmen in an attack near Mogadishu's airport. He was the first American serviceman to die in Somalia. In all, 44 Americans would die, 30 in combat.
There had been warnings. In a December 1992 diplomatic cable, Smith Hempstone, then the U.S. ambassador to neighboring Kenya, advised Bush "not to embrace the Somali tarbaby." He said Somalia should be left to its own devices even though famine still threatened 2 million people.
"They will lay ambushes. They will launch hit-and-run attacks. They will not be able to stop the (humanitarian) convoys from getting through. But they will inflict - and take - casualties," Hempstone advised.
Somali militias could not stop the convoys. The famine, already waning by the time the Americans arrived, was over by late spring of 1993 and the Americans turned the mission over to the United Nations in May of that year.
But Somalis did lie in ambush. And they did take and inflict casualties.
On June 5, militiamen loyal to warlord Gen. Mohamed Farrah Aidid killed 24 Pakistani soldiers and wounded 54. That ambush led to reprisals, retaliation and four months of urban guerrilla warfare.
Looking back to December, Robert Oakley, Clinton's special envoy to Somalia, said U.N. forces had violated "the first axiom of peacekeeping - don't make enemies."
They didn't try to. But the U.N. mission crept into nation-building, and that infringed on the ambitions of warlords and upset their precarious balance of power.
So far, the United Nations said 102 peacekeepers have been killed in Somalia. No one knows how many Somalis have been killed, but last January Aidid claimed the United Nations had killed 13,000.
For Americans the end came with a fierce Oct. 3-4 battle that left 18 dead and 83 wounded. The body of one dead American was dragged through Mogadishu at the end of a rope as Aidid's supporters laughed, cheered and stomped on it. Horrified Americans saw the image on TV along with pictures of a frightened and injured American helicopter pilot shot down and captured by Somalis.
American resolve snapped. Within days of the battle Clinton ordered the troops to leave by March 31. The Italians, Belgians, Germans, French and Swedes quickly announced their own departure dates. Now Morocco, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates also have since called it quits.
Pakistan, which has the largest remaining contingent, is wavering.
Maj. Gen. Thomas R. Montgomery, the American commander, told reporters he was confident the United Nations can continue its mission in Somalia.
"I think absolutely nothing will happen here. We are leaving. But I think the coalition forces are absolutely capable," said Montgomery.
The United States, he said, will remain involved in Somalia in diplomatic and humanitarian ways. And he noted that Somali faction leaders had signed a peace agreement in Nairobi.
But others are less confident. The warlords have reached agreement before, only to break the truce almost before the ink was dry. And aid workers are leaving Somalia or regions of it in increasing numbers. A French relief group pulled out of Baidoa the same day the Americans left, citing lack of security.
 Load-Date: March 26, 1994

 

End of Document
