

An AP Sports Special - The Summer of '41; A Time For Heroes
The Associated Press
April 14, 1991, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 1160 words
Byline: By HAL BOCK, AP Sports Writer
Body




It was the summer of 1941, a time for heroes.
As the shadows of war lengthened over Europe and the world, there were signs everywhere that the conflict would inevitably involve this country. There was a foreboding sense that this might be America's last summer of innocence.
The nation searched desperately for relief from the flames of a world on fire and baseball supplied the antidote with two remarkable individual accomplishments - the 56-game hitting streak of Joe DiMaggio and the .406 season of Ted Williams.
Half a century and several wars later, DiMaggio still owns the barometer for batting streaks and Williams remains baseball's last .400 hitter. In a sport where other records regularly fall, theirs stand alone, only rarely challenged, perhaps never to be broken, magical reminders of the summer of '41, a time of innocence and accomplishment.
A time for heroes.
---
"Joe, Joe, DiMaggio, We want you on our side." - Refrain of a popular song of the day.
---
Joseph Paul DiMaggio was 26 years old in the summer of '41, winner of two straight American League batting championships, one of the game's burgeoning young sluggers.
On May 15 of that summer, he set out on an unparalleled batting odyssey. The 56-game hitting streak started modestly enough with a lonely first-inning, RBI-single against Chicago's Edgar Smith. It hardly stood out, since the Yankees lost the game, 13-1. For the next two months, however, day-in, day-out, through wins and losses, Joe DiMaggio got base hits.
The streak was marked by historical footnotes.
On May 3, two weeks before it began, Whirlaway won the Kentucky Derby. Before it ended, the colt would capture the Preakness and Belmont as well, sweeping the Triple Crown. A week later, Rudolf Hess, deputy chancellor of Hitler's Third Reich, parachuted into Scotland on a mysterious mission.
On May 23, barely a week after DiMag's first streak hit, heavyweight champion Joe Louis knocked out Buddy Baer for his 17th defense of the title. That same day, King George II of Greece eluded the Nazis, fleeing from Crete to Egypt. Three weeks later, Louis would defend the title again, this time beating Billy Conn.
On June 2, three weeks into the streak, a pall was cast over DiMaggio and the Yankees when, at age 39, ex-teammate Lou Gehrig died of amytrophic lateral sclerosis. That same day, Justice Charles Evans Hughes retired from the Supreme Court.
On June 21, German troops drove into the Soviet Union on a wide front from the Arctic to the Black Sea. That day, DiMaggio blooped a first-inning single off Detroit's Dizzy Trout, extending the streak to 34 games.
Later that week, the streak was in danger. DiMaggio was hitless through seven innings of Game No. 38. He was scheduled to be the fourth batter in the bottom of the eighth and with the Yankees leading, there probably wouldn't be a ninth. It was clearly a crisis.
With one out, Red Rolfe walked. Now Tommy Henrich huddled with manager Joe McCarthy. Henrich feared a double play that would end the inning and the streak. He suggested a sacrifice. McCarthy agreed. The bunt worked and DiMaggio, his swing saved, followed with a double, keeping the streak alive.
When he reached 39 games, DiMaggio faced an obscure Philadelphia pitcher named Johnny Babich. Fifty years later, he still recalls the encounter vividly.
"My first time up, the count went to 3-0," he said. "I got the hit sign, but the fourth pitch was way outside."
In his second at-bat, it was the same story - four straight balls. It was clear that Babich was determined not to be any part of the DiMaggio streak if he could help it. Four walks in four trips would have ended the streak. The rules have been eased since then but at the time, Joe D. was in jeopardy and he knew it.
"The third at-bat was the same," DiMaggio said. "Three straight balls. They gave me the hit sign again. This time, Babich got the fourth pitch not quite as far outside."
DiMaggio jumped on it, ripping the ball up the middle, through the pitcher's legs and into center field, extending the streak to 40 games. "Babich went down flat on his back," Joe D. said. "When he came up, he was ashen."
On July 1, DiMaggio tied Wee Willie Keeler's record of 44 straight games in a doubleheader sweep of Boston. The second game - No. 44 - was halted by rain after five innings and during the delay, a fan reached into the Yankee dugout and swiped the streak bat. It could have provoked a crisis, but not for DiMaggio. He simply borrowed another bat from Henrich the next day and continued his assault with a home run.
Keeler was a milestone. Now DiMaggio was in uncharted territory. It hardly distracted him. He just kept peppering pitchers.
It rained in Cleveland on July 16, 1941, a day DiMaggio ripped three hits. The ground was still damp the next night when the Indians played the Yankees with a crowd of more than 67,000 people crammed into Municipal Stadium.
In his first time at bat against Cleveland left-hander Al Smith, DiMaggio sent a shot down the third base line. Ken Keltner lunged to his right, back-handed the ball, and barely had time to catch the hitter. After walking in his next at-bat, DiMaggio went against Smith again in the seventh inning and sent another shot down the line. It was a mirror of his first swing and again, Keltner threw him out.
"They were unconscious stops," Keltner said. "Both were back-handed plays, down the line. Both times, I got Joe by an eyelash. He could run, too."
But not that night. In his first swing, DiMaggio, his legs set wide apart in his familiar stance, slipped slightly on the heavy footing getting out of the batter's box.
Keltner, who led American League third basemen in fielding three times and assists four times, had developed a style of looking at the ball before throwing it. "I grabbed the seams to make sure it didn't sail," he said. "On those plays, though, there was no time to do that."
The third baseman had been playing deep - "in left field," DiMaggio decided - partly because of the damp field, partly because Joe D. was on baseball's greatest hitting tear. "He was hitting with authority," Keltner said. "I wanted to guard the line and stop the double. Ordinarily, I played him toward shortstop, but not that night. He wasn't bunting, I knew that. "
Not once during the streak had DiMaggio bunted. There was no reason to expect him to change now. His last swing came in the eighth inning against reliever Jim Bagby. He came to the plate with the bases loaded and worked the count to 2-and-1, a good hitting situation. Then he sent a shot to shortstop, where Lou Boudreau turned it into an inning-ending double play.
The Yankees were leading 4-1 at the time. In the ninth inning, Cleveland rallied for two runs and had the tying run on third base with none out. If the Indians tied the game, Joe D. would be up again in the 10th, with a chance to extend the streak. But relief ace Johnny Murphy escaped the jam, preserving the victory and depriving DiMaggio of any extra swings.

 

End of Document
