

An Intriguing Journey 'Adrift on the Nile'
The Associated Press
April 9, 1993, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 461 words
Byline: By PRUDENCE HELLER, Associated Press Writer
Body




In "Adrift on the Nile," Nobel Prize-winning Egyptian author Naguib Mahfouz blends many intriguing angles: The serious vs. the absurd; drifting through life vs. taking it into one's own hands; the individual in the single dimension of the present or the three dimensions of present, past and future.
The civil servant Zaki Anis, whose wife and child have died, lives and regards life under the influence of the kif he and his friends smoke when they gather around the water pipe on the houseboat where he lives with his books. To him, his imaginings are just as real, or even more so, than the people around him.
He sees a huge whale on the Nile. It identifies itself as the whale that saved Jonah. He's sure he will see it again.
He doesn't notice, one day, that the report he has given his department head is nothing but blank pages - his pen had run out of ink after a few words.
The houseboat is cared for by an old man of vague background and imposing presence who also gives the call to prayer at the nearby mosque. "He was like something great and ancient, rooted in time."
The handful of people who gather for their nightly smoke include other government workers, a lawyer, the popular actor Ragab al-Qadi, a young girl just out of college and a critic. One night, the critic introduces a colleague, the renowned journalist Samara Bahgat, into the company. She had asked to come. She keeps coming, but never smokes the water pipe.
It is she who is bent on the theme of the serious vs. the absurd: absurdity, "the loss of meaning, the meaning of anything," and seriousness, which "means belief, but belief in what?"
She has tagged the members of the group around the water pipe in notes she has made, supposedly for a play about that very conflict.
One holiday, when the smoking has started earlier than usual, most of the group go out in Ragab's car - and near the end of their drive, as Ragab is driving faster and faster, the car hits and kills a man on the road in the countryside. They are appalled, but they don't stop. And the incident shatters their unity as they discuss whether they should report the death to the police, with the consequences that would surely follow.
Samara and the usually silent Anis - who in Samara's journal "has managed to forget completely what it is he is escaping from. He has forgotten himself" - turn out, in a way, to be two sides of the same coin. Both feel the accident should be reported.
Afterward, as the two discuss the accident and life in general, she talks about hope. He, drinking coffee spiked with kif, is expecting the whale to appear.
It's thought-provoking, tantalizing writing that makes readers determined to read more of Mahfouz.
---
"Adrift on the Nile" by Naguib Mahfouz is published by Doubleday (167 pages, $ 21).

 

End of Document
