

Analysts Differ on the Role of Sanctions in Ending Apartheid
The Associated Press
July 11, 1991, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 680 words
Byline: By GEORGE GEDDA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The pillars of apartheid in South Africa disintegrated more quickly than expected after U.S. economic sanctions were imposed five years ago. But how much credit goes to the sanctions is a matter of dispute.
President Bush and others who opposed sanctions from the start believe those measures played only a minimal role in South Africa's shift toward democracy.
Far more important, Bush said Wednesday after lifting the sanctions, was the rise of a reform-minded leadership in South Africa headed by State President F.W. de Klerk.
That view is shared by South African Ambassador Harry Schwarz, who said that while sanctions played some role, the credit belongs to de Klerk and the anti-apartheid struggle waged by the victims of that system.
But Robert Rotberg, president of Lafayette College and a specialist on southern Africa, said the importance of the sanctions should not be underestimated.
"I don't know if de Klerk would have moved as quickly, if ever, without sanctions," Rotberg said.
Ann Griffin, spokeswoman for the anti-apartheid group TransAfrica, said the sanctions converted South Africa into a pariah state, a burden that authorities there did not wish to carry any longer.
There is no disagreement that the South African economy has been in steep decline for years even though it remains the strongest on the continent. According to a recent estimate, jobs are available to only one in 10 South Africans who enter the labor market; the figure was seven in 10 two decades ago.
Herman Cohen, who heads the African affairs bureau at the State Department, said the decline started well before the sanctions took effect.
"We believe there have been no new jobs created in South Africa for the past 10 years," said Cohen.
Prohibitions on a variety of South African exports to the United States hurt job creation. According to the American Committee on Africa, U.S. imports from South Africa dropped from $ 2 billion in 1985 to $ 1.5 billion in 1989.
Cohen said there were 250 U.S. firms operating in South Africa with an investment of $ 2.5 billion before the sanctions. Only half that many firms remain and the investment figure now is about $ 1 billion, he said.
A U.S. official, asking not to be identified, said South Africa offset the decline in its trade with the United States by finding alternate markets in Asia. The official could not say whether South Africa was able to compensate fully for the loss because the country generally does not make its trade figures public.
The official said sanctions have been less a factor in South Africa's economic decline than the apartheid system itself, which, he suggested, created artificial barriers to the free flow of capital and labor.
According to the official, it would be a mistake to exaggerate the importance of the U.S. role in the South African economy even by pre-sanctions standards.
He said the U.S. share of South Africa's total trade dropped from a peak of 17.2 percent in 1978 to 7.5 percent in 1988. The Washington-based Institute for International Economics estimates that European and U.S. sanctions against South Africa cost it less than 1 percent of its gross national product.
Civil rights groups and key Democrats said Bush acted too hastily in removing the sanctions and that they should remain until reforms are complete.
"I think we've sent a terrible message. It's reprehensibly premature." said the Rev. Joseph E. Lowery, president of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference.
House Speaker Thomas S. Foley, D-Wash., said that despite Pretoria's reforms, "the most important element - political rights - has not been achieved. Some additional encouragement, pressure is needed."
Bush disagreed. "The time has come to do it," he said.
Before announcing the decision, Bush called Nelson Mandela, the new president of the African National Congress.
He said he told Mandela that lifting sanctions was "the right thing to do in order to encourage continued change in his country" and help blacks prosper.
The president did not convey Mandela's reaction, but Cohen later told reporters Mandela told Bush he disagreed.
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto WX6

 

End of Document
