

ANC Threatens To End Talks With The Government
The Associated Press
April 5, 1991, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 538 words
Byline: By TINA SUSMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, South Africa
Body




The African National Congress on Friday threatened to end groundbreaking talks with the government unless President F.W. de Klerk meets tough demands aimed at stopping township violence by May 9.
The demands include the ouster of Defense Minister Magnus Malan and Law and Order Minister Adriaan Vlok. They control the military and the police, respectively.
"Instances when the (security forces) have averted attacks or deterred the perpetrators … are extremely rare," the ANC said in a letter to de Klerk that was read at a news conference.
The letter also suggested the rival black Inkatha Freedom Party had organized township attacks, and accused the security forces of siding with Inkatha. Inkatha and the ANC are the two main black opposition groups.
The group did not explain how it had chosen the May 9 deadline.
Police on Friday also reported a new outbreak of violence in Soweto, outside Johannesburg. Six people were injured, two seriously, police said. They had no other details.
The threat was the toughest yet from the ANC, which began talks with the white-led government in May 1990 after de Klerk announced the start of reforms to end apartheid. If the talks are suspended, it would delay the start of formal negotiations on ending white rule.
There was no immediate reaction from the government.
"They are reasonable demands and if they are genuinely interested in a peaceful resolution, they will have to address them," said ANC Deputy President Nelson Mandela.
He indicated the ANC would be flexible on its demands for the ouster of Vlok and Malan, depending on the government's response to its concerns.
The ANC also demanded:
-Laws banning weapons, "traditional or otherwise," at public assemblies and rallies. Inkatha supporters often carry spears, axes, clubs and other tribal weapons at rallies, and the ANC says this adds to the hostile atmosphere.
-Immediate suspension from duty of those police implicated in shootings that killed 17 blacks in the Sebokeng township in March 1990 and the Daveyton township in March 1991. A judicial inquiry ruled police fired without good cause in Sebokeng last year, killing five people.
Twelve ANC supporters were killed in Daveyton on March 24 when police fired on a crowd. Officers said they shot in self-defense, but witnesses denied it.
-The phasing out of workers' hostels, which have been flashpoints of violence. The crowded, all-male hostels house migrant workers from rural homelands.
Mandela said it was premature to discuss whether the ANC would consider resuming its armed struggle, which was suspended in August when the government agreed to free political prisoners and allow exiles to return home. The ANC has accused the government of dragging its feet on the agreement.
The latest statement followed a wave of township massacres and clashes, including an ambush at a funeral vigil that killed 13 mourners last month.
Mandela and Mangosuthu Buthelezi, head of Inkatha, held an urgent meeting last Saturday to discuss the violence. They reaffirmed their commitment to a Jan. 29 peace agreement, which has had little effect on the unrest.
The ANC and Inkatha both oppose apartheid but differ on tactics for fighting it and on their policies for a post-apartheid South Africa.

 

End of Document
