

Angola's Refugees Eye Horizon for Coming of the Blue Helmets
The Associated Press
June 2, 1995, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 810 words
Byline: BY CHRISTOPHER MCDOUGALL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAMP BOA ESPERANCA, Angola
Body




As a coffee farmer, Menizes Kalemba lost his young wife and two children when guerrillas attacked his village and torched his home. Fighting back as a government soldier, he lost his right leg to a land mine.
A refugee now, trapped in this sun-baked camp in a dusty no-man's-land, the 35-year-old whittles and squints long at the distant hills of home, waiting for the U.N. troops Angola has been promised to come and take him there.
Across the southern African nation, more than 2 million Angolans have waited for nearly three years in camps like Boa Esperanca - fighting cholera, malnutrition and depression and waiting, like Kalemba, for the change that peace was supposed to bring.
"There is no chance of farming here. We have no tools, no materials … do you see a book? A radio? We are left to roast, and wait," said Kalemba, as barefoot children in tatters emerged soundlessly from wattle huts to listen.
"Have you ever seen such quiet children? They're not well-behaved - they are starving," he said.
Around him sprawled the wicker huts and tattered tents raised by more than 45,000 refugees that have crowded onto this shadeless patch of land some 40 miles north of Luanda to escape fighting since UNITA rebels returned to arms nearly three years ago.
The government, locked until six months ago in Africa's longest and costliest civil war, prohibits refugees who fled from contested areas to leave the camps, fearing they might be pressed into the rebel army.
As long as they are considered war-dispossessed, the refugees qualify for foreign humanitarian aid, which frees the government from the cost of food, medicine and shelter for a fifth of its population.
Even if a refugee could elude camp officials and police checkpoints, he or she risks journeying across mined and bandit-plagued roads to a town that may no longer be standing.
All that was supposed to have changed after November, when the government signed a treaty with the rebel National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA), halting fighting that since 1975 has cost more than 500,000 lives and ruined $ 25 billion in roads, rails and factories.
A force of 7,460 international troops was supposed to arrive under the U.N. flag three months later to disarm UNITA's troops, deactivate Angola's 10 million land mines and escort the refugees home.
But faced with costly failures in Somalia and Bosnia, the United Nations and donor nations have been reluctant to ship troops into the bushland theater of a conflict that has repeatedly foiled promises of peace.
The first battalion of Uruguayan peacekeepers, originally scheduled to land in February, arrived Wednesday. Brazil has sent a third investigating team before committing its battalion, while India is three months late and Pakistan has pulled out altogether.
While it doesn't appear the peace mission will collapse - the deployment of the 800 Uruguayans being a promising sign of life - the long delay has strained the cease-fire, said U.N. special representative Alioune Blondin Beye.
With more than 200,000 troops staring each other down across battle lines sometimes less than three miles apart, "the restraint both sides have shown so far has been commendable," Beye said told The Associated Press.
"Every day we keep our fingers crossed that the tension doesn't cause someone to erupt," Beye said.
But in Boa Esperanca, the forced wait is taking a heavy toll.
"We live on corn mush, about half a kilo (1 lb.) a day," said Cardoso Mateus, a 20-year-old former soldier who joined his family here and works as a volunteer camp coordinator. The food is supplemented occasionally by fish from the nearby Dando River and whatever can be scrounged from a nearby trash dump.
The meager diet, low in iron and iodine, drastically decreases cerebral growth in children and heightens the risk of death for pregnant women, said Batilloi Warritay, director in Angola for UNICEF.
Diseases like measles and diarrhea, discomforts to a normal child, are often fatal in Boa Esperanca.
Trauma, varying degrees of autism and severe learning disorders are common among children in the camp - especially among the 400 orphans who have turned up here and are fending for themselves.
"Extended over years, you'd expect to see just what is happening in Angola's refugee camps - the world's highest infant mortality rate, epidemic disease and depression," said Warritay.
But many of the Boa Esperanca children show they are defying the odds and living up to up the camp's moniker - "Good Hope" - as they race between the huts booting a ball of rolled rags in a riotous game of soccer.
Nearby, 50 8-, 9-, and 10-year-olds squeeze together on planks under an open-sided tent and listen attentively to a math lesson, chirping answers in low voices to a volunteer teacher.
"They are the quietest, best-behaved kids in the world," said Warritay. "So docile they worry me."
 Load-Date: June 2, 1995

 

End of Document
