

Apologies Are the Rage in Foreign Affairs
The Associated Press
December 31, 1993, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 750 words
Byline: By HILARY APPELMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Who's sorry now? Just about everybody everywhere these days.
After years of silence, Japan, Russia, South Africa and the United States all apologized in 1993.
"Once it starts, every group with a grievance wants an apology," says Donald McHenry, a former ambassador to the United Nations and professor of diplomacy at Georgetown University.
- Japan made its first official apologies this year for World War II, after decades of resistance.
- Russia apologized for Soviet abuse of Japanese prisoners.
- South Africa's government apologized for apartheid.
- And the United States told Hawaii it was sorry for overthrowing Queen Liliuokalani a century ago.
So what's an apology worth, especially one that comes years after the fact and is made to improve relations or gain some other political advantage?
Etiquette expert Judith Martin, author of the Miss Manners column and an expert on when to say you're sorry, says, "You wouldn't think it would be worth anything, either privately or in an international context. This is a very practical, bottom-line world.
"But the fact is, it makes an enormous difference."
Apologies validate the suffering of people who have been wronged, Martin says. "Satisfaction of the soul is a very deep human craving," she explains.
Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's recent apologies for Japan's forcing tens of thousands of women to serve as prostitutes for its soldiers, and for the brutal occupation of its Asian neighbors, came only after years of official silence.
It was the first time Japan had fully acknowledged its wartime role even to its own people.
"I was deeply impressed by the prime minister's frank attitude, which past Japanese prime ministers have not had," South Korean President Kim Young-sam said. "We must open a new era."
It was important for the victims that Japan finally took moral responsibility for its brutality, says Charles Doran, professor of international relations at Johns Hopkins University's School for Advanced International Studies.
"If people have been wronged," he says, "at the very least they want to have this recorded as a fact."
But apologies are rarely made to make people feel better, at least in the hard-boiled, Realpolitik world of foreign policy.
Apologizing makes sense only when a past incident gets in the way of current relations, some analysts say. Every "sorry" has an ulterior motive.
Japan wants to improve its political and economic relations with the rest of Asia. Russia is looking for full acceptance into the international community. South Africa hopes to minimize the backlash when its black majority takes power.
And the federal government's apology to Hawaii?
"Personally, I'm looking at this as a new beginning for the Hawaiian spirit," says Sen. Daniel K. Akaka, who sponsored the bill.
Perhaps because Japan and the United States already have robust economic and political relations, they have never apologized to each other for Pearl Harbor or Hiroshima, though both countries have made noises of regret.
Tokyo's relations with its Asian neighbors, on the other hand, have been plagued by fears of Japanese expansionism and bitterness over past brutality.
Apologizing carries tremendous cultural weight in Japan, says John Curtis Perry, a Japan specialist at the Fletcher School of Diplomacy at Tufts University.
"The Japanese love apologies," he says. "When you apologize it's very wrong for the recipient not to accept."
In the end, though, actions speak louder than apologies. Regrets over apartheid would be meaningless without the dismantling of South Africa's racist system, and Japan's apologies will mean less to its neighbors than its military and economic policies.
"An apology should not stop at words," said Park Ji-won, spokesman for the Korean opposition Democratic Party. "It will be judged by the extent of South Korea-Japan cooperation in the future."
Will the flood of apologies keep coming? Diplomatic observers are divided over whether the deluge symbolizes something bigger, such as the end of the Cold War and a final closing of the book on World War II, or is just a fad.
Either way, don't hold your breath for apologies from the Israelis and Palestinians, or the British and the Irish.
"I don't think we're on the verge of a new wave where everybody apologizes to everybody else for everything in the past," says former ambassador Jerry Bremer, managing director of Kissinger Associates.
"If we were, we wouldn't see war in the Balkans. There's not a whole lot of apologies going on in Yugoslavia."
 Load-Date: December 31, 1993

 

End of Document
