

At the Movies: 'Malcolm X'
The Associated Press
November 17, 1992, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 916 words
Byline: By DOLORES BARCLAY
Body




When he was assassinated Feb. 21, 1965, Malcolm X was given an eloquent eulogy by actor Ossie Davis:
"Did you ever talk to Brother Malcolm? Did you ever touch him, or have him smile at you? Did you ever really listen to him? Did he ever do a mean thing? Was he ever himself associated with violence or any public disturbance? For if you did, you would know him. And if you knew him you would know why we must honor him: Malcolm was our manhood, our living black manhood! This was his meaning to his people. And in honoring him, we honor the best in ourselves."
Spike Lee uses Davis' eulogy to cap his three-hour, 21-minute epic on the slain black leader's life, "Malcolm X."
Davis' voiceover, combined with real footage, could have provided a powerful end to Lee's theatrical interpretation. Instead, Lee tacks on a segment with South African leader Nelson Mandela and a grade-school lesson, and thrusts us into a rally on Malcolm X Boulevard in Harlem where hired extras in Malcolm X T-shirts converge with arms raised.
The result is that we walk away from this film with little emotion. Certainly, the dramatization of Malcolm's life should evoke some feeling - rage, sympathy, hope, anger, frustration, pride, sorrow. Snippets of the film should remain burned in our minds or our hearts.
But Lee's movie, despite good intentions, does not inspire any visceral realities. It simply is too superficial, too theatrically poised without the hard edge that could have made it a masterpiece.
Malcolm X was indeed controversial and misunderstood by many - both black and white - while he lived and even in death. He was either a symbol of black pride and self-reliance or white America's worst nightmare. But whatever he came to mirror, his impact on the civil rights movement and black nationalism was great.
Denzel Washington, with hair dyed a nasty, coppery red, should earn an Academy nomination for his extraordinary and sensitive performance as Malcolm. He portrays the slain leader from his hustling days as Detroit Red to his death at the age of 39 as El-Hajj Malik El-Shabazz.
Malcolm X was born Malcolm Little in Omaha, Neb. He grew up wanting to become a lawyer, but one of his white teachers told him his dream was unrealistic because he was black; he told him to become a carpenter. Instead, Malcolm winds up a street hustler in Boston and later a numbers runner in Harlem. He's caught during a burglary attempt, convicted and sent to prison, where his life forever changes as he embraces the Nation of Islam.
The early years of Malcolm's life form about the first third of the movie. The segment is lively, peppered with the hot jazz and rhythm and blues of the day - jazz trumpeter Terence Blanchard and singer Mikki Howard provide some of the music. It also features Lee as Malcolm's best friend, Shorty.
Much of this part of "Malcolm X" is devoted to Shorty's shenanigans, and the movie suffers. Some thoughtful editing was needed here.
The second part of "Malcolm X" covers Malcolm's prison days when he made up for his aborted education by reading every book he could find and copying every single word of the dictionary.
The last part of the film chronicles his days as a Muslim leader - first his infatuation with Elijah Muhammad (Al Freeman Jr.), his rapid rise as a fiery and respected leader, his marriage and family life with Betty Shabazz (Angela Bassett), his disillusionment with Elijah and the Nation, his pilgrimage to Mecca, his philosophical changes, his death.
With Ernest Dickerson's rich photography, Lee weaves the threads of Malcolm's life into a coherent and fairly accurate tale. There's a lot of material here, and the screenplay, by Arnold Perl (who died 21 years ago) and Lee, covers a lot of ground.
But the screenplay does little to establish and unravel a conspiracy in Malcolm's death. It suggests FBI-CIA intervention without going into J. Edgar Hoover's program against black leaders and infiltration of black organizations. It also mentions the Nation of Islam's misgivings about Malcolm and his power. But the movie could have been stronger and more specific in tracking - and documenting - all of the forces working against Malcolm X.
The movie's strength is in the excellent performances Lee pulls out: Washington, Bassett, Freeman and Delroy Lindo as West Indian Archie. There's a huge cast in support, and they all work well.
"Malcolm X" is based on "The Autobiography of Malcolm X." Producer Marvin Worth ("Lenny," "The Rose") bought the book's rights from Betty Shabazz in 1967. Over the years, such filmmakers as Sidney Lumet and Gordon Parks wanted to make the movie, and James Baldwin, David Mamet and Charles Fuller wrote scripts.
The $ 42 million film finally was done by Lee, who also produced with Worth and added his own spin to Perl's script. It is perhaps the best written of all of Lee's movies, and maybe Lee will now realize that he shouldn't rely solely on his own writing.
Despite its minor failures, including its length, "Malcolm X" is a movie that can be educational for all generations. The Warner Bros. release is rated PG-13.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.

 

End of Document
