

At the Movies: 'Cry, the Beloved Country'
 The Associated Press
December 11, 1995, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 498 words
Byline: By BOB THOMAS, Associated Press Writer
Body




It is 1947 in a Zulu village amid the peaks of South Africa. Black pastor Stephen Kumalo (James Earl Jones) leaves his village on a personal mission to Johannesburg. Thus begins his Dantean descent into hell.
His arrival in the metropolis is harrowing. He is frightened by the traffic and noise. A bystander offers to buy a bus ticket for him, takes the money and disappears. Kumalo finally arrives at a church mission, where a benign young priest (Visu Kunene) gives him shelter.
The rural pastor is seeking his sister, brother and son, with whom he has lost contact. He discovers his sister (Dambisa Kente) has turned to prostitution to support herself and her child. The brother (Charles S. Dutton) is a slick businessman who harangues blacks with demagogic speeches. He cares only for himself.
Kumalo doggedly trudges the city in search of his son, Absalom (Eric Miyeni). He finds the woman who is bearing his son's child. Finally, he discovers that Absalom is in jail, charged with the burglary-murder of a white man.
Alan Paton's modern classic, "Cry, the Beloved Country," has been lovingly remade by director Darrell James Roodt and producer Anant Singh, who collaborated on the admirable "Sarafina!" The first version was filmed in 1951 by Zoltan Korda with a very young Sidney Poitier in the cast. Paton's book also provided the basis for the stage musical, "Lost in the Stars," which became a 1974 film.
The new "Cry, the Beloved Country" is a stirring rendition marked by an Academy Award-caliber performance by James Earl Jones.
Lately associated with roles as gruff curmudgeons, Jones reverses himself as the gentle, sometimes bewildered man of God. At times he seems ineffectual, overwhelmed by the personal tragedies he encounters, as well as the misery of black life in the city. But in matters of right and wrong, he remains assertive.
Counterpoint to Jones is Richard Harris as the affluent white rancher who lives in the same district. The two men know each other by sight, but they have never met. It turns out that Harris' son, a civil rights advocate, is the man killed by Jones' son.
The scene in which the two bereaved fathers meet and seek understanding is a masterpiece played by consummate actors.
Director Roodt deserves credit for keeping the narrative moving without pausing for preachments. The film attains even more significance than the earlier versions in light of efforts to end apartheid in South Africa.
The Miramax release was adapted with great sensitivity by Ronald Harwood. Rating is PG-13, perhaps for violence. Running time: 108 minutes.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Load-Date: December 11, 1995

 

End of Document
