

Baker Taking Plan for Peace Talks to the Arabs
The Associated Press
April 10, 1991, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 501 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




U.S. diplomacy is approaching a breakthrough point as Secretary of State James A. Baker III carries a proposal for Mideast peace talks to the Arab world.
"There is a long, long way to go," Baker said after Foreign Minister David Levy on Tuesday gave him Israel's approval of peace talks that would be held under U.S. auspices.
Baker praised the move as constructive, and a senior U.S. official said that, in principle at least, "there is agreement" between the United States and Israel.
Baker and Levy stressed there were many details to work out. Even so, Baker said he was hopeful. And Levy said "the land mines that existed we dispersed."
Baker met for two hours today with Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir but said nothing to reporters before heading to the airport for the flight to Cairo to meet with Egyptian and Saudi officials. Later in the week he will meet with Syrians and Jordanians.
Avi Pazner, an aide to Shamir, told reporters after the Shamir-Baker meeting today that the talks could lead to "a joint effort in good spirit" to advance Middle East peace prospects.
Pazner said progress was made but cautioned: "Of course we are not alone and are waiting for the answers of the other side."
"We have a good feeling as a result of these talks, that a lot of understanding was reached between us and the United States," Pazner said. "But as they say, it takes two to tango. It isn't enough for Israel and the United States to agree. The ball is in the Arab court."
The peace talks would include Palestinian Arabs as part of a Jordanian delegation, provided they are not members of the Palestine Liberation Organization, and the Soviet Union, as well, Levy said.
A senior U.S. official, briefing reporters under rules that shielded his identity, said the Bush administration insisted on Palestinian participation in the peace talks.
Levy suggested the talks be held in Washington and begin by the end of the year. Another Israeli official, speaking only on condition of anonymity, said Israel's aim was to hold direct negotiations with the Arabs as soon as possible.
Levy told Israel Television there was a good chance Syria and Jordan would go along.
At the same time, the Shamir government renewed its proposal for elections on the West Bank and in Gaza. The Palestinians who win would negotiate arrangements for limited self-rule with the Israeli government.
If the Arabs agree to the Israeli initiative, Baker's Mideast diplomacy could achieve a significant breakthrough, even though the outcome of negotiations would be uncertain.
The Arabs, with support from Bush, are demanding Israel give up territory in exchange for peace. Shamir, Levy and other leaders of the Likud government, however, are determined to hold onto the land captured from the Arabs in the 1967 Six-Day War.
The future of Jerusalem also could be a sticking point.
Bush last year referred to East Jerusalem as "occupied territory." Israel, which united the city after the war as its capital, intends to hold onto all of Jerusalem.

 

End of Document
