

BCCI-Altman: Why Did the Prosecution Fail?
The Associated Press
August 15, 1993, Sunday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 857 words
Byline: By ROB WELLS, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Washington attorney Robert Altman, acquitted in state court of deceiving regulators in the BCCI scandal, prevailed against a massive effort by government lawyers.
Why, after some five months in the courtroom, 45 witnesses, hundreds of documents, and a 15,000-page transcript, did New York state prosecutors fail?
There's no single explanation. The victory partly rested on the weakness of the prosecution's evidence, which was circumstantial and presented in a haphazard fashion. Altman's attorneys, meanwhile, skillfully exploited weaknesses in the state's case.
Jurors early Saturday evening cleared Altman of the four remaining counts against him. He was charged with scheming to defraud regulators and preparing false documents to conceal Bank of Credit and Commerce International's role in the 1982 takeover of First American Bankshares Inc., once Washington's biggest banking company.
That Altman and his defense team had won over the jury was clear after the verdict was announced. Several jurors tearfully embraced Altman, and others had their pictures taken with his wife, actress Lynda Carter.
Altman portrayed himself as a scapegoat for overzealous bank regulators, who sought to deflect heavy criticism of their handling of the BCCI affair.
BCCI, an international bank seized in 1991, engaged in drug money laundering and perhaps history's biggest bank fraud. Its collapse led to losses of $ 12 billion, bank runs and riots in several cities.
The BCCI scandal is difficult to understand, and the Manhattan district attorney's office didn't make it any easier.
The halting, plodding courtroom style of lead prosecutor John Moscow, the assistant district attorney, stood in sharp contrast to the engaging and animated performance of veteran criminal defense attorney Gustave Newman and the intense cross-examinations of Mitchell Ettinger, a Washington-based lawyer.
That contrast stood out sharply on March 30, when Moscow finished a low-key opening statement, in near monotone. Newman leapt to his feet in apparent outrage, marched to the jury box, shouting, "What you have just heard characterizes the whole prosecution - cover ups, leaving out key facts."
Lengthy delays due to repeated defense objections also made it difficult for the prosecution to present a smooth narrative to the jury.
The alleged crime - tricking federal regulators to obtain a bank charter - was hard to grasp in the extensive testimony, experts said.
"The generalization and conventional wisdom is that it's very hard in a case involving only circumstantial evidence to convince the jury of the guilt of a defendant when there wasn't clear evidence of a crime," John C. Coffee Jr., a Columbia University law professor, said in a telephone interview Sunday.
Coffee contrasted the Altman case with the Charles Keating trials, where elderly depositors lost their life savings in junk bond investments. "Not one dollar of First American was lost" due to BCCI's actions, said Coffee, although prosecutors would object to the claim.
But clearly, BCCI didn't loot and plunder First American as it did with other companies, Coffee said.
Moscow presented a convoluted case based on contacts Altman and his law partner, former Defense Secretary Clark Clifford, had with BCCI executives about First American business. BCCI founder Agha Hasan Abedi, for example, interviewed 11 people for management positions at First American.
The outlaw bank also provided favorable financing so Clifford and Altman could purchase First American stock, transactions in which they pocketed a combined $ 4.5 million. Altman contends the stock arrangement was properly disclosed.
Altman originally was indicted on nine counts, but five were thrown out by Justice John A.K. Bradley of New York's trial-level State Supreme Court before the case reached the jury, including a count that Altman received bribes from BCCI.
"I think the government really over pled their case when they charged bribery," Coffee said.
Moscow sought to portray First American as covertly controlled by BCCI. Clifford and Altman, in particular, were "at the center," he claimed, because they served as senior executives at First American and represented BCCI and a group of wealthy Persian Gulf businessmen who acquired the Washington bank.
Clifford also was indicted but didn't stand trial with Altman since he was recovering from heart surgery in March.
Defense attorneys said Moscow's version was a tortured twisting of the facts.
"The prosecution's case has been just that - a theory in search of the facts," defense attorney Mitchell S. Ettinger said.
First American had independent management comprised of prominent U.S. citizens who didn't take orders from BCCI, Ettinger said. By 1984, only five former BCCI officials worked at First American, a company employing 4,353 people.
"Every single (First American) officer who came before you told you they operated in accordance with the best interest of First American, not BCCI," Ettinger said. "It's a lie to say BCCI controlled this bank."
The argument convinced juror Doris Brooks.
"I believe everything he did showed he wasn't guilty," Brooks said of Altman. "He was so honest."

 

End of Document
