

Behind the Scenes at a Big Passover Winemaker
The Associated Press
March 28, 1991, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 744 words
Byline: By HILARY APPELMAN, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NAPLES, N.Y.
Body




At Seders across the United States this weekend, Jews will celebrate Passover and their deliverance from slavery in Egypt with traditional glasses of wine.
That means big business for Manischewitz, a leading producer of kosher wines.
Once based in Brooklyn, Manischewitz was snapped up by Canandaigua Wine Co. in 1987. Its kosher wines are now made and bottled under the supervision of rabbis in the tiny Finger Lakes village of Naples, where there isn't a synagogue to be found.
Manischewitz operations exist side by side with Widmer's Wine Cellars, another subsidiary of Canandaigua Wine.
"We essentially operate two wineries here," said Widmer's plant manager Jake Makepeace. "It's a cooperative effort, yet there's a very distinct separation."
While traditional kosher wine is sweet and purply, served at religious ceremonies and Sabbath celebrations, the biggest growth in kosher products is among dryer wines - chardonnays and white zinfandels, first introduced in the 1970s by Manischewitz competitor Royal Kedem Wine Co. of Brooklyn.
Sales of Manischewitz's California-made dry wines are growing at a rate of between 12 and 15 percent, said Howard Jacobson, vice president of marketing for Canandaigua Wine. That compares to a growth rate of only about 4 percent for the traditional Concord grape wine.
"Younger generations of Jewish people like dry table wines," Makepeace said. "There's a lot of Orthodox yuppies out there."
But there is still plenty of demand for the old-fashioned sweet stuff. Sales of fruit-flavored Manischewitz dessert wines are growing about as fast as the dry wines, Jacobson said.
The name Manischewitz is practically synonymous with Passover, partly because of the century-old food company - maker of the familiar orange-wrapped matzohs and macaroons - by the same name.
The two companies were started by members of the same family, but have always been separate, Jacobson said.
Manischewitz wines are approved by the Union of Orthodox Jewish Congregations of America, a Brooklyn-based organization that sets strict standards for kosher certification.
Kosher wine is made the same way as any other wine. But from the crushing of the grapes until the bottling of the wine, the process must be supervised by Sabbath-observing Jews to make sure that only kosher ingredients are used.
In Naples, production and bottling operations are overseen by two men known around the winery as "the rabbis."
Jacob Meyer, an ordained rabbi specially trained in kosher supervision and Michel Safier, a former automobile bumper salesman, commute to the winery each day from Brighton, a Rochester suburb about an hour north of Naples.
When Manischewitz was first acquired, supervising rabbis had to be flown in each week from New York, Makepeace said.
Manischewitz operations shut down early Fridays so the rabbis can get home before sundown, and the fall grape harvest must be scheduled around Jewish holidays.
For the actual crushing in August and September, a dozen or so rabbinical students - and the kosher food to feed them - are imported from New York and New Jersey.
After the crushing the wine is pasteurized and can be handled by non-Jews. But Meyer and Safier must still make sure that ingredients arrive with the proper certification and that the same equipment is not used for kosher and non-kosher - or Passover and non-Passover - wines.
The kosher wine is fermented and refined in a windowless building, unlocked each morning by Safier and locked again at night by Meyer.
Signs hanging from the ceiling warn "Absolutely no food or beverages of any kind are permitted in this building." Red, yellow and green stickers mark which equipment is used for which kind of wine.
At Passover, when strict Jewish religious law forbids eating any grain, corn sweeteners can't be used and the wine must be made with more expensive cane sugar. About 30 percent of the 12 million bottles Manischewitz produces each year are sold around Passover time.
"We're very strict," Safier said. "If it's a question of yes or no, usually we say no. Millions of people depend on us."
But certain compromises have been worked out. In the bottling plant, non-kosher Widmer's wine is bottled on a rattling conveyor belt that runs alongside the Manischewitz line. The lines are rarely operated at the same time, and when they are, blue plastic tarps are pulled between them to prevent any splashing, Makepeace said.
"Both sides have bent over backward to make this cooperative effort work."
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto

 

End of Document
