

Behind-The-Goal Gang Adds Color to U.S. Games
 The Associated Press
October 22, 1995, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 686 words
Byline: By BRIAN TRUSDELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Ron wears a blue wig. Brett plays the bagpipes. And a guy called "Big Dog" with wrap-around sunglasses and closely cropped hair stands in the front row.
The red T-shirted fans known as Sam's Army have set up camp behind the goal at U.S. national team games to lend support to coach Steve Sampson's lads.
"They're awesome, man," said American defender Alexi Lalas, who has become a soul mate of the drum-banging, cowbell-clanging crazies. "They're incredible, important, crucial. They make me smile.
"If I was not out on the field, I'd want to be smack-dab in the middle of Sam's Army."
Formed on the Internet by three 28-year-olds, membership has grown to nearly 1,000.
"We got sick of the apathy," said co-founder Mark Spacone, a student at Buffalo State University from Amherst, N.Y. "You'd go to a game, like the (U.S.-Switzerland World Cup) game, and when the Swiss scored, it was though you were in Switzerland.
"We had to do something."
Spacone and kindred soul John Wright from nearby Buffalo started talking after the World Cup about publishing their own magazine.
"We were just sitting in a bar when we came up with the idea," said Wright, now in the U.S. Air Force based in Lakenheath, England. "Originally, we were only going to do the 'zine, see how much interest we could create."
But with Wright's access to the Internet, he began discussing the idea with another soccer and computer fan, Mark Wheeler of Pittsburgh.
By May 28, a group of 10 fans had shown up in Tampa, Fla., at the U.S.-Costa Rica game with a banner reading, "Sam's Army - Tampa Brigade."
Spacone, Wright and Wheeler began planning to get a group to go to all American games at the U.S. Cup in June.
"By the third game against Colombia, we couldn't believe how many people wanted to do this," Wright said.
Starting with a core of 25-30 people, they showed up at Foxboro, Mass., for the Nigeria game June 8. By June 25 against Colombia in Piscataway, N.J., there were more than 70, and even more joined them during the game.
"We're trying to make it loud," Wright said. "We're trying to get away from the hot dogs and popcorn. Let the players know we're there."
Wearing red T-shirts with a soccer ball topped with a red, white and blue stove pipe hat, they sing songs and chant slogans - including some that are not very complimentary to the referees.
"We wanted to do what fans in other countries do. The Italians wear blue; the Brazilians yellow," Spacone said. "We picked red. We want to create a sea of red. We're a puddle right now."
It's by design that Sam's Army sits behind the goal.
"Traditionally, that's where the crazies sit," Spacone said. "It's the least attractive spot and it's where we can stand up and make all the noise we want without bothering anybody."
In other countries, supporters have a reputation for violence, but the U.S. Soccer Federation has no similar worries about Sam's Army.
"That's not the case here," said federation general secretary Hank Steinbrecher, who has on occasion sat with Sam's Army. "They're just a fun-loving group. There's been a couple of situations where security doesn't know how to handle them. We've had to intervene and tell security to chill out."
Steinbrecher's only concern about sitting with Sam's Army is "I'm the guy in the suit."
At the U.S.-Saudi game in Washington two weeks ago, about 100 red-clad crazies stood, chanted and sang. They gathered in the parking lot and marched in to the beat of Spacone's drum and New Yorker Brett Boye's bagpipes.
Everybody pitches in. Wheeler, a computer science doctoral candidate at Carnegie Mellon University, keeps up the page on the Internet. Spacone tries to get the fanzine, Bookable Offense, together.
Wade Jackson, who drove in from St. Charles, Mo., for the Saudi game with his wife, Sue, 15-year-old son Eric and 16-year-old Scott McAllister of Colombia, Mo., is designing Sam's Army scarves.
The next goal for Sam's Army will be the CONCACAF Gold Cup in Southern California in January.
"They give a great lift emotionally," Sampson said. "The (American players) come out to play for them. We live for the day when there are 65,000 of Sam's Army in red."
 Load-Date: October 22, 1995

 

End of Document
