

Below The Volcanos, Hutus Wait For The Enemy
The Associated Press
July 8, 1994, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 575 words
Byline: By KARIN DAVIES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RUHENGERI, Rwanda
Body




Beneath the menacing shadows of volcanos, the people of this army garrison town live in fear of an approaching enemy.
They hear the rockets fired by the Rwandan Patriotic Front and remember when the Tutsi rebels came twice before from the mist-shrouded volcanos on the Ugandan border.
Hutu government soldiers swiftly chased the rebels back across the border in 1991 and 1993. But now, the minority Tutsi-led rebels seem unstoppable. Their troops already have overrun the national army and marched west across two-thirds of the country, driving the Hutu population ahead of them.
"They have a country without people, we have people without a country," said physics teacher Vincent Ntezimana, a 33-year-old Hutu who fled Butare.
Since capturing the capital of Kigali last weekend, the rebels have launched a new assault, pressing south to within 8 miles of Ruhengeri from four positions atop the jungle-covered volcanos. These are the same hills where the naturalist Dian Fossey was murdered in 1990 among her beloved mountain gorillas made famous by the movie, "Gorillas in the Mist."
"Everyone is worried that the rebels will come from the volcanos again," said Pascasie Mukabasi, a Hutu who fled west to Ruhengeri from Byumba. "The national army can't protect us."
"I'm not afraid now, but I will be when the first bullet flies," she said from her shelter in a Roman Catholic church, a brown-bricked haven on a hill overlooking the city.
The hundreds of motley soldiers in Rwanda's third largest city were tense, uneasy and wandering aimlessly. Rebel advances have cut supply lines and left many army units without munitions.
Most of the young men's commanders have fled 50 miles to Gisenyi, a resort town on the border with Zaire.
"I want to fight but I have nothing to fight with," said soldier Edouard Mugabo, 25. "But we must have courage - I cannot live in a country with people who kill Hutus."
The civil war resumed April 6 after Rwanda's Hutu president died in a mysterious plane crash. Extremist Hutu militias began killing Tutsis as well as Hutus who supported last year's peace accord. The United Nations estimates 200,000 to 500,000 people, mostly Tutsis, have been slain.
Ruhengeri Gov. Basile Nsabumugish is afraid the nearly one million Hutus, including 350,000 refugees, now living in Ruhengeri will become victims of retribution.
"The RFP wants to take over all of Rwanda, they want an ethnically pure Rwanda," said Nsabumugish, himself a Hutu. He sent a letter to the French humanitarian mission, Operation Turquoise, asking for protection.
Nsabumugish wants the Hutus to stay and fight, but he admits their cause may be futile. Already, five of 16 districts comprising Ruhengeri, the breadbasket of Rwanda, have fallen to the rebels.
"We need more French troops here to protect us," said Josephine Nyiranzayino, 36, a refugee from Kigali. "I'm afraid if the French don't come we'll all be killed."
As they wait for the enemy, life in Ruhengeri grows grim.
Inflation is rampant. In the past three months, the cost of potatoes has tripled. Refugees clog the city streets and live in shelters built with sweet potato branches or banana leaves.
Yet a streak of defiance run through Ruhengeri.
Duhilimutu Placide, a 29-year-old priest, said the civil war has been "like a bullet to the heart." He does not trust the rebels to allow democratic rule, so Hutus "must organize ourselves, get international opinion on our side, then we will regain our country."
 Load-Date: July 8, 1994

 

End of Document
