

Beyond The Talks, The Real Challenge
The Associated Press
December 20, 1991, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 514 words
Byline: By BARRY RENFREW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, South Africa
Body




South Africa's hopes of replacing apartheid with democracy will depend on healing the wounds created by centuries of racial conflict.
If the talks that began Friday between white and black leaders lead to a democratic government, it will just be the start. South Africa will still be one of the world's most divided and violent nations.
South Africa is trying to end more than 300 years of racial antagonism virtually overnight. Its leaders are seeking a change never achieved in Africa or anywhere else.
But the country has no real tradition of democracy or peaceful racial coexistence on which to build. Political violence, which has claimed thousands of lives, shows no sign of ending.
It is the kind of challenge that has broken young democracies in other nations.
"A truly democratic South Africa will be one of the most difficult countries in the world to rule over," said political analyst Mauritz le Roux.
White and black leaders agree on the need to end apartheid and build democracy. They agree on the need to redress the enormous imbalances in wealth between whites and blacks.
But they are far apart on how to do it, and the talks Friday rang with warnings and rebukes as the two sides outlined demands they say they won't compromise on.
Some of the taunts were seen as political posturing by parties thinking about future elections. But underlining the gibes were profound differences.
African National Congress President Nelson Mandela demands a simple one-man, one vote system and drastic action to aid millions of poor blacks. Anything else, he says, would perpetuate apartheid.
President F.W. de Klerk says black majority rule won't work and white interests must be safeguarded. He says the white minority must approve any new political system.
De Klerk wants elaborate power sharing and a system that would let whites retain local control of some areas. One of his central aims is some form of white veto power over any future government.
Wealth and power remain concentrated in white hands. De Klerk opposes affirmative action to help blacks catch up and insists on whites keeping what they have.
Millions of desperately poor blacks expect a political deal to lead to immediate improvements in their lives. But leaders on both sides don't know how to meet those expectations and worry about what will happen if the expectations give way to disappointment and anger.
Black and white extremists, opposed to peaceful power-sharing, are lining up against any compromise.
The pro-apartheid Conservative Party has the support of hundreds of thousands of whites who fear majority rule will lead to the chaos that has devastated most black African nations. Radical black groups say power must be seized.
The government and the ANC say they must find a peaceful solution or face ethnic conflict of the kind tearing apart Yugoslavia.
The desire for a compromise has kept the reform process going for two years. Whether it is strong enough to produce an agreement is just the first test facing South Africa.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE: Barry Renfrew is The Associated Press' bureau chief in Johannesburg.

 

End of Document
