

Billy Shore's Idea: Fancy Food Raises Funds to Feed the Hungry
The Associated Press
April 19, 1994, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 789 words
Byline: By CONNIE CASS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




It has the fervent, seat-of-the-pants feel of a campaign headquarters. Twentysomething staffers rushing about. Ugly metal furniture. Boxes stacked here, brochures piled over there. Ever-ringing telephones.
But there's no candidate to promote. This small office at the end of a dim hallway promotes a cause - feeding the hungry.
Billy Shore is at home here. He built Share Our Strength into one of the nation's largest hunger relief organizations using skills he learned as a political strategist for Gary Hart and Sen. Bob Kerrey.
"It's similar to organizing a dark horse campaign," Shore said.
This is the busy season at Share Our Strength, like the final rush before an election. A handmade sign on the wall counts down "Days to Taste of the Nation" - the organization's biggest fund-raiser.
SOS hopes to raise more than $ 4 million this year with Taste of the Nation fund-raisers in more than 100 cities April 24-May 1. Some 5,000 chefs will donate their time to an assortment of black tie dinners, food fests and wine tastings. All of the proceeds go toward hunger relief.
Taste of the Nation alone has raised more than $ 10 million since 1988. SOS has awarded grants to almost half of all U.S. food banks - an impressive record for an organization begun only a decade ago.
Shore, now 38, was catching his breath after managing Gary Hart's 1984 campaign for the Democratic nomination when a newspaper story grabbed his attention. Thousands of children were starving in Ethiopia.
He felt compelled to do something. He knew how to raise money, how to build support for a cause. He knew he could help.
Shore asked himself what type of people would be most moved by hunger? The answer: people who love food. Chefs and restaurateurs.
What gave him the drive to actually do it - to borrow $ 2,000 on a credit card, to rent an office and begin calling chefs out of the phone book - he finds difficult to explain.
"Stepping across that line is the key hurdle that separates good programs from just ideas," Shore said.
It helped that it was the time of glitzy, everyone-can-make-a-difference fund-raisers like We Are the World and LiveAid. It was obvious people wanted to help, Shore said, and he figured a low-key campaign could rally the food industry.
Still working for Hart, he spent lunch hours and evenings and weekends putting SOS together, and hired his sister, Debbie Shore, to run things. The first few years were spent wheedling donations from the food industry.
"And then we realized people wanted to get involved in a more personal way than just writing a check," Shore said.
So Taste of the Nation was born in 1988. Chefs could help the hungry by doing what they did best - cooking. The first Taste of the Nation raised $ 252,000, and it's been growing each year.
"It's the first issue to come along that has completely united the restaurant industry," said Dallas chef Stephan Pyles, owner of Star Canyon and a member of the SOS board.
As SOS became aware of the growing hunger problem at home, it turned more attention to feeding Americans. Seventy percent of Taste of the Nation funds go to food banks and shelter kitchens in cities where the events are held. Ten percent goes to some of the neediest areas in the country.
The other 20 percent is still set aside for agencies that fight world hunger.
Two years ago, Shore dropped out of politics to devote himself full time to SOS. He gave up a chance to be chief of staff for Kerrey, D-Neb., after guiding Kerrey's bid for the Democratic nomination.
And he watched from the sidelines as many of his peers won jobs in the Clinton administration.
"I'd been on the Hill 13 years," Shore said. "I really don't miss it. I thought I would. Everyone I knew thought I would. I have no regrets."
There are some critics of Taste of the Nation's glitzy approach, people who can't quite see why a city needs a black-tie soiree to drum up support for feeding the poor.
But chefs say the highly visible fund-raisers publicize the hunger problem and encourage more people to help - and promote their restaurants.
"If we donate our food, and invite our guests to come donate their money, we are getting twice as many people involved in the issue," said Danny Meyer, owner of Union Square Cafe in New York. "Everybody wins."
Shore knows that food banks offer only emergency aid, not a long-term solution. He hopes SOS will inspire others to tackle the real problem - poverty.
"At the policy level right now, people have really given up on poverty," he said, "because there aren't clear answers. The answers are evasive and controversial.
"Part of what we're doing is trying to show something that can be changed. If we get rid of hunger, hopefully it will inspire people to get to the deeper, more evasive problems."
 Load-Date: April 19, 1994

 

End of Document
