

Books and Authors: Mentioning the Unmentionable
The Associated Press
July 31, 1992, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 823 words
Byline: By HILLEL ITALIE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Even as she preaches oneness with the earth, there is an edge to Alice Walker. Her laugh can turn rueful, her smile enigmatic. She knows enough to keep moving forward, but too much to forget about the past.
"I think we, people of color, talk about more serious things because our lives have to be much more serious," the author says. "We are constantly threatened with danger. We have to deal with a very complex reality all the time.
"There are white writers who can write as if they're in America and there aren't Native American or black people. I can never assume I live in a world that is all black or all Native American or all white. It's really hard to read those books, because when I open one up it seems so unreal to me."
Walker, interviewed recently at a Manhattan hotel, has made a career out of mentioning the unmentionable. She wrote of abortion in the short story "The Abortion," interracial love in the novel "Meridian," rape and wife-beating in her acclaimed "The Color Purple."
With her new novel, "Possessing the Secret of Joy," Walker takes on what may be her most difficult subject: female genital mutilation, the ritual of removing the outer sexual organs of women and girls. It has been performed on millions in Asia, Africa and the Middle East, and is reportedly on the rise among immigrants in Europe and the United States.
"In 1965, I was a student and I was in Kenya helping to build a school," Walker, 48, recalled. "I heard it mentioned. People were trying to talk to me about it. I was so young I couldn't understand what they meant.
"I started to read African novelists - extraordinary, African woman writers - and they would often mention a thing called the 'bath.' You would have a bath and sit on the floor for 30 days and you can't do this, you can't do that. And I thought, why?"
"Possessing the Secret of Joy," brings back the African character Tashi from "The Color Purple" and "The Temple of My Familiar." As a young woman, Tashi voluntarily underwent the "bath" and she spends years in analysis - including some time with C.J. Jung - getting herself to admit what happened and sorting out the emotional damage.
Walker herself had to decide how she wanted to express her feelings. It's hard enough to write about this in essay form, but more so in fiction, which tends to resist "issues" in favor of the more open-ended world of emotions, to offer questions rather than answers.
"It's the same question the ancient people asked when they knew their knowledge was going to be destroyed," Walker said. " 'Should we put this in an essay or should we make tarot cards.' And they said, 'Well, people would much rather play than read essays.'
"They decided to put it in a form that would really engage people and at the same time make them feel they had a little room to maneuver emotionally, ideologically and intellectually."
Tashi follows a road traveled by many in Walker's books - Mem in her first novel, "The Third Life of Grange Copeland"; the title character of "Meridian"; Celie in "The Color Purple."
They are women at first confined to lives of weary, frustrated silence, whether under the physical threat of an abusive man or the invisible cell of an oppressive society. But they eventually rebel (Mem, for instance, shoves a gun in her husband's face) and then undergo a healing process, learning to find happiness on their own terms.
"People are boxed in by whatever their circumstances are. We would all like to try different lives and one of the really sad things is that so many peoeple cannot and they are truly enslaved in the lives they have even if it is a comfortable life," Walker said.
"This is how many woman feel and this is why feminism is such a major force in the world. Women, even very comfortable women, who are chained to a role, their husbands often are just as chained."
You don't have to look far to understand why Walker relates to this kind of story. A native of Eatonton, Ga., she grew up poor in the strictly segregated South of the 1950s. She was inspired by the civil rights movement, went North to study at Sarah Lawrence College and soon began a life of writing and political activism.
"You'll never be as whole as ideally you'd like to be," she said, "but it's important because otherwise with the insecurities people have it's hard to trust. You need to be able to feel secure enough in who you are and in your belief and foundation, and in your joy that you connect with other people without fear.
"I never expected to be over 30, but once I got to 30 I was able - to my surprise and happiness - to feel connected to life. It was in such a way that now, instead of thinking I could leave at any moment - that was the proper response to despair - I feel could leave at any moment and that's the response to joy."
Walker laughed, warmly.
"Ain't that nice."
---
"Possessing the Secret of Joy" is published by Harcourt, Brace, Javanovich and has a suggested retail price of $ 19.95.

 

End of Document
