

Books and Authors: Outflanked by Rommel the Desert Fox
The Associated Press
August 13, 1993, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 648 words
Byline: By RON HARRIST, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: OXFORD, Miss.
Body




Author Larry Wells says he may have been outflanked by the Desert Fox when he conjured up a tale of Germany's famous World War II general motorcycling around Dixie to study Confederate cavalry tactics.
"I think the spirit of Gen. Erwin Rommel may have gotten the last laugh," said Wells, whose novel "Rommel and the Rebel" was first released in 1986. "The more I look into this and the more people I talk with, the more I'm convinced Rommel did visit Mississippi and Tennessee in the 1920s."
Wells said the original idea for his book came from a newspaper article detailing the visit of five German officers to Mississippi before World War II to study the tactics of Confederate cavalryman Nathan Bedford Forrest. Rommel, whose Afrika Korps clashed with the British in North Africa during World War II, supposedly used them in deploying his armor.
"I became interested in the notion of a German field marshal visiting Mississippi before the war and having all sorts of Mississippi adventures and misadventures," said Wells, who along with his wife, Dean Faulkner Wells, operate the Yoknapatawpha Press in Oxford.
For some time after the release of his book, Wells had been contacted by people who said "the story rang a bell for them, that they either had heard or had evidence that Rommel had been in the South before World War II."
And after the book's recent re-release, Wells said the calls began anew, leading him to visit Clifton, Tenn., a crossing point for Forrest on the Tennessee River.
"There was one woman in Clifton who remembers seeing Rommel in 1922," he said. "One reason the event sticks out in her mind is that Rommel was riding the first motorcycle she had ever seen."
Flora Mae Davis, 74, has taken a special interest in the Rommel stories that have continued to circulate in Clifton during her more than 30 years as a weekly newspaper correspondent.
"From what I can tell, Rommel stayed in our local hotel, which has since been torn down," she said. "After the war, when somebody was working the hotel and trying to restore it, they put a plaque on the door of the room where the general stayed."
Davis said one of the town's oldest residents, Carrie Willie Fowler, years ago told her of an encounter with a motorcyclist she's convinced was Rommel.
"She has been able to describe him in his high boots and the uniform of the day," Davis said. "I think at the time he was a young lieutenant."
Fowler, now 82, said she has a better recollection of the motorcycle than the man.
"I was just a young girl, working in the telephone office my father owned," she said. "I heard something and when I got out on the street here he came. I heard somebody say that it was Rommel."
Wells said he also had been told that the German general was "riding a motorcycle when he came to Baldwyn, Miss., site of the Battle of Brice's Crossroad, and I already knew from his memoirs that after the first World War Rommel made a motorcycle tour of Italian battlefields where he had seen action. Suddenly the pieces were coming together."
Wells hopes to visit the port authority in New Orleans to see if records from the 1920s exist and if Rommel's name was among the foreign nationals who visited the United States.
"I believe that's where he would come into the country," he said. "I think he might have worked his way up to Vicksburg and then to Baldwyn, walking the terrain and seeing how the generals used the terrain to their advantage. Then he could have headed up to Clifton to look at the river crossing Gen. Forrest made.
"I don't know if all this will work into another book about the Desert Fox but it just might," he said. "You know I made up most of my novel but something told me it could have happened. A writer can't second-guess the past, but if he's lucky sometimes he can come close."
---
"Rommel and the Rebel," published by Yoknapatawpha Press, sells for a suggested retail price of $ 14.95.

 

End of Document
