

Books and Authors: 'Those Were the Days, My Friends'
The Associated Press
September 27, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 723 words
Byline: By KARIN DAVIES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Frederick Forsyth has lost the best villain he ever had - the KGB.
"As a spy writer, obviously it is going to affect what one does next," Forsyth said over tea at the Montcalm Hotel, also the scene of a more shadowy rendezvous between two of his characters. "Clearly, you can never now use the KGB again as the all-purpose villain."
Forsyth's newly released seventh novel, "The Deceiver," is his first since the fall of the Berlin Wall and the second Russian revolution. With uncharacteristic nostalgia, his dedication notes the passing of an era:
"The Cold War lasted 40 years. For the record, the West won it. But not without cost. This book is for those who spent so much of their lives in the shadowed places. Those were the days, my friends."
Writers of spy thrillers have struggled with change since Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev introduced his programs of perestroika and glasnost and the Cold War ended.
But until now the KGB has lurked in the background.
With its demise, John Le Carre, Robert Ludlum, Tom Clancy and Forsyth have had to change their course. Forsyth praised Clancy's success, using Middle East terrorists in his latest book "Sum of All Fears."
Forsyth, the 53-year-old author of "The Day of the Jackal" and "The Negotiator," speaks as he writes - with authority, flair and a hint of mystery. He is fit and tanned after a fishing trip off the North Carolina coast, his blue-eyed gaze is direct from behind a cloud of smoke curling from a cigarette that sits snugly in a holder.
"The Deceiver" is Sam McCready, who has served with distinction for seven years as chief of covert operations for the British Secret Intelligence Service. When an ambitious, young superior decides it is time for him and other old-style operatives to retire, McCready insists on a hearing which reviews four of his rule-bending exploits.
Originally written for television, the gripping tales concern a mission into East Germany to retrieve a sensitive Soviet document and a courier gone mad; the defections of two Russians; an arms shipment from Libyan leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi to the Irish Republican Army; and Caribbean politics and cocaine.
"They are all drawn from real-life stories that have only been lightly reported," said the ex-foreign correspondent, a self-described Soviet watcher whose fiction has sometimes anticipated or mirrored reality.
He was annoyed that he learned of the Soviet coup one rainy day in remote Glacier Bay, Alaska, where he was vacationing with his two sons.
"Those bastards," Forsyth said sardonically of the coup leaders. "They struck too early. Most inconsiderate."
He had hinted in the British version of his book that the hard-liners would close in on Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev one day, but Forsyth said he would have preferred that they waited until his book was released.
"We'll have to find fresh bad guys. Our standby of 40 years has gone," said Forsyth, who sees plenty of alternatives at hand.
"We've got the terrorists, we've got the IRA, we've got Central and South America, we've got cocaine, we've got the Middle East, maybe Asia, we've got the guys behind Tiananmen Square, except that … no one can understand them."
The choice of a new villain will wait until the new year, for Forsyth is sticking to his habit of taking a year off between books.
"My thoughts stray to a plot, and I know I'm returning to the loneliest sight in the world - a sheet of white paper in the typewriter," the author said.
Forsyth said he hates writing, but does it to keep his 190-acre sheep farm in Hertfordshire, northwest of London, where he lives with the woman he met after he and his wife, Carrie, divorced.
The author grew up in rural Kent, where many of his friends lived on farms, and he said he always has wanted one for himself.
"Three years ago, I said I'm coming up to 50, and I'm damn well going to do it. So I did it. I bought my farm and I'm very, very happy on it."
It's a quiet turn for a man who was once an aspiring matador, the Royal Air Force's youngest pilot at age 19 and a foreign correspondent in European and African capitals for 12 years.
"When you look back on the things you did in past life there's always, if you had good times and I did, bound to be some nostalgia," he said.
"(But) I'm perfectly happy sitting here in a nice armchair, knowing I'm going to sleep in a warm bed. One slows up."
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto

 

End of Document
