

Boy Scouts Do Their Good Deed in Goma: Burying the Dead
The Associated Press
July 25, 1994, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 579 words
Byline: By MORT ROSENBLUM, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: GOMA, Zaire
Body




Like everywhere else, the Boy Scouts of Zaire are prepared, ready to help wherever they can. Here their good deed is to collect bodies by the thousand and dump them into a pit.
From early morning until dark, kids of Little League age struggle to shove gruesome bundles into the back of trucks.
Sometimes the bundles are tiny, easily tossed onto the pile. But the killer here is cholera, not the malnutrition of infants, and more often the victims are adults.
"It is only normal, isn't it?" asked Jean Wauters, a retired Belgian importer in a rolled kerchief who supervises 500 young volunteers. "Scouts do their part."
Over 10 days, the kids and older ex-Scouts have collected 7,000 bodies outside Goma, and their work is only beginning. Aid officials say as many as 80,000 could die before the epidemic runs its course. As many as 11,000 had died by Monday.
French soldiers pick up corpses in Goma, where they have scooped out a huge common grave in a banana grove. Some European volunteers help. Mostly, Boy Scouts do the job.
Bodies are everywhere: dotting city streets, lining the roads out of town, stacked like logs in the refugee camps.
Some are wrapped in bright-colored sarongs. More are in woven straw sleeping mats. One was boxed neatly in a cardboard food aid container, strapped as if for mailing. A large label read, "Hard Biscuit."
Early on Monday, a crew worked at Mugunga camp near Goma, a patch of hell on earth where the vast swath of laid-out corpses never seems to get smaller, despite regular calls by the body trucks.
"I must do this," explained Oscar Benda, 20, as he helped two boys hoist a corpse onto a battered blue Toyota flatbed. "The disease might get me next and, in a few days, this could be me."
Like the others, he was out of uniform. He wore a scout kerchief with a painter's beret pulled low over his delicate features. He looked like what he was: a tragically miscast art student.
A Rwandan, he fled with more than 1 million other Hutus to Zaire when Tutsi rebel troops routed the Hutu-dominated army and took power in Kigali. Hutus now fear revenge for the slaughter of perhaps a half-million people, most of them Tutsis, at the hands of the army and Hutu miliitias.
Orphaned at an early age, Benda's only home was the school he attended in Gisenyi, a ghost town just across the border. In Goma, his family is the Boy Scouts.
Kisimba Ndondo wears a regulation shirt with "Boy Scouts of Zaire" over the left pocket. The right-pocket patch says "Cub Scout," but he is 34. People call him Mosquito.
"We are here to help people," he said. "This is our good deed."
Active scouts are aged 12 to 17, but Mosquito is a troop leader in the alumni association. One of the members, at 72, is heaving bodies with the rest.
Each day, the scout teams prowl the camps, roadsides and lakefront for more bundles. When the trucks are full, they drive to the French-dug grave among the banana trees.
Unmarked and unmourned, the victims' remains are pitched into the common grave. Other graves will be necessary, Mosquito said, but everyone is too busy to dig them. To save time, French engineers are dynamiting the volcanic rock near Goma to open more space for burials.
The teams beg gloves and antiseptic solution wherever they can. Wauters was at Mugungu to get a meager supply from the Irish aid group Concern.
"So far all of our volunteers are working for free, in the spirit of scouting," Wauters said. "But soon we must give them something. One can only ask so much."
 Load-Date: July 26, 1994

 

End of Document
