

Brazil Brings African Killer Crocodiles to the Americas
The Associated Press
April 23, 1991, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 774 words
Byline: By TODD LEWAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




Brazil, the country that brought African killer bees to the Americas 35 years ago, has now imported even more dangerous creatures: African killer crocodiles.
A Brazilian company flew 95 female and 15 male Nile crocodiles from Zimbabwe to a top-security facility in southern Brazil in June 1989 to breed them in captivity and sell their skins abroad.
Last month, local ecologists lost an 18-month attempt to force the owners to return the animals to Africa when an outgoing governor signed a last-minute decree legalizing the crocodile farm.
A nearly unanimous group of environmentalists and scientists warns it is just a matter of time before the crocodiles escape into the wild.
When they do, experts say, the crocodiles will reproduce, infiltrate Latin America's jungles and wetlands, overpower rival species and upset the continent's ecological balance.
"They'll certainly attack and eat many humans," said Dr. William Magnusson, a crocodile specialist at the Institute for Amazon Studies in the jungle city of Manaus. "But that's trivial compared to the destruction they'll do to the continent's ecosystems."
Michael Denley, a British citizen, and his Brazilian wife, Andreia Fillippi, joined with her stepfather, Nilo Shunke, to start the farm six years ago. Shunke's business machine company, Contaregis Equipes y Controles SA, built the compound in Osorio, 900 miles southwest of Rio de Janeiro.
Andreia's mother, Rezane Fillippi, a former state justice minister and an influential lawyer in Rio Grande do Sul state, said the family took every precaution.
Double, concrete walls enclose a breeding patio, sand hill and artificial lagoon. The adults are kept isolated in concrete-lined tanks with heavy wooden hatches, she said.
"Escape is next to impossible," Fillipi said in a phone interview from Porto Alegre, the state capital.
That doesn't comfort environmentalists, who say the risks of escape remain high, especially at a private facility with a capacity to hatch 4,800 crocodiles a year.
"History tells us that schemes like this always backfire in the long run," said Dr. Ludwig Buckup, an ecology professor at the Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul. "All you need is a thief, (or) a lax guard to cause a disaster."
He noted that a Sao Paulo beekeeper gave similar assurances of safety after importing 70 African killer bees in 1956.
The bees escaped and began a 33-year migration north. By last fall, they had killed nearly 1,000 people and crossed into Texas from Mexico.
Last October, scientists from 13 Brazilian scientific organizations and from Argentina and Australia held an emergency meeting in Porto Alegre to discuss the crocodiles. They issued a statement saying the Osorio compound was safe for now, but crocodiles would surely escape or be released someday.
Rio Grande do Sul's numerous lakes, swamps and waterways provide an ideal breeding ground for the crocodiles, said Maria Tereza Queiroz, a crocodile specialist at the Museum of Natural Science in Porto Alegre.
She said the crocodiles could migrate northwest through the wetlands of central Brazil and Bolivia before fanning out through the Amazon basin, the world's largest river system.
"There is no effective boundary," said Queiroz. "They could spread up through Central America and go as far north as southern Texas."
The Nile crocodile, which weighs as much as a ton and can reach 21 feet in length, could wipe out amphibious populations simply by spreading diseases unknown to native species, Magnusson said.
South America's seven species of caiman crocodiles also could vanish, unable to compete for food against the larger, more aggressive Nile crocodile, he said.
Nile crocodiles stalk and kill dozens of people in Africa every year. Wildlife experts have compiled eyewitness accounts of Nile crocodiles attacking groups of African women washing clothes in rivers. The crocodile also has been said to attack boats and rafts.
The governments of Peru and Colombia have criticized the farm, and Paraguay's president has called for a blanket ban on all Nile crocodiles. So have the environmental groups Traffic U.S.A., World Wildlife Fund and World Conservation Monitoring Center in Cambridge, England.
Officials at Brazil's environmental agency, IBAMA, concede the agency wrongly allowed a low-level employee grant the family a license to import the crocodiles without a public forum in 1989. But officials say it may now be illegal to revoke the license.
Frances Bordas, a lawyer for the state environmental agency, plans to sue the farm.
"Time is against us," said Bordas. "But if we allow this company to continue, what's to stop others from opening Nile crocodile farms?"
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto RIO1 April 23.

 

End of Document
