

Briefs From The Persian Gulf War
The Associated Press
January 24, 1991, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 661 words
Dateline: NICOSIA, , Cyprus
Body




Iran's spiritual leader called President Bush "a murderer and a criminal" on Thursday for allegedly ordering bombing raids on civilian targets in Iraq, the Islamic Republic News Agency reported.
The agency, monitored in Nicosia, quoted Ayatollah Ali Khamenei as saying that targeting the Iraqi people was a "most blatant crime."
"Mr. Bush is a murderer and a criminal for massacring innocent people," IRNA quoted Khamenei as saying.
But he also criticized Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein, for "dragging Iraq under the jackboots of invaders."
"With what right have you involved the Iraqi nation in an unwanted war in order to satisfy your own ambitions?" he asked.
Iran, which fought an 8-year war with Iraq, has deplored both Saddam's occupation of Kuwait and the presence of the allied forces in the Persian Gulf.
---
CAIRO, Egypt (AP) - Sixteen Egyptians coerced into enlisting in Iraq's army have escaped and returned home, a senior Interior Ministry official said Thursday.
The official, who insisted on anonymity, said the escapees told security authorities the Iraqi government had tried to persuade some of them to carry out terrorist activities in Egypt.
He said they fled to Jordan hidden in trucks after the U.S.-led gulf forces launched the air attack on Iraq last week.
The escaped Egyptians also said Saddam Hussein's ruling Baath Party has launched a campaign to recruit Egyptians living in Iraq into the popular army. Some said they were offered money to join.
Egyptian officials say there are about 200,000 Egyptian workers currently in Iraq. Although Cairo never acknowledged it, some Egyptian expatriate workers fought with Iraq in its 1980-88 war with Iran.
Egypt, which spearheaded Arab opposition to the Iraqi invasion, has more than 38,000 troops among allied forces.
---
LONDON (AP) - A British insurer has sharply reduced its rates for sea and air cargo carriers traveling in the Middle East, reflecting optimism about the risks to commercial shipping there.
However, if a commercial vessel is attacked or strikes a mine, or if a commercial plane is shot down, insurance rates are likely to go shooting up again, analysts said.
The War Risk Rating Committee, which sets cargo insurance rates for most insurers, announced Wednesday it was decreasing rates to 2 percent of the value of cargo headed for Iran, Qatar and other Persian Gulf countries. The rates had previously been between 3 percent and 3.5 percent.
The War Risks Rating Committee is a joint body of the Lloyd's of London insurance company and the Institute of London Underwriters.
---
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (AP) - Former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto's Muslim countrymen have branded her a traitor to Islam for comments published Thursday in which she praised President Bush's handling of the Persian Gulf crisis.
Most Pakistanis consider Iraq's Saddam Hussein to be the champion of Muslim unity.
Members of Ms. Bhutto's left-leaning Pakistan People's Party have organized anti-U.S. demonstrations since war erupted in the gulf, shouting "Death to Americans," burning effigies of Bush and waving Iraqi flags.
They were stunned by news reports Thursday quoting Ms. Bhutto, in an interview with U.S. television, as praising Bush for handling the crisis "with a masterly hand."
Ms. Bhutto was on a speaking tour of the United States, Canada and Britain.
---
STOCKHOLM, Sweden (AP) - Residents of the central Swedish university city of Uppsala thought the Persian Gulf war had reached them Thursday when air raid sirens screamed for more than an hour.
A technical problem caused the sirens to sound on the wrong day and to stay on for too long.
More than 200 people called the local police, and radio, hospital and university lines were also jammed by worried callers.
"This is not really the right time for a false alarm," said Robert Gustafsson, head of the regional emergency center. "People are afraid because of the war in the Persian Gulf."
Air raid sirens are tested all over Sweden on the first Monday of the month.

 

End of Document
