

BU.S.H NOTEBOOK: A Big Night On The Indian Ocean
The Associated Press
January 1, 1993, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 519 words
Byline: By RUTH SINAI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ABOARD THE USS TRIPOLI
Body




They talked about Yale, they talked about Dartmouth, they talked about bird hunting.
"It was a magical evening," Commodore John Peterson said of a relaxed New Year's Eve that President Bush spent with the senior commanders of Operation Restore Hope.
The president's host went to Dartmouth, Bush to Yale, and the conversation flowed freely in the flag mess hall aboard the amphibious assault ship that Bush called home during his 44 hours in Somalia.
The amphibious squadron on the Indian Ocean off Mogadishu is commanded by Peterson and consists of the Tripoli, Rushmore and Juneau.
Bush has tried to meet with the majority of the 1,000 sailors and 1,800 Marines based on board the Tripoli.
"The impact has been mind boggling," said Peterson, who was Bush's official host. "He's come to tell them they haven't been forgotten."
 
 ----
ABOARD THE USS TRIPOLI (AP) - It's hot below decks on this amphibious assault ship docked two miles off the Mogadishu coast.
The "near beer" with which the Marines and sailors toasted the New Year didn't do much to help. The thermometer read 90 degrees, rising with every reveler who crowded into the hallways below decks.
The sailors and Marines, out here since early December, are already used to it. Lucky for President Bush, though, the stateroom where he was spending two nights is air conditioned.
The Cold War is over, said Capt. Mike Cavana of Philadelphia. "But this is a hot war - against the bandits, the mosquitos and mostly - the heat."
 
 ----
ABOARD THE USS TRIPOLI (AP) - His name is Larry, not John.
But he's expecting a "Dear John" letter any day.
Seaman Larry Booth, an air traffic controller aboard this amphibious assault ship, hasn't received a letter from his girl in Miami, Okla., in over a month.
He's been out at sea for 90 days.
"The days are getting longer and longer," he said.
Is it worth it?
"If we've helped save even one life - and I think we saved lots more than that - then it's great," said the 20-year-old.
His boss, Chief Air Traffic Controller Eugene Edwards of Lumberton, N.C., was one of the officers who met New Year's Eve with President Bush. Edwards said he and Booth are ready for some shore leave. But that might be a ways away.
"Even Bush didn't tell us when we'll leave," Edwards said. "We didn't ask, and he didn't say."
 
 ---
ABOARD THE USS TRIPOLI (AP) - Capt. Ken Vanderworp of Detroit was blowing a party whistle, a Santa cap on his head and the sweat pouring down his face.
It was New Year's Eve, and he and his fellow Huey helicopter pilots were making merry, oblivious of their commander in chief sleeping on their ship just 100 yards away.
Vanderworp and his fellow pilots were recounting how they shot and destroyed a truck from which Somali bandits shot at two Cobra helicopters several weeks ago near the Somali town of Baidoa.
"First we fired warning shots, then the guys in the vehicle ran away, and then we got orders and destroyed the truck," said Vanderworp.
Vanderworp and his helicopter squadron escort the convoys carrying food to the starving in Baidoa. "We're their eyes in the sky," he said.
"It's a good thing to do and it feels good doing."

 

End of Document
