

Bucking the Tide, Some Black and White Groups Boycott Elections
The Associated Press
April 28, 1994, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 480 words
Byline: By SAHM VENTER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAPE TOWN, South Africa
Body




While millions of South Africans cast their votes, Richard Dudley ignored his country's first democratic election. "Freedom is Not Negotiable," his bumper sticker declared.
The head of the New Unity Movement, one of several black and white groups boycotting the poll, Dudley, 70, says he will never see real democracy.
He dismisses this week's vote as a "pantomime" that won't change the lot of ordinary South Africans. Dudley's socialist-leaning organization claims 4,000 members, mostly mixed-race intellectuals.
Boycotting organizations form a small but vocal opposition to the election, which is expected to make Nelson Mandela the country's first black president.
Mandela probably will govern the country in cooperation with outgoing President F.W. de Klerk's white-led National Party, which is expected to come in second and win a handful of Cabinet seats.
The boycotting black groups claim the election won't lead to genuine black majority rule. Some white groups are staying away because they don't want to be led by blacks.
Dudley maintains the election is the result of a plan worked out between de Klerk, Mandela and the World Bank, and won't end exploitation of South Africa.
"People are being taken for a ride. … There is hardly going to be any change," Dudley said. "Some of the benefits are going to accrue to a very small section of the oppressed."
Across the country in the black township of Mabopane, near Pretoria, Dr. Gomolemo Mokae of the black consciousness Azanian People's Organization also refused to vote. He closed his medical practice to allow staff members to cast ballots, but heeded Azapo's call on its 450,000 members to boycott.
"I feel like those people who did not buy the hype that the Titanic was unsinkable," he said.
Mokae, 29, predicted blacks will quickly become disillusioned when the new government doesn't deliver on promises of houses and jobs.
"The proof of the pudding is in the eating and our people will find that the results and effect of the election will stick in their throats," he said.
Azapo wants majority rule, not the sharing of power, and says land and wealth should be redistributed to blacks.
Mokae said his organization was "the magnifying glass" for people who didn't notice "the small print in the constitution," which will make De Klerk and Mandela "the nightwatchmen" of the wealth and property of white-owned conglomerates.
Also boycotting the election are many right-wing whites who have demanded their own homeland rather than submit to black rule.
Pro-apartheid whites, once unified under the banner of the Conservative Party, have splintered in recent months, with some backing the Freedom Front in the election campaign.
But many staunch Conservative Party supporters are standing behind their leader, Ferdi Hartzenberg, who rejects the election and sees the party fighting for its demands from outside Parliament in the future.
 Load-Date: April 28, 1994

 

End of Document
