

Bush Visit to Somalia the Talk of the Town
The Associated Press
December 29, 1992, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 437 words
Byline: By MARK FRITZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOGADISHU, Somalia
Body




If President Bush happens to rub elbows with some ordinary Somali citizens when he visits the capital on Thursday, odds are good he may get an earful from somebody like Ahmed Abdullah Hussein.
"We need jobs, schools open, electricity, communications so we can telephone New York for business," said Hussein, 42, who said he worked at the Mogadishu seaport.
Bush's tightly controlled visit is unlikely to allow such exchanges, but the fact that he's coming is the talk of the town. Some people are expecting a pocketful of miracles to pull Somalia out of misery and lawlessness.
"Bush is the president of Somalia now," said Mohammed Abdi Farah, 25, who said he was a former clothing salesman.
Bush, who ordered U.S. troops into Somalia to protect aid deliveries to its starving people, has resisted U.N. pressure for Washington to expand its mandate to include disarming the heavily armed, lawless nation and helping rebuild its shattered society.
About the only people who aren't either expectant or happy about the Bush visit are the bandits largely forced underground in the towns where U.S.-led troops have set up positions, said Hussen Ali Omar, 21, a math teacher.
"The gun holders don't like him," he said as he walked through a marketplace on a typically sweltering day. "Not only Bush, but all the Marines. If the Marines weren't here the bandits could come and take food and kill people."
He said a man on the bus grabbed a newsmagazine with the headline "Welcome Bush" and ripped it to pieces. Omar, however, was overjoyed about the visit by a U.S. president to Somalia, and to Africa in general.
"The world is talking about Somalia now," he said. "Somali people are optimists. Bush is trying to help the Somali people."
Less happy was Abdi Rahman, 21. "Tell Bush to give me back my trucks," he said.
Rahman said the U.S. Marines confiscated his two trucks because they had gun mounts. Marines have been confiscating guns they see openly and recently began seizing trucks with mounts, to which guns can easily be fitted.
Asked why he had guns mounted on his trucks, Rahman said: "To protect myself from bandits." A group of his friends laughed.
But university history teacher Abdi Shouaib, 34, said Bush is welcome only if he gets the guns out of Somalia. He said even the troop presence hasn't made the capital safe.
"I doesn't make any sense to come here and not take guns away," he said. "He is not welcome here if he doesn't take the guns from the bandits and pirates."
Hussein, the seaport worker, was asked if he expects President-elect Clinton to pursue the broader goal of restoring law and order in Somalia.
"Who?" he said.

 

End of Document
