

Bush Must Keep All Parties at the Table
The Associated Press
October 27, 1991, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 747 words
Byline: By TERENCE HUNT, AP White House Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




After finally coaxing warring parties to the Middle East peace table, President Bush faces a much tougher job: keeping them there long enough to find an end to the seemingly hopeless Arab-Israeli conflict.
No one has ever been able to do it before and the odds are still stacked against success.
There have been five full-scale wars between Arabs and Israelis, with thousands of casualties on each side. The nations of the Middle East have never been able to sit down for a successful peace conference.
The region has become a graveyard for peace proposals.
But on Wednesday in Madrid, all of Israel's Arab neighbors, including the Palestinians, will be engaged in formal direct negotiations with the Jewish state for the first time in 42 years.
Bush and Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev, as co-sponsors, will open the conference with speeches intended to put intense international pressure on the parties to negotiate seriously.
By itself, the meeting at the 18th century Royal Palace is a remarkable achievement for Bush and Secretary of State James A. Baker III. It required eight trips by Baker to the Middle East just to set up the conference.
Bush has much invested, but believes it's worth the risks. The Middle East is one of the most combustible regions on the globe and perhaps the only spot that could ignite a World War.
When the talks begin, everyone will be in uncharted waters. There are no precooked results for the negotiations that follow. And there are many predictions of failure.
Despite the uncertain outcome, some view the peace talks as a no-lose gamble for Bush.
"If he fails, so has everyone else," said Stephen Hess, a Brookings Institution scholar who is a specialist on presidential politics. "If he succeeds, he might as well get out his top hat and tails to march to Stockholm to pick up his Nobel Peace Prize."
There is another school of thought that the Middle East could undercut Bush's successes on other foreign policy fronts.
"George Bush has gained enormous credit from the notion that he can make things happen on the international stage," said Norman Ornstein, an analyst at the American Enterprise Institute. "If he focuses on and highlights an area where he can't make things happen, then it takes down the image of statesmanship that he so carefully built a peg or two."
Unlike Jimmy Carter, who orchestrated the Camp David peace talks between Israel and Egypt, Bush will stay on the sidelines. Officials say he will be involved, though, prodding the parties primarily through telephone diplomacy.
Polls show that a big majority of Americans feel Bush spends too much time on overseas travel and foreign policy. Accordingly, he will leave Madrid as soon as he makes his opening speech - flying to Houston where he will begin raising funds the next day for his re-election campaign.
Unlike 1973, there is no oil embargo or long gas lines driving the United States into deeper involvement in the Middle East.
The United States is trying to seize opportunities created by the end of the Cold War, the collapse of superpower rivalry and the defeat of Iraq in the Persian Gulf War. After risking the lives of hundreds of thousands of Americans, Bush seems to view Arab-Israeli peace almost as the payoff for his efforts.
It is a matter of importance for many Americans and an issue of intense political passions.
It's far from clear, though, whether the parties are willing to seriously negotiate.
"It is by now a truism that Syria, along with the other parties to this conference, agreed to attend … not so much because they have a deep interest in reconciliation but because none of them wishes to say no to the newly powerful United States," said Michael Mandelbaum of the Council on Foreign Relations.
Martin Indyk, executive director of the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, says the United States "is at the peak of its influence in the region and it can take advantage of that to move parties that want to make peace through this bumpy road to that final destination."
However, no one is willing to bet that the United States, even with its enhanced stature and influence, can bring peace to the Middle East.
"No one's going to be foolish" in their expectations, an administration official said. "There is a uniquely different set of circumstances. You can't say you're hopeful, but there's no reason to be pessimistic."
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Terence Hunt has covered the presidency since 1981 and is The Associated Press' chief White House correspondent.

 

End of Document
