

Buthelezi Power Looks to Be Eclipsed As Time Runs O 0 The object of their attention nods amiably. Granted times are "desperate," he tells a visitor, but there is no need to be uncivil.
The Associated Press
April 17, 1994, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 687 words
Body




Here in the heart of Zululand, the 65-year-old chief minister, elder cousin to Zulu King Goodwill Zwelithini, patriarch of the 100,000-strong Buthelezi clan and president of the Inkatha Freedom Party, still receives the respect he craves.
Not so in the rest of South Africa and the world beyond. His stock has fallen as he has steadfastly boycotted the negotiations that drafted South Africa's new interim constitution and instructed his followers to stay away from the first non-racial elections in South Africa's history.
Buthelezi is often described as a shrewd politician, but his holdout policy now looks more muddled than clever. With the collapse on Thursday of an international mediation mission, Buthelezi has failed utterly in his campaign to get the April 26-28 election postponed and appears to have lost everything.
The day after the election, Buthelezi's KwaZulu administration will cease to exist and his Inkatha party will have no parliamentary seats. Also ending will be the money from Pretoria that enabled him to build up a patronage network and keep an iron grip on Zulu tribal chiefs and migrant workers' hostels nationwide.
"I will get my pension," a resigned-sounding Buthelezi told reporters Thursday.
Political commentator David Welsh of the University of the Western Cape calls it "the most spectacular case of political self-destruction" he has ever witnessed.
For longtime Buthelezi watchers, it is a mystery why he painted himself into such a corner.
"What kind of future is left to him?" says Mary de Haas, an anthropologist at the University of Natal and an expert on Zulu nationalism and Buthelezi.
Buthelezi still has a few cards to play. Inkatha commands a fighting force of several thousand armed and trained men capable of starting a war of attrition against the new government in Zulu-dominated Natal Province.
Buthelezi's influence over the king remains, although that could change when South Africa's new government, likely to be led by the African National Congress, takes over from Buthelezi's administration in paying the king and his court. The ANC is already wooing the king fervently, promising to install him as a constitutional monarch in Natal.
Buthelezi has been a prominent public figure in South Africa since founding his Inkatha movement in the mid-1970s, mixing Zulu nationalism with a conservative political philosophy.
Many whites, realizing their dominance over South Africa's black majority was coming to an end, considered Buthelezi and Inkatha a more palatable alternative to Nelson Mandela and the left-leaning ANC.
But since the eruption of a grassroots civil war between Inkatha and the ANC, followed by Mandela's release from prison in 1990, Buthelezi has been steadily losing political ground.
The mounting death toll from clashes between Buthelezi's supporters and opponents - thousands have been killed in Natal and around Inkatha-dominated hostels in the Transvaal - has tarnished his image as a moderate.
Reports that Inkatha took government money and that the KwaZulu police operated "hit squads" and received smuggled weapons from right-wing elements of the South African Police undermined his claims to independence. After all, Buthelezi was his own minister of police.
In a recent interview with The Associated Press in his Ulundi office, Buthelezi was dismissive of such claims: "How easily the media imbibes the ANC propaganda."
The chief insisted his stand was based on principle - he cannot accept a constitution that fails to ensure his Zulu people self-determination within a federal system.
"I don't care how lonely I am if I am convinced it is the right thing," he said.
But critics such as de H ?0 enry Kissinger and Lord Carrington of Britain ended Buthelezi's last hope of delaying the election.
As the mediators flew off Friday, the Business Day newspaper pronounced in an editorial: "Today may well mark the beginning of the end of the political career of Mangosuthu Buthelezi.
"Given the recently malign influence of a man with a potential for greatness, South African politics and the South African economy will be healthier for his eclipse," the paper said.
 Load-Date: April 17, 1994

 

End of Document
