

Camera Angles: Shooting the Wild Requires Tame Adherence to the Rules
The Associated Press
October 8, 1993, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 481 words
Byline: By JOHN S. CALLAHAN
Body




Photographing animals in the wild can be exhilarating and shooting them on a photo safari in Africa is probably every photographer's dream. But whether you're going to another continent or merely to a nearby game park or zoo, it's best to know the ground rules before you go.
A recent trip to the Kruger National Park in South Africa offered a chance to shoot pictures of great animals in their natural environment. The park, the size of Massachusetts, has an incredible diversity of animal wildlife - the sleek impala, large herds of elephants, wildebeests, and zebras.
The photo opportunities may be endless, but there are several important things to know about a wildlife shoot, be it in Africa or any of the domestic drive-through game parks, national parks, or zoo exhibitions.
The first consideration is to follow the rules set by the administrators and enforced in the field by the rangers. These rules are for the benefit of the animals and to ensure the safety of all visitors, and any photographer or visitor who disregards them does so at considerable risk.
There are several rules at Kruger National Park that are taken very seriously by the rangers. The first is not to get out of your vehicle for any reason except in designated areas. When I thoughtlessly opened the door to our van to get more film out of the back, I was sharply reprimanded by our guide and forced to sheepishly climb over the back seat for the film.
Another rule that is strictly enforced within the park is not to feed any animal under any circumstances, because it alters animal behavior in potentially dangerous ways.
It is particularly a problem with several colonies of Chacma baboons which frequent the road leading to the main entrance. Despite strict enforcement of the "no feeding" rule, these baboons have been fed often enough by visitors to expect a handout from any car stopped on this stretch of road.
In several incidents, baboons have pounded on roofs and entered open windows of parked vehicles in search of the food they have come to expect. An aggressive baboon is a dangerous animal, and feeding of any wild animal by casual visitors or photographers trying to "get the shot" is a bad idea.
Another rule enforced by the rangers is stick to the main roads and not to drive off into the bush.
While it is frustrating to see a pride of lions trooping across the road and not be able to turn off and follow them, if every visitor did this, the Kruger and other safari parks would soon be nothing more than a barren patch of vehicle tracks with a few bewildered animals wandering about being photographed.
So even if your wildlife adventures take you down the road and not out of the country, remember to temper your enthusiasm for getting the shot by paying attention to the local rules, and you will come back with terrific photos and a new respect for the animals and the people who care for them.
 Load-Date: October 8, 1993

 

End of Document
