

Can Rwanda Be Governed After the Bodies Are Buried?
The Associated Press
May 17, 1994, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 821 words
Byline: By MARK FRITZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RUTARE, Rwanda
Body




Hundreds of weary, ragged Hutu refugees gathered around a bespectacled, well-dressed Tutsi man as he laid down the rules of a refugee camp springing up on a felt-green hillside:
You will be divided into sectors and elect your own leaders. You will form work committees to build huts and gather food. You will settle your grievances peacefully.
And you will forget who is Hutu and who is Tutsi.
"This is the only way we can survive," said the Tutsi, Athanasuis Karisa, a political officer for the rebel movement that blames the Hutu government for inciting the human holocaust in this Central African nation.
Can a nation in the throes of psychotic slaughter ever learn to live in something resembling harmony? There are actually cool heads in this vortex of violence, Hutu and Tutsi alike, who are working on it.
But like ants trying to build a home in a hurricane, their efforts are overwhelmed by swings of machetes toward bowed heads.
The United Nations and other agencies estimate that up to 200,000 people have been killed since the Hutu president died in an April 6 plane crash that Hutu extremists blamed on the Tutsi minority and Hutu collaborators.
Since then, Hutu death squads - often motley collections of villagers who say they were armed and often assisted by the army or local officials to kill the enemies in their midst - have embarked on merciless, eerily robotic killing sprees regardless of their victims' age or gender.
The killings reactivated a 4-year-old rebellion by the predominately Tutsi Rwandan Patriotic Front, a movement dominated by anti-government intellectuals - the chairman is a Hutu - who insist they have instructed their guerrillas to keep their heads in the conflict.
The mass movements of people triggered both by the march of the rebel army and the massacres in the towns have created vast new communities of strangers from both ethnic groups, many of them under the command of the rebel army that is being forced to put its no-vengeance code to the test.
One such precursor of potential rebel rule in Rwanda is Rutare, which three weeks ago was a deserted town and now teems with 50,000 people, most of them Hutus fleeing the fighting in the divided capital, Kigali, 40 miles to the southeast.
"Every day there are more, every, every day," said Karisa. "They know it is secure here. There are probably even killers who came here because they know it is secure.
"Look at them," he said gesturing to the huddled masses making camp, giving one another haircuts and toting heavy baskets of bananas, wheat and sorghum on their heads. "They are all Hutus. Why aren't they killing us Tutsis?"
As a party dominated by an ethnic minority, it is in the best interests of the rebels to portray themselves as representing the greater whole. But numerous interviews with rebels found many invoking a code against ethnic bias, reciting it almost as if by rote.
At a hospital in Byumba, about 60 miles north of Kigali, 19-year-old Alphonse Rusake talked about how he lost nine members of his family and his left ear during an April 11 massacre by government troops and Hutu militias inside a school in Kigali.
Asked if he felt hatred of Hutus because of it, he began to answer when an older man barked angrily at the youth in his native language.
"There is nothing to be gained by violence," Rusake mumbled, hanging his head.
Lt. Firmin Gatera, a rebel Hutu, says he feels no stigma from his ethnic background or animosity from subordinate Tutsis who crisply salute the 33-year-old political science graduate at the many rebel checkpoints.
"Only a minority sees this as ethnic, and that is the minority that is spilling the blood," he said.
For all of its talk of national reconciliation, there appear to be divisions within the rebel movement over whether to continue to pursue a military victory regardless of the prospects of a negotiated settlement to the horror of Rwanda.
Former schoolteacher Tito Rutaremara, one of the most influential politicians of the Rwandan Patriotic Front, said he favors a dialogue with the enemies despite the atrocities he blames on them.
"A military victory is not impossible, but we are not certain of it," he said. "The war can never end. You have to achieve a political solution. We need national reconciliation."
But Maj. Wilson Rutayisire, the movement's information commissioner, said the rebels have no interest in forming any sort of coalition government with the Rwandan leadership it blames for the massacres.
One thing the rebels agree upon is the common disgust they have for the United Nations and its delays in deploying peacekeepers to the region while its supporters were cut down with grenades, bullets, machetes and the studded wooden clubs fashioned especially for this dark moment in history.
"The U.N. disappointed us very much," Rutaremara said. "We are not against them coming, but it's too late. From this point, the only chance of peace lies with the Rwandan people."
 Load-Date: May 18, 1994

 

End of Document
