

Can He Triumph Diplomatically As Well On The Battlefield?
The Associated Press
February 20, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 652 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Winning a war is turning out to be a lot easier for President Bush than arranging a finish that includes Saddam Hussein's total surrender.
Though the unquestioned leader of a 32-nation coalition that is on the verge of ousting Iraqi troops from Kuwait, the president risks having others - particularly the Soviet Union - compel him to consider concessions.
At this point, Bush is holding fast. He has ruled out any rewards for the Iraqi leader to quit Kuwait, such as pressure on Israel to negotiate. The question is whether he can persuade Mikhail S. Gorbachev and anxious Europeans and Arabs to stick with him.
Congress also may try to shove him toward terms he considers inadequate - especially if U.S. casualties mount.
"I don't know how he could fail to accept it if Saddam Hussein would agree to withdraw unconditionally and without linkage from Kuwait," House Speaker Thomas S. Foley of Washington said Wednesday on ABC-TV.
There is another view, however, and it is that Bush is at the brink of dismantling the Iraqi war machine - a goal that would make peace in the Persian Gulf far more secure - and should not step back.
"The United States and its coalition are poised to achieve victory and that is to send the Iraqi army into disarray and really to completely change the military picture," Sen. Richard G. Lugar, R-Ind., said.
"To accept the Soviet situation on the face of it would appear to leave Iraq with its authority, with Saddam in charge, with the whole government apparatus of Iraq still there, and that would be a historical mistake," Lugar told CBS-TV.
Details of the Soviet proposal have yet to be made public, but Bush said Tuesday that the plan was "well short of what would be required."
Bush's ultimate war goals are cloaked in ambiguity, but Secretary of State James A. Baker III emphasized Wednesday that on one point at least - withdrawal - the administration would give no ground.
"One way or another, the Iraqi army of occupation will leave Kuwait," he said in a speech at a luncheon honoring Queen Margrethe II and Prince Henrik of Denmark. "And one way or another, the army of occupation of Iraq will leave Kuwait soon."
But is the president intent on pummeling Iraq past the point of being able to recover and menace its neighbors again? Will he insist that Iraq pay reparations to the Kuwaitis?
And must Saddam Hussein be removed from power and, assuming he survives, stand trial in an international forum as a war criminal?
To much of the world, apparently, it will be enough that Iraq leaves Kuwait and the killings stop.
To some diplomats, the miracle of organizing a coalition of Egypt, Saudi Arabia and other Arab nations to go to war alongside the United States against another Arab country may not be sustainable for very long.
Saddam's popularity in the streets and bazaars, particularly among the poor and those who hate the United States and Israel, may limit how long Bush can keep the war up.
Baker has made the point repeatedly that nobody believes Saddam took over Kuwait to help the Palestinians.
But the subtlety of the argument may be lost on those who see in the war an opportunity to put pressure on Israel to give up the West Bank and Gaza.
Gorbachev, meanwhile, stands to gain prestige in the Arab world with his peacemaking.
Bush administration officials do not question the Soviet leader's motives. They accuse him neither of trickery to forestall a U.S. ground assault on Iraq or of parting company with Bush over the main war goal: unconditional withdrawal from Kuwait.
But Gorbachev's energetic diplomacy could leave the president out in the cold.
If Iraq agrees to Soviet terms for a withdrawal it would be difficult for Bush to attempt to undo them, or even revise them radically. It would be even more difficult for him to go ahead with an invasion.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Barry Schweid, head of The Associated Press' State Department staff, has covered diplomacy since 1973.

 

End of Document
