

Carlos The Jackal, Master Terrorist, Eluded Arrest For Two Decades
The Associated Press
August 15, 1994, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 703 words
Byline: By MARTIN MARRIS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NICOSIA, Cyprus
Body




At the height of his notoriety, Carlos the Jackal was a flamboyant gun-for-hire and revolutionary with a taste for the good life.
Carlos, whose real name is Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, began his terrorism career in 1970, when he joined the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.
Since then, he was involved in some of the most spectacular terrorist attacks around the world, including the 1972 massacre of 11 Israeli athletes at the Munich Olympics, the 1974 takeover of the French Embassy in The Hague and the 1976 hijacking of an Air France jetliner to Entebbe, Uganda.
Born Oct. 12, 1949, Carlos is the son of a wealthy communist Venezuelan lawyer, Jose Allagracia Sanchez, who gave each of his three sons one name of Russian revolutionary leader Vladimir Ilyich Lenin.
In 1964 he joined the Communist Students' Movement in the streets of Caracas. From there he went on to guerrilla training in Cuba.
In 1968, the Venezuelan Communist Party sponsored his attendance at Lumumba University in Moscow, where many Third World nationals were selected by the KGB spy agency for training as Soviet agents or as political activists in their homelands.
While there, Carlos came in contact with the Popular Front and went to Jordan to train at its camps.
He has said in interviews that the Popular Front assigned him to its "foreign operations" branch in 1971 and he took part in the fighting against King Hussein's army when it cracked down on the guerrillas.
Carlos also was linked with Germany's Baader-Meinhof gang, the Turkish Popular Liberation Front, the Japanese Red Army, the Basque separatist movement in Spain and various other Palestinian organizations.
He told the Al Watan Al Arabi magazine in 1976 that he shot and wounded British millionaire Edward Sieff, a prominent Jew whose family owns Marks and Spencers, in London in 1973.
Carlos was sentenced in absentia by France in 1992 to life in prison for the killing of two French intelligence agents. The agents were killed in 1975 while they were investigating attacks on planes of Israel's El Al airlines at Paris' Orly Airport.
He also was held responsible for the December 1975 attack on OPEC headquarters in Vienna, in which three people were killed and 11 taken hostage. The cartel's oil ministers were taken in a hijacked plane to North Africa in a $ 1 billion ransom drama.
One hostage was Ahmed Zaki Yamani, then Saudi Arabia's oil minister, who later called Carlos a "ruthless terrorist who operates with cold-blooded, surgical precision."
By 1981, Carlos reportedly was organizing covert operations for the Syrian government aimed at overthrowing the Iraqi government. Some reports said he was the leader of a Libyan hit squad sent to kill President Reagan in 1981.
In March 1982, Carlos threatened to strike against the French government unless it freed two of his suspected agents, Bruno Breguet, a Swiss, and Magdalena Kopp, a West German terrorist, who were arrested the previous month in Paris.
The threat was contained in a letter bearing his fingerprints, verified by French police. It was the first proof in six years that he was alive.
Later that month, a bomb exploded aboard the Paris-Toulouse express, killing six people and wounding 15. The French blamed Carlos.
In April 1982, a bomb exploded in a rush-hour crowd just off the Champs Elysees, killing a pregnant woman and wounding 63 other people.
On New Years' Eve, 1983, bombs exploded in Marseilles' main railroad terminal and on the Paris-Marseilles express, killing five people and wounding 50.
Kopp and Breguet were released in May 1985. Kaupp flew to Damascus to join her lover Carlos, and the two later were married.
Carlos sought refuge in Syria in 1985. Since then, as far as was known, he had lived quietly in Damascus with his wife and their daughter, Rosa.
In 1990, Hungarian state television showed 10-year-old film of intelligence agents trying to coax Carlos into leaving Hungary. It became clear that former communist leaders had permitted Carlos to use Hungary and East Germany as a base for his terrorist attacks and supported his operations.
The Syrians, seeking to improve their image with the Americans following the collapse of the Soviet Union, reportedly had tried to kick Carlos out.
 Load-Date: August 15, 1994

 

End of Document
