

Changing of The Guard At Elysee Palace As Chirac Moves In
The Associated Press
May 17, 1995, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 780 words
Byline: By ELAINE GANLEY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




Saluted by cannon blasts from the site of Napoleon's tomb, Jacques Chirac became France's president Wednesday, culminating a long quest for power that he promised to use to heal a deeply divided nation.
His ailing predecessor, Socialist Francois Mitterrand, stepped down "without regret or bitterness," ending a 14-year tenure, the longest of any French president.
Some eight hours later, Foreign Minister Alain Juppe was named prime minister. Juppe, 49, has led the neo-Gaullist Rally for the Republic party since Chirac stepped down to run for president.
The nomination of Juppe, a Chirac loyalist, came as no surprise. It was expected to reassure financial markets as well as hearten Europeans intent on greater unity.
Juppe succeeds Edouard Balladur, a conservative like himself who has headed the government since 1993, when the right won a landslide victory against the Socialists in legislative elections. The formal transfer of power was set for Thursday, when Chirac was to announce his Cabinet.
Balladur, also from the RPR, vied for the presidency, earning enmity from Chirac's supporters for betraying his party boss.
Assuming the post he fought for so arduously, Chirac escorted Mitterrand, 78 and stricken with prostate cancer, to the door of the Elysee Palace after a private meeting.
Chirac, previously Mitterrand's bitter rival, paid homage to his predecessor at the inauguration that followed, saying Mitterrand "left his imprint" on the nation.
"A new term begins," Chirac said. "I hope at the end of my mandate the French will see that the hoped-for change has been accomplished."
Chirac, a conservative, waged his presidential campaign on the theme of change, with a promise to break the cycle of unemployment - now at 12.2 percent.
He also promised to address what the French call the "social fracture," caused by the increasing alienation of some sectors of society, mainly poor North Africans.
It is seen as the root of violence in poor suburbs and racist incidents, like the drowning of a Moroccan immigrant May 1 by skinheads in a far right march.
"I feel that hope has been vested in me," Chirac said. "My only ambition is to make the French people more unified, more equal and to make France more vibrant… Employment will be my preoccupation at all times."
Chirac spoke in favor of the fledgling European defense force, but also hinted at a closer relationship with NATO, saying France should move toward full membership.
Gen. Charles de Gaulle, Chirac's role-model, took France out of NATO's military wing in 1966. But Paris has gradually been widening its role in the alliance.
Chirac, France's 22nd president, was sworn in before 1,500 dignitaries and guests in the main hall of the Elysee Palace. A 21-gun salute from three tanks sounded across the Seine from Les Invalides, where Napoleon is buried.
The salute came as Mitterrand arrived at the headquarters of the Socialist Party he founded and led before becoming president in 1981.
"I leave without the least bit of regret or bitterness, but with the same tranquility with which I arrived," Mitterrand told the party faithful. "I'm entering the final stage of my life… It cannot be very long."
Mitterrand also said although Socialist Lionel Jospin lost the May 7 election runoff against Chirac, his 47 percent showing was encouraging.
Chirac received 52.6 percent of the vote, giving him a stronger hold on power than any other major Western leader. His conservative alliance already dominated Parliament and French regional governments.
Carrying on a presidential tradition, Chirac later rode in an open-topped limousine along Champs-Elysees to lay a wreath at the tomb of France's unknown soldier at the Arc de Triomphe. Cavalrymen with swords and plumed helmets escorted him as he waved to crowds packing the sidewalks.
Chirac relit the flame at tomb, then stood with military commanders and war veterans as an army band played the national anthem, "The Marseillaise."
The inauguration culminated a long political odyssey for Chirac, 62, who was mayor of Paris for 18 years. Never lacking in ambition or perseverance, Chirac lost in the first round of the 1981 presidential election, then lost in a runoff to Mitterrand in 1988.
That election followed two often stormy years in which Chirac was prime minister of a conservative Cabinet that sparred frequently with Mitterrand.
He said his election victory was not a triumph for conservative ideology, but "the victory of a France which seeks the means to enter the third millennium strong and united."
As chief of state, Chirac promised to reduce the powers of the presidency that Mitterrand dominated like a monarch, playing the role of arbiter, policy guide and unifier.
 Load-Date: May 17, 1995

 

End of Document
