

Christopher Says More Troops Going to Haiti "to Dominate the Scene"
The Associated Press
September 29, 1994, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 777 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Additional U.S. troops will be dispatched to Haiti through the weekend to make sure potential troublemakers know the United States "dominates the scene," Secretary of State Warren Christopher said Thursday.
They will be supplemented by a vanguard from the 28 coalition partners who have joined with the United States to oversee the ouster of Lt. Gen. Raoul Cedras and clear the way for elected President Jean-Bertrand Aristide to return to power.
Christopher, in New York to urge the U.N. Security Council to end its trade embargo and other sanctions against the Haitian junta, reacted calmly to the explosion of a grenade in front of thousands of pro-democracy demonstrators in Port-au-Prince.
"This is a reminder we are in a dangerous and risky situation and will be for some time," Christopher said at a news conference. "That's why we have an overwhelming force of troops."
He urged reporters to bear in mind that the demonstration was in support of democracy. "The predominant mood is to welcome the multinational forces," he said.
The Clinton administration intends to minimize dangers to Americans - apparently none were hurt in the explosion - but "we have long recognized there are risks in the situation." he said.
According to the Pentagon about 19,600 U.S. troops are on the ground in Haiti. A spokesman there said the number "may go up a little."
The 19,600 include 1,450 military police, said spokesman Dennis Boxx, but does not the 9,200 troops and sailors on 16 naval vessels in the region. Counting those on the ships, the overall deployment totals 28,800.
Senior Pentagon officials initially anticipated only 15,000 troops would be involved in the operation.
But Boxx said there are several reasons for the larger deployment, including the continued presence of 1,800 U.S. Marines in Cap-Haitien in northern Haiti, and the potential for violence, given Friday's planned demonstrations marking the third anniversary of the coup that overthrew elected President Jean Bertrand Aristide.
The peak force deployment for the U.S. invasion of Panama in 1989 was 25,750; in the Persian Gulf, 541,000; and in Somalia, 25,800, according to the U.S. Army's Center for Military History. The center had no such figure for the operation in Grenada.
Christopher said the troops would be increased to a new peak to be decided by military planners in the Defense Department. "We don't want to leave any question as to our ability to control the scene, to dominate the scene," he said.
In Washington, meanwhile, the Congressional Black Caucus called for an early withdrawal of American troops but did not propose any deadline. Divided before the U.S. intervention, the 48 black members of Congress are now solidly behind President Clinton on the issue.
"This is one of the nation's and President Clinton's finest hours," the caucus said in a statement.
However, Rep. John Murtha, D-Pa., chairman of the House Appropriations defense subcommittee, said Clinton should have stayed firm and followed through with an invasion of Haiti.
Murtha said an invasion could have shown the United States' willingness to use force in conflicts brewing around the world.
"I'm concerned the hard line message necessary has not gotten across," Murtha said in an interview this week. "In foreign policy, you have vision, you take a position and you have to stick to that position."
Elsewhere on Capitol Hill, Aristide met with members of the House Foreign Affairs Committee and urged Congress not to put a time limit on the U.S. military presence.
"I would like to say, give us a chance in terms of not tying the hands of President Clinton," the deposed president said in a statement. He also thanked the U.S. troops who are trying to set the scene for his return to power.
"Together with President Clinton we will succeed in restoring democracy," Aristide said.
In the first few days after the American troops landed, however, Aristide was noticeably noncommittal about Clinton's action. He offered public support after the operation took hold.
Christopher said the transition in power depends on when Cedras steps down. "I wouldn't be surprised he would find the situation uncomfortable, and desire to go" from Haiti after stepping down, he said. Cedras is to leave power no later than Oct. 15.
No date has been set for the U.S.-dominated military phase to give way to a peacekeeping operation spread among several nations, Christopher said. "That depends not on a particular date but on a condition - that is, when there is a safe and secure environment that will permit the U.N. mission to be deployed."
He said it may be a matter of months, but added, "We hope it will be in the relatively near future."
 Load-Date: September 29, 1994

 

End of Document
