

Clinton Says He Wants 'Somalia Back in the Hands of Somalis'
The Associated Press
September 28, 1993, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 637 words
Byline: By RON FOURNIER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Clinton said today he wants a political strategy "that puts the affairs of Somalia back in the hands of Somalis" and gives the United States and other nations a fixed date to get out.
The remarks signal the administration's shift away from the goal of capturing Somalian warlord Mohamed Farrah Aidid, stressing instead its effort to isolate him and create a political structure without him.
"The enforcement strategy has not changed, but what I wanted to emphasize at the U.N. yesterday was that there has to be a political strategy that puts the affairs of Somalia back into the hands of Somalis, that gives every country, not just the United States … a sense that they are rotating in and out," Clinton said.
In a photo session with Democratic congressional leaders one day after addressing the United Nations, Clinton said nations involved in peacekeeping need a "fixed date for their ultimate disengagement in Somalia because there are so many other peacekeeping operations in the world that have to be considered."
After the meeting, House Majority Leader Dick Gephardt, D-Mo., said "there is a mood of concern and support" in the House over U.S. involvement in Somalia. "But I think the basic support is there."
Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell, D-Maine, said Congress supports Clinton's actions, but he said some lawmakers are disappointed with the way events have transpired in Somalia.
"The longer any operation goes on - whenever there is a loss of life, whenever there is risk - there's going to be questions, reservations, arguments … And clearly this exists, not just in the case of Somalia, but in Bosnia."
The New York Times reported today that the United States has moved away from its goal of capturing Aidid. Without confirming the report, White House spokeswoman Dee Dee Myers signaled a less aggressive approach, saying, "Should the opportunity present itself, certainly he would be arrested."
In New York, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said the U.S. had not changed its policy on Somalia. He said the Clinton administration continues to support the U.N. resolution calling for the apprehension of Aidid and to "see him brought to justice."
But, he said, "we definitely need a political strategy."
Facing growing criticism from Congress after three American soldiers were killed on Saturday, the administration is trying to change the view that the United States is a combatant in the fighting.
"I have tried to raise the visibility or the urgency of getting the political track back on pace because in the end, every peacekeeping mission or every humanitarian mission has to have a date certain when it's over and you have to, in the end, turn the affairs of the country back over to the people that live there," Clinton said.
"We were not asked to go to Somalia to establish a protectorate or a trust relationship or to run the country, that's not what we went for," he said.
Asked how the United States could set a deadline for disengagement, Clinton said, "There are a lot of things that need to be sorted through there. And I think what you'll see in the next few weeks is a real effort by the United Nations to articulate a political strategy and how the country can be basically given back to the people who live there."
Learning from the lessons in Somalia, Clinton said the United States and other nations are prepared to better assess the magnitude and dangers of sending peacekeepers in Bosnia before deploying any troops.
His announcement comes as the House scheduled a vote this evening on a resolution that asks the president to report to Congress by Oct. 15 on the goals of the Somalia operation and urges Clinton to seek congressional authorization by Nov. 15 for continued U.S. involvement.
The Senate approved the same provision earlier this month by a resounding vote of 90-7.
 Load-Date: September 28, 1993

 

End of Document
