

Clinton Says U.N. Can't Engage in All the World's Crises
The Associated Press
September 27, 1993, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 951 words
Byline: By TERENCE HUNT, AP White House Correspondent
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




President Clinton urged the United Nations today to limit its global peacekeeping role, saying it "cannot become engaged in every one of the world's conflicts." He also called for a ban on production of bomb-grade nuclear materials.
In his maiden speech to the U.N., Clinton, the first president born after its creation, said bluntly: "If the American people are to say 'yes' to U.N. peacekeeping, the United Nations must know when to say 'no.'
Clinton renewed his call for all nations to abide by a global moratorium on the testing of nuclear weapons. China is believed on the verge of resuming testing. If it does, the United States would have to re-examine the voluntary testing halt announced by Clinton in July, a senior administration official said.
The current U.S. ban on further production of highly enriched uranium and plutonium would be offered to other nations as a model, while surplus U.S. stockpiles could be checked by international inspectors to make sure it would not be used for weapons.
He also promised to pay the U.S. peacekeeping bill to the U.N., now $ 400 million in arrears. At the same time, he said he would push to have the U.S. assessment reduced. The United States now picks up 30.4 percent of U.N. peacekeeping costs and would like to get this down to 25 percent.
The president praised the role of U.N. peacekeepers in Somalia and said the United States is prepared to join other nations in enforcing a peace agreement in Bosnia.
Yet, even while saying that the United States intends "to remain engaged and to lead" in world affairs, he said the U.N. has become overextended.
"When lives are in the line," Clinton said, "we cannot let the reach of the U.N. exceed its grasp."
It was a sharp turnabout from his position as a candidate, when Clinton advocated a small, U.N.-led rapid-deployment force to combat ethnic warfare and other problems. In recent months, powerful members of Congress have raised concerns about sending troops to Bosnia and about the danger of getting bogged down in a long military engagement in Somalia.
Clinton said there should be stiff conditions for creating peacekeeping operations:
Is there a real threat to international peace?
Does the proposed mission have clear objectives?
Can an end point be identified for those who will be asked to participate?
How much will the mission cost?
"The United Nations simply cannot become engaged in every one of the world's conflicts," Clinton said.
In 1987, there were 9,800 U.N. peacekeepers deployed around the globe; today there are upwards of 90,000 in 17 parts of the world.
Clinton also:
-Praised the international relief effort in Somalia, saying, "the United States and the United Nations have worked together to achieve a stunning humanitarian rescue."
"U.N. peacekeepers from over two dozen nations remain today, including some brave Americans who have lost their lives … to ensure that anarchy and starvations may not return," he said.
-Called for the creation of a U.N. commissioner for human rights. "Human rights are not something conditional, founded by culture, but something universal granted by god." The Chinese representatives did not join in the applause for that proposal.
-Recognized Cambodia's new elected government - a coalition that brings the Khmer Rouge's former allies together with their mutual enemy of 13 years, the former Vietnamese-installed government of Hun Sen.
Clinton also pledged that the United States would start to pay its overdue bill at the U.N. and "be current in our peacekeeping bill."
The United States contributes about 25 percent of the international organization's budget. The United States currently owes the U.N. $ 757 million - in dues and peacekeeping fees.
At the same time, he called for reducing that U.S. share, noting the assessment system hasn't changed in 20 years.
"I come before you as the first American president born after the founding of the United Nations," said the 47-year old president. The United Nations is 48 years old.
He said that while it was laudable for nations of the world to look inward to its own problems, "isolationism and protectionism are still poison."
"My government intends to remain engaged and lead. We cannot solve every problem but we intend to serve as a fulcrum for change and a pivot point for peace.
"It is a moment of miracles," Clinton proclaimed, citing peace accords between old enemies in the Middle East and South Africa and the fledgling democracies in Russia and in other formerly totalitarian states.
Still, Clinton added: "Serious threats remain … Even small conflicts can take on murderous proportions."
He vowed to oppose extremism wherever it emerged.
And, in an implied warning to Libya, Clinton made it clear he intended to stand by an Oct. 1 deadline for turning over two suspects in the 1988 downing of Pan Am flight 103, which killed 270 people. Relatives of the victims were expected to be at the U.N. today.
"My government is determined to see that such terrorists are brought to justice," Clinton said to applause. The Libyan delegation did not join in the applause.
Clinton also promised to work for easing Cold War-era export controls on high-tech goods.
The U.N. appearance marked a daylong shift to foreign policy for Clinton after five straight days of selling his plan to overhaul the nation's health care system. It was intended in part to answer criticism that Clinton lacks a coherent framework for foreign-policy decision making.
After his address, Clinton was to meet with the leaders of the Baltic nations of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia; Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa of Japan, President Cesar Gaviria of Colombia, Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri of Lebanon and President Joaquin Chissano of Mozambique.
 Load-Date: September 27, 1993

 

End of Document
