

Clinton Summons Advisers on Somalia; Fresh Troops on the Way
The Associated Press
October 5, 1993, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 996 words
Byline: By SUSANNE M. SCHAFER, AP Military Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




More than 600 U.S. troops armed with specialized weapons were prepared to head for Somalia Tuesday as administration officials tried with little success to quiet calls from Capitol Hill for quick withdrawal of American forces.
President Clinton met late Tuesday with his top national security advisers - including the commander for the region, Marine Gen. Joseph P Hoar - to review the situation, especially increased casualties suffered by U.S. forces.
Clinton's spokeswoman, Dee Dee Myers, said he was "obviously very concerned" but that no dramatic change in Somalia policy was being considered.
A senior White House official, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said that Clinton had asked those at the meeting to present options on possible courses of action in Somalia.
"They were going to review those options" at the meeting, the official said. Clinton has not set himself a timetable on when to decide what to do, the official said.
Defense Secretary Les Aspin, Secretary of State Warren Christopher and White House adviser David Gergen briefed more than 150 House and Senate members but failed to placate scores of Democrats and Republicans.
"The administration needs a plan and needs it now. We're not hearing it yet," Sen. Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., said following the closed session that lasted just over an hour.
Sen. Howard Metzenbaum, D-Ohio, said it was "pretty late to be figuring out what the policy should be. … I had hoped for more." And Sen. Don Nickles, R-Okla., said the administration was "in serious trouble. He didn't outline a clearly defined mission yet."
Before the briefing, lawmakers expressed disenchantment and frustration with the 10-month mission.
"I cannot support U.S. troops being in the situation of hostilities without an authorization of Congress," said Sen. Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., the chairman of the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Foreign Operations.
However, Christopher said the recent attacks, coupled with the need to find missing Americans, meant "it certainly is not the time for us to depart."
Christopher, commenting before his meeting with the lawmakers, said the United States wants to withdraw its forces "but not before our job is done of providing some security."
He made the remarks during an appearance with NATO Secretary General Manfred Woerner.
Meanwhile, a senior Pentagon official, speaking on condition of anonymity, confirmed that Hoar's Central Command had requested heavily armored vehicles for the Somalia operation several weeks ago but that the request had been turned down by Aspin.
Pentagon spokeswoman Kathleen deLaski, queried about the matter, had no immediate comment. Later, the Pentagon released a statement saying, "Deployment requests of various sizes and configurations are classified in nature and come to Secretary Aspin on a daily basis. He bases his decisions on the best military and diplomatic information available at the time."
At a Pentagon briefing, Ms. deLaski announced that some 650 troops had begun moving to Somalia by air, including a fleet of seven Special Operations MH-60 and AH-6 helicopters which are designed to conduct night-time raids and evacuations from hostile areas. The deployment was expected to take several days, she added.
The majority of the 12 deaths and 78 injuries sustained by the U.S. forces in Mogadishu over the weekend came after the Americans were pinned down near the crash site of a U.S. helicopter.
Ms. deLaski called the new troops, their armored vehicles and helicopters a "modest deployment" that does not reflect a change in policy toward fugitive warlord Mohamed Farrah Aidid.
"We're not trying to increase the force in any large way at this point. We're just responding to an immediate need," she said.
The Pentagon declined to comment on reports that up to eight Americans were being held hostage by Aidid supporters. One was shown on a videotape being interrogated by his captors.
Ms. deLaski said anew that the soldier, identified as chief warrant officer Michael Durant, "be afforded proper treatment and be released."
On Monday, Clinton warned of "appropriate" retaliation if any captured Americans were mistreated.
Sunday's operation in Mogadishu led to the capture of two of Aidid's top aides. In hindsight, Ms. deLaski said, "that's not worth the cost on that particular day, but obviously we didn't know that going in."
On Capitol Hill, frustration continued to grow, although a consensus for the immediate withdrawal of U.S. troops still hadn't materialized.
A push by Sen. Robert Byrd, D-W.Va., to stop funds for the mission, though not immediately, could come as early as Wednesday. Several lawmakers said they would support such a move.
"We can't continue in that quagmire," said Sen. Pete Domenici, R-N.M.
"There is a growing feeling the president has changed the policy. The American people don't support the policy. The Congress doesn't support the policy," said Sen. Phil Gramm, R-Texas.
But other lawmakers said the capture of American servicemen complicated the demand for quick withdrawal.
Clinton's decision to send in reinforcements won an influential endorsement, from Republican Sen. Richard Lugar of Indiana, a leading member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. He echoed Clinton in saying additional troops were "imperative for the safety of those that are there now."
Sen. Sam Nunn of Georgia, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, also said the deployment was necessary to protect American troops while the overall policy is debated.
Ms. deLaski said the new troops being sent include: 250 rangers from the 75th Ranger Regiment from Fort Benning, Ga.; 210 soldiers reinforced with an M1-A1 tank platoon from Fort Stewart, Ga.; 150 U.S. Air Force personnel and two AC-130 aircraft stationed at Brindisi, Italy; 20 soldiers and seven helicopters stationed at Fort Campbell, Ky., as well as four M1-A1 tanks, two M-88 recovery vehicles, 14 Bradley Fighting Vehicles, two M-113 armored personnel carriers and seven heavy trucks.
 Load-Date: October 5, 1993

 

End of Document
