

Clinton Orders Round-the-Clock Airlift to Help Rwandans
The Associated Press
July 22, 1994, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 754 words
Byline: By GEORGE GEDDA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Clinton today ordered a round-the-clock military airlift of supplies and medicine to confront hunger and plague among Rwandan refugees. He said the crisis was claiming one life a minute.
"The flow of refugees across Rwanda's borders has now created what could be the world's worst humanitarian crisis in a generation," Clinton told a news conference in the White House briefing room.
He put a pricetag of more than $ 100 million on the expanded relief efforts. Clinton on Thursday had announced $ 41.5 million in aid will be added to $ 109 million that had been pledged earlier.
Private aid experts have charged that the administration failed to recognize the magnitude of the Rwandan crisis.
The administration's new efforts include establishment of an "airlift hub" in neighboring Uganda that U.S. military forces will use as a staging area for the 24-hour shipment of supplies to Rwandan refugees in the region.
Clinton also called for a "full contingent" of United Nations peacekeepers to be sent to Rwanda to provide security for civilians who want to return to their homeland.
The U.S. goal, Clinton said, is to relieve the suffering as quickly as possible and to enable the safe return of refugees to Rwanda, where rebel forces have routed the Hutu government that directed widespread massacres of the minority Tutsis.
Clinton said he had directed the Pentagon to expand airlift capacity to facilitate 24-hour delivery of emergency goods to the refugee camps in Goma and Bukavu in Zaire and to establish a safe water supply to ward off the cholera plague that is quickly sweeping through the 1 million people at the refugee camp at Goma.
Clinton urged Americans to contribute to aid agencies that are working with the refugees.
Clinton also said the Pentagon would provide 20 million rehydration therapy packages to the refugees.
Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman John Shalikashvili told reporters that water is critical because even with the supply airlifts, "you will still lose the race against time if we do not establish safe water and distribution systems."
The Pentagon will base its operations out of Rhein Main Air Base in Germany and is discussing with Ugandan officials use of a site for the distribution headquarters. From Uganda, flights would go to smaller airfields near the refugee camps.
Richard Bissell, of the Overseas Development Council, said the high cost of air missions used to deliver food to the area means there's less money left over for food purchases.
"Frequently, more money goes into jet fuel than into food," Bissell said.
The immediate problem facing relief workers in refugee areas is a cholera epidemic. In one refugee camp near the Rwanda-Zaire border, there was one cholera victim on Tuesday. By Thursday, 250 were dead.
An official asking not to be identified acknowledged that the administration was caught by surprise by the speed and scope of the exodus. Reports from the refugee areas indicate that other donor governments and relief organizations were ill-prepared as well.
Julia V. Taft, president of InterAction, an association of U.S. private voluntary organizations, said she regretted that the funds announced by Clinton will be diverted from programs to help the needy in stricken areas such as Angola and Sudan. "It's like shifting chairs on a sinking ship," she said.
An administration official noted that fresh money should become available for Africa's various crises with the start of the new fiscal year, slightly more than two months from now.
Taft said she was "gravely concerned" several weeks ago when the administration seemed to be able to find tens of millions of dollars to help Haitian refugees but not much to help Rwandans.
Bissell agreed that Haiti has had the administration's attention because important political constituencies in Washington "have been talking about Haiti and not Rwanda."
A second reason is that Haiti is a lot closer than Rwanda. "We don't have Rwandan refugees showing up in Florida," Bissell said.
He also noted that the European colonial heritage in Africa has an impact. The Europeans, he said, "are seen as having a much better response capability."
Nonetheless, Bissell said the administration is making a "serious contribution" to alleviating the Rwanda crisis but, with the sudden exodus into Zaire, new strategies are required.
Taft said Clinton must act decisively to ensure that the Rwandan refugees will be able to return to their villages.
"We have to make sure the refugees can go back," she said. "These people can't live in Zaire."
 Load-Date: July 22, 1994

 

End of Document
