

Clinton Ups the Stakes, But U.S. Media Can't Cover the Story
The Associated Press
October 8, 1993, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 441 words
Byline: By FRAZIER MOORE, AP Television Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




President Clinton's decision to escalate the U.S. presence in Somalia also upped the ante for reporters who were forced to leave the country when the guns were turned on them.
No news outlet announced plans to restaff the story that began as famine relief and became the hunt for Mohamed Farrah Aidid, a rebellious warlord.
"Nothing has changed in our Somalia coverage," said ABC News spokeswoman Liz Noyer after Clinton's speech Thursday. "We have people who are ready and anxious to go, but right now we're not prepared to send anybody in."
ABC's coverage peaked early, with 70 to 80 staff members in the capital city of Mogadishu, including five correspondents and "Nightline" anchor Ted Koppel. Noyer said no ABC staffer had been in Mogadishu for at least a month.
"We'll be back," said Eason Jordan, Cable News Network's vice president for international newsgathering. "We'll try to keep our heads down, but there's no way to guarantee safety in a city like Mogadishu."
Covering Somalia has changed since the first U.S. troops, hailed as saviors in the drought- and famine-ravaged land, came ashore in December. Scores of reporters and TV crews covered the moonlit landing of Navy SEALs.
But since then, at least four journalists have been killed and dozens wounded. When two Army helicopters were shot down Sunday, no U.S. reporters were present.
CNN pulled out its remaining correspondents after five Somali staffers were killed Sept. 10, when a rival subclan's attempt to hijack their CNN truck escalated into a three-hour rocket, mortar and automatic weapons battle.
Many U.S. reporters are covering developments from Nairobi, capital of neighboring Kenya. Otherwise, U.S. media rely on a handful of reporters affiliated with international news media who have stayed on.
"At the moment, we take seriously the warnings given by the government and everybody else that we stay out," said Bernard Gwertzman, foreign editor of The New York Times. "In the meantime, we're covering Somalia in other ways. Right now, the main front of the story is in Washington," where U.S. policy toward the country is being decided.
The Associated Press had a reporter and photographer in Mogadishu until two weeks ago.
"AP reporters have long operated in dangerous areas," said international editor Thomas Kent, "but the journalistic payback is small in Somalia because of the difficulty in getting around."
That difficulty is felt in particular by CNN, which airs the only TV news locally available.
"CNN has an extraordinarily high profile in a city where a high profile may not be in our best interest," Jordan said, adding, "Gen. Aidid, we're told, is a CNN fanatic."
 Load-Date: October 8, 1993

 

End of Document
