

Cocky Carlos the Jackal Arraigned in Paris Bombing
The Associated Press
August 16, 1994, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 846 words
Byline: By TERRIL JONES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




A chained but cocky Carlos the Jackal bantered with France's top terrorism judge today while being arraigned on charges he engineered a deadly bombing in Paris.
The Venezuelan-born Carlos, 44, whose real name is Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, is accused of being a terrorist-for-hire for a variety of groups and eluded Western intelligence agencies for 20 years until his arrest in Sudan. The bombing in Paris was among the lesser of the crimes he is suspected of.
A day after being secretly flown to France, Carlos was escorted into a closed hearing at the Palais de Justice by five policemen carrying assault rifles and wearing bulletproof vests. Chains stood out against his white pants, beige sweater and brown slip-on shoes.
Witnesses said he casually talked with his guards about guns and then threw out some quips at the entrance of Judge Jean-Louis Bruguiere, France's renowned judge of terrorism cases who travels with a bodyguard and carries a concealed pistol.
"Ah, here's the judge, how's it going?" Carlos said to Bruguiere, speaking French.
"And you?" Bruguiere replied.
"Still alive, for a long time to come," answered Carlos, whose death had been rumored numerous times in recent years. Then, to his escorts, he added, "This guy, he's a star."
Initially assigned three court-appointed attorneys, Carlos took on noted lawyer Jacques Verges, who has made a career of defending notorious people, including Gestapo chief Klaus Barbie and Magdalena Kopp, a West German terrorist who reportedly married Carlos after a term in French prison.
Carlos was charged with masterminding a 1982 bombing just off Paris' Champs Elysees that killed one person and wounded 63.
He will be charged later by a panel of judges with the fatal shooting of two counterintelligence agents in 1975. A French court convicted him in absentia in 1992 and sentenced him to life in prison for those slayings, but under French law he will have to be retried.
Interior Minister Charles Pasqua, announcing the arrest Monday, said Carlos claims to have killed 83 people around the world. He said Carlos was directly or indirectly responsible for killing at least 15 people in France and injuring 200.
"I rejoice that one of the most dangerous terrorists in recent years is now in the hands of justice," he said.
Pasqua said Sudan informed France on Sunday that Carlos was in custody and offered to turn him over to French authorities.
The leftist newspaper Liberation said today that in return, French intelligence gave the Sudanese government satellite photographs pinpointing positions of the Popular Army for the Liberation of South Sudan, a rebel group.
France also agreed to use its influence to win permission for Sudanese troops to pass through the Central African Republic and attack the rebels from the south, Liberation said. The newspaper did not cite any sources.
Reponding on French radio, Pasqua said France "gave nothing in exchange" for Carlos' extradition.
But a defense attorney, Mourad Oussedik, claimed Sudan's government had been harboring Carlos and betrayed him to France.
"There was no extradition demand," Oussedik said on French radio. "It was a kidnapping following transactions between the French and Sudanese governments."
Sudanese agents "threw themselves on (Carlos), neutralized him, drugged him and tied him up," Oussedik said.
As a free-lance terrorist, Carlos reportedly teamed up with Germany's Red Army Faction, the Japanese Red Army, the Basque separatist movement in Spain and various Palestinian organizations.
He was most often linked to Middle East terrorism. Intelligence reports connected him with the 1975 attack on OPEC headquarters and the 1976 hijacking of an Air France jetliner to Entebbe, Uganda.
Carlos got his nom de guerre after British tabloids learned that a copy of the 1971 thriller "Day of the Jackal" was found in one of his London safehouses. The novel tells the story of a killer hired to assassinate French President Charles de Gaulle.
The son of a wealthy communist lawyer, Carlos embarked on his terrorism career in 1970 when he joined the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.
Some investigators have linked him to the massacre of 11 Israeli athletes at the 1972 Munich Olympics. But Yigal Carmon, a former adviser on terrorism to Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, said Carlos had nothing to do with the attack.
Pasqua said French counterintelligence agents, helped by friendly countries, found Carlos early this year in Sudan, where he had gone six months ago on a false passport and was living under a false name.
Pasqua suggested Sudan, which the United States blacklisted last August as a nation supporting terrorism, might have turned over Carlos as a show of good will to the West in an effort to end its ostracism.
Sudanese Justice Minister Abdel-Azziz Shado called Monday for the United States to remove it from the blacklist, which has cost it most of its aid, Egypt's Middle East News Agency reported.
In Washington, State Department spokesman Michael McCurry said the surrender of Carlos to France was "not sufficient to rescind the listing."
 Load-Date: August 16, 1994

 

End of Document
