

Congress May Compromise With Clinton on Gays in the Military
The Associated Press
May 12, 1993, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 582 words
Byline: By DONNA CASSATA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Key lawmakers are voicing increasing support for a plan to permit homosexuals to serve in the military as long as they don't openly state their sexual orientation.
President Clinton, who favors ending the 50-year ban on homosexuals in the service, has yet to indicate whether such an approach would be acceptable to him.
But at a hearing on Tuesday, Sen. John Warner, R-Va., predicted Congress would accept the partial repeal, already in effect under an interim order issued by the White House in February.
In addition, the chairman of the Armed Services Committee, Sen. Sam Nunn, D-Ga., and Sen. J. James Exon, D-Neb., also have spoken favorably of the possible compromise: not questioning recruits about sexual orientation, imposing a strict code of conduct and not ferreting out homosexuals.
However, personnel who declared themselves gay would not be allowed to serve.
As a result, gay groups and their allies in Congress would likely oppose the measure.
But support for such a plan was offered by Marine Col. Fred Peck, who stunned a congressional hearing on Tuesday with the disclosure that his 24-year-old son, Scott, is gay.
"I can live with that," the elder Peck said today of the policy of not asking recruits about their sexuality. He and his son were interviewed on morning television programs.
Peck said he was fearful his son could be "killed or injured by his own men" if he joined the military and his sexual orientation were known.
But Scott Peck, said, "I think I have a little more faith in members the military … they can be counted on to act honorably."
Retired Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf, who commanded troops in Operation Desert Storm, told Nunn's committee on Tuesday he found the current practice of not asking recruits about their sexual orientation acceptable.
"I have no objection to leaving the situation exactly where it is now," he testified.
Although Schwarzkopf said he would be willing to accept the current policy of not asking recruits about their sexual orientation, Clinton has directed Defense Secretary Les Aspin to draft an executive order on ending the ban by July 15.
The testimony from Col. Peck, a familiar face to Americans as spokesman for the U.S. military mission in Somalia, and Schwarzkopf, who led the allies against Iraq in the Persian Gulf War, strongly opposed Clinton's efforts to formally end the ban.
"My son is a homosexual and I don't think there's any place for him in the military," Col. Peck told the committee on Tuesday.
Schwarzkopf said ending the ban would significantly damage morale and the ability of the military to fight.
If Clinton goes ahead with ending the ban, Schwarzkopf said the military will follow, but unenthusiastically.
"To me, they will be just like many of the Iraqi troops who sat in the deserts of Kuwait, forced to execute orders they didn't believe in," he said.
Three military people forced out because of their homosexuality testified in favor of lifting the prohibition, offering as evidence their stellar military careers cut short simply because of their sexual preference.
Margarethe Cammermeyer, a former colonel in the Army Nurse Corps and former chief nurse of the Washington state Army National Guard, served for 27 years before she was separated from the service on June 11, 1992 for being a lesbian.
"There is no rational basis for the regulation barring homosexuals from serving in the military. Gays and lesbians have been serving since the beginning of time without disrupting good order and discipline," she said.

 

End of Document
