

Critics Say New Police No Different Than The Old
The Associated Press
July 31, 1992, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 755 words
Byline: By TOM COHEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PRETORIA, South Africa
Body




Feared for decades as the fist of apartheid, South Africa's police say they are changing from a political force to one that serves whites and blacks alike.
But fresh accusations of brutality and incompetence suggest little progress has been made since President F.W. de Klerk launched his reforms almost three years ago.
A leading pathologist has claimed police routinely kill people in detention. Foreign experts have called police organization and planning inadequate. The African National Congress broke off black-white political talks charging police involvement in fighting in black townships.
Some critics say police ranks still have many conservatives opposed to de Klerk's reforms.
"That we have to change is indisputable," said Capt. Craig Kotze, spokesman for the Law and Order Ministry.
Kotze and other officials blame the problems on the police legacy as a political force that enforced apartheid, and a propaganda campaign to discredit police by the ANC and other opposition groups.
Many blacks perceive police as an enemy, and militants have targeted them for attack. More than 120 policemen have been killed so far this year - a record number.
Police often patrol squalid black townships in intimidating armored vehicles that make them look more like an occupying force than a protector.
The government-appointed Goldstone Commission on public violence has been critical of police actions and cited instances of abuses by individual officers.
But the commission, respected by both the government and the ANC, has not found evidence of an orchestrated police role in the violence.
Despite their strong criticism, ANC and other opposition leaders agree that many "good" police are trying to reform the force and act in the public interest.
At a recently integrated police training college, some recruits said most of their classmates accepted change, leaving the outright racists as outcasts who either adjust or drop out.
"You may have your own feelings inside you, but you must keep them to yourself," said Stephen Booys, a mixed-race recruit.
Under apartheid, police enforced segregation laws and served as the frontline force against banned black movements. Thousands of activists were detained, and allegations of torture and killings abounded.
Shortly after de Klerk began dismantling apartheid in 1989, he told the police they would no longer fight the ruling National Party's political battles.
But in response to chronic township violence and increased crime, the government has expanded the police force by about 40 percent - to more than 115,000 members - in the past two years. About half the force is black, but almost all the top commanders are white.
Etienne Marais, a researcher studying police for a privately funded project, said many senior commanders rose to prominence during decades of counter-insurgency work that condoned harsh measures and required little accountability.
They have few of the management skills necessary to implement reform through the ranks, and tend to see criticism of the police as "a problem with their image rather than their actions," he said.
British legal experts who studied the police response to the June 17 massacre of more than 40 blacks in the Boipatong township called police organization and techniques incompetent and misguided.
For example, they cited a failure to collect evidence from the site of the attack as a possible indicator that police rely too much on seeking confessions from suspects.
"The South African Police must learn afresh how to cultivate relationships and adapt their tactics in order to achieve public acceptability," their report said.
Police officials say reform efforts start with initial testing and training and continue through the entire force, including a motivational speaker hired to promote the need to accept change.
The four police colleges - traditionally segregated by race - became integrated this year.
Brig. L. van Vuuren, commanding officer of the Police College of Pretoria, said the curriculum now includes subjects long ignored, such as police ethics and human rights.
"That teaches the student to start off with a respect for life, people, their belongings," he said.
But a recent report by Marais' research colleague, Janine Rauch, criticized recruit training as too narrow and stifled by military-style discipline.
As hundreds of blue-uniformed recruits marched in drills outside his office, van Vuuren admitted the college was "a bit closed" in the past. He said it now promoted more-relaxed interaction between the staff and recruits.

 

End of Document
