

Current Quotes on The Gulf War
The Associated Press
January 22, 1991, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 665 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




"Nobody in Israel is interested in being a sacrificial lamb or … waiting defenseless for gas to choke us." - Israeli Foreign Minister David Levy, before Tuesday's rocket attack on Tel Aviv.
 
 "The idea is to resume normal living as much as possible. This is not going to be a short war … but the longer people stay home near their sealed rooms, it isn't healthy." - Brig. Gen. Nahman Shai, the military spokesman in Jerusalem before Tuesday night's Iraqi missile attack.
"All the strength of holy anger will gather and turn into a combat and fedayeen (suicide commando) force and add new elements to the increasing scope of suicide operations that will seek retribution..." Baghdad radio on Tuesday.
 
 "This is not a religious war, but a war for power." - Thailand's Muslim leader, Prasert Mohammed.
 
 "News of any long-term damage to oil fields is just the sort of news to send this market higher after last week's stunning drops. It definitely darkens the picture as far as supply worries go." - a London broker commenting upon Iraqi mining of some Kuwaiti oil facilities.
 
 "We continue to be very encouraged about the results. We are hurting Saddam Hussein across the board." - Lt. Col. Greg Pepin, commenting from Riyadh on the air assault.
 
 "They used to take any opportunity to torture us in the most barbaric manner. We were beaten many times just for praying, which was not allowed." - Yadollah Abadi, an Iranian soldier who was made a prisoner of war by the Iraqis in 1982.
 
 "It puts a jab in your gut. It doesn't make you feel that great about what is going on up there but I would hope he would treat them under the Geneva Convention." - Capt. Pete Edgar of Littleton, N.H., on the Iraqi capture and treatment of the allies' downed pilots and crew.
 
 "It's not just the air crews, it's the guys that work on the decks as well. People tend to forget that they have been working 20 hours a day." - Cmdr. Kolin Jan, executive officer aboard the USS John F. Kennedy commenting on crew exhaustion.
 
 "The events taking place in the Persian Gulf clearly are escalating, and that is very dangerous. We must do our utmost to prevent the conflict from spreading. I think that is our common responsibility, a responsibility of all the United Nations." - Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
 
 "Whether it is justified or not, Saddam Hussein has, in the eyes of many, been cast in the role of champion of the oppressed. Indeed, his stand sounds a sympathetic chord in the minds of many black South Africans." - Sowetan, the South Africa's largest black-run daily newspaper.
 
 "If you're white, chances are that you'll regard George Bush as the good guy and Saddam Hussein as the bad guy, and vice-versa if you're black." - Ameen Akhalwaya, journalist for Johannesburg newspaper, The Star.
 
 "If he is not stopped, the decade, the 20th century, will end in hopes darkened and aggression again triumphant." - Australian Prime Minister Bob Hawke, on Saddam Hussein.
 
 "There is undoubtedly a considerable disparity in the extent to which individual European countries have committed themselves to the problems of the Gulf. Political union and a common foreign and security policy in Europe would have to go beyond statements and extend to action." - British Prime Minister John Major, speaking in the House of Commons on the uneven response of European Community nations to the Gulf crisis.
 
 "You had a freewheeling, adventurous, individualistic theater for covering the story in Vietnam. Here you really have the war as a kind of MGM movie, totally absent of blood and anything that smacks of deceit." - Liz Trotta, former NBC correspondent.
 
 "I think it's embarrassing that the three (broadcast) networks don't have Peter Arnett. He's lost some of his hair. He isn't your current, mellow kind of guy that you see now as a reporter. - David Halberstam, whose reporting for the New York Times from Saigon in 1962 and 1963 won a Pulitzer, commenting on CNN reporter Peter Arnett's reporting from Baghdad.

 

End of Document
