

Day-by-Day Chronology of the Gulf War
The Associated Press
February 7, 1991, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 719 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Here is a day-by-day summary of the Persian Gulf War:
 
 Day 19, Sunday, Feb. 3:
An Air Force B-52 bomber and a Marine Cobra helicopter gunship crashed in separate incidents, killing at least two U.S. airmen and leaving three missing, the U.S. military said. Both crashes apparently were not related to combat.
Investigators have found that seven Marines were killed by a missile fired by an American warplane during a fierce armor battle along the Kuwaiti border last week, the U.S. military said.
The allied air war passed the 40,000-sortie mark.
White House Budget chief Richard Darman said the government forecasts the war will cost the United States $$15 billion, with an additional $$51 billion coming from the allies for the first three months of 1991.
 
 Day 20, Monday, Feb. 4:
Iranian President Hashemi Rafsanjani made a surprise offer to hold direct talks with both Iraq and the United States to try to end the Persian Gulf War. Allied warplanes pounded Baghdad before dawn. Witnesses said communication centers, government offices and industrial installations were hit.
Marine light armored vehicles exchanged cannon and small arms fire with Iraqi troops in Kuwait, Marine officials said. No casualties were reported.
President Bush proposed a $$295 billion military budget for fiscal 1992 that scales back strategic weapons geared to a once formidable Soviet threat and plans for conflicts like the Persian Gulf War. The budget does not include any of the costs of the military buildup in the Persian Gulf or the expense of war.
 
 Day 21, Tuesday, Feb. 5:
Allied aircraft bombed Baghdad and Saddam Hussein's hometown of Tikrit. Radio Baghdad issued a terrorist call to arms, ordering attacks against Iraq's enemies and broadcasting what may have been coded instructions to agents abroad.
President Bush said he is sending Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and Gen. Colin L. Powell to the Persian Gulf to report on a conflict he said is "going very well indeed."
Iraq's Foreign Minister Tariz Aziz, in a letter to Iraqi newspapers, said Iraq's civilian casualties have risen to 428 killed and more than 650 wounded.
Syria and Iraqi forces exchanged fire near the Saudi border, in the first reported combat by Syria in the Persian Gulf War.
 
 Day 22, Wednesday, Feb. 6:
U.S. warplanes shot down four Iraqi jets fleeing to Iran, and a U.S. Navy F-14 Tomcat knocked down an Iraqi helicopter skimming along the northern Saudi border.
Iraq announced that it was severing diplomatic ties with the United States, Britain, France, Italy, Egypt and Saudi Arabia - the leading members of the coalition that is trying to oust Iraqi troops from Kuwait.
Allied bombers continued to unload tons of explosives on Iraq's Republican Guards the highly feared soldiers at the rear of Iraqi lines.
A Saudi military spokesman said one of three Iraqi patrol boats was sunk when Iraqi troops attempted to sneak into the town of Khafji again this time by water. The remaining two boats retreated.
Iraq claimed Wednesday that 150 civilians, including 35 children, had been killed in a single air raid on the southern city of Nassariyah.
King Hussein of Jordan tilted sharply toward Iraq describing the Gulf War as an effort by outsiders to destroy that country and carve up the Arab world. He called on Arabs and Muslims to "make the alliance accept a cease-fire."
President Bush immediately rejected the king's cease-fire call.
 
 Day 23, Thursday, Feb. 7:
The allies pounded Baghdad with bombs and missiles for 12 hours overnight. Iraqi officials said Thursday the raids on Baghdad killed 22 civilians and injured many others.
A Navy FA-18 fighter was lost Thursday in the northern Persian Gulf while returning to an aircraft carrier following a mission. Rescuers were searching for the pilot, listed as missing.
Two allied F-15s Thursday shot down two Iraqi planes fleeing to Iran. One U.S. Army UH-1 Huey crashed from non-combat causes, killing one soldier and injuring four others
A gunman Thursday assassinated an American civilian employed at an air base in Adana, Turkey used for bombing raids on Iraq. A terrorist group said he was killed because of the Persian Gulf War.
Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney and joint chiefs chairman Gen. Colin Powell flew to the gulf to confer over the weekend with local commanders on the countdown to a ground offensive.

 

End of Document
