

De Klerk Confronts Frustration in the Townships
The Associated Press
January 28, 1994, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 750 words
Byline: By TOM COHEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HLALANIKHALE, South Africa
Body




President F.W. de Klerk smiled and shook hands with Simon Maseko and followed him into his one-room home in this black township.
On the other side of Maseko's rusting fence on Friday, chanting and dancing neighbors threw stones and threatened to kill Maseko for welcoming the leader of the party that invented apartheid.
Political violence is the greatest threat to free and fair voting on April 27-29, when South Africa holds its first all-race election and will almost certainly come under black majority rule.
Though their leaders have scheduled the election and adopted a new constitution, many South Africans have little understanding of democracy after centuries of racial conflict and decades of political rivalry. To them, political meetings and campaign speeches are a threat, not an opportunity.
White extremists have threatened to fight rather than submit to black majority rule. Clashes among rival black factions have killed more than 11,000 blacks in the past three years.
De Klerk's three-day campaign foray through farming towns east of Johannesburg brought him face-to-face with the anger festering in the impoverished townships created under apartheid.
In nearby Badplaas, de Klerk made an unscheduled campaign stop to ask hundreds of ANC supporters to let voters decide on their own who to vote for, and to help him bring jobs and peace to South Africa.
"Help me, not as leader of the National Party, help me as leader of the country, help me to bring peace to the country and stop the violence," he said from the back of a pickup truck.
In an unusual response to de Klerk, who is often heckled by ANC backers, the crowd clapped politely when he ended his speech by saying, "Stop believing in what other people tell you about the National Party. We are not the devil."
Maseko, a full-time employee of de Klerk's National Party, wore party regalia as he welcomed the president earlier Friday. He said National Party posters put up on his property for the morning visit were torn down before de Klerk and an entourage of security officers and journalists arrived.
After the president left, the crowd in the dirt road began throwing stones and Maseko was whisked to safety by police, de Klerk told a luncheon audience at his next stop, nearby Nelspruit.
De Klerk told reporters Maseko had been eager to meet him, though he had been aware it could spark an angry reaction in this township 60 miles east of Johannesburg.
"He said to me that he's reached his zenith and he's tired of being told what to do," the president said.
Maseko and two other men who greeted de Klerk wearing National Party hats had been threatened earlier.
"They're going to die today," said Johannes Nhlango, 21.
Nhlango and his friends support the African National Congress, the nation's leading black group and expected winner of the April vote. They said most people in this township supported the ANC.
The ANC formed in 1912 with a vision of a democratic and racially just South Africa. But it has a history of intolerance that includes the "necklace" killings of suspected apartheid collaborators by placing burning tires around their necks.
ANC President Nelson Mandela has denounced intolerance and intimidation, but that mattered little to the milling crowd.
"It's our democratic right to chase somebody away," Nhlango said. "Nobody's going to tell us what to do."
Maseko, 35, said he joined the National Party last year because it promised him a job. He acknowledged the danger from the crowd but said de Klerk promised him police protection.
De Klerk's tightly controlled campaign trip was designed to make it seem the president had growing support and acceptance from rural black workers.
A consistent theme of de Klerk's campaign has been the ANC's reputation for intimidation, along with the National Party's reform.
During his four years as president, de Klerk scrapped apartheid laws and opened negotiations with the ANC and other groups that resulted in the scheduled election and in a constitution guaranteeing equal rights to all.
Residents of Hlalanikhale blame the white government for their poverty and inability to get jobs. Nhlango said the ANC's guerrilla war, suspended in 1990, had forced de Klerk to make changes, and that only the ANC would deliver housing and jobs to blacks.
Early polls indicate de Klerk has little support among blacks, who comprise about 80 percent of the population. The ANC is the strong favorite among blacks, and some polls indicate it could win more than 60 percent of the total vote.
 Load-Date: January 28, 1994

 

End of Document
