

De Klerk's Peace Summit Opens - Without the ANC
The Associated Press
May 24, 1991, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 579 words
Byline: By TINA SUSMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PRETORIA, South Africa
Body




President F.W. de Klerk opened a conference on political violence Friday and said he thought it could be effective although the key black rights groups were not participating.
About 200 delegates, including politicians and academics, accepted de Klerk's invitation for two days of talks on the violence plaguing black townships. Conspicuously absent were the African National Congress and major church leaders.
In the opening speech, de Klerk tried to minimize the effect of the ANC's boycott, saying the summit would start negotiations that eventually could include all major groups.
"The temptation to play politics is great," he said. "We must give our attention to getting all the role-players to become involved."
In refusing to attend, the ANC said the government was involved in the violence and was therefore in no position to lead talks aimed at ending it. It said a neutral party should lead the talks.
The influential South African Council of Churches said Wednesday it would not attend the conference because the ANC would not be there. The council represents about 12 million churchgoers, mostly blacks.
Most small anti-apartheid groups, such as the Pan Africanist Congress, followed the ANC's lead.
The main black group participating in the summit was the ANC's rival, the Inkatha Freedom Party, which has generally good relations with the government.
More than 6,000 people have died since 1986 in black factional clashes that usually involve supporters of the ANC and Inkatha.
Inkatha leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi acknowledged at the meeting that his supporters had been involved in violence, but blamed the clashes on the ANC.
He said Inkatha had been forced to fight after being attacked by the rival group for its non-revolutionary stance.
"No organization of human beings could suffer that kind of attack without anger, without retaliation, without preemptive violence and without blood feud violence," he said.
"On no single occasion have I ever, ever made any decision whatsoever to use violence for political purposes."
While criticizing the ANC, Buthelezi added: "Whatever else this conference does, it must aim at keeping the ANC in the peace process."
The government invited groups of all political persuasion to speak at the conference.
Among the speakers was white extremist Eugene TerreBlanche, dressed in military khaki, who warned that revolution was inevitable because of de Klerk's effort to dismantle apartheid. He then walked out of the hall.
One speaker, who suggested using peace-keeping forces to end the unrest, was answered with laughs and jeers.
"People can laugh. That is my view. I won't laugh when you speak," said Brian Currin, national director of the anti-apartheid group Lawyers for Human Rights.
Most Inkatha supporters are Zulus, and the tribal heritage forms the basis for much of the bitterness between Inkatha and the ANC. Most ANC supporters are Xhosas. The two groups also disagree on methods for fighting apartheid and on their ideas for post-apartheid South Africa. Inkatha is more conservative than the ANC, opposing sanctions and mass action such as strikes and protests that the ANC favors.
A Zulu leader at the meeting called for unity among blacks.
"I am both appalled and ashamed as a black man … that blacks in South Africa have lived to see these days of violence," said King Goodwill, the leader of the Zulu tribe and a close Buthelezi ally.
Delegates were expected to hold private talks Saturday before a formal statement was issued.

 

End of Document
