

Decades In the Making, Massive History Of Africa Nears Completion
The Associated Press
February 18, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 720 words
Byline: By DAVID CRARY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




After 28 years of research, writing and occasional scholarly skirmishing, UNESCO is on the brink of completing the most comprehensive history of Africa written under the control of African editors.
Nearly 300 scholars recruited worldwide wrote the eight-volume, 6,000-page work. It makes extensive use of oral history, and its approaches to the slave trade and other volatile topics were thrashed out at sometimes impassioned symposiums.
"It fills a void," said Augustin Gatera, who since 1972 has helped coordinate the project from the Paris headquarters of the U.N. Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
"Previous works usually were written by historians from ex-colonial powers, from a colonial point of view," said Gatera, a Rwandan.
Sharp differences of opinion surfaced during the project.
Jean Devisse, a French historian who serves on the oversight committee, recalled a 1978 colloquium on the slave trade, held in Haiti.
He said some African scholars said that, because Europe had failed to pay compensation for slavery, they had nothing to discuss with their European counterparts.
"The Africans said it was an unpardonable phenomenon...," Devisse recalled.
"The other side said it was necessary to study. Some Europeans said there couldn't have been a slave trade if Africans hadn't sold the slaves… The Africans were revolted by that."
"But there was a certain transformation of spirit, after which we began to work together instead of insulting each other."
The end result, he said, was a "bilateral" approach that synthesized the various viewpoints. African rulers' role in the slave trade is mentioned, but Arabs and most of all Europeans are blamed.
The General History of Africa, UNESCO's biggest editorial project ever, was proposed in 1965. Formal work began in 1971 with formation of a 39-member committee - 26 Africans and 13 non-Africans - to select editors and contributors for each volume.
The first volume was published in 1980. The eighth and last, about Africa since 1935, is due for publication within a few months.
Funding for the $ 6 million project came from diverse sources: major donors included Libya, the Vatican and the deposed empress of Iran.
Contributors include not only preeminent academics, but others such as Nigerian writer Wole Soyinka and Kenyan paleontologist Richard Leakey. African scholars were given preference, said Gatera.
The writing was done in English or French. Editions also exist in Arabic, Spanish, Portuguese, German, Chinese, Japanese, Korean and Italian. Abridged paperback versions, costing roughly $ 20 per volume, are available in two indigenous African languages - KiSwahili and Hausa.
Robert Harms, professor of African history at Yale University who was not part of the project, said the UNESCO series was a very useful reference tool, rather than "original, cutting-edge research."
Harms said he wrote a review of Volume 7, dealing with the colonial period of 1880-1935, which questioned the editors' objectivity.
"What the authors did, and it seemed to be policy of the editors, was to write about every known example of heroic resistance - for use in building up national histories," Harms said. "It failed to mention that many African rulers collaborated with colonial rulers because they personally profited."
"This isn't surprising," Harms said. "But from a scholarly viewpoint, it's a little simplistic."
The final volume, now being proofread, was edited by Professor Ali Mazuri, a Kenyan who heads the Institute of Global Cultural Studies at the State University of New York in Binghamton.
The volume's cutoff date was 1985, but Mazuri said some later developments were included, such as the demise of Soviet Communism.
Mazuri said he wished the role of women in modern Africa had received greater emphasis. The supervisory committee rejected a proposal to have a West African woman on the volume's cover, he said.
The preface for the project was written by Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow, the Senegalese educator who often was accused of anti-Western, pro-Third World bias while serving as UNESCO director-general from 1974-87.
"For a long time, all kinds of myths and prejudices concealed the true history of Africa from the world at large," M'Bow wrote.
"Africans themselves have felt a deep-seated need to re-establish the historical authenticity of their societies."

 

End of Document
