

Desert Storm Chief Bids Farewell to the Gulf and His Troops
The Associated Press
April 20, 1991, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 587 words
Byline: By GEORGE ESPER, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia
Body




Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf bid farewell to allied forces today and headed home, saying the United States had completed its mission in the Persian Gulf.
As he boarded his military jet at Riyadh Air Base, he turned at the top of the steps, saluted and waved to the crowd that included a Royal Saudi honor guard.
Asked if he had any plans to enter politics when he retires this summer, the military commander of Operation Desert Storm replied, "None." There has been speculation he might run for the Senate from Florida.
"I'm going to go home. That's what's next for me," he said.
His plane flew off to Cairo, where he planned to stop briefly to thank Egypt's government and military officials for their support in the Gulf War. Egypt committed thousands of troops.
After the brief stopover, he was flying to Tampa, Fla., the U.S. Central Command's headquarters in the United States.
Although American troops have entered northern Iraq to help Kurdish refugees, the U.S. force in the south is rapidly withdrawing and Schwarzkopf said, "There's no question in my mind that we completed our mission."
"Our mission was to come over here and to enforce the United Nations resolution with regards to the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait and that's precisely what we've done," he told reporters after receiving Saudi Arabia's highest military honor ever given a non-Arab.
He said that the situation of the Kurdish refugees was "tragic" and that the United States was disappointed their rebellion was driven into the mountains by Saddam Hussein's army.
"All of our hearts cry out to the Kurdish people," he said. "I don't think that we should ever say that because of what's happening to the Kurds now means that our mission failed. It's exactly the same thing that happened to the Kurds a few years ago at the end of the Iran-Iraq war. It's exactly the same thing that's happened to the Kurds for many years."
Schwarzkopf's departure signals the end of the U.S. combat role in the Persian Gulf. Fewer than 260,000 American military personnel remain from a peak of 540,000.
His Central Command headquarters in Riyadh, from which he plotted a smashing victory over Saddam, closed down after 257 days.
He and nearly 400 of his staff members were scheduled to arrive Sunday morning at Tampa, from where Schwarzkopf will continue to command U.S. forces in the Persian Gulf.
Operation Desert Storm transformed Schwarzkopf from an unknown to fame. Lucrative speaking engagements, job offers, multimillion-dollar book offers await him as does the speculation about a political future.
The Trenton, N.J., native is retiring this summer after 35 years of Army service to enter private life. Iraq was his second war. He served as a battalion commander in Vietnam, where there were no heroes and no welcome homes.
But during the Gulf War, Schwarzkopf became a household word.
"Stormin' Normin"' shared a penchant for bluntness with Gen. Douglas MacArthur, who was fired by President Truman during the Korean War for questioning policy.
Schwarzkopf created an embarrassing stir recently when he suggested in a television interview that he wanted to pursue Saddam's forces rather than call a cease-fire in the war Feb. 27, which President Bush did.
Schwarzkopf later apologized to the president, saying he agreed "100 percent" with Bush's decision to end the war.
Critics have said Bush should have given Schwarzkopf the approval to finish off Saddam so he would not have been able to crush the rebellions by the Kurds and Shiite Muslims that began after Iraq lost the war.

 

End of Document
