

Desert Town Reflects The Horror of Somalia
The Associated Press
August 19, 1992, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 593 words
Byline: By GREG MYRE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAIDOA, Somalia
Body




A skeletal boy lies in the red sand of a refugee camp, too weak to move, to speak, even to cry. Only his blinking eyes give any hint of life. Like so many others, he is beyond help. Every dawn finds new bodies in the dust of the hospital courtyard.
The scenes of horror multiply beyond imagination in this desert town 155 miles northwest of the capital, Mogadishu. It is an apocalyptic vision of the famine engulfing Somalia.
War, anarchy and drought have put 1.5 million people in danger of starvation in this northeast African nation, creating what has been described as the world's worst humanitarian crisis.
Aid workers cite Baidoa as one of the most desperate areas of the country.
"It is a catastrophe. The level of suffering is incredible," said Cristophe Serezu, head of the International Red Cross delegation in Baidoa.
Hundreds of men, women and children, stick figures all, straggle down a dirt road leading from deserted villages into Baidoa.
They pass a fly-covered corpse beside the road and pull their dirty, ragged shawls over their noses to block the stench. They avert their eyes, trying not to look into the face of death.
No one can say how many people are dying in Baidoa. But a survey of refugee camps, aid agencies and the hospital suggested the figure is between 25 and 50 a day.
Aid workers say hundreds more may be dying in the brush and villages surrounding the town.
Baidoa has about 60,000 residents, about the same as when the famine began months ago. But almost all the original inhabitants fled to Mogadishu seeking food.
Food began reaching Baidoa only two months ago through the Red Cross and the U.N. Childrens' Fund, when clan fighting that had swept the area moved on to more distant regions.
That brought an influx of new people into the town from remote villages. Many of them once were hardy, self-reliant families of farmers and herders. Now they wander down the tarred road that runs through the middle of town, their eyes glazed and uncomprehending.
A car honks for the starving to move aside, but it takes a while for the sound to register before the people lurch off the asphalt.
"When your stomach is so empty, your ears don't work," said Bile Farah Artan, a Baidoa resident.
The Red Cross is feeding 37,000 people in Baidoa, and the United Nations and other organizations are trying to feed the rest. Much of the food comes by plane in three or four flights a day.
The flights are 10 times as expensive as ground transport. But in anarchic Somalia, free-lance gunmen control large stretches of the road between the capital and Baidoa, looting and hijacking with impunity.
Dorothy St. Germain of the Los Angeles-based International Medical Corps, the group running Baidoa's lone hospital, said a recent supply convoy left Mogadishu as 17 trucks, but only six arrived in Baidoa.
Baidoa is one of several southern Somalia towns targeted by a United States military airlift that will deliver 145,000 tons of food over the next two months. The first flight to Baidoa is expected in about 10 days.
As food becomes increasingly available, more people will come. Others would if they could.
In a village 12 miles away, a widow and her four small children huddled around a small black pot containing the boiled skin of a camel, the meat of the animal consumed long ago. The woman's fifth child died Tuesday morning and was covered with a shawl.
"Before the civil war, this area used to grow sorghum and nuts to feed the rest of the country," said Musa Rafael, a former agriculture official. "It is so horrible now I cannot believe my eyes."

 

End of Document
