

Disasters Draw The Curious And The Helpful
The Associated Press
September 2, 1992, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 383 words
Byline: By DIDRIKKE SCHANCHE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NAIROBI, Kenya
Body




Something about the dying, the desperate, the wounded and the embattled draws the curious.
Thousands of people starve to death every day in Somalia. Tens if not hundreds of thousands already have died from the combined effects of drought and warfare.
The disaster has brought hundreds of aid workers - and also onlookers who, when asked why they want to visit a country that most people are trying to flee, invariably respond: "Just to see it."
One American wanted to charter a DC-3, fill it with journalists and essentially make a day-trip to see Somalia's worst. But he wasn't sure where to go and eagerly accepted advice on where people were dying in the greatest numbers.
Aid officials say this sort of curiosity sometimes comes of a desire to help. But often, it is just voyeurism.
The better-known aid organizations are peppered with requests for transportation to hot spots.
"If we were able to take everybody who wanted to go, it could possibly lead to greater public awareness and concern," said Panos Moumtzis of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees. "But we're not running sightseeing safaris."
"We call them development or emergency tourists," said Paul Mitchell, of the U.N. World Food Program.
"Some of them are sort of peripheral aid workers. But you get a lot who aren't really involved but want to be able to do it so they can go back home and say, 'I was there," said Mitchell. "We tell them to join a relief agency if they want to do something."
In one instance, a pair of young German backpackers, passing through Nairobi on an East African safari, stopped at an international news agency for advice on how to get into the Horn of African country, which months of warfare has reduced to little more than a name on a map.
Widespread banditry and continuing clashes among clan militia makes it a dangerous place to visit. Poor roads and no commercial air service make it impossible to get there independently.
These days, the only way into the lawless nation is by hitching a ride on a relief plane or bribing your way aboard one of the small, overloaded, airplanes that daily deliver a ton or more of khat, a leafy stimulant which when chewed in large enough quantities results in a form of euphoria.
The German women were not interested in risking a flight on what amounted to a drug run.

 

End of Document
