

Edging Aspin to the Door
The Associated Press
December 16, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 707 words
Byline: By RON FOURNIER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Convinced Les Aspin had to go, President Clinton spent weeks patiently edging his defense secretary to the door. Meanwhile, the search for a replacement went on outside.
In the end, the Pentagon post went to a reluctant Bobby Inman, who impressed the White House with a sterling resume and a bundle of connections to the Clinton administration. The retired Navy admiral and former government intelligence official has history with Vice President Al Gore, White House counselor David Gergen, Secretary of State Warren Christopher, Deputy Defense Secretary William Perry and Clinton confidant Vernon Jordan.
After a lengthy search process and two meetings with his top choice, Clinton on Wednesday offered Aspin's job to Inman. He then had Aspin draw up his resignation letter.
White House officials insisted that Aspin was not fired, nor did Clinton request his resignation.
But neither gesture was needed: The writing was on the wall and Clinton was showing it to him.
Aspin's departure came after a turbulent year marked by numerous policy controversies, including the issue of homosexuals in the military, American deaths in Somalia and a messy fight over the Pentagon budget that he took public.
At the White House, it had been clear for several weeks that Les was to be no more.
Clinton and Aspin began talking resignation, according to a senior administration official speaking on condition of anonymity. Then Clinton asked Chief of Staff Mack McLarty "a couple of weeks ago" to find a successor.
Whatever happened, the official said, Clinton wanted to be prepared for a smooth transition.
Another official, this one involved in the search for a replacement, said Clinton and his top advisers knew by then that Aspin was leaving, even if Aspin did not. "Why would we work so hard to replace a guy who wasn't leaving?"
Three weeks ago, Inman met his future boss for the first time. They chatted for 90 minutes in the White House residence about a broad range of national security issues. Although Inman was on the search team's list of candidates, Clinton did not consider the meeting an interview - it was another in a series of talks with national security experts.
Inman, however, interviewed the president. The man who voted for President Bush - not Clinton - in 1992 was skeptical about the new commander in chief.
"I was persuaded from our lengthy conversations of the president's absolute commitment to build a strong bipartisan support for where this country needs to go in the years out ahead," Inman said Thursday.
Aides said Clinton was impressed by Inman in the first meeting, found him blunt, honest and intellectually stimulating. Recommendations from National Security Adviser Anthony Lake, who had interviewed Inman on Monday, and Gore carried great weight.
"Gore was a big player in this," the senior official said.
Aides said Clinton also was attracted by Inman's lifelong relationships with senior military leaders and his management experience in large government agencies. Aspin, a man respected and liked by Clinton, was weak on both points.
Clinton's two tracks - talks with Aspin and resume-gathering by his staff - came together Tuesday. He met first with Aspin in the Oval Office, a meeting that ended with Aspin "fairly certain" that he was out of a job, the senior White House aide said.
Aspin aides, who all spoke on condition of anonymity, said the secretary said little about that session. "There was a strangeness about the silence," one official said.
Within hours, Clinton formally interviewed Inman. Like their first meeting, they chatted for 90 minutes.
Clinton thought on the matter overnight and Wednesday offered the job to Inman, the only person he interviewed. Inman accepted.
Later Wednesday, Aspin was told to make the mutual decision formal: Get the resignation letter written and over to the White House. The bombshell was dropped in a hurry-up announcement to a handful of reporters in the Oval Office.
"It's time for me to take a break," said Aspin, who just days earlier said he loved his job more than any other.
On Thursday, he stood like a good soldier at the ceremony for Inman, who said he really didn't want what Aspin had always wanted.
"I did not seek the job," he said. "In honesty, I did not want the job."
 Load-Date: December 16, 1993

 

End of Document
