

Egyptian Filmmakers Learn the Limits of Cultural Freedom
The Associated Press
March 30, 1992, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 820 words
Byline: AP Photo Planned, By ZINA HEMADY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




Cairo is the Broadway and Hollywood of the Arab world, and its artists have begun dealing increasingly with political themes since the government began easing restrictions.
Heated debate often results. For instance, two movies and a play have been the talk of Cairo for months.
None of the three has much to do with Islam, unlike the case of an eight-year prison given a novelist whose book recounts humorous encounters with prophets.
Such intolerance is widely seen as a governmental effort to avoid criticism by religious movements. Lenin el-Ramli, author of the hit play "In Plain Arabic," said religion still defines the "limits that we cannot go beyond," largely because of traditional public piety in Egypt.
El-Ramli's play does not address religion, but mocks Arabs as self-serving hypocrites. It illustrates how far Egyptian society has come since the authoritarian Arab nationalist regime of Gamal Abdel Nasser, who died in 1970.
"In Plain Arabic," set in a student hostel in London, depicts the trials of a Palestinian student and the hand-wringing and lip service his housemates, Arabs from 14 countries, pay to his cause. A meeting on the Palestinian's fate deteriorates into a loud debate of who should be chairman.
Such a work would have been forbidden under Nasser.
Movie director Youssef Chahine, who discovered Omar Sharif, has battled government censors for months in an effort to have a short film shown in Cairo, where he shot it last year.
He says authorities don't want it exhibited here because it raises questions about President Hosni Mubarak's rule. He figures they hope to entwine it in the government bureaucracy until he gives up.
"My job is to ask how do you ban it and then talk about democracy?" Chahine said in an interview. "But they have a thousand bureaucratic ways to stop it."
"Le Caire" (Cairo), which runs 23 minutes, is part documentary and part drama. Unlike other films that deal with the city's grand history and appeal for tourists, it focuses on Cairo's economic and social problems.
"The film is saying that, in spite of education, no jobs are foreseen for the tremendous number of unemployed," he said. "People have very little money and inflation is very high. In addition to that, we have a very grave population problem.
"Having no one to turn to, the people have to turn to God alone. They become sort of fundamentalist."
Chahine appears as himself in the movie, which also speaks to friction between Egypt's Muslim majority and Coptic Christian minority, an off-limits topic for Egyptian media.
In one scene, a Coptic shopkeeper expresses annoyance with Muslim worshipers who gather outside his store on the Muslim Sabbath to pray at a sidewalk mosque.
"You know, Fridays really get on my nerves," the Copt says to Chahine when the director enters the store.
"I bet Sundays get on the sheik's nerves," the director replies.
The other movie, a biographical work called "Naji el-Ali," raised the ire of politicians, press and public for its favorable depiction of el-Ali, a Palestinian political cartoonist murdered in London in 1987.
El-Ali was severely critical of Egypt for its peace treaty with Israel. One cartoon showed Egypt as a woman undressing behind an American flag under a sign reading "Make Love Not War," as men lined up.
Nour el-Sherif, one of Egypt's most popular movie stars, has been the target of special anger for playing the title role. Critics argue that no Egyptian should glorify el-Ali.
"I was shocked by Nour el-Sherif because he sold his art and talent and the Egyptian people's love for him for a handful of dollars," editor Ibrahim Saada wrote in Al-Akhbar, a state-owned newspaper.
The movie concentrates on el-Ali's disillusion and disgust with Arabs and Palestinian leaders for double standards and unsuccessful pursuit of the Palestinian cause. It implicitly blames his killing on fellow Arabs.
El-Sherif said in an interview that he co-produced and starred in the film in an effort to change the image of Palestinians among Arabs.
Anti-Palestinian feeling has grown in Egypt and many Persian Gulf countries since the Gulf War, when many Palestinians sided with Iraq.
Al-Ahali, a leftist newspaper that supports el-Sherif, quoted the actor as saying he played el-Ali because the cartoonist "symbolized the noble rejection" of Arab hypocrisy.
"He only brandished his feather," el-Sherif said. "His assassination proves that there is no freedom in the Arab world."
Atef el-Tayyeb, who directed the movie, said the uproar proves the freedom el-Ali died for is yet to be realized.
"Our problem is freedom and democracy in the Arab world," el-Tayyeb said. "It should be the right of any artist to choose the subject he wants."
Many Egyptians disagree. Members of Parliament asked Farouk Hosni, the culture minister, to ban the movie.
He did not, but it has been rejected for display at a national film festival. The minister said he had nothing to do with the decision.

 

End of Document
