

Embassy Officer the Mystery Man of Hostage Group
The Associated Press
December 27, 1991, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 625 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




William Buckley, a CIA official at the U.S. Embassy in Beirut, was the mystery man among the American hostages in Lebanon.
He was kidnapped in March 1984 and is believed to have died in June 1985 after being tortured. Authorities today identified a body dumped near a Beirut highway as his.
The puzzle over Buckley apparently was explained by his position.
The CIA issued a statement in Washington today confirming what had been reported many times, that Buckley was the senior CIA official in Beirut at the time of his kidnapping.
The CIA said it was "carefully following reports" about the finding of the body and would make a positive identification once the remains are returned to the United States.
If the body is Buckley's, said the statement, "it ends the final chapter in the tragic death of this courageous and dedicated American patriot who gave his life for his country."
It said a memorial service was held for Buckley at CIA headquarters in Langley, Va., on Aug. 31, 1987.
He was one of the first Americans abducted in the streets of Beirut. On March 16, 1984, gunmen stopped his car and seized him as he drove out of his apartment building driveway on his way to work.
Buckley, who was 55 when kidnapped, was a native of Medford, Mass. He joined the Army in 1947, rising to the rank of captain, and graduated from Boston University in 1955 with a degree in international relations.
He joined the CIA in the 1950s and served as an operations officer in the Middle East, Africa, Southeast Asia and Europe. Buckley also held management positions in the Directorate of Operations at CIA headquarters, according to official documents.
In 1983, he was posted as a political officer to the U.S. Embassy in Beirut, a cover for his real position as head of the CIA's station. CIA station chiefs often operate abroad under diplomatic cover.
On Jan. 22, 1985, nine months after his abduction, Buckley appeared in a 56-second videotape that somehow reached Visnews, a British televison news agency.
"I am well, and my friends Benjamin Weir and Jeremy Levin are also well," he said. "We ask that our government take action for our release quickly."
Levin escaped his captors in February 1985, and Weir was released seven months later. Both men said they had no contact with Buckley.
In October 1985, the Shiite Moslem extremist group Islamic Jihad released blurred photographs of what it said was Buckley's body. It said he was killed in retaliation for Israel's air raid that month on Palestine Liberation Organization headquarters in Tunisia.
But no body was produced, and U.S. officials said the photos were not "conclusive proof" Buckley was dead. Lebanese Shiite and Western intelligence sources said at the time Buckley actually may have died earlier, possibly after being tortured.
On Jan. 20, 1987, President Bush confirmed the death in an oblique reference in a speech at a Washington conference on terrorism, saying President Ronald Reagan felt concern "when an American in terrorist hands is tortured and, in the case of William Buckley, killed."
Freed hostage David Jacobsen said that for a time he was held, blindfolded, in the same room with Buckley and he believes Buckley died June 3, 1985. He was severely ill before his death, Jacobsen said. Unofficial reports say the illness was the result of torture.
Terry Anderson, the last American hostage to be freed, said after his release on Dec. 4 that he believed Buckley might have died in the same room with him. But he was chained and blindfolded at the time and did not actually see Buckley die.
Buckley's sister, Maureen Moroney, told the Providence Journal-Bulletin newspaper: "He knew it was dangerous there, but he went because he was ordered to. It was his job. That's the way he thought of it."

 

End of Document
