

Ethiopians Fleeing Ethnic Violence By The Thousands
The Associated Press
April 2, 1992, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 549 words
Byline: By CHEGE MBITIRU, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GURAR, Kenya
Body




When Ethiopia's Marxist government collapsed last year, Mohamed Hamid expected peace. He was wrong.
"Those fighting the government said they wanted peace, but I haven't seen it," said the gaunt cattle herder from Ethiopia's southern Sidamo region.
Hamid, 54, was one of an estimated 23,000 Ethiopians, mostly from the Gari ethnic group, who crossed into arid northern Kenya in the past month to escape fighting between the Garis and another ethnic group, the Borans.
U.N. officials say the influx of the Ethiopians is only a part of a growing refugee problem in Kenya, where the number of refugees has risen to 157,000 this year from 15,000 in 1990.
More than 115,000 of the refugees are Somalis who have fled civil war in their homeland, and an influx of thousands is expected to soon from Sudan, where the government recently launched an offensive against southern rebels.
"We expect the total number of refugees in Kenya to double in the next few months," said Ulf T. Kristoffersson, Horn of Africa coordinator for the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees.
The fighting in Ethiopia's Sidamo region is a result of traditional rivalry, civil disorder and conflict for grazing land in an area suffering from drought for the past three years, U.N. officials say.
The UNHCR settled most of the Ethiopians in Walda, a border camp 335 miles north of Kenya's capital, Nairobi.
Most of the refugees took up to five weeks to trek to the nearby border post of Gurar, whose dominant features are a police station and a well. Thousands of refugees jam Gurar.
"Walda is overcrowded, but we can't care for them here," Claude Detouillon, a UNHCR health officer, said in Gurar as refugees were loaded on a truck for Walda. "The slightest rains will make the road impassible."
Hamid sat patiently in the hot sun as the people on the truck were counted and recounted, to prevent double registration.
Like most other refugees, Hamid fled with a straw mat but was luckier than others. He had a metal flask "to carry water for the children."
His wife, two sons and three daughters sat beside him, all with unstirring eyes. His oldest son, he said, was killed when their village was attacked by members of the Boran tribe.
He had long given up farming because of the drought and was vague about the number of the cattle he claimed the Borans stole.
"Several," was all he would say.
Walda, which houses 30,000 refugees, was established soon after President Mengistu Haile Mariam's government fell to rebels in May and Ethiopians began fleeing south.
The refugees say the new government in Ethiopia's capital, Addis Ababa, has yet to establish control in the Sidamo region.
The feuding Garis and Borans in Sidamo are not the dominant groups in Ethiopia, an ethnic patchwork of 51 million people.
Kristoffersson said the number of Ethiopians crossing the border daily ranges between 1,500 and 2,000, most of them women and children.
"We expect up to 100,000 in the next four to five weeks," he said. The UNHCR faces a daunting problem locating the refugees, who pop up everywhere in the sparsely populated region.
Inspector David Wambugu of the Kenyan police regularly visits the border and estimates 40,000 women and children are camped in the scrub on the Ethiopian side.
"If their men lose the fighting, they will be here," Wambugu said.

 

End of Document
