

Events In The Flight 103 Case
The Associated Press
March 25, 1992, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 470 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Here is a chronology of events in the Flight 103 bombing and the investigation that led U.S., British and French authorities to accuse two Libyans in the case.
---
1991
Nov. 14: U.S. and British authorities indict two Libyan intelligence officials in connection with the December 1988 bombing over Lockerbie, Scotlandof Pan Am Flight 103.
Nov. 18: Libya says it was falselyaccused in the Pan Am bombing as part of a deal to free Western hostages by letting Syria off the hook.
Dec. 4: Libya's intelligence chief says the two Libyans wanted in the bombing have been arrested and are being questioned.
Dec. 7: A Libyan official says Libya will accept a U.N.-nominated judge to decide the fate of two Libyans charged in the Pan Am bombing.
Dec. 19: The United States, Britain and France seek international support for sanctions against Libya for its alleged role in the bombings of Pan Am Flight 103 and a French airliner.
 
 1992
Jan. 3: The United States, France and Britain are pressing for a U.N. resolution demanding that Libya reveal all it knows about the bombing of two civilian airliners and hand over the accused attackers.
Jan. 9: Libya says it does not oppose trials for the two Libyan suspects in the attack, but will not allow their extradition until more evidence is produced.
Jan. 21: U.N. Security Council unanimously calls on Libya to hand over suspects charged with blowing up Pan Am Flight 103 and a French airliner over Niger in 1989.
Jan. 24: Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali sends an envoy to Libya on Friday to press the Tripoli government to surrender the two Libyans.
Jan. 28: Libya's No. 2 man says that Libya would surrender the suspects if an international commission examines the evidence and seeks their extradition.
Feb. 12: Libya agrees to provide evidence and witnesses in France's investigation of the explosion of the French airliner.;
Feb. 18: A Libyan judge rejects U.S. and British demands for the extradition of the Flight 103 suspects.
March 3: Libya says it will ask the World Court to resolve its dispute with the United States and Britain over their demands for the extradition of the two men accused of the bombing.
March 4: The United States, Britain and France say they are willing to have Libya turn over the two Libyans indicted in the bombing of Flight 103 to the United Nations.
March 20: Moammar Gadhafi appeals to world leaders to oppose a U.N. resolution that would impose sanctions on Libya.
March 22: Arab foreign ministers turn down Libya's request that they ignore sanctions that Western countries have threatened to apply against Libya.
March 23: Libya's U.N. ambassador says that his country will turn over the two suspects.
March 25: Moammar Gadhafi tells visiting delegation from the Arab League that only the International Court of Justice could make him surrender the suspects.

 

End of Document
