

Events In The Flight 103 Case
The Associated Press
March 26, 1992, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 464 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Here is a chronology of events beginning with the indictment by the United States and Britain of two alleged Libyan agents in the bombing of Flight 103:
---
1991
Nov. 14: U.S. and British authorities indict two Libyan intelligence officials in connection with the December 1988 bombing over Lockerbie, Scotland of Pan Am Flight 103.
Nov. 18: Libya says it was falsely accused in the Pan Am bombing as part of a deal to free Western hostages by letting Syria off the hook.
Dec. 4: Libya's intelligence chief says the two Libyans wanted in the bombing have been arrested and are being questioned.
Dec. 7: A Libyan official says Libya will accept a U.N.-nominated judge to decide the fate of two Libyans charged in the Pan Am bombing.
Dec. 19: The United States, Britain and France seek international support for sanctions against Libya for its alleged role in the bombings of Flight 103 and of a French airliner over Niger in 1989.
 
 1992
Jan. 3: The United States, France and Britain press for a U.N. resolution demanding that Libya reveal all it knows about the bombing of the two airliners and hand over the agents accused in the attacks.
Jan. 9: Libya says it does not oppose trials for the two suspects in the Flight 103 attack but will not allow their extradition until more evidence is produced.
Jan. 21: U.N. Security Council unanimously calls on Libya to hand over suspects charged in the downing of Flight 103 and of the French airliner.
Jan. 24: Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali sends an envoy to Libya to press the Tripoli government to surrender the two Libyans.
Jan. 28: Libya's No. 2 man says Libya would surrender the suspects if an international commission examines the evidence and seeks their extradition.
Feb. 12: Libya agrees to provide evidence and witnesses in France's investigation of the explosion of the French airliner.
Feb. 18: A Libyan judge rejects U.S. and British demands for the extradition of the Flight 103 suspects.
March 3: Libya says it will ask the World Court to resolve its dispute with the United States and Britain over their demands for the extradition of the two men accused of the bombing.
March 4: The United States, Britain and France say they are willing to have Libya turn over the two Libyans indicted in the bombing of Flight 103 to the United Nations.
March 20: Moammar Gadhafi appeals to world leaders to oppose a U.N. resolution that would impose sanctions on Libya.
March 22: Arab foreign ministers turn down Libya's request that they ignore sanctions that Western countries have threatened to apply against Libya.
March 23: Libya's U.N. ambassador says his country will turn over the two suspects.
March 25: Gadhafi tells visiting delegation from the Arab League that only the International Court of Justice could make him surrender the suspects.

 

End of Document
