

Extravaganza and Nightmare Both: The World Descends on New York
 The Associated Press
October 21, 1995, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 859 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Presidents and premiers converged on New York from around the world Saturday to mark the 50th anniversary of the United Nations, in a four-day diplomatic jamboree of speechmaking and toasts, meetings and motorcades through chaotic city streets.
It is history's greatest gathering of world leaders - and New York's biggest security nightmare.
"It will probably be the largest security force ever implemented in the city," said the local FBI chief, James Kallstrom.
Fidel Castro will sermonize from a Harlem church pulpit. Yasser Arafat will fund-raise on Wall Street. Bill Clinton will host minisummits with his Russian and Chinese counterparts. And street protesters, from Cubans to Tibetans, will dog delegations everywhere.
Thousands of city police and federal agents will wrap a security blanket around the dignitaries, deploying rooftop anti-sniper teams, bomb-sniffing canines and, around Manhattan island, police boats with frogmen. Helicopters scoured the U.N. property, which sits next to the East River, late Friday.
Security concerns may have prompted one last-minute cancellation: by Egypt's President Hosni Mubarak, who escaped assassination four months ago in Ethiopia, apparently an attempt by Islamic extremists. Another Islamic target, Algeria's President Liamine Zeroual, was still scheduled to attend.
Safety was only one worry for organizers, who had to decide, for example, what kind of food to serve dignitaries from more than 180 lands.
Beef, veal, pork and shellfish - the politically or religiously incorrect - were crossed off the list for the dinner topping Saturday's agenda, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's gala event in the glass-encased lobby of the downtown World Financial Center.
Chief caterer Liz Neumark settled on chicken, lamb and a vegetarian selection. For dessert, the potentates will partake of a Ben & Jerry's ice cream "bombe."
"Ice cream is noncontroversial," she said. "Everybody likes ice cream."
The dinner, however, was hardly noncontroversial. Giuliani compiled his own "enemies list" - including Cuba's Castro and Palestinian leader Arafat - and left them off his guest roster.
But the Cuban president won't be idle. Business leaders are flying in by corporate jet from around the country to meet with Castro to explore economic opportunities in Cuba if the U.S. embargo is lifted, said John Kavulich of the U.S.-Cuba Trade and Economic Council.
"By Wednesday, he will have seen close to 200 business executives," Kavulich said.
Arafat, meanwhile, had his own party arranged - at the same time as Giuliani's and right across the street. Arab-American groups organized a dinner to honor Arafat to raise money for causes connected with the emerging Palestine "entity" in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
In faithful U.N. fashion, the half-century-old Middle East conflict has dominated even the anniversary celebration.
Arabs were still wrangling with the Americans and British on Saturday over wording in the three-day special session's final declaration, particularly a paragraph reaffirming peoples' rights to "self-determination" under "foreign occupation," phrases long linked to Israel's occupied territories.
The declaration, a recommitment to U.N. ideals, will be adopted Tuesday, the anniversary of the Oct. 24, 1945, ratification of the U.N. Charter. It will climax an unprecedented marathon of five-minute speeches by more than 200 kings, presidents, prime ministers, foreign ministers and other leaders of U.N. member states and international organizations.
The visiting heads of state and government also will attend a black-tie Clinton reception Sunday evening in the marble-columned New York Public Library, and a New York Philharmonic performance of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony on Monday night at Lincoln Center.
But the nitty-gritty business of this diplomatic extravaganza will be conducted in numberless "bilats" - one-on-one meetings between government chiefs to discuss bilateral concerns.
Clinton tops the list with his summit sessions with Russian President Boris Yeltsin on Monday in upstate Hyde Park and with Chinese President Jiang Zemin back in New York on Tuesday. But all in all, probably more than 500 bilateral meetings will take place, as cavalcades of armored limousines and black security vehicles race - or crawl - across midtown Manhattan.
City officials issued a "full gridlock alert" for Monday and Tuesday, warning motorists to stay away.
Lost among the sirens and photo opportunities will be what was once considered an ideal opportunity to enact major U.N. reforms.
As recently as last year, some diplomats saw the 50th anniversary as a time to restructure the Security Council, for one thing, to give the developing world and such powers as Germany and Japan a greater role on the U.N. "board of directors."
But a draft of the final declaration calls only vaguely for "expanding" the Council, with no specifics.
The draft also declares that "the United Nations must have adequate resources." But scores of those paying tribute to the world organization this week are official deadbeats, owing a total of some $ 3 billion in assessments. The biggest of all is the United States, which owes $ 1.3 billion.
 Load-Date: October 21, 1995

 

End of Document
