

Famine Conquered, Yanks Turn Over Command To The U.N.
The Associated Press
May 4, 1993, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 766 words
Byline: By PAUL ALEXANDER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOGADISHU, Somalia
Body




The United States transferred control of Somalia relief efforts to the United Nations today, ending its five-month leadership of a project that brought food and greater stability to the war-ravaged country.
In a low-key ceremony typical of the goal for a "seamless transition," Marine Lt. Gen. Robert Johnston handed over control of the 23-nation military coalition to Lt. Gen. Cevik Bir of Turkey, who will command a force that is projected to peak at 28,000 troops.
The American flag atop the coalition headquarters was lowered as an honor guard representing the participating countries stood at attention. It was replaced by the blue-and-white U.N. flag.
Johnston praised the work of Operation Restore Hope's soldiers, who have safeguarded food convoys and virtually ended the starvation, civil war and death by disease that claimed an estimated 350,000 lives last year.
"We need to thank the 19- and 20-year-olds in uniform … who by their poise and discipline and patience and good judgment truly did make it all possible," Johnston said.
But he said a lot of work remains for the U.N. force, which will include more than 4,000 Americans who are staying behind for about a year.
"Yes, there are still bandits out there," Johnston said. "The future of Somalia is in the hands of Somalis."
After handing over their duties to Pakistanis, Botswanans and Moroccans, Johnston and over 200 U.S. forces immediately left for the United States. As the group departed, 10 helicopters from the quick reaction force the Americans are leaving behind circled the city several times, and Johnston's plane also flew low over Mogadishu before disappearing into the clouds.
Soldiers, sailors and Marines have been leaving by the planeload over the past two weeks, flying home to bases in California, New York, Texas and other states.
Since they began arriving Dec. 9, death rates for towns like Baidoa and Bardera have dropped from hundreds a day to less than a dozen daily - a figure aid officials consider normal.
The multinational effort has fulfilled its mission of guarding food shipments and curbing lawlessness. Aid workers are now able to concentrate on primary health care.
But security in the countryside remains dicey, and many farmers have delayed returning to their fields for the wet season that already has started in some regions.
Still, there's little doubt there's been a drastic change in Somalia. Mogadishu's streets are relatively safe, at least during the day. Markets are thriving.
As the transfer ceremony was going on today, the market that sells the mildly narcotic drug "khat" was booming with today's shipment. Children also lingered at street corners looking for a chance to grab food, or perhaps a pair of sunglasses.
On Monday, kids were perched along the edge of a damaged building's roof like birds on power lines. They waved and shouted "A-mer-i-ca" as a six-truck convoy of troops rolled by. No rocks were thrown - a big change from the hostility the troops often faced.
Eighteen coalition members, including eight Americans, have died in Somalia since Operation Restore Hope began.
The latest was Cpl. Michael David Abel, 27, from Sidney, British Columbia, who died Monday in Belet Huen where Canadian forces are based. Another soldier was cleaning his rifle when it accidentally discharged, killing Abel, Canadian forces spokeswoman Capt. Karen Mair said today.
The danger remains great for relief workers in Somalia.
Today, the Dutch branch of the humanitarian group Medecins Sans Frontieres (Doctors Without Borders) said it has suspended its aid project in Baidoa and removed its 10 relief workers there because of frequent death threats. A Somali nurse working for the group was killed two weeks ago.
"The increasing danger in Baidoa is a direct result of the fact that the … U.N. intervention operation until now has not been able to lay a groundwork for peace in Somalia," the group said in a statement. "By this it is meant the institution of a police force and the restoration of justice."
At the airport outside Mogadishu, U.S. soldiers cleared their guns and rifles for the last time in Somalia and shared the powerful memories each is taking home.
Some recalled being pelted by rocks, shot at, yelled at.
Others, like Air Force Capt. Joe Davis, left with haunting images and unanswered questions. He recalled a young girl he met in December at the Lafolle orphanage outside Mogadishu.
"Both her legs were crippled," he said. "She came crawling out, pulling herself by her hands, just to see the Americans arrive. Every time I went back there, I looked for her, but I never saw her again."

 

End of Document
