

Fate of the American "Silk King" Still a Mystery
The Associated Press
April 18, 1992, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 710 words
Byline: By KENNETH L. WHITING, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAMERON HIGHLANDS, Malaysia
Body




The trail is cold now and the fate of a flamboyant American known as the "Silk King of Thailand" remains as much a mystery today as when he vanished 25 years ago.
Jim Thompson, who introduced Thai silk to the world, dropped from sight at this mountain resort on Easter Sunday 1967. He went for a walk and never returned.
The whereabouts of the 61-year-old businessman, antique collector and former intelligence officer attracted international curiosity. Theories range from suicide to robbery to some dark intrigue linked to his cloak-and-dagger past.
Others suggested he got lost in the jungle, fell victim to wild animals or was carried away by aborigines.
The mystery has inspired books, TV documentaries and countless newspaper and magazine articles.
Even before he vanished, the life led by James H.W. Thompson had the makings of legend.
Scion of a wealthy Philadelphia family, he graduated from Princeton in 1928 and studied architecture at the University of Pennsylvania, practicing professionally before enlisting in the Army in 1941.
With the war came the Office of Strategic Services, forerunner of the CIA. As an OSS operative, Thompson served in North Africa and Europe before being trained for behind-the-lines action in Thailand.
He settled in Bangkok after the war, first helping to revive the famed Oriental Hotel. In 1948, he launched the Thai Silk Co., reviving a dormant industry overwhelmed by cheaper textiles from Europe and Japan.
Thompson improved the dyes and taught hand-weavers to produce brightly patterned silks under strict standards for foreign buyers. He prospered and became one of the best-known Americans in Asia.
He assembled a home mostly of teak out of six smaller, old-style Siamese houses and filled it with ancient stone statues, Chinese porcelains and a priceless sixth-century Buddha. The palatial building is now a museum.
Among the last people to see Thompson alive were his hosts, the late Dr. and Mrs. T.G. Ling of Singapore, and another house guest. They said they assumed he went for a stroll after church and a picnic lunch.
Cameron Highlands, a resort 6,496 feet above sea level, offers a cool respite from the tropical heat. But many of the jungle paths near the former Ling cottage are indistinct and can be dangerous. Visibility is curtailed by a gloomy green canopy of tall trees.
Creepers and bushes conceal steep ravines; there are leeches, ready to suck the blood of unwary strollers.
Some say Thompson could have died in a fall and his body hidden by thick undergrowth. Others suggested he was devoured by a tiger.
Hundreds of searchers, including aboriginal trackers, Malaysian troops and U.S. Army helicopter crews combed the area for 10 days, finding no trace of Thompson. An unofficial search continued for months.
Local witch doctors, called bomohs, and foreign clairvoyants and seers were consulted. Several said Thompson was alive but far away; one said he was being held captive in Cambodia.
Unconfirmed reports of strange cars with Thai license plates in the area that day sparked rumors that he was kidnapped for ransom or for political or business reasons.
Some theorized that he staged his own disappearance, leading to later "sightings" in Singapore, Indochina, Tahiti, China and elsewhere.
The Thai Silk Co. offered a $ 25,000 reward for information - a move seen as an offer to open dealings with any kidnappers.
As the mystery deepened there was speculation that the silk business was a front for covert operations and that he had never left the intelligence field.
Jim Mysberg, one of Thompson's associates in the OSS, dismisses such conjecture: "He was just too exposed."
The Lings say Thompson was in good spirits the day he disappeared, a somewhat absent-minded chain-smoker in reasonable health except for gallstones.
His "jungle box" - a small container of pills he carried for gallstone attacks - was left behind along with his cigarettes and lighter.
Thompson was declared legally dead in 1974, soon after the statutory seven-year period of disappearance under Thai and U.S. law.
Five months after Thompson disappeared, his sister, Katherine Wood, was beaten to death in her West Chester, Pennsylvania home. The case was never solved but investigators said it was not connected with her missing brother.

 

End of Document
