

Fiat Drives the Punto to a Comeback - For Now
The Associated Press
June 18, 1995, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 772 words
Byline: By DANIEL J. WAKIN, AP Business Writer
Dateline: TURIN, Italy
Body




In its periodic Houdini escape from ruin, Fiat again has found new life thanks to a single model.
The spunky Punto compact is Europe's top seller, the winner of wide praise from analysts and the auto that helped Fiat win over drivers in Italy and the rest of Europe.
The Punto has done just what its popular predecessor, the Uno, did for the company in the 1980s. The question now is, can the automaker escape from its reputation as a one-car wonder?
Fiat is putting its hopes on a new mid-size car due out in September, a bevy of new models in various niches and a "world" car to be produced in its expanding foreign plants, mainly in the Third World.
The effort is of no little significance to Italy, where the Fiat empire is the largest private company and accounts for 5 to 7 percent of the gross national product and nearly a quarter of the equity on the Milan stock market. Aside from its core auto business, Fiat sells everything from trains to insurance to groceries to a leading Italian newspaper.
In the dark days of 1993, Fiat lost 1.78 trillion lire, or more than $ 1 billion, its worst result since World War II. It sold off holdings and borrowed heavily to raise money.
Matters were nearly as bad as they were during the early 1970s, when Fiat sold almost 10 percent of its shares to Moammar Gadhafi's Libya to help it past big losses brought on by the oil crisis. It bought back the stake a decade later.
About a dozen managers, including the company's chief financial and operating officers and leaders of its turbine and insurance arms, were implicated in Italy's far-reaching kickback scandal over the past two years.
More ominously, "many people thought Fiat couldn't come up with a new successful car," said Alessandro Barberis, the No. 2 manager of the conglomerate's auto division.
Then the Punto arrived. Since its November 1993 launch, the Punto has brought in more than 944,000 orders. About a quarter of all the 2.5 million Fiat-made cars produced a year are Puntos.
On June 2, the Fiat group announced it had made 1.01 trillion lire, or $ 612 million, in net profit during 1994, and boosted revenues 22 percent, to 65.8 trillion lire, or $ 39.88 billion.
"If the Punto had not had such success there wouldn't have been such a turnaround," Barberis said in an interview at Fiat headquarters here.
Other credit goes to changes Fiat has made in the way it makes cars, finally catching up to industry standards.
The Punto took about three years to get from drawing board to showroom, significantly shorter than past models. Fiat has also cut the number of components suppliers from 1,200 to 300. Its venerable Mirafiori plant here has adopted team-oriented production lines; at its new plant in Melfi, in the south, managers and blue-collar workers all wear the same overalls.
At Mirafiori, 1,200 Puntos roll out each day. Many of the components are produced from scratch. Little black polypropene bits, held in crates, are melted into plastic sheets. Dies, made at the plant, then stamp out dashboards and bumpers with the help of robots and human hands.
The Puntos made there and at Melfi are "the first real evidence" that Fiat can meet the quality standards of its best opposition, said Nicholas Potter, an auto analyst at the London office of Credito Italiano International.
Barberis stresses that "Fiat isn't just a small car." He runs down recent launches in a slew of segments, from the Coupe, to the Ulysse minivan to the Dedra station wagon and the new line of upscale Lancias.
All those are important for image but occupy small niches in the car-buying market. Big revenues come from big volume-sellers like the Punto and the mid-size Tipo.
That makes analysts worry about the future.
"What are you going to do a year from now when the Punto already is two years old and it's not the cutest thing on the market?" said Michael Ierubino, an analyst at Giorgio Murchio SIM & Co. in Milan.
The answer, Fiat hopes, lies partly in its Bravo and Brava medium-priced models, due for launch in September. They will succeed the Tipo and incorporate engineering and design aspects of the Punto.
Fiat also plans to sell its world car, a low-cost, simpler version of the Punto, in Brazil, Argentina and Turkey starting in 1996 and possibly Third World markets elsewhere.
Analysts give credit for Fiat's turnaround to auto division chief Paolo Cantarella, who oversaw a five-year investment program starting in 1991.
The biggest question mark for the future concerns Fiat's leadership.
Chairman Giovanni Agnelli, 75, whose family controls the company, has deferred plans to step aside. And no announcement has been made about a successor.
 Load-Date: June 18, 1995

 

End of Document
