

Fighting, Farming as Fickle as the Weather
The Associated Press
December 26, 1993, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1186 words
Byline: AP Photos NY170-2, By MARK FRITZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SARMANDER, Somalia
Body




The world gave Sarmander farm tools, sorghum seeds, expert advice and an army to keep the peace, but that wasn't enough. Nobody gave it rain, so the harvest failed and Sarmander is hungry again.
Nearby Germegel had a decent harvest. The sorghum was packed into underground larders to last through the dry season. But a neighboring clan looted the village two weeks ago, emptying the earthen cellars of four months of food.
Germegel is now a collection of smashed thatched huts shaded by trees on a gentle hill overlooking a rare thing in this part of Somalia: a reservoir. The people have fled to other towns, including Sarmander, which is flat, parched and increasingly overcrowded.
Both villages are in Somalia's sorghum basket, the heartland of the staple grain that often is ground and mixed with water to form a paste called sor.
The villages are within 40 miles of Baidoa, the resuscitated urban center the United Nations likes to show as a symbol of its effort to end starvation in Somalia and restore a semblance of law and order.
Sarmander and Germegel, more typical of this nation of itinerant farmers, are among the scores of villages around Baidoa that have failed to get back on their feet despite an unprecedented relief effort.
Humanitarian groups say it may be necessary to resume distributions of free food, suspended in July, so farm families can survive until the next rainy season in April.
But Sarmander, Germegel and other flyspeck villages have two things no one can change: the dry, caramel-colored soil that yields enough food only when the rains come twice yearly, and the complex interclan relationships that are as unpredictable as the weather.
Somalia has two growing seasons: the Gu, which begins with the rains in April and ends with an August harvest, and the Deyr, running from September to late December.
Both were catastrophes in Sarmander, which means "long tree." People are eating coble leaves - weeds, actually - and chopping down those long trees so they can sell wood for food in bustling Baidoa, 35 miles to the east.
The failed harvest was a crushing disappointment to Farey Madey, who was born here 36 years ago.
Madey, her husband and seven children were farming their plot when the civil war against President Mohammed Siad Barre spilled into the village.
After being driven from Mogadishu, the capital, Siad Barre set up headquarters in Baidoa. His soldiers raided nearby villages, looting food stores and shooting the occupants.
Village chief Haji Hussein Adam said 330 homes were burned down. Sarmander once had 5,000 families, he said; now there are fewer than 1,500.
The people fled in three migrations and many died of starvation en route, including Mrs. Madey's husband and three of her children. She made it to Wagit, 60 miles away, where humanitarian agencies had set up a feeding center.
She returned for the second growing season four months ago. The Irish aid group Concern gave her tools, seeds, and advice.
"I planted, but nothing grew," she said.
"All the farms are like this," said Mohammed Osman Bul Bul, a Somali agronomist for Concern. "People are eating leaves now."
Bul Bul tries to persuade Somalis to plant little gardens of carrots, cabbages and peppers to get through bad sorghum harvests. He teaches them to plant their seeds in rows rather than haphazardly, so crops can be tended more efficiently and produce greater yields.
He wants farmers to turn the soil with plows pulled by livestock, rather than by hand, and to plow deeply so the overused topsoil will be enriched.
But in Sarmander, he is up against nine generations of farming custom.
"They only believe what they learned from their grandfathers," Bul Bul said.
Sarmander is now in the early days of a dry season that will last until April.
The major humanitarian groups in the Baidoa sorghum region held an emergency meeting in mid-December to discuss whether to resume giving food to places like Sarmander.
Food giveaways are desirable only in cases of starvation because they can cause mass migrations from other villages and create havoc with food prices. "But if we don't, we're going to have a serious malnutrition problem again," said Beatrice Killen, head of Concern in Baidoa.
The problem in places like Sarmander is that its agricultural backup system was destroyed by the devastating combination of drought, mass migration and clan warfare that killed 350,000 people, prompting the U.S.-led relief effort in 1993.
People ate their camels, cattle, chickens and goats. Food stores were looted. Bushmen became bandits.
Livestock were always the insurance against disaster in this hardscrabble region of frequent droughts and failed harvests.
"What these villages need is a few good harvests in a row to build up their livestock so they can get through a bad harvest," said Richard Dixon, chief of CARE relief in Baidoa.
Hinde Ali, whose husband was shot to death when Barre's soldiers burned their hut in 1992, was foraging for leaves to eat.
"Give me biscuits. Give me water," said the young mother of two, reciting in English a mantra learned by people grown dependent on foreign help.
There are 17 subclans in the farm region around Baidoa.
About a month ago, the Harim and Leizon squared off in a murky dispute over two stolen camels. The feud exploded, engulfing dozens of villages. Huts were burned and underground sorghum stores looted. Killen said gangs of young clansmen shot and stabbed at least 60 people to death, and that seven to 10 villages were razed.
"It just shows how volatile the situation can be," she said.
The people of Germegel, not part of either warring clan, heard the shooting in the distance, said Isak Alimyou, 53, a village elder.
"We all escaped," he said. "Nobody wants to die any more.".
Unlike Sarmander, Germegel had a Gu harvest that produced enough sorghum, perhaps, to get it through the bad second harvest.
When the people returned from hiding, however, the deep underground storehouse was cleaned out. Seeds, tools, clothing and cooking utensils also were gone. The only thing not taken was the green-and-red flag marking the home of the Islamic holy man.
"Even he had to escape to save himself," said Humeri Mohammed Abdi, 36. "They used to respect the mullah. Not in these days."
She had come to fill a clay pot with water at the reservoir, where children splashed near the shore and magnificent egrets swooped in to drink.
Abdi, an unusually tall woman with a confident stare and commanding presence, walked past the deathly quiet collection of pillaged huts and stepped down the sloping bank to the little lake.
She fled to Mogadishu when famine and warfare last emptied her village two years ago. She watched her two children shrivel into leathery sacks of bones and die.
She made it back home, got the seeds in the ground and actually had something to harvest and live on. Then, in one night of looting, hundreds of lives were altered.
"Now we are beggars again," she said.
She surveyed her village and announced that she was moving back into her hut.
"No more escaping," she said, turning away with the pot of muddy water sloshing on her back. "I will stay here until I die."
 Load-Date: December 26, 1993

 

End of Document
