

Finding a Place for the Nomadic Tuaregs
The Associated Press
September 3, 1992, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 757 words
Byline: By ROBERT WELLER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAMAKO, Mali
Body




Modern Tuareg warriors ride four-wheel-drive trucks, not camels, and fire automatic rifles instead of slashing with their traditional two-edged swords.
Their most common targets are police posts, buses, trucks or tourists driving across the Sahara. The Tuaregs take weapons, money, food and vehicles, but seldom inflict many casualties.
In Mali and neighboring Niger, the government response to the hundreds of raids by "the blue men" of the desert has been bloody, particularly if the desert nomads kill any of their soldiers. Hundreds of Tuareg civilians have been slain in reprisals, according to Amnesty International and Western embassies.
Mali and the Tuaregs signed a peace agreement in March and Niger has tried to work out a cease-fire. Malian army soldiers patrol with former Tuareg rebels, some of whom were trained in Libya and fought in Lebanon and Afghanistan.
The violence in Mali that claimed 1,000 lives in three years has decline sharply since the agreement. Still, blacks fear traveling in the north, where most of the lighter-skinned Tuaregs live, and only a few thousand of the 400,000 Tuaregs who fled Mali have returned.
Both Alpha Oumar Konare, the newly elected president, and Tuareg spokesman Zeidan Ag Sidalamine blame the rebellion on poverty and attempts by former Malian governments to force Tuaregs to abandon their nomadic life.
For 1,000 years, Tuaregs controlled the lucrative trade across the Sahara and raided African villages to the south for food, livestock and slaves.
Sidalamine said that version of history was written by the French, "the ones who decided we love to fight."
France began its love-hate relationship with the Tuaregs in the middle of the last century, when explorers wrote of "the blue men" of the Sahara, for the color of the veils worn by male Tuaregs.
When the desert warriors impeded its colonial expansion in North Africa, France sent soldiers to subjugate them. Tuareg society, dependent on the ability to move freely across borders, began to disintegrate.
The cycle of drought and desertification of the 1970s forced Tuaregs to move into urban areas and beg for food. African governments unable to feed their own people had little sympathy for their former Tuareg masters, who make up less than 10 percent of the population in any country.
Thousands of Tuaregs fled to Algeria and Libya, trying to escape poverty and forced change. Some joined Moammar Gadhafi's Islamic Legion, thus antagonizing Western governments whose aid was critical to developing new agricultural techniques for other Tuaregs.
"We have no interest in Gadhafi, Islamic fundamentalism or the nostaglia of the past," Sidalamine said in an interview. "We are attached to the notion of liberty and of great spaces - no stop signs, no carnivals. But we are Malians."
Although the peace treaty has not been been perfect, he said, "one day of fighting in Yugoslavia claims as many lives as two months here." Sidalamine added that his Tuaregs "have total trust" in Konare, the first democratically elected president of Mali.
Konare told a reporter the Tuaregs had legitimate complaints before the treaty, but now must stop fighting or risk a coup by the military.
"Only a democratic government can solve the Tuareg problem," the president said.
His government set up a Commission of the North, which includes Sidalamine and other Tuareg representatives, to deal with Tuareg grievances.
Konare added, however, that there is not enough money to give Tuaregs the necessary aid for agricultural projects or to mount enough joint army-Tuareg patrols to control the vast northern territory.
Meanwhile, pamphlets are circulating that urge blacks to defend themselves. Sidalamine could drive to Timkutu safely, the independent newspaper La Nation declared, but if Prime Minister Younoussi Toure tried, chances were "eight of ten he would lose his skin."
Sidalamine contends that the reprisals for Tuareg raids are out of proportion. "When the Mafia killed the judge in Italy," he said, "the army didn't begin shooting people in the street."
A dozen Tuaregs, interviewed under a sun-shelter made of sacks attached to a mud house, said they were ready to adjust their nomadic ways in order to survive.
"The projects set up for us in the past weren't well planned and they didn't allow for us to keep our sheep, cattle, goats and camels," said Hattaye Ag Atouhami Haidara, their marabout, or Muslim holy man.
Asked about the criticism that Tuaregs drop agricultural projects as soon as a good rain falls, one said: "Who doesn't go to greener pastures?"

 

End of Document
