

Finding Value in Saying the World is a Nasty Place
The Associated Press
March 13, 1995, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 467 words
Byline: By THOMAS GINSBERG, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: COPENHAGEN, Denmark
Body




The U.N. poverty summit may best be understood as a global gripe session: everyone got a chance to speak, but nothing firm was agreed.
What the weekend meeting of 120 leaders at the World Summit for Social Development did accomplish was to launch what promises to be a long debate on how to fix poverty, hunger, persecution and greed.
Facing calls for reform itself, the United Nations may have the most at stake. It will try now to implement the summit's 80-page declaration of goals for ending poverty, unemployment and social inequalities.
The summit was held now as the world redefines itself after the Cold War. But the timing hardly could have been worse.
The United States, Germany, Britain and other wealthy nations - most facing domestic political rebellions against welfare - insisted that years of abundant foreign aid are over.
"During more than 30 years of development cooperation, we have all learned that the key to success is help towards self-help," said German Chancellor Helmut Kohl.
Many of the 130 developing nations represented at the summit agreed.
But they parted ways with the rich over whether the answer is to shovel the aid burden onto private groups and individual nations without addressing the rules of the game built up during the Cold War.
"International development efforts became predicated on the degree of support that developing countries gave to either of the two superpowers. … The developing countries and their peoples became mere marionettes," said Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir bin Mohamad.
The East-West conflict defined almost all aid decisions after World War II, from the Marshall Plan to the Peace Corps.
Today, delegates from the Third World - the term itself a Cold War relic - say the rich are moralizing again and ignoring the realities.
"Of course, we have little right to complain unless we can demonstrate that the limited resources available to us are being used efficiently," said President Jerry J. Rawlings of Ghana.
"But if we are sincerely and effectively making these efforts, and yet it is clearly not enough to address the social injustices in our countries, then are we not justified in questioning the present world order?"
Juan Somavia, the Chilean U.N. Ambassador who initiated the poverty summit, pointed out that the first U.N. global environment conference was held in 1975 when "nobody even knew what ozone was."
Twenty years later, ecological concern is often a prerequisite for winning elected office.
That's what the Copenhagen summit hopes will happen with poverty.
"Unless governments follow through, the conference will stimulate a sort of global cynicism," said James Gustave Speth, head of the U.N. Development Program. "That would be the worst of all results."
---
EDITOR'S NOTE: Thomas Ginsberg is the AP News Editor for Scandinavia.
 Load-Date: March 13, 1995

 

End of Document
