

For Most, the History-Making Vote Ends; Counting Starts Saturday
The Associated Press
April 28, 1994, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 955 words
Byline: By JOHN DANISZEWSKI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, South Africa
Body




Most of South Africa stumbled to the finish of its history-making election Thursday after a titanic effort to move ballots to millions of people voting to end three centuries of white rule.
Air force planes rushed hastily printed ballots to trouble spots in the hinterlands, and helicopters equipped with loudspeakers circled rural areas announcing where to vote.
But time ran out in some remote areas that were bedeviled by shortages of ballots, indelible ink and stickers, and the Independent Electoral Commission authorized some rural regions to continue voting Friday.
Election officials said the counting would start at 6 a.m. Saturday, and they plan to issue hourly results as the counting progresses.
The crush of people seen at polling stations on Wednesday was not as evident Thursday, as people turned out to elect the country's first government representing blacks, who make up three-fourths of the population.
For one thing, it appeared the vast majority of first-time black voters in their enthusiasm had stormed the polls Wednesday, the first day of general voting.
All signs pointed a massive turnout among the country's 23 million voters, but there were no immediate figures from election officials. The odds-on favorite to be president was African National Congress leader Nelson Mandela.
"Happy, happy. I nearly jumped out of my skin and stood next to my body," said Eddy Mile, a vegetable vendor who was one of the last voters in Soweto, outside Johannesburg.
Despite dire predictions in the months leading up to the election, and a spate of bombings early in the week blamed on white extremists, most of the three days of balloting took place in an atmosphere of calm.
"It looks like a miracle," said Dirk Bakker, 33, a white election worker, as he shut down a polling station in Durban.
Police moved to avert any further trouble from far-right whites by declaring unrest areas in 15 towns that are strongholds of pro-apartheid whites. That gives police expanded powers to detain people and break up public gatherings.
In many areas, the mood was jubilant.
It amounted to "a magnificent tribute to our national peace structures and the South African electorate," said relieved peace monitor Rupert Lorimer.
Although poll superintendents were permitted to keep the voting stations open until midnight, the majority were closing at 7 p.m., as originally planned, for lack of business.
Chaos that marred administration of much of the vote Wednesday subsided Thursday.
"Yesterday was exhausting. Today we are battling to keep awake, drinking lots of coffee," said one bored electoral officer in Johannesburg.
The situation also was helped by the military and Independent Electoral Commission pulling out all stops before dawn Thursday to resupply voting stations.
Photographers were dispatched to some polling stations to help issue temporary identity cards for voters.
Mandela and Inkatha leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi pressed for extending the voting until Friday, and an exhausted IEC reluctantly agreed to do so in some areas.
Mandela suggested that the foul-ups were more than just bungling and poor planning. In a television interview, he blamed "massive sabotage," apparently alluding to missing ballot shipments. His main political rival, President F.W. de Klerk of the National Party, challenged Mandela to provide proof.
Although Mandela made no other public comments Thursday, other ANC officials retreated somewhat from the allegations of abuses.
In the end, the government accepted IEC chairman Judge Johann Kriegler's recommendation that voting continue Friday in the eastern region of KwaZulu; in Transkei and Ciskei in the southeast; and in the region encompassing Lebowa, Gazankulu, and Venda, in northern Transvaal.
"The voters there have not had a fair and free opportunity to express their views," Kriegler said.
De Klerk applauded the decision. "We've got to make this election work for all the people," he told a news conference. "If we don't get a 100 percent perfect election, let us strive to achieve a 95 perfect one, and let us live with it."
Buthelezi, visiting polling stations in northern KwaZulu, also said he was happy. "It's obvious the least they could do is extend the time."
Most of Buthelezi's support is concentrated in his black homeland of KwaZulu - and that was where problems were worst. An Ulundi election officer, Peter de Bruyn, said despite an air force airlift, supplies were "too little, too slow."
"We've been running at 30 percent of our supposed voting capacity. It's worse than yesterday," he said. Tensions were on the rise among would-be voters, many of whom slept at polling stations the previous two nights.
One team of senior election officials fled, dragging unsealed ballot boxes with them, when angry voters attempted to storm a station north of Ulundi, de Bruyn said. "It's at a boiling point."
Some whites, about to lose their privileged positions, said they could not be bothered to vote.
"It's not worth it," said one unemployed 34-year-old, Johan Kilian, in Durban. "Whether we vote or not, blacks are still going to take over" and the country will go downhill.
Computer manager Kim Spencer disagreed. "Black governments have a bad track record throughout Africa, but maybe it will be different here."
Eugene TerreBlanche, leader of the neo-Nazi Afrikaner Resistance Movement whose followers have been accused in the three bombings this week that killed 21 people and wounded 170, warned of a coming apocalypse.
"The struggle our fathers have started will continue until we die or win," he said at a farmhouse once owned by Afrikaner leader Paul Kruger.
Obviously disappointed by the progress of the vote, he predicted: "Hell and terror will go on where it left off a day or two ago."
 Load-Date: April 28, 1994

 

End of Document
