

For a Healthy Diet, Science Turns to the Sunny Shores of the Mediterranean
The Associated Press
February 3, 1993, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1229 words
Byline: By MARY MacVEAN, AP Food Writer
Dateline: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.
Body




Scientists and chefs are finding happy common ground on the sunny shores of the Mediterranean Sea, where the former have found a healthy diet and the latter a tasty larder.
"Eat your vegetables" may not carry much culinary weight, but turn them into gazpacho or roast them and mix with pasta, and they're transformed into inviting fare.
With estimates that half the chronic disease in this country is related to diet, exercise, alcohol and smoking, public health authorities have been searching for ways to change behavior, with limited success.
"Simply to tell people what they should do is to take a naive approach to change," said W. Philip T. James, diretor of the Rowett Research Institute in Aberdeen, Scotland, and author of the United Kingdom's dietary guidelines.
Science couldn't have engineered a better answer than that provided by many popular chefs who are finding inspiration in the produce, grains, beans and olive oil that are mainstays of the diets of Greece, southeastern France, southern Italy, Spain and northern Africa.
Researchers can't yet agree on an exact shopping list. And the confusion many Americans feel about trying to eat a healthy diet isn't likely to disappear when, for example, one leading researcher says it's OK to eat a diet that's 40 percent fat as long as the fat is olive oil, while another says 10 percent fat is the absolute ceiling.
And there other parts of the world, particularly Asia, where diet seems to help prevent chronic disease.
But everyone agrees American and northern European diets are woefully short of fruits and vegetables. The government recommends at least five servings a day. On a given day, nearly half the population eats none at all, and just 9 percent of Americans are eating five a day, according to surveys.
The importance of Mediterranean diets was brought to scientists' attention by Ancel Keys. His continuing, landmark study of eating habits and disease in seven countries was the first to connect diet and heart disease, beginning in the 1950s, when Americans were adding extravagant amounts of meat, butter, and other animal foods to their meals.
The generation of research Keys spawned led to a great deal of agreement about what to eat. Still, the diets of the Mediterranean vary substantially from place to place, and scientists don't agree on just what components are key to preventing cancer and heart disease.
Researchers and public officials from several countries sought to define an "optimal diet" last month at a conference sponsored by the Harvard School of Public Health and Oldways Preservation and Exchange Trust, a Boston-based food think tank.
Points of agreement:
- Vegetables and fruit.
"The heart of the Mediterranean diet is vegetarian," Keys said in a speech at the conference. It differs from the diets of northern Europe and the United States in that it is lower in meat, dairy products and desserts.
In a 1960s study in southern Italy, for example, the average person ate 719 grams of bread, fruit and vegetables and just 44 grams of meat - less than a tenth of a pound - daily.
- Alcohol.
Many studies have shown that moderate alcohol consumption - up to two glasses of wine a day - is associated with a lower rate of heart disease, most notably reported as the "French paradox."
Researchers are not sure of all the reasons, or whether wine has big advantages over other drinks.
While the Moslem countries of the Mediterranean show very low alcohol consumption rates, wine with food is part of many of the cultures in that part of the world.
"That's very important. We drink wine with the meal," said Antonia Trichopoulou, president of the Federation of European Nutrition Societies and a professor of nutrition and biochemistry at the Athens School of Public Health. In Greece, she said, three-quarters of men and 92 percent of men never drink alone, according to surveys.
- Lifestyle.
Exercise is fundamental; diet is not enough. Low rates of chronic disease in the Mediterranean likely are also the result of lives strongly connected to extended families.
The researchers had many disagreements, as well. And after hearing from many of them, the director of the Food and Nutrition Board at the U.S. National Academy of Sciences, Catherine Woteki, concluded it was premature to recommend a Mediterranean diet to the public.
Points of contention:
- Fats.
Americans have been told to switch from saturated fats, found primarily in animal foods, to unsaturated fats, found in plants, for a total of no more than 30 percent of calories.
But researchers disagree about the effects on blood cholesterol of polyunsaturates and monounsaturates, found in olive, peanut and cottonseed oils. And they disagree about how much is acceptable.
Olive oil, one of the hallmarks of the Mediterranean diet, is consumed at levels from 5 percent to 40 percent around the region.
Walter Willett, chairman of the department of nutrition at the Harvard School of Public Health, presented an alternative to the federal government's pyramid, a graphic illustration of its dietary guidelines.
Rather than allowing two to three servings a day of meat, he suggested a primarily vegetarian diet, with meat included only a few times a month. And rather than suggesting that additional fats and oils be used "sparingly," Willett said total fat can be as high as 40 percent of calories, if it's mostly from olive oil.
Willett noted that children and pregnant women may have somewhat different needs, but said that for other people, the evidence shows no advantage to lowering fat even to 20 percent.
To Dean Ornish, whose diet and lifestyle prescriptions have reversed heart disease in his patients, the fat issue is clear: Eat less, no more than 10 percent of calories. "Olive oil is not good for you. It's 14 percent saturated fat, 100 percent fat. It's less bad for you than others," he said.
- Will supplements or fortified foods do the trick?
Gladys Block, a professor of public health nutrition at the University of California in Berkeley, noted that such diseases as beri-beri and rickets were wiped out through fortifying foods, not changing diets.
"Nine percent of the population consumes five fruits and vegetables a day. I don't think we're about to see a tenfold increase in that," she said.
Others, however, say no one knows what to fortify foods with, or whether such promising components as vitamins E and C are protective alone or only as part of the "anticarcinogenic cocktail" of certain foods.
And even if everyone could agree, other problems remain.
An "optimal diet" must be made up of foods that are available, affordable and palatable, said Marion Nestle, who chairs the nutrition department at New York University. Among the poor, and in many urban neighborhoods, good fresh produce and olive oil, among other foods, are often neither available nor affordable.
As Americans look to the foods of the Mediterranean, the diet is becoming endangered at its source.
"It is changing, and the change tends to destroy the virtue," Keys said.
Diet-related deaths are on the rise in Spain, Portugal, Greece, Yugoslavia and Egypt, said Elisabet Helsing, a World Health Organization official in Denmark.
Part of the problem is a prejudice against foods considered peasant-class - the bean and grain-based dishes thought to be among the healthiest - and a yearning to emulate the habits of the United States in food as in other things.

 

End of Document
