

For Some, the Crimes of South Africa Will Never Be Forgotten
The Associated Press
May 20, 1995, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 985 words
Byline: By JOHN DANISZEWSKI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, South Africa
Body




A strong believer in the African National Congress' call for national reconciliation, party member Marius Schoon thought the anger inside him had long since died.
But when a former secret policeman publicly acknowledged killing Schoon's wife and 6-year-old daughter with a mail bomb 11 years ago as part of the old regime's dirty war to preserve apartheid, Schoon found his anger still burned.
Schoon, a white who supported the black rights movement, swore out an affidavit and went to police demanding that the ex-officer be put on trial for murder.
"There is absolutely no remorse there," he said of the killer of his loved ones, who were blown to bits while in exile in Angola, more than 1,000 miles from South Africa. "There cannot be forgiveness without remorse."
Craig Williamson, a former undercover agent who admits leading the police squad that booby-trapped the package sent to the Schoon home, sees it differently.
"I was given orders," said Williamson, who now runs an import-export business in Johannesburg's northern suburbs, not far from where Schoon lives. "There must be collective responsibility."
Finding the truth and exacting justice in cases like the bombing is among the most vexing problems facing South Africa's new leaders.
After more than three decades of bitter struggle, the anti-apartheid movement and the country's former white rulers joined forces last year in launching a new non-racial democracy under President Nelson Mandela.
But thorny questions remained: Who should be tried and punished for crimes of the past? Who should be let go in the interest of national reconciliation? What is the best policy to bring about healing and mutual forgiveness?
Parliament is giving the task of answering those questions to a Truth and Reconciliation Commission.
Under legislation passed by the National Assembly on Wednesday, Mandela will appoint 11 to 17 people empowered to investigate past abuses, grant amnesty for political offenses and award compensation to victims. The measure goes to the Senate, which also is expected to pass it.
When he introduced the bill, Justice Minister Dullah Omar conceded crimes were committed by both sides of the apartheid struggle, but said the overwhelming number were by the old white-minority government.
The state's resort to violence and its example of intolerance continues to undermine respect for law today, Omar said.
"South Africa needs to make a break from the past," he said. "This is our one hope of turning South Africa around from the path of violence and intolerance."
The Truth Commission is the most delicate step by the new government so far, going to the very root of the compromise that allowed South Africa to escape civil war as it moved to black-majority rule.
To promote healing, Mandela's ANC and the formerly governing National Party agreed before the transition that amnesty would be granted for political crimes. But differences quickly arose.
Warning of "witch hunts," the National Party argued that too much openness would exacerbate wounds, not heal them. It wanted the commission to conduct investigations behind closed doors. It also wanted to use a liberal standard for defining political crimes and granting amnesty.
From the ANC side, the pressure was to make sure that all government crimes of the past were not simply washed away and that there would not be a policy of blanket amnesties.
Among the public at large, there appears to be little appetite to dig too aggressively into the past.
The general outline of what went on in South Africa already has been revealed in admissions by former secret police, court cases, reports by human rights organizations and investigations by journalists and a commission set up in the waning days of white rule.
They painted a picture of top officers in the police and army - some still on the job but many in early retirement - putting themselves on a war footing to oppose what they considered a "total onslaught" by apartheid's foes.
Circumstantial evidence suggests Cabinet members approved, or at least looked the other way, when secret police and military operatives committed terrorism and murdered ANC members outside the country and provoked bloodshed within South Africa by arming "hit squads" that worked for the anti-ANC Inkatha Freedom Party.
Human rights monitors think there were more than 200 assassinations at home and abroad. More than 15,000 people are believed to have died in black factional violence. Hundreds of prisoners died in police custody under murky circumstances, including internationally known black leader Stephen Biko in 1977.
Deputy President F.W. de Klerk, who negotiated the handover of white power, still defends the use of certain "strong methods, fair in war" against the regime's enemies. He says the ANC and more militant groups were backed by the former Soviet bloc with designs on all of southern Africa.
But de Klerk denies that he and others high up in government knew about assassinations or other atrocities.
"It's really a question of certain things which were done in such a way that it was covered up all the way, and that nobody in a decision-making position like me knew about it," he said recently.
As someone who knows firsthand the pain caused by the former government, Schoon thinks it would be good for his fellow whites to look hard at what they condoned.
Schoon believes the killing of his wife and daughter so far from South Africa amounted to common murder and should not be eligible for amnesty. He would like to see Williamson dealt with by the courts, but will accept the ruling of the Truth Commission.
Mourning his wife, Jenny, and little golden-haired Katryn, Schoon hopes exposing the facts about their deaths will help build the new South Africa.
He said people must face the truth so they can "give the assurance that things like Jenny's and Katryn's deaths, the atrocities, the whole secret business, will never happen again."
 Load-Date: May 20, 1995

 

End of Document
