

For Perry, This Time the Slide Show Was Disquieting
The Associated Press
October 4, 1994, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 504 words
Byline: By JOHN DIAMOND, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SPANGDAHLEM AIR BASE, Germany
Body




It was supposed to be the standard slide presentation by the general for the VIP from the Pentagon. Instead, Defense Secretary William Perry got an earful about the strains of military life in an era of defense cutbacks.
Pilots are overworked and undertrained, he was told. Spouse and alcohol abuse are increasing. Child abuse, too.
"Should I be concerned, or deeply concerned?" Perry asked Brig. Gen. John Dallager Tuesday after being told that 21 of 23 air combat controllers had been unable to meet training requirements and needed waivers to remain on duty.
Perry, a mathematician and high-tech entrepreneur who has been in office eight months, visited Spangdahlem during a European tour undertaken in connection with NATO meetings.
The base is eight miles east of Bitburg, in western Germany near the Belgian border.
Dallager, commander of a fighter wing, told Perry that reports of spouse abuse among the base's 11,915 civilian and military personnel are up 9 percent in the past year.
Child abuse is up 20 percent, he said; alcohol abuse is up 11 percent.
Pilot training, he said, has declined sharply, and so has readiness to fight a war.
The general showed slides, all right, but they involved the human strains of meeting the base's commitments.
The general told the secretary about Tony and Louisa Clift, both senior airmen. They are getting out of the Air Force because they are so often apart.
He told about Capt. Timothy J. Hogan, an A-10 fighter-bomber pilot who spent nearly two-thirds of the past 22 months deployed away from the base and his family. Hogan's wife, Linda, told an Air Force interviewer she feels like a single parent.
Dallager conceded that the increases in reported violence and other domestic problems could be the result of better monitoring now that the base is "starting to take care of people."
"We've made this a priority," he said.
But the pressure that constant deployments put on training is beyond question, Dallager said.
Air units from the base protect the Kurdish population in northern Iraq, patrol the skies over Bosnia and provide logistics experts to the Rwanda relief mission - all cutting into the time pilots and controllers need to keep up with training, he said.
Poor weather in Germany frequently forces the pilots to go to bases in the United States for a month or two to stay current with the latest skills and technologies, he said.
Dallager said the crews are still capable but that the trend in training is in the wrong direction.
Perry could offer no assurances of change.
"That trend will continue as long as we have these operations," he said. "Since we're not going to get an increased force structure, there are two options: We can reduce our operations tempo or we can use the Guard and Reserves to supplement missions."
For most of the past 40 years, this base has been on the front line of the Cold War. If one of the nightmare scenarios of that era had developed - an invasion of the West by Soviet forces - pilots at Spangdahlem would have been among the first into combat.
 Load-Date: October 4, 1994

 

End of Document
