

For Nonproliferation Treaty, the Countdown's Begun
The Associated Press
January 20, 1995, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 726 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




At a little-noticed meeting next week, in murky maneuvering over agendas and rules, the world begins to make up its mind about the place of nuclear weapons in the 21st century.
The Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, designed to block the spread of atomic arms, is unique among big arms-control pacts: It wasn't written for the ages. When it took effect in 1970, it had only a guaranteed 25-year run.
Anything beyond that, the treaty itself stipulated, would have to be decided on by the world's nations in far-off 1995.
That distant future is here, and the critical decision will be made at a global conference this April at U.N. headquarters in New York. But the tone may be set first in procedural debates at next week's preparatory meeting here.
The United States would prefer a quick exercise in April: Gather, vote an indefinite extension of the NPT, then disperse forever. But many Third World governments have other ideas.
They want the five major nuclear powers - America, Russia, Britain, France and China - to do more to ban nuclear tests, dismantle arsenals and give weaker nations guarantees against nuclear attack. Dissatisfied with how the treaty has worked, many favor only a limited extension.
George Bunn, who helped negotiate the NPT for the United States in the 1960s, sees sense in the Third World arguments, since indefinite extension could make the nuclear class system - of haves and have-nots - permanent.
Asking non-nuclear nations to accept an open-ended treaty, without greater progress toward global disarmament, "is asking them to … give up the bargaining leverage they now have," said Bunn, a Stanford University professor.
The Nonproliferation Treaty has its shortcomings.
Under its provisions, the 169 signatory governments pledge to confine nuclear weapons to the five treaty nations acknowledged to have them. In return, the five are supposed to work toward nuclear disarmament, and every nation is guaranteed the right to develop peaceful nuclear technology.
But three countries not in the treaty - India, Pakistan and Israel - have developed nuclear weapons capability. And two that did sign - Iraq and North Korea - are known or suspected to have developed weapons programs by misleading the International Atomic Energy Agency, which administers the NPT.
No government proposes scrapping the treaty, but almost everything about it is in dispute.
A Third World group including Mexico, Nigeria, Egypt and Iran wants the conference to produce a list of concrete disarmament targets.
The Iranians, accused by Washington of having their own nuclear weapons ambitions, are among the loudest NPT dissidents. They want the April agenda to include, before any extension vote, a review of the big powers' performance on disarmament and on disseminating peaceful technology.
Tehran's particular complaint: The Americans have tried to block its imports of nuclear equipment from Europe.
"They have interrupted the cooperation of other Western countries with Iran, and now they are putting pressure on Russia," said Behrouz Moradi, an Iranian negotiator.
It would be "irrational" for Iran to agree to an indefinite NPT extension when "the obligations of certain parties to the treaty have not yet been realized," he said.
Third World negotiators are worried, too, about voting procedures for extending the treaty - how options will be presented and in what order they will be voted on. They fear the U.S. delegation will orchestrate rules to ease the way for indefinite extension.
A U.S. official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said Washington is optimistic it will have the 85-vote majority needed for indefinite extension.
But renewing the NPT by only a slim majority could weaken it forever. Some countries already hint at withdrawing to free themselves to build atom bombs. Egypt, for one, threatens to leave unless Israel submits to treaty oversight.
"There has to be a decision at the highest levels of the U.S. government: Are we willing to push for indefinite extension if only by a bare majority?" said Jon B. Wolfsthal of the Arms Control Association, a private Washington research group.
Various proposals for limited extension are circulating among the Third Worlders. "I think they will come together on one," said Bunn.
Meanwhile, the votes for indefinite extension must be "nailed down and improved upon," the U.S. official acknowledged.
 Load-Date: January 20, 1995

 

End of Document
