

For South Africa's Mandela, the Honeymoon Is Over
The Associated Press
July 18, 1994, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 631 words
Byline: By TOM COHEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, South Africa
Body




Even for South Africa and Nelson Mandela, the honeymoon had to end.
In the span of two days, reality returned in the form of a disruption to Mandela's careful accommodation with business and an outburst of the violence that once plagued black townships.
On July 5, Finance Minister Derek Keys, a respected fiscal conservative, announced his resignation, effective in October. Rumors of the resignation sent shock waves through financial markets.
A day later, gunmen killed 11 people in a shooting spree on a roadside south of Johannesburg.
During his campaign for the presidency, Mandela promised impoverished blacks a better life after apartheid. But two months after his inauguration, he was expressing loyalty to a different constituency.
"We have won this election, for those who do not know, because of the financial support of big business," Mandela told the Sowetan newspaper in an interview published July 8.
Mandela's responses to the two events illustrated the difference between pre-election rhetoric by his African National Congress and post-inauguration action by his unity government.
He retained Keys from President F.W. de Klerk's Cabinet to convince the business community and foreign investors he was committed to fiscal austerity. Two hours after Keys announced his resignation, Mandela named another white businessman, retired banker Chris Liebenberg, to replace him.
In doing so, Mandela consulted with business leaders rather than with the Congress of South African Trade Unions, the largest labor organization and an ANC ally. Its leadership had urged him to choose someone with roots in the struggle against apartheid.
In the newspaper interview, Mandela also warned of a crackdown on criminal gangs and youths blamed for violence in black townships southeast of Johannesburg, including the roadside massacre.
"We are going to be forced to take very tough action against everybody who is … killing innocent people," he said. "That decision appears to be inevitable."
Since then, more soldiers have been sent to the townships to bolster military patrols that began before the April election.
Political violence decreased dramatically since before the election, when the Zulu nationalist Inkatha ended a boycott that had led to fighting with the ANC.
The relative peace was attributed to post-apartheid euphoria that overrode racial and political divisions. Mandela's government, including representatives of the Inkatha Freedom Party and the white-led National Party, held steady with few visible rifts.
But the realities of day-to-day life eventually asserted themselves.
The most dramatic shift by the ANC leadership has been from the protest-oriented struggle against apartheid to an attitude favoring business and accommodation.
Many blacks were angered by the government's refusal to make a national holiday of June 16, the date the Soweto student uprising began in 1976. Hundreds of black youths were killed by police during the uprising.
Mandela also left intact a 14 percent value-added tax on basic foods that the ANC had said it would eliminate.
Such policies are likely to frustrate poor blacks who thought Mandela and the ANC would immediately improve their squalid living conditions.
Mandela says the government needs time to implement its ambitious reconstruction and development plan to provide jobs, housing, electricity and running water for the people.
Other problems have arisen, including strikes in many industries. The number of working days lost to strikes in the first half of 1994 exceeded the figure for all of 1993, said Duncan Innes, a labor consultant.
"I think with the election and the new government, a lot of workers are feeling empowered politically and they're wanting to flex their muscles," he said. "They're wanting to get a post-election dividend."
 Load-Date: July 18, 1994

 

End of Document
