

For French In Rwanda, Shooting War May Be The Easy Part
The Associated Press
June 23, 1994, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 620 words
Byline: By MORT ROSENBLUM, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: PARIS
Body




To save lives in Rwanda, France's toughest troops not only face adversaries from two warring armies but also sizeable factions of snipers at home.
Old African hands predict the 2,500-man force, backed by Jaguar attack aircraft and a Senegalese contingent, can knife through any resistance.
France has put down African uprisings since 1960. This time, it is sending 1,500 Africa-based troops and a battalion from its Rapid Action Force, including marines and the Foreign Legion.
But winning hearts and minds in Rwanda - and in France - will be another problem entirely.
Although commanders are seeking to limit the mission, French forces cannot avoid the sort of crossover into politics that plagued the U.S. Marines in Somalia.
Before the blood flowed, French advisers and military aid allowed the Hutu-dominated national army to fend off the rebel Rwanda Patriotic Force, made up mostly of the Tutsi minority.
On balmy evenings in the peaceable little capital of Kigali, young Frenchmen in shaved heads and starched tunics cruised the streets with laughing Rwandan friends in tow.
After Hutu began killing Tutsi by the thousands, advancing RPF officers swore revenge against the French.
"We have general instructions to deal with the aggressor by any means possible," RFP secretary general Theogene Rudasingwa told The Associated Press. He meant France.
Now France has declared its neutrality, and the first targets of its humanitarian force will be 8,000 Tutsi refugees, threatened by Hutus in the border town of Cyangugu.
If French troops begin to shoot at Hutu, the likely reaction is that of an ally scorned.
And if body bags come back to France, the government must deal with political opponents, intellectuals and a sector of the public who already criticize what they say is an element of Don Quixote.
In Somalia, a single image of a helicopter pilot being dragged through the streets was enough to collapse the home front. U.S. troops were brought home, to the derision of warlords.
The French may have more tolerance for battlefield casualties, but no one can say how much more. Quagmire is a dreaded word in any language.
So far, several factors encourage the French.
Most Rwandan civilians are desperate for any outsiders to pacify the killing fields, whatever the color of their flag or skin.
And in that pocket of Central Africa, European armies have repeatedly confronted local forces with few losses.
In 1960, Belgium freed its colony of Ruanda-Urundi to form Rwanda and Burundi. Four years later, Belgian troops ended a massacre of 10,000 Tutsi by Hutu mobs in Rwanda and crushed later outbreaks.
In 1968, about 40 white mercenaries held out for months against the Zairean army until they evacuated to Cyangugu, where the French are now headed, to be taken prisoner by Belgian officers.
The well-organized RPF outnumbers the French by 10 to one, but military strategists do not expect the rebels to wage a sustained war.
Hutu machetes have eliminated so many of the Tutsi elite that the RPF must think in the long term, remaining on good terms with European donors, such as France, which can help them rebuild.
Still, no one in France is betting heavily on any outcome.
Foreign Minister Alain Juppe told the Paris daily Liberation that France had no choice: "It is no longer the time to stand by and deplore the massacres with folded arms."
But approval to send troops squeaked through the National Assembly. Intellectuals who demand troops in Bosnia call this operation hypocritical because it does not target the culprits.
If the surprisingly stiff opposition grows, troops on the ground may find the shooting war is the easy part.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - AP Special Correspondent Mort Rosenblum has covered Africa and France since 1967.
 Load-Date: June 23, 1994

 

End of Document
