

Forensic Tests, The Key To Identifying School Killers
The Associated Press
September 29, 1994, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 507 words
Byline: By ANGUS SHAW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KIGALI, Rwanda
Body




Forensic experts are being dispatched to a massacre site in Rwanda, a key step in the U.N. investigation of allegations that the new government's army has carried out revenge killings.
U.N. troops on patrol in southeastern Rwanda recently found the corpses of 400 people gunned down in a school at Nyarubuye, 66 miles southeast of Kigali.
Experts want to find out when the slaughter occurred and whether it was before or after Tutsi-led rebels took control of the area.
The massacre is believed to be the most recent of those discovered since the United Nations began investigating the slaughter of civilians during the fighting between Hutus and their ethnic rival, the Tutsis.
Most of the killings have been blamed on Hutu militias. But most of those victims were bludgeoned or hacked to death with machetes.
"The difference between this and others is that all have been shot with shotguns," said Gen. Guy-Claude Tousignant, commander of 4,300 U.N. peacekeepers in Rwanda.
Tousignant said today the U.N. troops who found the massacre site estimated the victims were killed about 2 months to 3 months ago, about the time rebels gained control of the southeast. Tousignant said the bodies were found in the courtyard of a school.
"They are skeletons. They fell where they were shot," Tousignant told reporters today.
U.N. officials say investigators will try to establish whether rebels secured Nyarubuye before the massacre. The investigation is expected to take a week. It was not immediately known when the forensic experts would arrive.
The rebels have been accused of reprisal massacres of Hutus to avenge the ethnic slaughter of Tutsis. An estimated 500,000 people, most Tutsi, were killed in the fighting before rebels seized power in Kigali in July.
U.N. forces who have turned up some of the massacre sites in recent weeks say the slaughter for the most part dates to early days of the war when the former Hutu-dominated government and its troops were still in control.
Tousignant said U.N. troops have found no fresh evidence of killing since they began extensive patrols in the southeast last Friday.
The United Nations has been trying to persuade Hutus who fled the southeast fearing rebel reprisals to return to their homes. Most of the Hutus displaced by the war are in southwestern Rwanda where the French created a safety zone as rebels took over the country.
On Wednesday, the United Nations called off its program to transport as many as 4,000 Rwandans a day from the southwest back to the southeast. Officials said not enough refugees wanted to return and they attributed the reason to fear.
There have been reports of Tutsi reprisals since the new government came to power but many were dismissed as Hutu propaganda or rumor. Last week, however, the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees lent new credence to the charges.
The agency said its repatriation teams reported an unmistakable pattern of vengeance killings in the southeast and some other areas.
The government has denied the charges and challenged the United Nations to provide proof.
 Load-Date: September 29, 1994

 

End of Document
