

From Exile, a Somali Writer Saw the Civil War Coming
The Associated Press
December 21, 1992, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 703 words
Byline: By ARTHUR ALLEN, Associated Press Writer
Body




Even before dictator Mohamed Siad Barre fell and his country collapsed into chaos, novelist Nuruddin Farah had begun a novel about a Somalia full of looters and thugs.
That might in itself not be so remarkable - but Farah has not seen his homeland in 18 years. A death sentence has kept him away.
The Somalia of Farah's memory and imagination is a vivid place.
After decades of Italian and British colonialism, followed by 22 years of home-grown dictatorship nurtured on the sour milk of geopolitics, Somalia could not escape a violent fate.
"The phenomenon of the looters can be explained in the following way," said Farah: "Siad Barre was a looter in the guise of a head of state. The colonialist was a marauder and looter in the guise of a country with a civilizing mission.
"Whoever has the guns has the power."
Farah has been unable to finish the novel; its characters died on him. Because of the war, "I have failed in raising in them an instinct of humanity," Farah wrote this week in In These Times, a Chicago newsweekly.
Imagine Mogadishu, an Italianate city by the sea in 1974, the last year Farah saw his home. Over cappuccinos, Soviet advisers speak about solidarity with the oppressed African masses while plying Siad Barre with new weapons.
A few years later, Siad Barre invades the Ogaden, occupied by Ethiopia; at a key moment, his Russian friends abandon him.
At desert places with names like Jijiga and Diri Dawa, Cuban troops and pilots destroy the Russian gifts and the Somalis who carry them.
From the Ogaden, more than 1 million people flee to Somalia. The refugees bring poverty, the poverty, over time, rebellion. In Siad Barre's last two years, his henchmen slaughter 50,000 people.
And after the dictator flees in January 1991, the victims begin fighting among themselves.
"Once someone has stayed in power long enough, there is corruption in everybody," Farah said in a recent telephone interview from Kaduna, Nigeria. "It is a contagious disease."
In his 1986 novel "Maps" and the earlier three-part "Variations on the Theme of an African Dictatorship," reissued this year, Farah writes about Africans at war with themselves.
In ways that seem to parallel his own life, his characters search for internal maps to guide their behavior between systems of Western rationalism and tribal tradition. Politics is a chilling current throughout.
Farah was born in Baidoa in 1945 and lived there only a year and a half before his father, a translator for the British, moved the family into the Ogaden, then British-administered.
In 1963, during a war with Ethiopia, the family fled to Mogadishu.
Farah was offered a scholarship at the University of Wisconsin but chose Chandigarh, in India. A British newspaper review of an early satirical novel, "A Naked Needle," attracted the angry attention of Siad Barre.
Farah was in Rome, about to board a plane home, when his brother told him in a phone call to stay away.
Other African leaders also have not appreciated Farah and his lyrical flights of parody. In 1986 he was kicked out of Gambia for accusing President Dawda Kairaba Jawara of being more interested in golf than governing.
"Stupid of me."
In Uganda, in 1990, he became embroiled in a dispute with President Yoweri Museveni, who then headed the Organization of African Unity. Farah accused Museveni of missing opportunities to mediate the war in Somalia, where Siad Barre was about to fall.
"Museveni was inept," said Farah. "He spent all of his time watching CNN, watching the Americans beat the Iraqis."
After Museveni denounced him at a news conference, Farah picked up stakes for Ethiopia.
Farah at present makes his home in Kaduna, Nigeria. About 100 miles away, in Abuja, Siad Barre lives in splendor with his looted fortune.
As for Operation Restore Hope, Farah believes the United States may face more trouble than it imagined as it ventures into the famished terrain.
"I sympathize with (U.S. envoy) Robert Oakley, who has terrible cards to play. For one thing he is in a foreign land, and for another he doesn't know the ropes."
He does not want to badmouth the Marines and their dangerous mission, Farah said, but thinks more lives and taxpayer dollars would have been saved had the world intervened months ago.

 

End of Document
