

From Protest to Escapism in the 'New' South Africa
The Associated Press
April 9, 1993, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1070 words
Byline: By MATT WOLF, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, South Africa
Body




The Market Theater, once home to South Africa's most fiery and urgent drama, is doing its best business of late with a genteel British tearjerker.
In Cape Town, the searing "Playland" about black-white relations closed two weeks early - despite international acclaim for the newest work from leading dramatist Athol Fugard.
The commercial sector finds the bland drawing the crowds, whether it's farce - "Uproar in the House" and "The Earl and the Pussycat" are two Johannesburg titles - or a synthetic musical tribute to Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice.
Up and down the country, the message is the same. While theater may have been one of South Africa's major exports throughout the troubled apartheid era, these days escapism is the event.
Besieged by soaring violence and crime and a crumbling economy, the white minority - traditionally the theatergoing mainstay - wants escape, not reportage, from its entertainment. The black majority has yet to be initiated in any large-scale way into the theater, preferring the mostly American imports that crop up nightly on television.
In the struggle against apartheid, the theater was both a source of information and a rallying-point for protest. Now, the approach of democracy has dissipated its impact, as has deep uncertainty about what precise shape any new government may take.
Changing political times, in other words, aren't necessarily good news for culture. The theater finds itself facing an ideological enemy in retreat, performing for a dwindling white audience while the black public has yet to be fully tapped.
"Everybody's suffering a crisis in the theater; there's no question," said Barney Simon, 59, artistic director of the nation's banner Market playhouse. "The Market is in transition just as the country is in transition."
Echoed producer Mannie Manim, a co-founder of the Market in 1976 who left 18 months ago to join Johannesburg's University of the Witwatersrand: "It's a real quandary; there's a tendency to find a new center of gravity.
"Before, it was an us-and-them kind (of theater); it was very obvious what we were doing, filling a part of the media when the media was very controlled."
Commercial impresario Pieter Toerien, South Africa's most successful independent producer, said the situation amounts to "survival of the fittest; people are very worried here."
"We have too few actors, too few directors," said Toerien, 48. "The theater is rapidly dying in South Africa."
To a visitor, the dilemma is apparent on multiple fronts.
Such places as the Market and Cape Town's Baxter struggle to adjust their socially conscious programming to an audience grown weary of what they perceive as agitprop, or plays used for propaganda.
The Baxter, one-time home to brave mixed-race productions of classics and new plays, has of late hosted a long-running staging of the camp musical, "The Rocky Horror Show."
At the Market, the bracing "Playland" was performed last summer to a disappointing 75 percent or so of capacity, while William Nicholson's teary English import, "Shadowlands," played to near-capacity.
"The problem in this country is that so many people in this country see anything black as political; what whites call 'protest theater' often is just black reality," Simon said.
Elsewhere, the state-funded arts complexes face a potentially grim fate if a future government decides - as various critics have charged - that they constitute so many "apartheid dinosaurs."
Funded over the years by white governments to mount shows for a white audience, these centers must attract the nation's black majority - or risk extinction.
Thus, in Johannesburg's multiracial Hillbrow district, drama administrator for the Performing Arts Council of the Transvaal (PACT) Peter Terry watches rehearsals for a black play, "Yamina," unsure whether its intended audience will come to watch it.
"You can't wave a wand and suddenly everyone is going to go to the theater," said Terry, who began his career as an actor.
"I'm sure we're seen as Eurocentric and elitist. (But) to destroy the arts councils for the sake of revenge is for me a very shortsighted move. There's so much expertise contained within them."
In the commercial sector, a dwindling band of producers chase an increasingly small public whose taste has in turn been affected by a decade-long cultural boycott.
The country that produced such lasting theater artists as composer Mbongeni Ngema ("Sarafina"), actress Janet Suzman ("A Dry White Season") and Fugard nowadays offers up mostly unchallenging English imports, from "The Rocky Horror Show" and "Shirley Valentine" to the thriller "The Woman in Black" and Ray Cooney's farce, "It Runs in the Family."
Even as Cape Town readies the South African premiere of "Hair" - a musical a quarter-of-a-century old - provocative American plays like John Guare's 1990 "Six Degrees of Separation" flop because the public cannot accept it.
"Expectations are lowered; the audience skills are reduced," said Barry Ronge, arts editor of Johannesburg's Sunday Times, which has a readership of 3 million.
"The theater doesn't operate within any framework. There's been a generational void in the passing on of traditional theatrical skills."
The situation is made bleaker by a shared belief that the country continues to need the theater.
"Essentially, there's no question we have to continue to work, to make stories about where we live so other people are aware of where we live," said the Market's Simon.
He added, "I suppose I think if theater has a function, it's moving human beings into empathy, getting people to understand more about one another."
"This is the time when the country should be listening to messages. Otherwise, this country could turn upside down," said Ngema, whose new musical, "Magic At 4 A.M.," opens in Johannesburg April 21.
Black actor John Kani, 49, a co-star of "Playland" and a 1975 Tony winner (with Winston Ntshona) for his Broadway performances in "Sizwe Banzi Is Dead" and "The Island," argued that the theater's mission does not die with apartheid.
"People must not think we're involved in a theater of political conscience simply because we had a white enemy," he said. "We did it because the government was wrong, and if the next government is wrong, we will continue doing that.
"We remain the thermometer that gauges the feeling of our people - the conscience of a government, the watchdog of that government. … There is much work to be done."

 

End of Document
