

Grand Conspiracy or Overreaction by the Government?
The Associated Press
August 29, 1993, Sunday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 562 words
Byline: By LARRY NEUMEISTER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The intense attention the government once turned on the heads of the Gambino, Colombo, Bonnano and Luchese crime families has been refocused onto Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman and his followers.
Defense attorneys say it will take creative work to fight the charge against the radical Muslim cleric and his 14 co-defendants - a seditious conspiracy count based on an old, rarely used law.
It is not an insurmountable task. The only recent conviction in a seditious conspiracy case came in 1985 when the government successfully accused a Puerto Rican separatist group of bombings in New York.
Kirk Lyons, a lawyer who successfully defended a client against a 1988 seditious conspiracy charge in Arkansas, said the sheik will have some legal and personal weapons on his side.
"To me the biggest advantage is that you'll be the ultimate underdog," Lyons said. "If you can convince the jury that they brought the entire weight of the government to rub you out for your political or religious beliefs, then you've got a good shot at acquittal."
In the indictment filed Wednesday, prosecutors described Abdel-Rahman as the leader of "the organization," a term usually used in Mafia cases to describe mob bosses like John Gotti. The conspiracy charge gives them greater latitude to accuse the sheik of guiding the plot without actually committing any acts himself.
"Some of the conspiracy statutes require an overt act," said Matthew E. Fishbein, chief assistant U.S. attorney. "In this, you don't have to do that."
Still, Fishbein noted, prosecutors listed about 50 overt acts in the indictment. They included the World Trade Center bombing, plans to kill Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak and plots to bomb the United Nations and bridges and tunnels connecting New Jersey and Manhattan.
The overt acts cited should "dispel any notion we are prosecuting these people simply for their political and religious views," Fishbein said.
Fishbein said the conspiracy count does not require prosecutors to prove the defendants succeeded in carrying out any of the alleged aims of the conspiracy.
The conspiracy charge also will allow prosecutors to introduce hearsay evidence that otherwise would be excluded, meaning they can use statements the defendants made to the government informant, Emad Salem, about conversations they may have had with co-defendants.
The government's strategy is to portray the sheik as a boss who left the dirty work to his followers while he made important decisions.
But defense lawyers say the 55-year-old blind cleric can turn the tables by using his charisma, age and disability to draw sympathy from a jury.
"Picking on an old blind man is kind of like picking on somebody's wife," Lyons said. "The government has an interest in finding who did the bombing. I do not believe that should include the bomber's minister."
Elizabeth Fink, a Brooklyn lawyer who successfully defended suspects against a seditious conspiracy charge in a series of bombings in New York City and Long Island in the early 1980s, called the law "outrageous … because it's a thought crime."
Lyons said he would consider having the cleric testify in an effort to elicit sympathy. He predicted prosecutors will "bore these people to tears with their overpresentation of the case."
"They'll just drop 10 tons of evidence on the jury. It's important for a defendant to testify so he can explain things," he said.

 

End of Document
