

Gunmen Keep Up The Heat On U.N. Forces
The Associated Press
July 21, 1993, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 648 words
Byline: By ANGUS SHAW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOGADISHU, Somalia
Body




Gunmen kept the heat on U.N. forces Wednesday in four more attacks in the area surrounding U.N. headquarters.
In the last attack just before dusk, two Zimbabwean soldiers were wounded in a barrage of shooting near the perimeter wall where American troops conducted weapons searches earlier in the day.
The attacks underscored the increased violence that has returned to Mogadishu since 24 Pakistani peacekeepers were slain in gunbattles June 5. Aid officials said Wednesday their aid deliveries have been halved since then.
Italy, which has peacekeepers in Somalia, and other critics say that the U.N. command has made the operation into a partisan combat mission at the expense of its humanitarian aims.
In New York, the U.N.'s top peacekeeping official said the operation's primary aim remains humanitarian, but he stressed that the troops will use force if necessary to disarm violent factions.
In the attack before dusk, Zimbabwean peacekeepers were escorting officials from the U.N. judicial affairs office through the Medina suburb adjacent to the U.N. headquarters complex when they were ambushed from both sides of the road.
Reporters on their way to U.N. headquarters and crowds at a nearby market raced for cover as small-arms and machine-gun fire blasted over their heads.
The lives of the two Zimbabweans were not in danger from their wounds.
"The Zimbabweans got us out of there, they saved us," said Doug Ierley, an American law officer attached to the U.N. provost marshal's department.
He said he was traveling with American colleagues and a German liaison officer.
Overnight, nine gunmen, some riding a jeep mounted with a heavy machine gun, exchanged fire for nearly three hours with American and Tunisian peacekeepers posted in former university buildings inside U.N. headquarters.
U.N. military spokeswoman Leann Swieczkowski said there were no casualties in the attack, one of the longest night-time assaults on U.N. positions.
Later Wednesday, the same area came under small-arms fire and after dawn Pakistani peacekeepers nearby shot at a small group of attackers, wounding one, she said.
Swieczkowski said American troops backed by Pakistani units and helicopters seized four sub-machine guns and at least as many rifles Wednesday in a sweep through the Medina suburb.
The operation followed actions a day earlier to demolish derelict buildings and clear street vendors from the vicinity of the headquarters.
U.N. aid organizations acknowledged Wednesday that continued attacks in this embattled seaside capital have stifled their activities in the city.
Hugh Cholmondley, head of U.N. humanitarian affairs in Somalia, said relief efforts have been reduced by about 50 percent since near-anarchy returned to southern Mogadishu after the June slayings of the Pakistanis.
Some 350,000 to 400,000 people in the city of nearly 1 million inhabitants were unable to provide themselves with the basic necessities of life but since June 5 only 180,000 have regularly received aid.
"In those circumstances, obviously developments here are unfortunate," he said.
Thirty-five peacekeepers have died and more than 110 have been wounded in Mogadishu since early June.
Cholmondley said harsh military tactics against gunmen blamed for attacks on U.N forces, including missile bombardments of strongholds of renegade warlord Mohamed Farrah Aidid, have hindered dialogue between U.N. humanitarian agencies and aid recipients.
"We must get back to our work with the Somalis as fast as possible," he said.
At U.N. headquarters in New York, Undersecretary-General Kofi Annan reaffirmed that the operation's primary aim is humanitarian.
"We will pursue through cooperation with all factions the program of disarmament, but if necessary coercive measures will be used … to achieve the primary humanitarian and political objectives," Annan told representatives of countries contibuting to the mission in Somalia.

 

End of Document
