

Handling the Media No Problem for Russian
The Associated Press
October 1, 1993, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 452 words
Byline: By JENNIFER LOVEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Whatever troubles Russia may be having at home, its foreign minister demonstrated Friday that its diplomats have mastered the concept of the freewheeling Western news conference.
At the conclusion of the Palestinian aid meeting, a questioner pointedly asked Andrei Kozyrev: "With all due respect sir, how can your nation expect, in the unstable situation in Russia, to promote stability in the Middle East? And I have a follow-up."
Without missing a beat, Kozyrev called for the follow-up question and said he would handle both.
The second question dealt with what role Russia could play in influencing Syria to reach a peace agreement with Israel.
"That is what I suspected. The second question would make much more sense than the first one," beamed Kozyrev as he launched into an answer that completely ignored question No. 1.
 
 ---
Secretary of State Warren Christopher welcomed the high-level foreign officials to the conference with the self-effacement that has become a hallmark in his first year.
"For those of you who may not have had a chance to meet me, I'm Warren Christopher, secretary of state, and one of the co-chairs of this event," he said to the crowd.
 
 ---
Is the size of the motorcade any indication of the depth of the pockets?
The Saudi entourage arrived at the conference in five cars, including security detail and a limousine.
Later in the day, they pledged $ 100 million in the first year to help the Palestinian Liberation Organization establish self-rule in the Gaza Strip and parts of the West Bank.
Many of the 47 delegations drove up in just one car, ranging from station wagons to limos, luxury sedans to minivans.
 
 ---
The countries varied in size from Bahrain, a collection of 35 islands 267 square miles in area in the western part of the Persian Gulf, to China, which covers almost 3.7 million square miles.
 
 ---
Even lunch time can prove a protocol nightmare.
The appetizer was smoked salmon ravioli filled with dilled cucumber mousse. But no, it was not salmon of the Norwegian variety, despite the fact that the secret talks between Israel and the PLO which led to the peace agreement were held in Norway.
In fact, all the food, wine and tea served at the elaborate lunch were America's own, from the sauteed baby french beans with a "frizzle" of Vidalia onions to the dessert of blushing pears served on a pond of chocolate-orange sauce.
 
 ---
At the head table, the PLO's chief representative, Yasser Abed Rabbo, and Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres faced each other over a floral arrangement of pink and white and roses.
Before lunch began, the two former adversaries chatted and shared a few laughs while Abdellatif Filali, Morocco's minister of state for foreign affairs, looked on.
 Load-Date: October 1, 1993

 

End of Document
