

Hassan Says Israel Stands in the Way of a Middle East Peace Conference
The Associated Press
September 26, 1991, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 645 words
Byline: By RITA BEAMISH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




King Hassan II of Morocco on Thursday told President Bush that Israel poses a problem to convening a Middle East peace conference, a spokesman said, but Bush voiced a less pessimistic view.
"We now see the real prospect of a peace conference leading to direct negotiations between Arabs and Israelis," Bush said in remarks during the arrival ceremony for Hassan on the White House south grounds.
In their private talks on efforts to bring the Arabs and Israelis to the negotiating table, Hassan told Bush that he will consult in New York this weekend with nations involved in the peace process as to what role should be played by the five north African nations of the Maghreb region, said Frederick Vreeland, deputy assistant secretary of state.
The Bush administration, seeking to arrange a peace conference next month, has said it welcomes participation of Morocco and the other north African states.
The administration would like Morocco individually or as part of the Maghreb group to send an observer or participate in some way to show support for the peace process, said an official who spoke on condition of anonymity.
Hassan promised Bush in his arrival speech that his country will "constantly be on your side, mobilized in order to seek this peace in the Middle East."
But he stopped short of specifying that Morocco would participate in the talks, pending consultation with the other nations involved and discussion with the Maghreb nations of Tunisia, Algeria, Mauritania and Libya, said Vreeland.
Bush and Hassan spoke at length about the Middle East and Iraq, and Hassan also gave the president his assessment of the post-Cold War situation in the Mediterranean and Africa, Vreeland said.
Hassan is seen as a link to Arab nations and Palestinians and also has good credentials with the Israelis.
Hassan "gave his very personal opinion that the Israelis were going to represent a difficulty in the peace process," Vreeland told reporters after the meeting.
Bush however, told the king, "I am not as pessimistic as you are."
Vreeland added, "He said we will press on. We are determined to go all the way with this peace process."
However, Bush also said that "there are problems with Israel, with Syria and with other countries, with Palestinians," said Vreeland.
Bush and Hassan pledged to work together toward an Arab-Israeli peace.
Bush in his speech said the effort is based on United Nations resolutions calling for Israel to return occupied territories "and the principle of territory for peace."
"We seek to elaborate on this principle to provide for real security and real peace for all states in the Middle East, including Israel, and for recognition of legitimate political rights of the Palestinian people," Bush said.
Morocco "shall ever be ready to contribute to any peaceful solution" to the ancient regional strife in the Middle East, Hassan said.
Bush praised Morocco for joining the U.S.-led coalition against Iraq in the Persian Gulf War and lauded his acquiescence to a United Nations referendum plan on the status of the Western Sahara part of Morocco.
Bush said it "took a great deal of courage" for Hassan to agree to the referendum that will determine whether Western Sahara wins independence from Morocco.
Bush and Secretary of State James A. Baker III, who visited Hassan in Rabat last month, have tried to enlist the king's help in bringing the Palestinians to the table and working with other Arab leaders.
In a related development Thursday, Palestine Liberation Organization leaders dropped their insistence on publicly naming the Palestinian delegation to the proposed peace talks and supported joining Jordanian negotiators, senior PLO officials said.
The mostly cosmetic action complies with Israeli demands that the PLO have no public role in the peace talks, but the PLO likely will take a major behind-the-scenes role in choosing the delegation.

 

End of Document
