

HEAD: Stamps in the News
The Associated Press
January 25, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 682 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH, AP Newsfeatures
Body




Children and carousels are a delightful combination of fun and fantasy.
Those wonderful childhood moments are captured on a series of nine stamps and two souvenir sheets from the West African nation of Sierra Leone that feature illustrations of classic carousel animals.
The denominations and featured animals are: 5 le, the Rabbit Carousel made by the Dentzel Co.; 10 le, the Horse with Panther Saddle Carousel made by Stein & Goldstein; 20 le, the Ostrich Carousel made by Dentzel; 30 le, the Zebra Carousel made by the Philadelphia Toboggan Co.;
50 le, the Horse Carousel made by M.C. Illions & Sons; 80 le, the Sea Monster Carousel made by Herschell-Spillman Co.; 100 le, the Giraffe Carousel made by Dentzel; 150 le, the Armored Horse Carousel made by Charles Carmel; and 200 le, the Camel Carousel made by Looff.
Another recent issue from Sierra Leone features real animals. It is a sheetlet of 18 different 25-le stamps showing a colorful array of animals against a map of the nation.
U.N. Stamps Delayed
The U.N. Postal Administration had announced that its first 1991 stamps would have the theme "Ban Chemical Weapons." However, this issue has been postponed until later this year because the printing was "not of the highest standards for U.N. stamps."
The 30-cent and 50-cent definitive stamps scheduled to be issued at the same time will also be rescheduled for release later this year.
The UNPA says it will return to customers "all orders received for the original release." New order forms will be made available before the new issue date.
 
 Stamp Set Honors the Super Bowl
Collectors of stamps with sports themes are well aware that St. Vincent has released several issues which hailed athletic events and sports stars - particularly U.S. athletes.
St. Vincent inaugurates its 1991 stamp program with a salute to the 25th anniversary of the National Football League's Super Bowl. It consists of two series printed in limited editions of 25,000 complete sets each.
One series consists of a total of 51 stamps on 25 souvenir sheets. Two stamps on each of 24 sheets feature action from each of the past Super Bowl games. One sheet contains three stamps: The center stamp shows the Vince Lombardi Trophy, which is awarded to the winning team, and the two stamps flanking it illustrate the helmets of the 28 NFL teams.
The other series consists of 24 large stamps on which the covers of official Super Bowl programs are reproduced.
A package containing all the Super Bowl stamps and souvenir sheets plus protective mounts is available for $$39.95 plus $$3.50 postage and handling. Order from the Shield Co., P.O. Box 6238, Grand Central Station, New York, NY 10163.
 
 'Love' Design Unveiled
The U.S. Postal Service has announced the design for the 1991 Love stamps scheduled for release May 9 in Honolulu. It depicts a heart-shaped Earth on a dark-blue starry background.
The new design will be the 10th in the popular Love Series, which began in 1973. There will be two Love stamps - one for the 1-ounce rate in sheet and booklet form, and one for the 2-ounce rate in sheets only.
 
 New Issues From China
"Han Xizai's Night Revels," a famous ancient Chinese painting showing a banquet scene, is the subject of five new attached stamps issued by the People's Republic of China. Each stamp has a face value of 50 fen. All the lettering and the denominations appear in the margin of the stamps to preserve the integrity of the ancient painting.
The People's Republic also issued a set of four stamps titled "The Romance of the Three Kingdoms," which is the name of a historical novel focusing on the rise and fall of the states of Wei, Shu and Wu.
 
 Condition Counts!
A reminder to stamp collectors, neophytes as well as veterans: The condition of a stamp is extremely important when determining its value. Relatively common stamps in exceptional condition usually sell for many times the price of a scarce but defective issue that might have a much higher catalog value.
Experts say that perfect copies of some inexpensive early definitives now enjoy unprecedented demand and have brought record sale prices.

 

End of Document
