

HEAD: Dick Francis rides into the winner's circle on his 29th novel
The Associated Press
January 11, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 751 words
Body




---
 
 By JOSEPH HOLLAND
The Associated Press
What keeps Dick Francis in the saddle, writing so hard year in and year out?
The latest book by the 70-year-old Francis is "Longshot" (Putnam), his 29th novel since 1957. At an age when many men would resign themselves to a more leisurely lifestyle, Francis continues to produce mystery thrillers of the kind that have captured the imagination of his millions of fans for over a quarter of a century.
With two sons and five grandchildren, Francis is always getting new ideas from a younger generation. But his driving force appears to be the diverse interests he shares with Mary, his wife of 43 years. He makes it clear that their meticulous research together - covering fields from wine-tasting to aviation to precious stones - is the lifeblood of his stable of best-selling whodunits.
Francis says that Mary "learned to fly for 'Flying Finish' (1966) and 'Rat Race' (1970), then took up painting for 'In the Frame' (1976).' And for 'Longshot,' she studied survival tactics." He adds with a grin,"Our research for 'Proof' (1984), which is a story about the wine industry, is something we've been researching for 43 years."
But, no matter what field is researched, all of Francis' stories in some way deal with his first love - horses and horse racing.
Francis was born in Pembrokeshire, Wales. His father and grandfather were horse trainers and hunting sportsmen. Says Francis: "My father was a jockey before the First World War, but became a horse dealer after the war. I joined him as soon as I could walk, really, and used to ride the ponies until I graduated to the horses.
"In the late 1930s, I wanted to be a jockey, but neither of my parents were very keen that I should be. My father knew what a hard life it was unless you made it to the very top."
Francis' dreams of racing to the winner's circle were stalled by the start of World War II, and, at 19, he found himself instead jockeying the legendary Spitfire fighter aircraft over Africa for the Royal Air Force.
"I was trained for fighters," he says, "but the fighter war was coming to an end, and the bombers were the strong point then. . .. I was a guinea pig. They took me and put me straight on the Wellington bombers from Spitfires and wanted to see if I could make the transition. I suppose I didn't do bad, as well."
At Christmas 1945, after six years in the service, he returned to his father's business and eventually found work as a trainer and jockey. "I went into racing when I was 25 and was an old man, really. I had 18 months as an amatuer jockey and then I rode for another nine seasons as a professional."
Francis proved his father's reservations unfounded by riding 350 winners, and even held the honor of being the Queen Mother's First Jockey for four seasons. In the process of winning, he broke his collarbone 12 times and fractured countless ribs. Also, his right index finger bends backward in an unnatural fashion.
"You ride three or four hundred races a year, and about 10 percent of those races you're going to fall. It means you're hitting the ground 30 or 40 times a year at 30 or 40 miles an hour. … It's a tough old job, but it's a great life!"
Upon retirement from racing, Francis - again the adventuresome one - declined the security of horse training and instead put his energy into writing his autobiography, "The Sport of Queens" (1957). Quite the prolific writer, he has since penned nearly a book a year, including "A Jockey's Life," a 1986 biography of celebrated jockey Lester Piggot.
Readers need not be too well-versed in the dynamics of horse racing to appreciate the well-spun plots and informative narrative of Francis' fast-paced stories. His writing is pure and unpretentious for a man who rubs elbows with royalty.
Life seems sweet for this Welsh gentleman and his charming, resourceful wife. They rise early each morning and watch one of the wake-up TV programs such as the "Today" show or "Good Morning America," then stroll the beach or catch a refreshing swim in the ocean near their Fort Lauderdale, Fla., home before returning for coffee. Only then does Francis take up his scheduled five or six hours of writing that he obviously loves so much.
Although Francis has access to many of the modern conveniences, including a word processor, he prefers to write in longhand before transcribing his text to the keyboard. It's somewhat like keeping the hands free to feel the horse as it communicates its thoughts through the reins to the master.
Some things never change.

 

End of Document
