

HEAD: Stamps in the News
The Associated Press
January 4, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 664 words
Body




---
 
 By SYD KRONISH
AP Newsfeatures
As part of its goal of world disarmament, the United Nations has urged a worldwide convention to ban all chemical weapons.
To publicize these efforts, the first 1991 issues from the U.N. Postal Administration feature a set of six stamps titled "Banning of Chemical Weapons."
The stamps show: a human figure pushing away the image of an airplane carrying chemical weapons to be dropped over a forest; a hand pushing away barrels of toxic materials; a hand pushing the continents out of reach; a bleak city in the distance as chemical bubbles fill the air; a gas mask above gas bubbles; and a surrealistic design of masks and gas bubbles.
Also among new U.N. issues are two definitives. One features a Norman Rockwell painting showing people of different nationalities standing together. It bears the inscription, "Do unto others as you would have them do unto you." The other stamp shows a fluttering U.N. flag.
For more information about these stamps and their first-day covers, write to the U.N. Postal Administration, P.O. Box 5900. Grand Central Station, New York, NY 10163.
 
 Soviet-Japanese Space Flight
It doesn't take long for the Soviet Union to project its space program onto its stamps. The Soviets recently issued a 20-kopecks stamp honoring the joint Soviet-Japanese space flight, the Soviet Culture Fund and the Charity and Health Fund.
The design features a part of the globe's surface and an outer-space scene. Also shown are the flags of the Soviet Union and Japan. The inscription "USSR-Japan" is made to resemble a spaceship.
The flight carried a Japanese journalist.
 
 Tanzania Is Sports-Minded
Tanzania postal officials have apparently been in a sports mood. The East African nation recently released two sets, each with eight stamps and two souvenir sheets, dedicated to sporting events.
One set honors various forms of racing. Depicted are a sailing-class yacht race, a downhill ski race, the Tour de France bicycle endurance race, the 24 Hours of LeMans endurance race, the two-man bobsled competition, the Belgian Grand Prix, the Indianapolis 500 auto race, and powerboat Gold Cup championship racing.
The other set pays tribute to the 1992 Summer Olympic Games in Barcelona, Spain. The stamps highlight men's archery, women's gymnastics, heavyweight boxing, canoe K2 racing, men's volleyball, men's gymnastics, men's 4-by-100-meter relay race and men's judo.
One souvenir sheet illustrates the men's 400-meter hurdles race, while the other depicts men's cycling.
 
 Wildlife on Grenada Stamps
The Caribbean island nation of Grenada has released a set of eight stamps and two souvenir sheets that focus attention on various species of birds found there.
The denominations and featured species are: 15 cents, tropical mockingbird; 25 cents, gray kingbird; 65 cents, bare-eyed thrush; 75 cents, Antillean crested hummingbird; $$1, house wren; $$2, purple martin; $$4, hooded tanager; and $$5, common ground dove.
One $$6 souvenir sheet shows the fork-tailed flycatcher; the other shows a pair of smooth-billed anis.
Also from Grenada comes a set of stamps featuring species of lobsters and crabs that are found in Grenada's waters.
Depicted are the coral crab, smoothtail spiny lobster, flamestreaked box crab, sally lightfoot rock crab, spotted swimming crab, spotted spiny lobster, longarms spiny lobster and the Caribbean spiny lobster.
 
 Getting Started on Stamps
The U.S. Stamp Collectors Society has a special offer for anyone who would like to start a stamp collection.
It's a Scott beginner's stamp collecting kit, which features a 16-page album with spaces for hundreds of U.S. stamps. Included in the kit are 35 U.S. stamps, 500 hinges, a 96-page illustrated booklet, and a special collection of 301 additional U.S. stamps, including one of the first commemoratives. A stamp collecting pamphlet from the U.S. Postal Service is also included.
The kit is available at $$15.95 from the U.S. Stamp Collectors Society, P.O. Box 854, Van Nuys, CA 91408.

 

End of Document
