

HEAD: Stamps in the News
The Associated Press
April 19, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 683 words
Body




---
 
 By SYD KRONISH
AP Newsfeatures
Shortly after midnight on March 21, 1990, a new nation was born. The South African flag was lowered and the flag of the newly independent state of Namibia was raised.
The birth of Namibia is celebrated on a new set of six stamps to be issued by the United Nations on May 10.
Each stamp features a different Namibian landscape in full color. The stamps are divided into three pairs - one each in English, French and German - and bear the inscriptions "Namibia - A New Nation, A Trust Fulfilled" and "United Nations."
Namibia's birth was the result of one of the largest and most complex operations supervised by UNTAG - the United Nations Transition Assistance Group.
For information on acquiring these stamps and their first-day cancellations, write to: U.N. Postal Administration, United Nations, New York, NY 10017.
 
 A Stamp for Dennis Chavez
Dennis Chavez, the first American-born Hispanic elected to the U.S. Senate, is honored on a new U.S. definitive stamp in the Great Americans Series. The denomination is 35 cents, the 1-ounce rate for letters to Mexico.
The stamp shows a head-and-shoulders portrait of Chavez. The vertical inscriptions flanking the portrait read "Dennis Chavez 1888-1962" and "United States Senator." In the lower right corner is "USA 35."
Chavez was born into poverty in the New Mexico Territory. He became a lawyer before entering politics. He was elected to the Senate in 1935 and continued uninterrupted until his death in 1962. A statue in his honor stands in the U.S. Capitol's Statuary Hall. Its inscription reads, in English, Spanish and Navajo: "We have lost our voice forever."
First-day cancellations are available in the two usual methods. The deadline for ordering is May 3.
The Postal Service recommends that customers buy the stamp at a local post office, affix it to a self-addressed envelope and submit it in a larger envelope addressed to: Customer-Affixed Envelopes, Dennis Chavez Stamp, Postmaster, 1135 Broadway Blvd. N.E., Albuquerque, NM 87101-9991.
If you want the Postal Service to affix the stamp, send, for each cover desired, a self-addressed envelope and 35 cents payment in the form of a check or money order to: Dennis Chavez Stamp, Postmaster, 1135 Broadway Blvd. N.E., Albuquerque, NM 87101-9992.
 
 Tribal Blankets of Lesotho
Tribal blankets are the subject of a new set of four stamps and a souvenir sheet issued by Lesotho in southern Africa.
The Basothos, the primary tribal group in Lesotho, are farmers and herders who make beautiful tribal blankets from the wool of their sheep.
The 12-senti stamp depicts King Moshoesshoe II and his son, Prince Mohato Sesiso, adorned with the traditional Seana-Marena blanket. The 16-senti features the prince wearing his blanket. The 1-maloti shows Pope John Paul II wearing the blanket at a Mass he conducted in the predominantly Roman Catholic Lesotho. The 3-maloti illustrates a group of Basotho horsemen, all wearing their best blankets.
The 5-maloti souvenir sheet portrays the pope wearing the special blanket presented to him during his visit to Lesotho.
 
 Happy Birthday, Queen Mum
Since 1990, many British Commonwealth nations have issued stamps commemorating the 90th birthday of the queen mother, Elizabeth, who is affectionately known as "the Queen Mum."
The latest of these tributes to arrive on the stamp scene is a set of three sheetlets and nine souvenir sheets from the Grenadines of St. Vincent.
Each sheetlet consists of nine $$2 stamps. One sheetlet shows the queen mother from 1900 to 1929; another shows her in scenes from 1930 to 1959 based on photographs; and another shows photos of the Queen Mum made between 1960 and 1989. The souvenir sheets, each valued at $$5, show the queen mother at various residences throughout her life.
 
 Kennedy Stamps
A reader in New York wrote to ask about stamps issued to honor President Kennedy. The market is flooded with memorial stamps for Kennedy that have been issued by several nations. In terms of price, none is particularly valuable yet, but many collectors find these issues of interest for their sentimental value.

 

End of Document
