

HEAD: Stamps in the News
The Associated Press
March 8, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 632 words
Body




---
 
 By SYD KRONISH
AP Newsfeatures
Birdwatchers - especially those who prefer to watch birds on stamps - will be interested in a new four-stamp set from Australia that features water birds.
One of two 43-cent stamps features the black-necked stork, the only stork species in Australia. The design shows a pair of the birds standing in shallow water.
The other 43-cent shows the black swan, which is native to Australia and is the only black species of swan. The stamp design shows a pair of black swans on a nest with three newly hatched young nearby. An egg is visible in the nest.
The Cape Barren goose appears on the 85-cent stamp. Although it is considered a water bird, this goose is also at home on land, where it forages during breeding season on grasses, clover and herbs. The species is fully protected but not considered endangered. The design shows a pair of the geese in flight.
The chestnut teal, the subject of the $$1 issue, is a small freshwater duck that is native to Australia. Although it is a game bird, its numbers do not seem to be decreasing. The design portrays a pair of chestnut teals in flight.
The four birds featured on the stamps were selected by the ornithology department of the Museum of Victoria.
For more information, contact the Australia Stamp Agency in North America, One Unicover Center, Cheyenne, WY 82008.
 
 Animals of Uganda's Wetland
From Uganda in East Africa come a 16-stamp sheetlet and a souvenir sheet that salute the country's unique wetland animals. The sheetlet consists of two rows of eight vertical 70-shilling stamps that form a scene of the wetland and its various species.
Stamps on the top row show the damselfly, purple gallinule, sitatunga, purple heron, bush pig, vervet monkey, long-reed frog and malachite kingfisher. Bottom-row stamps depict the marsh mongoose, painted-reed frog, jacana, charaxes butterfly, Nile crocodile, herald snake, dragonfly and lungfish.
The 1,000-shilling souvenir sheet shows the Nile monitor and the shoebill stork.
 
 The Latest From Israel
Subjects of recent stamp releases from Israel include famous women, the centenary of the town of Hadera and three "good wishes."
The Famous Women set honors Sarah Aaronsohn, Rahel Blustein and Lea Goldberg. Each stamp features various portraits of the woman it honors.
Aaronsohn worked for British Intelligence during World War I. She was captured and tortured, and finally committed suicide.
Blustein was a Russian-born Hebrew poet who immigrated to Israel. She was one of the first Hebrew poets to write in a conversational style. Her poems are still heard as popular songs of Israel.
Goldberg, also a Hebrew poet, was born in eastern Prussia and later went to Tel Aviv. She wrote about childhood, nature and love.
The Hadera centenary stamp has an illustration of the town with a symbolic eucalyptus tree. Hadera is situated in central Israel, between Haifa and Tel Aviv.
Three non-denominated stamps offer good wishes - "Happy Birthday," "Greetings" and "Keep in Touch" - to be sent to friends and relatives.
 
 Egypt Releases Two
Egypt has issued a new stamp marking the 125th anniversary of the founding of the Egyptian Post. Although founded by European officials, the company was bought by an Egyptian who transferred its operation to the government.
Also issued by Egypt is a stamp dedicated to the Day of the Handicapped, a special day initiated by the United Nations. A number of countries issued stamps for the occasion.
 
 Collecting Military Mail
The recent world focus on the war in the Middle East brings to mind the topic of military mail - letters sent to or by service people in the field. Many folks enjoy collecting such covers, especially ones written at battle scenes.
Although they are usually not too valuable in terms of money, the covers do have sentimental value.

 

End of Document
