

Hebron Mayor Shows The PLO Has Influence
The Associated Press
April 5, 1994, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 445 words
Byline: By SAID GHAZALI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HEBRON, Occupied West Bank,
Body




In a sign the PLO may have crucial influence with Palestinians in the streets, Hebron's new mayor averted a clash with Israeli soldiers near the site of the mosque massacre.
Mustafa Natche, appointed as mayor by the Palestine Liberation Organization, led nearly 500 Palestinians on a march to the mosque Monday, his first day in office. But he dispersed the protesters, including Islamic fundamentalists, after the soldiers refused to let them enter.
Infighting among Palestinian factions and eroding support for the Israel-PLO accord have raised doubts about the PLO's authority in recent months.
The marchers, angry that the mosque has been closed since the slaying of 30 Palestinians on Feb. 25 by a settler living near Hebron, carried signs saying "evacuate the settlers" and "no peace with settlers in Hebron."
They were stopped by a military cordon around the building, and Israeli officials urged the Palestinians to turn back.
Natche instructed activists of PLO chairman Yasser Arafat's Fatah faction to tell the protesters to leave, and a man told the crowd over a loudspeaker to disperse, saying there had been enough bloodshed in the city.
A group of about 40 adherents of the Islamic fundamentalist Hamas, which opposes the PLO and the peace accord, tried to continue the demonstration, shouting "Allahu Akbar," God is Great, and calling for prayers at the site.
Fatah activists, however, pushed them back, and the crowd broke up with some protesters tearing up their placards.
When a Hamas activist began praying in front of the 70 soldiers at the site, one soldier started to remove him but stopped after a Fatah activist intervened, saying "Allow him to finish his prayer. It is over now."
"The march achieved its goal. We've had enough violence and casualties," Natche said.
A month-long curfew imposed the day of the massacre has been lifted, but Hebron still resembles an armed camp, with an estimated 1,500 troops protecting about 450 Jewish settlers and daily clashes occurring between soldiers and Palestinians.
Soon after the protesters dispersed Monday, stone-throwing clashes with soldiers erupted elsewhere in the center of Hebron. Soldiers fired tear gas and rubber bullets, wounding four Palestinians.
Natche, 63, was restored to office as part of the agreement in Cairo last week between the PLO and Israel to provide security for the city's 80,000 Palestinians. He had been deposed in July 1983 for inciting unrest against Israeli settlers.
Israel and the PLO are currently negotiating the return of PLO mayors or city councils in nine towns in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and in Gaza City, the largest town in the Gaza Strip, Palestinian officials said.
 Load-Date: April 5, 1994

 

End of Document
