

Help Wanted - By the U.N. in Sarajevo
The Associated Press
August 29, 1992, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 538 words
Byline: By JOHN POMFRET, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SARAJEVO, Bosnia-Herzegovina
Body




Incessant warfare has made it so hard for the United Nations to find staff for Sarajevo that the agency soon could soon be advertising for outside help.
"We're thinking about advertising in The Economist," said U.N. official Fred Eckhard, referring to the respected British weekly and its classy international employment ads.
"For the first time we're hiring people with no experience in the U.N.," he said.
Eckhard is chief spokesman for the United Nations Protection Force in Yugoslavia, and he is painfully familiar with the dangers.
On Saturday he was busy giving reporters details of yet another attack on U.N. peacekeepers. In this instance, three French soldiers were wounded, two seriously, when a rocket-propelled grenade hit their armored personnel carrier in a Sarajevo suburb.
Many U.N. soldiers have been injured and two Ukrainian peacekeepers killed in Sarajevo since the U.N. troops began arriving there last February.
So far no civilian U.N. staff members have been seriously hurt. But the randomness of violence that has killed hundreds of non-combatants in Sarajevo, including several foreign journalists, and the almost daily shelling of the U.N. headquarters have made the dangers clear enough.
Cedric Thornberry, civil affairs director for the U.N. force, said in a telephone interview from Zagreb that only 29 of 65 civilian positions in the former Yugoslavia had been filled.
Of those, only four or five had the necessary qualifications to work in Sarajevo, said Thornberry, the highest-ranking U.N. civilian here. One of them is Eckhard, who is due to return to New York in two weeks.
Thornberry said he expected the U.N.'s needs in former Yugoslavia to grow, especially with the likely expansion of the U.N.'s mandate in Bosnia-Herzegovina.
"We are in a bind, especially in Sarajevo, because it is difficult to find anywhere that is safe," he said. "The requirements of the job - the ability to think on your feet and make snap decisions - demand a special type of person."
Thornberry conceded the U.N. force's "back was against the wall" in its attempts to get competent staff.
On Friday, U.N. Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali approved a proposal to go outside of the U.N. to hire civilians for the U.N. force.
Thornberry said his staff was preparing to contact eight to 10 governments to see if they would be willing to second officials to the U.N. Given the dangers, he said, former military officers would be especially welcome.
While not unprecedented, the move is rare. The U.N. hired officials on a contract basis during the elections in Namibia in 1990.
"The General Secretariat has basically told us we are going to have to go outside the mission now to fill senior staff positions," he said.
Conditions in the Bosnian capital remain grim. U.N. personnel generally are confined to the headquarters, and some have not been outside for a month.
On Friday and Saturday, scores of U.N. soldiers packed sand bags and covered windows and doors throughout the sprawling establishment in the most intensive security preparations since the operation began.
The facility was hit several times last week, spraying shrapnel through windows. On mortar shell landed in a room next door to one where soldiers were sleeping.

 

End of Document
