

Highlights of the Israel-PLO Cairo Agreement
The Associated Press
February 10, 1994, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 584 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Highlights of the Cairo, Egypt, agreement to implement Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho, initialed by Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres and PLO Chief Yasser Arafat on Feb. 9.
 
 ---
JERICHO: The size of Jericho is not yet determined, but the agreement includes safe passage for Palestinians to the nearby areas of Nebi Moussa, revered by Muslims as Moses' burial place; al-Maghtas, believed by Christians to be the site of Jesus' baptism by John; and a Dead Sea resort to be jointly run by Israel and the Palestinians. The religious sites will be under Palestinian administration and will fly the Palestinian flag.
The 1,300-year-old Peace Unto Israel synagogue inside the town of Jericho will remain under the authority of the Israeli Religious Affairs Ministry.
Palestinians will have ultimate control of roads in Jericho. Joint Palestinian-Israeli patrols will be led by the Palestinian vehicle.
 
 ---
GAZA: Israel will have ultimate security responsibility for three designated areas containing settlements: Gush Katif in the south, Erez in the north and "other settlements," presumably meaning Netzarim and Kfar Darom, two small settlements in the center. Israel's security responsibility will extend to a security zone along the Egyptian border, and lateral roads connecting Israel to the three settlement areas. Joint Israeli-Palestinians patrols along those roads will be led by the Israeli vehicle, and overpasses will be built to circumvent Gaza's main north-south road, which will be under Palestinian authority.
The Palestinians will have ultimate responsibility for civilian issues in all areas, including areas where Israel is responsible for security.
 
 ---
EARLY EMPOWERMENT: The agreement states that negotiations for early empowerment - authority over some administrative functions in other parts of the West Bank - will begin as soon as all Gaza-Jericho issues are resolved. Originally, early empowerment talks were to begin in 1996.
 
 ---
BORDER CROSSINGS: Among the most sensitive issue stalling the talks. The agreement initially applies to the Rafah crossing between Egypt and Gaza and the Allenby Bridge crossing between Jordan and Jericho, but will include other bridges over the Jordan River and any as yet unbuilt seaports and airports.
Israel will have ultimate control over the crossing stations and passage roads to the borders. Each crossing will be managed by an Israeli director-general with two assistants, one Israeli and one Palestinian, to be appointed by Palestinian authorities.
There will be two wings at each crossing, one Palestinian and one Israeli. The Palestinian wing will feature a Palestinian flag and Palestinian police officers armed with handguns. There will be three lanes for residents of the autonomous area, other Palestinians and Israelis.
Palestinians will go through an electronic metal-detector gate, a quick process that will replace the extensive body searches they now undergo. There will be special arrangements for Palestinian VIPs. Problems will be referred to a liaison bureau which will be set up at each crossing, consisting of an equal number of Palestinian and Israeli officials.
Israel has the right to deny entry to Palestinians not currently residing in the West Bank and Gaza, a provision that will stem Israeli fears of a tide of returning refugees.
Entry visas to the autonomous zone will be for three months, and may be extended for another three. Further extensions must be approved by the Israelis.
 Load-Date: February 10, 1994

 

End of Document
