

Holocaust Museum Dedicated Fifty Years From The 'Black Hole in History'
The Associated Press
April 22, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 786 words
Byline: By HARRY F. ROSENTHAL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A half century and a world away from the gas chambers of Auschwitz, Majdanek and Chelmno, a new Holocaust museum was dedicated Thursday to teach future generations the lessons of what one survivor called "the black hole in time, the black hole in history."
Before 7,000 people, many of them survivors of the concentration camps erected by Nazi Germany in World War II with a mission to exterminate the Jews, came a repeated admonition: Never again.
From Elie Wiesel, who won a Nobel Prize for his efforts to keep the Holocaust memory alive, came this recollection:
"In Poland, SS officers used Jewish infants for target practice. The only emotion they ever showed was anger when they missed," he said. "In Kiev, an SS officer beheaded two Jewish children in front of their mother, who in her anguish, in prey of some mystical madness, held them close to her bosom and began to dance. In Romania, the Iron Guard hanged Jews on meat hooks and displayed them in butcher shops, with signs, 'Kosher Meat."'
Through starvation, execution, and overwork, Hitler's henchmen executed 6 million Jews, two third of the pre-war population of Europe, in their drive for a "Final Solution."
In his dedication address, President Clinton said the museum binds "one of the darkest lessons in history to the hopeful soul of America."
At the end of his speech, Wiesel turned to Clinton.
"Mr. President, I cannot not tell you something," he said. "I have been in the former Yugoslavia last fall. I cannot sleep since (because of) what I have seen. … We must stop the bloodshed in that country. People fight each other and children die. Why? Something, anything, must be done."
The president, who is considering using military force in the former Yugoslavia, said "ethnic cleansing" in Bosnia is 'but the most brutal and blatant" example of evil in the world today.
The museum reminds the world "again and again how fragile are the safeguards of civilization," he said.
Throughout the ceremony, held on a rainy, windy day on a plaza fronting the museum, the derisive chants of demonstrators who spread the falsehood that the Holocaust was a hoax, could be heard by the crowd.
As if in answer, Clinton said, "Look at the liars and the propagandists among us, the skinheads and the Liberty Lobby here at home, the Afrikaners Resistance Movement in South Africa, the radical party of Serbia, the Russian Black Shirts …
"The evil represented in this museum is incontestable. … We must stop the fabricators of history and the bullies as well. Left unchallenged, they would still prey upon the powerless, and we must not permit that to happen again."
The museum, built with $ 168 million in donated funds, will open to the public next Monday. Its admission is free but agencies that handle the tickets charge a fee.
In the audience were the heads of 12 states and members of the Senate and the House. But attention was not on them. It was on the speakers.
-Wiesel: "There were only two categories: those who were there to kill and those who were there to be killed."
-Chaim Herzog, president of Israel: "For us, one of the major lessons has been that it is not sufficient to have justice on your side; it is essential to be strong enough to defend it."
-Harvey Meyerhoff, chairman of the U.S. Holocaust Memorial Council: "This building tells the story of events that human eyes should never have seen once, but having been seen, must never be forgotten. … It is not sufficient to remember the past. We must learn from it."
Clinton, Wiesel and Meyerhoff together held a torch that ignited an eternal flame outside the museum.
Wiesel told the audience that even after all these years it is difficult to comprehend the Nazi extermination policies.
"We never will explain," he said. "How can one understand that human beings could choose such inhumanity."
The museum traces Adolf Hitler's Nazism from the book-burnings of the early 1930s through the hate-driven hoodlums in 1938 attacking and arresting Jews on "The Night of Broken Glass" to the killing centers of Auschwitz, Majdanek, Chelmno, Sobibor, Belzec and Treblinka and finally the liberation of inmates by the stunned troops of the United States and its allies.
The museum tells its tale with photographs, films and some of the actual possessions of inmates, like bowls and brushes, and even uniforms of guards and official signs exhorting hatred of Jews.
One chamber is entirely filled with thousands of shoes the victims were forced to remove before they entered the gas chambers. There are bags in which the Nazis put hair removed from inmates; it was used for mattress fillings.
And there is a 70-foot tower of family pictures of an entire village's population, taken before German soldiers wiped out the town.

 

End of Document
