

How The Tutsi Rebels Won Rwanda
The Associated Press
July 19, 1994, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 739 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER McDOUGALL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUTARE, Rwanda
Body




How did a young band of Tutsi guerrillas turn the tables on government troops and murderous Hutu militias and blaze from exile to victory?
Fight, fade and confuse. Those are the laws the guerrilla army lives by.
And the young rebels in castoff fatigues, plastic shades and high-top sneakers learned from 12 years in hiding: the less you say, the longer you live.
A month ago, if you asked rebel commander Maj. Wilson "Cybone" Rutayisire how many fighters he had in the field, he'd smile and say, "perhaps many."
But since then, the rebels have beaten a government army that had better fortifications, weapons and air power and forced more than 100,000 hardened Hutu militias to drop their machetes and skulk into hiding.
Flush with victory, the Rwandan Patriotic Front, today 20,000 strong, is now more than willing to explain how they did it.
"Go back to 1959," said Cybone, his nom de guerre. Tutsis were no more than 15 percent of the Central African nation but, as the country's traditional leaders, lorded over the majority Hutus.
"But Belgium was the real ruler, and instead of uniting against the common colonial enemy, Hutu attacked Tutsi and sent many of us into exile," said Cybone.
In refugee camps in neighboring Burundi, Tanzania and Uganda, the first Tutsi revolutionary cadres were born. Called "inyenzi," or "cockroaches," they snuck into Rwanda on small hit-and-run raids from across the border.
"Ah, it was miserable," Cybone winced. Untrained and disorganized, the only thing the inyenzi accomplished was to irritate the Hutus to even further attacks, which drove more Tutsis into exile.
Soundly whipped, the Tutsis gave up their arms, until 20 years later, when the children of the first refugees picked them up again.
"We were born in refugee camps. We had no schools, no jobs, no land, nothing. We had nothing to lose," said the slight, 34-year-old major, taking a swig of orange soda. So when Ugandan rebel leader Yoweri Museveni launched his guerrilla movement against Idi Amin, many of the young Tutsis took to the bush with him.
The young rwandans quickly became notorious as fierce fighters, said Francis Besesego, a Ugandan safari guide before the war. "Everyone in Uganda heard about those boys, but nobody wanted to meet them."
When Museveni finally seized control of Uganda in 1986, 3,000 of his officers were Rwandan Tutsis. They waited four more years, gathering skill and weapons, then deserted en masse to launch an attack on their mother country.
"Another disaster," said Cybone, noting the rebels-in-exile didn't know the lay of the land and had no support from the people.
But after the rebel commander was killed in the first battle, and the next two generals killed in the second, the rebels had to find a way to fight for maximum gain with minimum casualties. It was back to the hills.
"We abandoned heavy weapons and went to guerrilla tactics - ambush, surprise attacks, always on foot with mortars and small weapons," Cybone said. "We came down from the volcanic cliffs before dawn, attacked, and were gone."
There was one vital lesson: never, never mistreat civilians, who could provide food, information and cover.
A raid on Ruhengeri prison in February of 1991 was a master stroke. Besides freeing hundreds of political and common criminals, many of whom became grateful new recruits, the rebels became overnight heroes.
The humiliating raid inspired Hutu President Juvenal Habyarimana to begin negotiations that led to a peace treaty in 1993. But it also led him to form his Hutu militias, known as interahamwe, or "those who attack together."
Habyarimana died in an unexplained plane crash on April 6, and within hours interahamwe across the country were slaughtering Tutsi men, women and children.
"We had to move fast," said Cybone. "We had to fight like guerrillas, but hold territory and protect our people as well."
The rebels launched a new offensive, blitzing down from their mountain hideaway, outnumbering and surrounding an enemy target, then leaving minimum troops to hold them and secretly moving the rest on to the next target.
"That's how we won Kigali one day, and three days later we were advancing 99 miles away - half our troops had already gone there."
The rebels never deviated from their stingy use of troops.
"We surrounded the army, shelled them for several days, then, as if by accident, opened an escape route," said Cybone.
"A trapped enemy is dangerous - a fleeing enemy is easy to hit."
 Load-Date: July 19, 1994

 

End of Document
