

If There Are New Rwandan Massacres, Where Are The Bodies?
The Associated Press
October 14, 1994, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 632 words
Byline: By JOHN DANISZEWSKI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KIGALI, Rwanda
Body




Is a new round of massacres taking place in Rwanda, this time directed against the country's Hutu majority?
Hutu refugees loyal to the former government now in exile in Zaire and Tanzania have been making such claims, and some aid agencies that work with the refugees in eastern Zaire have lately begun echoing the allegations.
But U.N. peacekeepers charged with investigating the reports contend the allegations are part of a propaganda campaign waged by murderers in exile.
The almost 5,000 U.N. troops spread out on the ground throughout Rwanda, conducting daily patrols, concluded this week they cannot document a single instance of a recent massacre that would support the claims.
Rwanda's new Tutsi-led government, which wants an international war-crimes tribunal to investigate the slaughter of an estimated 500,000 people, mainly Tutsi, strenuously denies any campaign of reprisal killings.
The government has opened its territory for U.N. inspection and has blasted the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees and other agencies as "irresponsible" for falling for charges from Hutus in neighboring countries.
"If somebody just makes wild accusations, and then when you say 'Come and prove it,' and they cannot come and prove it, then you begin to question the intentions behind such allegations," Rwanda's new military leader Maj. Gen. Paul Kagame told journalists in Kigali on Wednesday.
Kagame says the accounts of alleged reprisals, circulated by word of mouth and the media, hurt its chances of convincing Hutus that it is safe to come home and start rebuilding the war-ravaged country.
At a U.N. outpost in southern Rwanda, Canadian officers monitoring the area made no attempt to hide their disgust with what they consider a successful propaganda campaign being waged by Hutus outside Rwanda.
"There's a lot of disinformation on the other side in the camps with regard to what's going on here," said Canadian Maj. Gary Dawson, who commands international troops patrolling the southeast corner of the country, bordering Burundi and Tanzania.
"All the 'credible' evidence I was supposed to go out and check has turned out to be incredible," said Dawson. "If anything, the RPF is being awfully magnanimous when you consider what's been going on in this country."
After a disputed UNHCR report issued in Geneva two weeks ago said there was evidence of an alleged pattern of new reprisal killings in Rwanda, Dawson said he was instructed to visit five sites where new massacres had reportedly been carried out.
In every case, he said, the bodies he found dated from before the Tutsi-led Rwandan Patriotic Front took control of the country in July, or massacres carried out by the forces of the former Hutu-led government.
Dawson said his troops are at liberty to visit any area they wish.
"They have given us free rein. If they were committing reprisals, they wouldn't do that."
The evidence supporting the claims of new massacres appears to be circumstantial. It includes aid agencies citing the ongoing exodus of Hutus from Rwanda and the consistency in their accounts of persecution by the RPF troops, including killings, house-to-house searches and the burning of bodies to avoid detection.
After the UNHCR report aroused the ire of Rwanda's new government, U.N. Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali imposed a gag order against any U.N. officials speaking publicly on the matter and ordered U.N. human rights investigators to conduct a thorough inquiry that is still under way.
Kagame accused the UNHCR of helping the former Hutu government in its propaganda to keep the refugees from returning home.
He acknowledges instances of government soldiers and civilians illegally taking vengeance into their own hands. "We are far from being angels," he said, but added that wrongdoers were being punished.
 Load-Date: October 14, 1994

 

End of Document
