

In Gaza, People Wait for Change on the Streets, Not Signings
The Associated Press
February 11, 1994, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 772 words
Byline: By SAID GHAZALI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GAZA CITY, Occupied Gaza Strip
Body




Despite a new security agreement with Israel that Yasser Arafat called a major step forward for Palestinians, there were no celebrations - much less change - on the streets of the occupied territories Thursday.
On both sides, many saw Wednesday's signing ceremony in Cairo, Egypt, as basically a public relations move. After two meetings last month between Arafat and Shimon Peres, Israel's foreign minister, failed to produce a deal, some said neither man apparently wanted to face an increasingly skeptical public with empty hands.
Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin said Thursday it would take at least a month to finish an agreement, and there would be no prisoner releases or Israeli troop withdrawal until then.
"Our people have lost confidence in all talks and negotiations because they don't see any change in the reality," said Diab Al-Loh, a member of the PLO delegation to peace talks. "Our people are waiting for change."
Israel's right-wing also saw the agreement as politically motivated.
Moshe Katzav, head of the opposition Likud Party faction in the Israeli parliament, said Rabin was under pressure to make an agreement because he had to show something for all the efforts. He condemned the Cairo document as a further step toward a Palestinian state that would endanger Israel's existence.
Israel was to begin pulling troops out of the Gaza Strip and West Bank town of Jericho two months ago under the terms of the Israel-PLO peace pact.
But such questions as who would control the borders and how much land Israel would cede around Jericho have proved nettlesome.
On Wednesday, Arafat and Peres initialed an agreement that revolved key issues blocking the Israeli withdrawal. Israel released a text of the Cairo agreement Thursday, minus the maps defining areas under Palestinian control.
Palestinians won the right to raise the Palestinian flag and post armed police at crossings from Jordan and Egypt into the autonomous enclaves - the Gaza Strip and the West Bank region of Jericho. Humiliating questioning and searches of Palestinians are to end. Palestinians achieved a foothold in the Dead Sea and limited control of two religious sites in the West Bank.
Israel, on the other hand, maintains all Jewish settlements in Gaza, controls roads leading to them and keeps army bases near the settlements. Israel also maintains ultimate authority over border crossings, and the right to veto anyone entering.
After initialing the deal Wednesday, Arafat said, "We can say that Palestine - and the name of Palestine - has returned to the map of the Middle East."
But on the streets of Jericho and Gaza, where the population waits for the Israeli troops to leave, there were no celebrations.
"All the time they talk about this agreement, but there is no change here," said Suhailah Al-Kumi, a 37-year-old Gaza shopkeeper.
Gazans warned that the two steps forward, one step back maneuvering that characterized the negotiations had to change.
"If the agreement doesn't work this time there will be more frustrations, more violence and an uprising with all the weapons coming in here," said Majid Arafat, a pastry shop owner distantly related to the PLO leader. "There will be more Palestinians and Israelis killing each other on the streets."
Islamic Jihad, a militant organization that opposes the peace accord, announced Thursday it had kidnapped and killed an Israeli border policeman. Police could not confirm the death, but his bloodstained car had been found near Gaza.
Also Thursday, the body of an Israeli farmer was found bludgeoned to death in his orange orchard. Police suspected he was killed by Palestinians and detained over 100 Arab suspects.
The constant bloodshed has eroded support for the peace process on both sides. According to an Associated Press count, 62 Palestinians and 20 Israelis have been killed in violent confrontations since Sept. 13, when the peace accord was signed in Washington.
Israel's right-wing condemned the Cairo document as a further step toward a Palestinian state that would endanger Israel's existence. They planned several protests.
Speaking on Israel radio Thursday, Rabin said talks would now resume in Paris on economic issues and in the Egyptian resort of Taba on the handover of power to a Palestinian self-rule authority.
"What was signed in Cairo is a very important step towards completing the agreement," he said. "I predict that at least another month will be necessary in order to finish the details of the agreement to a full accord."
Rabin's office said Rabin and Arafat would meet after agreement was reached on all issues. They will decide the size of the Jericho autonomy enclave.
 Load-Date: February 11, 1994

 

End of Document
