

In Somalia's War, The Surreal Mixes With The Tragic
The Associated Press
September 13, 1992, Sunday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 903 words
Byline: By GREG MYRE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOGADISHU, Somalia
Body




The young boy rides a donkey cart, a grenade launcher at his side. On a nearby street, a drug-addled youth greets a friend by pointing a pistol in his face - then offering a warm handshake and a smile.
Elsewhere, a half-pint teen-ager on the back of a jeep tries to strike a tough-guy pose behind his mounted machine gun. He fails, possibly because he's wearing brown plaid pants and a clashing blue plaid shirt. It's a military fashion risk that doesn't work.
In Somalia, war, famine and anarchy have combined to create an atmosphere that is both tragic and surreal.
No longer a country, Somalia is a bizarre sociological experiment in what happens when you give teen-agers guns, drugs, stolen cars and no curfew.
You can tell Somalia is out of joint even before you arrive. On flights into the country, pilots sometimes tell passengers - after takeoff - that they don't know where they are going to land.
Flights are sometimes diverted at the last minute due to gun battles on the tarmac at the main airport in Mogadishu, the capital. It's been closed twice in the last week due to tarmac shooting that claimed three lives.
It's considered much safer to fly into a gravel airstrip outside the capital controlled by drug dealers importing khat, a mildly narcotic twig and leaf grown in Kenya and known as "Somali whiskey."
Khat, which was legal before Somalia disintegrated, is the one industry that has hummed along uninterrupted by the surrounding chaos.
A squadron of six or more chartered khat planes touches down at 9:30 sharp every morning, greeted by hundreds of buyers and sellers. You can tell business is good. The merchants are among the few overweight people in Somalia.
Despite the famine and collapsed economy, virtually all Somali men find the means to buy a daily bundle of khat. Its effects can be measured by the behavior of the young gunmen who man the countless roadblocks in Mogadishu.
Friendly, smiling and prompt in the morning, they are surly, snarling and bleary-eyed by late afternoon.
Bashir, a devoted khat chewer who was driving journalists around one day, suddenly stopped on a barren patch of road and said he needed to stretch his stiff shoulder.
He got out, flapped his arms as if he were a giant stork, then pulled out his pistol and fired three rounds randomly into the bushes, startling several people washing at a nearby watering hole. Then he got back in the vehicle and popped another stick of khat in his mouth.
To travel anywhere, aid agencies and journalists must hire the gunmen and their four-wheel-drive vehicles, most of which are stolen. The gunmen and their cars are politely called "technicals," Somalia's contribution to the euphemisms of war.
A "technical" car costs anywhere from $ 50 to $ 200 daily, depending on one's needs. Horsepower counts, though not as much as firepower.
A mounted machine gun is at least $ 50 extra per day. But it also gives you the automatic right-of-way at intersections.
Abdi Ali Egalle, a 22-year-old who was a university student before the war, succinctly explained why he got a weapon and became a "technical."
"In Mogadishu, you are not a man without a gun," said Egalle.
While Somalia starves, 10,000 tons of sorghum has been sitting in the warehouse at Mogadishu's port for two weeks because aid agencies are looted every time they try to move it out to feeding centers.
Offshore, a ship with 6,500 tons of rice and beans has been anchored for days waiting for a semblance of order in the port before docking.
Somalia is tragedy and suffering. But it's tragedy with a mean streak.
The two leading warlords signed a cease-fire in March, dividing Mogadishu into north and south after their forces had reduced most of the capital to rubble.
But gunfire still rings out night and day and is treated as mindless background noise by anyone who has been in Mogadishu for more than a day.
How low have Somalia's warlords sunk?
One armed faction has repeatedly threatened to kill a woman known as the "Mother Teresa of Somalia" - Annalena Tonelli, an Italian woman who has spent 23 years caring for sick and destitute Somalis.
The group demanded she hand over an old Catholic mission station she had turned into a hospital, one of several charitable operations she runs in the Indian Ocean town of Merca.
Tired of defying death threats, she and the patients moved out of the hospital last week.
Such acts of thuggery are countless, many of them aimed at aid workers.
One German with the United Nations had his house burgled so frequently he had concrete furniture made.
Gunmen have repeatedly stolen blankets handed out to children by the aid agency CARE. To combat the problem, CARE cut the blankets in half, making them just big enough for children, but useless to the men who want to steal them.
There are, of course, random acts of kindness, carried out in unique Somali style.
Associated Press photographer Santiago Lyon and his armed escorts were traveling on an empty stretch of desert road when their four-wheel-drive vehicle broke down. Gunmen in a pickup truck drove up and stopped, and without uttering a word, began working under the hood of Lyon's vehicle.
While the mystery mechanics tinkered, one of their colleagues put a Michael Jackson cassette on the tape player. After several minutes, Lyon said, his vehicle was fixed and "everyone was dancing in the desert to the song 'Billie Jean.' It was a bit bizarre."
In Somalia, one shouldn't expect anything less.

 

End of Document
