

In South Africa, the Easy Reforms are Over, the Hard Ones Remain
The Associated Press
June 17, 1991, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 553 words
Byline: By GREG MYRE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, South Africa
Body




So far, President F.W. de Klerk's sweeping reforms have required only the approval of his ruling National Party.
To reach his stated goal of a multiracial democracy, he now needs to reach agreements with the African National Congress and other black groups still skeptical of his motives.
On Monday, de Klerk marked his most significant legislative reform to date as Parliament scrapped the Population Registration Act, which classified all citizens by race and provided the underpinnings of other apartheid laws.
"Today, the vast majority of our population is rejoicing … because they see we keep our word and fulfill our promises," de Klerk told Parliament.
But like his earlier reforms, de Klerk was able to chip away at apartheid either by decree or with help from only his National Party, which controls the dominant white chamber of Parliament.
Now one monumental reform remains: a new constitution that gives blacks voting rights. That must be negotiated by all political parties, black and white.
While expressing his customary confidence, de Klerk acknowledged the difficulty of such negotiations, saying a new constitution would probably take years.
It has been 13 months since de Klerk's National Party first met with Nelson Mandela's African National Congress, and the country's two most powerful political movements are still divided over preliminary issues.
The ANC accuses the government of provoking violence in black townships. The government says the ANC must stop threatening to resume its sabotage campaign, which it suspended in August.
The ANC says more than 1,000 political prisoners remain jailed and it demands their release. The government says only a few contentious cases remain.
With each new round of accusations, mutual suspicion grows.
Even the repeal of the Population Registration Act seemed to heighten distrust rather than produce good will. People already classified by race will remain so until a new constitution is written, something the government says is necessary during the interim.
The ANC called this "totally unacceptable" and urged the retention of economic sanctions.
De Klerk, speaking immediately after the vote, accused the ANC of making "rigid declarations which preclude sensible compromises and even make them impossible."
"In short, the ANC should now begin to think, talk and act like an organization which really believes in negotiation," he added.
Other black organizations such as the Pan Africanist Congress and the Azanian People's Organization have taken positions even more hard-line than the ANC's.
Anti-apartheid groups say many reforms have loopholes allowing whites to retain segregation though it may no longer exist in the statute books.
In his speech, de Klerk stressed that the new constitution must have "effective protection for minorities."
Many blacks interpret this as code language that means whites will retain special privileges.
Last year, de Klerk was seeking to start constitutional negotiations in January.
With 1991 half over, such talks don't appear any closer. Black township violence, a 2-year-old recession and mounting black expectations have complicated the political process, and from here on out reforms will prove much harder to come by.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE: Greg Myre, the AP's news editor in Johannesburg, has reported from South Africa since 1987.

 

End of Document
