

Incentives for War: A Hot Meal and a Walk in the Desert
The Associated Press
February 23, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 652 words
Byline: By MIMI MANN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: EL-ALAMEIN, Egypt
Body




In the last 2 hours before the desert tank battle that would change the course of World War II, Allied soldiers were given two incentives to ease their way into war - a hot meal and a little walk in the desert.
At the same time, their cocky, methodical commander, British Gen. Bernard Montgomery, uncharacteristically anguished over what was to come. He wondered if his timing was right.
Weeks before, in early October 1942, practices hadn't been perfect. As the final Battle of El-Alamein approached, "I was not satisfied that we were capable of achieving success in a plan so ambitious," Montgomery wrote later.
The battle isn't history's best tank battle, but it's among the most famous and decisive. The fighting between Allied and Axis troops along Egypt's northern coastline was a tireless wearing down of the enemy.
El-Alamein nonetheless is a classic study in the horrors of desert fighting, the kind that could be in store for nearly 1 million soldiers facing each other in the Persian Gulf War.
Desert landscape is so barren of markers that the blasts of war bring not only dust and maelstroms of sand but confusion as well. Where and who is the enemy?
Machinery slugs along, suffocated by sand. Desert silence magnifies explosions. Weather ever changes. The final Battle of El-Alamein, begun under lovely starlit skies, ended 12 days later in rainstorms and mudslides.
At 7 p.m., Oct. 23, 1942, the allied fighters of El-Alamein found places to eat hot meals, ordered up specially by Montgomery. The day had been horrid, a relentless sun and pesky flies. But now the sky was cloudless, the moon bright.
Shortly after 9:30 p.m., the hum of distant bombers broke the desert stillness.
Ten minutes later, at exactly 9:40 p.m., every gun of the 8th Army opened up, a bombardment unequaled since World War I. A wail of bagpipes arose from the 51st Highlanders.
More than 1,000 shells exploded every minute. The bombers dropped their loads, raining noise and destruction for 15 terrifying minutes. Line upon line of infantry advanced at 50 yards a minute toward the first minefields.
Then silence.
At 10 p.m. war began again. It continued, more and more, both sides suffering terribly. Early on Oct. 25 allied commanders begged Montgomery to change his battle plan to ease casualities.
Montgomery had ordered vehicles to the rear and told the Commonwealth soldiers that anybody who tried to desert under fire would be shot. He stood fast. But 1 days later he gave in, scrapped meticulous plans and redeployed his forces. Ironically, military historians give the mid-battle alterations much of the credit for Montgomery's victory.
Shocked by the initial bombardment, worse than anything they could imagine, the Germans found themselves short of ammunition and gasoline. The fire of the 8th Army was extremely accurate.
German communication lines were expertly cut by Montgomery's forces, forcing the German general standing in for Rommel as he recuperated from illness in Europe to go to the front to see what was happening. He was killed.
Rommel returned, but, denied resupply by Berlin, he could do nothing. By Nov. 3, day 12 of the offensive, the battle belonged to the Allies.
But many years afterward, Montgomery confessed there was not a single moment of certain victory. He said he won because of the "courage and will to conquer of regimental officers and men."
What price war? Allied 13,500, Axis 50,000 dead, wounded or captured at El-Alamein.
And war creates strange winners. Field Marshal Erwin Rommel, the "Desert Fox," leader of the German and Italian forces at the El-Alamein, lost in history books. But the courtly warrior won a lasting victory. He cared for his men, defied Adolf Hitler's orders to stay put and retreated, but with dignity.
Rommel refused to poison wells, leaving their water for local Bedouins to build a new life around. He remains a hero to many Egyptians, especially the Western Desert Bedouins.

 

End of Document
