

Inside Makala Prison: The Politics of Neglect
The Associated Press
June 4, 1993, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 731 words
Byline: By MARK FRITZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KINSHASA, Zaire
Body




Joseph Olenghankoy lives in a squalid cell in Makala prison, a place where the luckiest inmates get fed by family members who can still afford food and bribes for the guards.
He is the most famous of the 559 prisoners in this dank, crumbling stone edifice built by Belgian colonists four decades ago. A preacher's son, he grew up in the United States and returned to Zaire to start a solar energy business in 1990.
Soldiers looted it, and Olenghankoy thrust himself into the politics of chaos in this central African nation.
He now leads a young people's pro-democracy organization that is the most dynamic element of the diverse opposition movement trying to topple Mobutu Sese Seko. The despot has ruled Zaire for 28 years and is trying to cling to power as the nation's fitful move toward democracy collapses into social disorder.
There are at least 16 political prisoners in Makala prison, one of the institutions that has broken down in this country. Local human rights workers here say a prisoner or two dies daily in Makala from malnutrition or poor medical care.
An Associated Press reporter who gained access to the prison without revealing his occupation saw family members pass crumpled bills to belligerent guards so they could enter the sprawling, sand-covered prison yard dotted with junked vehicles.
In a new report, the New York-based group Human Rights Watch paints a bleak picture of Makala, Zaire's 207 other prisons and the unknown number of secret police lockups. Among the allegations:
- Only 15 percent of the inmates have been convicted; the rest are awaiting trial, some for years.
- Prison administrations have largely collapsed, with prisoners in many cases running the operations from inside. Prison workers, like most public employees, haven't been paid in months and often use inmates as slave laborers.
"At Makala, prisoners effectively decide who will eat and how much," the report said. "New prisoners and younger prisoners are forced to service the more senior prisoners - working their garden plot, for example, or providing sexual favors."
- The organization said 2,229 prisoners - one in every 12 - died in lockup in 1991. The situation is believed worse now, reflecting the further collapse of society and increase in hunger and disease.
"The prisons? It's death," said Human Rights Watch's Peter Rosenblum, who wrote the report.
Because of 4,000 percent annual inflation and the breakdown in food distribution, hunger is rising in this capital city of 3 million people. Local human rights workers say some prisoners are starving because their families no longer can afford to bring food.
The International Committee of the Red Cross began an emergency feeding program in Makala in July 1991, but it ended in March.
The political prisoners were rounded up in March and April as Mobutu increased pressure on the pro-democracy government of Etienne Tshisekedi.
Mobutu grudgingly appointed Tshisekedi prime minister in 1991 under pressure from the West and his own people, but has since tried to fire him and has appointed his own prime minister.
Olenghankoy, 28, leads the youth wing of Tshisekedi's party. According to foreign diplomats and human rights representatives, he enjoys a grass-roots following.
He was arrested April 9 by Mobutu's secret police. He and other opposition figures say they are subsisting on rice and vegetables brought in by human rights groups.
Olenghankoy is the mastermind of "Ville Morte," or "Dead City," a periodic protest in which Kinshasa's 3 million residents are urged to stay home for the day. It is a somewhat safe way to tell Mobutu his era is ending.
"When (Olenghankoy) signs his name to something everybody listens," said Jean-Marie Rusimbuka, an official of a rights group called Voice of the Voiceless and a member of an interim parliament meant to usher the nation to democracy.
"He has charisma. The streets are dead when he calls a Dead City."
Olenghankoy walked the prison yard patrolled haphazardly by slouching guards wearing jungle camouflage and red berets. Worried because he was being watched, he communicated through brief conversations made as he and a reporter casually crossed paths.
"Our goals are to fight dictatorship," he said, smiling serenely as inmates trailed him like ducklings. "As the dictatorship dies we see the signs of intimidation.
"The fact that I am here is a sign of the death of the dictatorship."

 

End of Document
