

Inside Rwanda, Another Tragedy for The Displaced
The Associated Press
July 25, 1994, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 551 words
Byline: By PAUL AMES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CYANIKA, Rwanda
Body




While the world's eyes are fixed on the plight of refugees in Zaire, another act in Rwanda's multifaceted tragedy is being played out inside the nation.
In a camp sprawling over the hills around this village, 80,000 people live in rough huts of sticks and leaves. Families huddle amid cemetery gravestones. The air is heavy with dust, smoke and the stench of human waste.
An estimated 1.2 million displaced people live in camps like this one in southwestern Rwanda, the security zone protected by the French military.
They are hungry and exhausted. Many are sick. But most of all, they are frightened.
They are Hutus who fled the advance of the Tutsi-led Rwandan Patriotic Front, and they are terrified the French will pull out, leaving them at the mercy of the new government formed by the rebels.
The French have said they will leave by the end of August. If they do, relief workers fear, the displaced multitudes in southwest Rwanda will flee across the frontier to Bukavu, turning it into a second Goma, the Zairian border town to the north that houses more than 1 million Rwandans. More than 200,000 refugees already are camped around Bukavu.
"We will have a repeat of the catastrophe in Goma," said James Fennell of the international aid agency CARE. "We can only expect yet more deaths on an enormous scale."
"I want to stay in my country, but if the French don't protect us, we will all go to Zaire," said Alvera Ntahitau, a mother of two small children who fled fighting in her home in Butare three months ago.
For more than a week, thousands of refugees have trekked the winding mountain road to Bukavu, about 95 miles away. More haven't joined yet because the French presence has given them confidence to stay in Rwanda. Still, they face dire hardship.
"People are dying of hunger, they are so weak," said Lt. Col. Jacques Brice, commander of the French force in the Gikongoro district, home to an estimated 800,000 displaced people.
"We are trying to keep them in place. It will be just like Goma" if they flee, he said.
Relief workers are trying to get food and medicine into the Rwandan camps to encourage people to stay, but they say supplies must increase to prevent a new disaster.
"We have been here five weeks and there has been only a kilo (2.2 pounds) of food per person per week," said Sister Siobhan Corkery, one of four nuns from the Irish Medical Missionaries of Mary looking after the 80,000 at Cyangugu.
She said 15,000 people fled the camp last week because of rumors the French were leaving.
With the defeat of the Hutu government, law and order in the southwest is entrusted to the thinly spread French troops.
In Gikongoro, the last government officials fled Saturday. Shops have been emptied by fleeing people. The little available food sells at hugely inflated prices. Displaced people pack the streets, begging for food or medicine for their children.
The remnants of the government army have mostly fled to Zaire, but some units are rumored to be hiding in the forest, preparing to fight a guerrilla war against the rebels. Militias believed responsible for the massacres of Tutsis still roam the countryside, terrorizing refugees and villagers.
Sullen young men carrying machetes glare at passers-by. And the French soldiers say they still find fresh bodies along the road to the border.
 Load-Date: July 26, 1994

 

End of Document
