

International Briefs by The Associated Press
The Associated Press
September 29, 1992, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 620 words
Byline: AP Photo KL2 with Kuala Lumpur-dated news item
Dateline: CHITTAGONG, Bangladesh
Body




Two ferries carrying about 300 people disappeared Tuesday in the Bay of Bengal after being attacked by sea pirates, police and survivors said.
Fishermen rescued about 25 people who jumped into the sea after the pirates fired guns at the two boats, said police in Sandwip, 15 miles from Chittagong.
The authorities said the boats, which were crossing the Sandwip Channel, neither arrived in Sandwip nor returned to the port of origin, Sitakund, and that a search boat had been unable to track down the vessels.
Mohammad Hedayetullah, one of the rescued passengers, told reporters one of the boats had capsized but could not say if the passengers had drowned or were captured by the pirates.
The boats usually take six hours to cross the 12-mile-wide channel.
 
 LUSAKA, Zambia (AP) - Riot police opened fire Tuesday on student demonstrators, killing one and critically injuring another, a police spokesman said.
It was the first violent confrontation between police and students since democratic elections in November ended three decades of authoritarian one-party rule in Zambia.
Bartholomew Jere, the Lusaka police public relations officer, said eight policemen were being held for questioning.
About 2,000 demonstrators had gathered outside a magistrate's court on the second day of a class boycott to protest the court appearance of 144 classmates charged with taking part in an illegal march Sunday, the spokesman said.
Authorities had refused the students a permit to demonstrate against economic hardships.
Student leaders have argued against Western-style economic reforms they say threaten 70,000 jobs. They have accused President Frederick Chiluba, a former labor leader, of ignoring the plight of the poor.
Last year's elections won by Chiluba were partly the result of student-led demonstrations that left about 30 protesters dead from police and army gunfire.
 
 KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia (AP) - Malaysia and Singapore suffered massive electrical outages Tuesday after lightning struck a power station, forcing offices to close because of a lack of air-conditioning and knocking out traffic lights.
In Singapore, the Public Utilities Board said it would be days before electricity was completely restored. Electricity supplies to most of peninsular Malaysia were disrupted for more than seven hours, said Ibrahim Hassan, manager of public affairs for Energy Malaysia Ltd.
About 80 percent of Malaysia's 18 million people live on the affected main peninsula. Officials of the power company said this was the biggest power failure ever in Malaysia.
Power cuts are rare in Singapore, a modern island-state of 3 million residents.
 
 KABUL, Afghanistan (AP) - Afghanistan's acting army chief on Tuesday narrowly escaped an attempt on his life by suspected rebels who blew up his car, defense and diplomatic sources said.
Gen. Asif Delawar suffered only minor injuries, but his bodyguard was killed, said the sources, speaking on condition of anonymity.
No one claimed responsibility for the attempted assassination on the road leading to the joint civilian-military airport, but Defense Ministry sources blamed Hezb-e-Islami, a renegade rebel faction expelled from the Islamic interim government last month.
The assassination attempt followed several days of fierce fighting in the Kohistan district north of Kabul. Forces supporting the Islamic government have wrested control of the area, which was controlled by Hezb-e-Islami and its leader, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar.
Delawar was army chief-of-staff under the former Communist regime of ousted President Najibullah. When the government collapsed in April, Delawar and other senior officers in the Afghan military switched allegiance to rebel leader Ahmed Shah Masood, Hekmatyar's biggest rival.

 

End of Document
