

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
May 21, 1993, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 784 words
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




U.S. Ambassador Thomas Pickering began his new assignment Friday, presenting his credentials and holding talks with President Boris Yeltsin.
Pickering was among several ambassadors who met with Yeltsin, including representatives from Italy, Georgia, Slovenia and Slovakia, the ITAR-Tass news agency reported.
Pickering, a career diplomat who was U.N. ambassador during the Persian Gulf War, was named to his latest job by President Clinton in January. He succeeds Robert Strauss, who stepped down late last year.
A member of the foreign service since 1959, Pickering had high-level jobs in the Nixon, Ford, Carter, Reagan and Bush administrations. He has been ambassador to Israel, Jordan, El Salvador and Nigeria.
Pickering is one of only four career diplomats in the State Department's foreign service to hold the rank of career ambassador - the diplomatic equivalent of a five-star general.
Officials in Washington have said he will work closely with Strobe Talbott, who is Clinton's special envoy to the states of the former Soviet Union.
---
RIYADH, Saudi Arabia (AP) - A Pakistani convicted of smuggling heroin and two Arab bandits responsible for killing police were beheaded Friday.
The Interior Ministry identified the Pakistani as Mathil Khan Kulzadeh, the latest of 60 beheaded in Saudi Arabia since the mid-1980s, when Muslim theologians ruled the death penalty was valid for convicted drug smugglers and peddlers. Most of the condemned were Pakistani nationals.
The kingdom rules by Islamic law, which prescribes beheading for the death penalty. The beheadings are usually carried out outside mosques on Fridays after the Muslim sabbath prayers, to act as a deterrent to the public.
The two Arabs, as Hamad ibn Salem al-Damnan and Mohammed ibn Haid al-Damnan, were convicted of being highwaymen and armed robbers who had several shootouts with security forces "of whom they killed some and injured others." Their nationality was not given, often the case with Saudi nationals.
The three beheadings, the latest in some three dozen this year, were carried out in various parts of the central Saudi region of Riyadh.
Mohammed ibn Haithem, identified as a Saudi, was convicted of 13 robberies in a number of houses, shops and gasoline stations. His right hand was cut off from the wrist.
---
ROME (AP) - Italy's corruption scandal spread to the restoration business Friday when reports emerged of kickbacks for work on monuments and architectural sites.
News agencies said prosecutors had begun investigating payments to political parties in the granting of contracts by the Culture Ministry starting in 1988. The contracts were for work done at museums, villas and artistic and archaeological sites, the ANSA news agency said.
Spending allotted for the contracts was around $ 50 million from September 1988 to March 1990 alone, it said.
Nearly 3,000 politicians, businessman and state company managers have been implicated in the long-running scandal. The cases center on payments to parties and politicians in exchange for their influence in granting contracts.
The contracts involve everything from highways to stadiums to theaters to subways. The kickbacks have amounted to billions of dollars in the past decade.
The Culture minister for the past 11 months, Alberto Ronchey, had no direct comment but noted he had set up a committee to look into the granting of funds.
---
OSLO, Norway (AP) - Farah Siad Shuriye finally completed a quest that was interrupted three months ago when he was wrongly identified as the hijacker of a Lufthansa airliner.
The quiet Somlai refugee tracked down the wife and children he left behind when he fled civil war in his country in 1990. He fulfilled a vow and brought them to his adopted home of Kristiansand, Norway, his attorney said Friday.
"It was wonderful to see them again," said 32-year-old Shuriye in an interview with the Oslo newspaper Aftenposten on Friday. "I longed for my family and thought of nothing else. Why would I have hijacked an airplane?"
Refugees in the town on the southern tip of Norway, where Shuriye found asylum in 1991, had helped him buy a ticket from Norway to Ethiopia so he could search for his wife, Halawi Elmi Shire, and their three children.
Instead, Shuriye and 103 others spent a harrowing 11 hours aboard Lufthansa Flight 529 on Feb. 11, while a hijacker - later identified as Nebiu Zewolde Demeke, a 20-year-old Ethiopian living in Morocco - forced their plane to fly to New York.
For a few hours that day, German and U.S. officials named Shuriye as the hijacker.
"It was not good that my name was spread all over the world like that. It has caused me problems. I often feel that people look at me and think, 'There goes the hijacker,"' he said.

 

End of Document
