

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
June 24, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 641 words
Dateline: BERN, Switzerland
Body




The Swiss government Thursday approved the free distribution of hard drugs to 700 addicts in a 3 -year experiment.
The Federal Health Office said the results of the trials in eight cities will help the government decide whether to legalize consumption and dealing of hard drugs.
The project's focus is Zurich, where the drug trade has burgeoned after authorities last year closed a notorious park that had become an open-air drugs bazaar and junkie hangout.
One aim of the trials, taking place under doctors' supervision, is to compare the usefulness of heroin, morphine and methadone, a synthetic substitute, in controlled distribution, the office said.
Supporters see legalization as a way to curb crime, prostitution and the spread of the AIDS-causing HIV virus.
One privately-run project in Zurich will focus on women addicts, of whom 150 will be supplied with the three substances. Basel, Bern and several smaller cities also will stage experiments.
---
HARARE, Zimbabwe (AP) - Impoverished and illiterate peasants on Thursday appealed to the United States not to ban imports of elephant trophies, in a petition bearing hundreds of inked thumb prints instead of signatures.
More than 3,500 tribesmen, mainly from northern Zimbabwe, said in the petition they will lose their livelihood if sport-hunted ivory is banned by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service under current conservation reforms.
"The only way to stop poaching and the loss of the elephant's habitat is to make the elephant as valuable as possible through sport hunting," said Taparendava Maveneke, a leader of the petitioners.
He presented the 500-page petition to U.S. ambassador Gib Lanpher in Harare.
Maveneke said changes in U.S. policy toward elephant hunting that propose a ban on possessing elephant trophies in the United States will cause a sharp drop in hunting trips.
American hunters pay local communities up to $ 8,000 to shoot an elephant.
Officials of Campfire, an independent conservation organization, say about 90 elephants, worth $ 720,000, are legally hunted every year in peasant areas of Zimbabwe inhabited by about 1 million people.
---
TBILISI, Georgia (AP) - Separatist Abkhazian forces battling Georgian troops shelled the besieged seaside town of Sukhumi on Thursday, killing at least 10 people and wounding 20 others, authorities said.
Commonwealth television showed burning homes and reported that a school was destroyed. The press center for the Georgian forces said six buildings had been destroyed in the latest bombardment.
More than 1,000 people have been killed since Abkhazia, a former resort area in northwest Georgia between the Black Sea and the Caucasus Mountains, declared independence in July and Georgia sent in thousands of troops.
Separatist forces have managed to hold about a third of Abkhazia, which is slightly smaller than Connecticut.
The Georgian Defense Ministry said the Abkhazian forces used "Grad" missiles to pound Sukhumi, dropping more than 50 rockets on the Georgian-held city, the Interfax news agency reported.
---
MOSCOW (AP) - A refrigerator truck slammed into a fuel tanker on a busy Moscow highway Thursday, killing 10 people and injuring 24 as fire spread to surrounding cars and three crowded trolley buses, authorities said.
The accident happened shortly before noon on the northern Dmitrovskoye Highway, a spokesman for Russia's State Committee for Emergency Situations said.
Police said the truck rammed the tanker at a traffic light, unleashing a fountain of fuel that poured onto nearby vehicles and ignited. The tanker, carrying 10 tons of gasoline, overturned and spilled fuel over more than 200 square yards, Emergency Situations spokesman Valery Boiko said.
Television footage presented a grisly scene, with charred bodies still on the street, lined up outside the shell of a bus. It also showed several burned-out buses and cars.

 

End of Document
