

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
February 23, 1993, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 734 words
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




The United States and other countries delinquent in paying U.N. dues should be charged interest on late payments, a blue-ribbon panel of fiscal experts says.
The Ford Foundation analysis on U.N. fiscal reforms was presented to Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali on Monday by Paul Volcker, co-chairman of the report and former chairman of the U.S. Federal Reserve Bank.
The United States, which pays one-fourth of the regular U.N. budget, owes it about $ 240 million - nearly half the total overdue payments of all member states.
The experts say governments should divert more of their defense funds to the U.N.'s peacekeeping budget. The average country now contributes just $ 1.40 to peacekeeping for every $ 1,000 it spends on its own military.
Peacekeeper deployment, meanwhile, has mushroomed from 15,000 troops two years ago to nearly 55,000 today, and cost a record $ 1.4 billion in 1992, the report says.
The Reagan administration began withholding U.N. dues in the 1980s to encourage the international body to trim its budget and make the budgetary process responsive to major donors.
In 1990, Washington began repaying past dues.
 
 ---
MONROVIA, Liberia (AP) - The commander of West African troops says they have seized the Firestone rubber plantation from Charles Taylor's guerrillas, freeing strategic routes to the heart of rebel-held Liberia.
The U.S.-managed plantation - the world's largest for rubber - straddles two major highways, leading north to Kakata town and southeast to Buchanan, Liberia's second port.
"We are pushing toward Kakata and Buchanan," Nigerian Maj. Gen. Adetunji Olurin told reporters Monday in Monrovia, 35 miles southwest of the plantation.
The West Africans have been fighting rebels at the 200-square-mile plantation for about two weeks.
Olurin did not discuss casualties, but said 100 rebels had been captured.
Taylor's rebels moved onto the estate in June 1990 and made it their headquarters. Firestone evacuated its internatonal staff in October after Nigerian warplanes bombed it.
Some 60,000 people died in the first year of the war Taylor began on Dec. 24, 1989. The rebellion ballooned into a tribal war. Taylor is fighting the West Africans and a Sierra Leone-based rebel group.
 
 ---
SPLIT, Croatia (AP) - Croatia's second-largest daily newspaper - the last critical voice in the new republic's press - is fighting a government plan that could strip it of its independence.
Ironically, the government plan is to privatize the state-owned newspaper, Slobodna Dalmacija. But it appointed a caretaker director to oversee the transfer and many reporters and Western diplomats fear he will silence the newspaper's editorial voice.
The caretaker director, 30-year-old Ante Busic, is a leader of President Franjo Tudjman's Croatian Democratic Union in Split.
Although the board is not supposed to interfere in editorial policy, Busic immediately rescinded the right of editors to authorize payment for articles.
Columnist Zvonimir Krstulovic said he has already clashed with the board for writing about the problems of Croatia's Serb minority.
"The board already threatened to throw us out," Krstulovic said.
Readers have turned increasingly to Slobodna Dalmacija for an independent view of the government in recent months, when other critical publications were taken over by new leadership and their editorial bite dulled.
 
 ---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Today is the second of two days of samba parades in Rio, the peak of the wild Carnival celebration.
Seven of Rio's "samba schools," backed by hundreds of percussionists, marched through downtown in a spectacle that lasted until early Monday. The other seven schools were to finish marching this morning.
The schools - actually neighborhood clubs from mostly poor districts - march around giant floats to a samba beat that blares from a huge sound truck.
Some floats this year were inspired by crime and corruption. One showed a tourist being robbed by a street punk as a tranvestite looks on.
City authorities have cracked down on nudity in recent years, but most women parade in skimpy, sequined, silk-and-feather costumes and not a few march topless.
President Itamar Franco unexpectedly attended a parade in Recife in northeastern Brazil on Monday and was jubilantly greeted by an estimated 1 million revelers.
The four-day celebration ends on Ash Wednesday, when Lent starts for many of Brazil's 110 million Roman Catholics.

 

End of Document
