

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
November 24, 1992, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 709 words
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




A United Nations study says the world's rural poor are facing increasing misery. It also notes that several countries have had huge increases in the number of rural poor over the last 20 years.
The report says rural poverty will worsen because while the world population is increasing markedly, millions of acres of arable land are being lost each year.
The World Rural Poverty report predicts the world's population will rise some 70 percent by 2025, to 8.5 billion people.
Meanwhile, an estimated 67 million acres of arable land are disappearing each year due to encroaching deserts and erosion aggravated by mismanagement.
The report also says the number of rural households headed by women alone is increasing rapidly. "Such women face a triple burden: they share all the hardships and constraints that poor rural men do; as women, they face discrimination, bias and neglect; and they are forced to manage homes and farms alone, unlike men," the report says.
The report says the five countries with the most miserable rural poor are Bhutan, Burkina Faso, Somalia, Mauritania and Sudan.
The countries cited with increases in the numbers of poor were: Brazil, up from 66 percent to 73 percent of total population between 1965-1988; Sri Lanka, 13 percent to 46 percent; Zambia, 52 percent to 82 percent; Mali, 48 percent to 60 percent; Kenya, 40 percent to 55 percent.
---
LONDON (AP) - The government will use tax revenues to pay to repair fire damage to Windsor Castle despite opposition lawmakers' demands that Queen Elizabeth II foot part of the bill.
Heritage Secretary Peter Brooke said Monday it was too early to determine the cause of Friday's fire to the weekend home of Britain's monarch or estimate the cost of repairs, which some newspapers say could hit $ 90 million.
But in a statement to the House of Commons, Brooke said: "Resources will be provided to restore this most precious and well-loved part of our national heritage."
Ann Clwyd, heritage spokesman for the opposition Labor Party countered: "There is legitimate public concern that the total cost of repair should not be paid exclusively by the taxpayer. Have you ruled out contributions from the royal family and would you welcome such a contribution if it were offered?"
Brooke said the government had been responsible for Windsor Castle since 1831 and noted that the fire had not damaged the queen's private apartments. He said she was responsible for restoring the royal collection.
---
UNITED NATIONS (AP) - A U.N. report says Iran makes excessive use of the death penalty and that nearly a third of the people executed earlier this year were convicted of political crimes.
Members of the Baha'i religion have come in for particular persecution in Muslim Iran, says the report by a U.N. human rights investigator, Reynaldo Galindo Pohl of El Salvador.
The report was to be presented to the General Assembly today.
Galindo found:
-Torture is often used illegally to force false confessions from the accused and legal procedures may be unfair and summary.
-Oppression of the Baha'i religion has been stepped up, with arbitrary arrest and detention continuing. A Baha'i man was executed this year for no apparent reason, after a 3 -year suspension of capital cases against Baha'is.
Iranian officials at the United Nations were not immediately available for comment.
Galindo relied on visits to Iran, press reports, responses from the Iranian government and interviews with Iranian expatriates to compile his information.
---
MOSCOW (AP) - Russia will spend 10 percent more on weapons and other military equipment next year, but the overall military budget will not rise, President Boris Yeltsin says.
Yeltsin's statement Monday was mixed news for the military-industrial complex, which has been hit this year with a 70 percent cutback in spending on weapons and equipment. Even with the 10 percent rise Yeltsin promised, 1993 orders still will be about 60 percent less than they were in 1991.
Yeltsin's decision to keep the total budget unchanged means the slight increase in weapons spending will have to be offset by other cuts, probably in manpower.
He did not give a specific budget figure in rubles. The Defense Ministry's press office said the ruble figure was constantly changing because of inflation.

 

End of Document
