

International News Briefs By The Associated Press
The Associated Press
June 3, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 845 words
Dateline: PARIS
Body




Amnesty International urged the French government Thursday to strike measures from an immigration bill that could severely curtail rights to political asylum.
The Cabinet adopted controversial legislation Wednesday on immigration that restricts access to France and greatly enhances authorities' powers to expel foreigners here illegally.
The bill puts the power to determine who qualifies as an exile into the hands of the police, rather than a special refugee office attached to the Foreign Ministry.
The Paris branch of Amnesty International said the Interior Ministry, which runs the police, "is not at all competent to appreciate the status of a foreigner as a refugee."
The human-rights organization also criticized the bill's proposal to force a foreigner appealing his rejection of residency papers to return to a third country while awaiting the outcome, which could take years.
The immigration bill is almost certain to be approved by the overwhelmingly conservative parliament.
 
 ---
OSLO, Norway (AP) - The International Whaling Commission's top scientist resigned because his committee's plan for managing commercial hunts was ignored, according to a letter released Thursday.
Philip Hammond, chairman of the IWC scientific committee, wrote that he was quitting because the commission failed to adopt a long-awaited plan for estimating whale stocks and managing hunts.
No management plan for commercial hunts was adopted last month at the IWC annual meeting in Kyoto, Japan.
In his May 26 letter of resignation, Hammond said he could not lead "a committee whose work is held in such disregard by the body to which it is responsible."
Whaling nations, such as Norway and Japan, complain that the IWC is dominated by anti-whaling countries interested only in stopping the hunts, not managing them as mandated in the 1946 IWC treaty. The IWC imposed a ban on commercial whale hunting in 1986. Iceland quit the IWC last year in frustration.
Norway is facing boycotts and sanctions as it prepares to embark on the country's first commercial whale hunt in six years. The government has authorized hunters to kill 296 minke whales, 160 of them for profit.
 
 ---
PARIS (AP) - Hundreds of women have been arbitrarily arrested in Tunisia over the past two years and scores of them tortured, sexually abused or threatened, Amnesty International said Thursday.
A report by the London-based human rights organization charged that some women were "detained as hostages" to pressure male relatives wanted for their ties to banned organizations to give themselves up.
Tunisia's Foreign Ministry rejected the report and said it brought discredit on the human rights group.
Amnesty called on the Tunisian government to recognize that torture and ill-treatment - documented in two 1992 reports - remain a "serious problem," to thoroughly investigate it, punish those responsible and ensure that such practices end.
According to the report, security officials over the past two years have targeted mainly wives and relatives of men who support the banned Muslim fundamentalist movement, En-Nahda, and the banned Tunisian Workers' Communist Party.
Many of those detained were not physically abused, the report said.
"However, scores of women have testified that during their time in detention they were tortured, beaten, undressed, sexually abused and threatened with rape," it added.
 
 ---
STOCKHOLM, Sweden (AP) - A Swedish television crew got dramatic pictures and sounds of gunfire outside barracks used by a Swedish U.N. unit in the Serbian capital, Belgrade. But the event was staged, the Swedish army said Thursday.
A Swedish army captain has admitted he bribed soldiers from the Yugoslav army to fire their handguns while the TV crew was videotaping, said Col. Anders Anerud, head of the Defense Forces International Section.
The incident occurred on May 3 and the dramatic pictures were broadcast May 9 on Swedish state television. The news report told viewers they were seeing what daily life is like for members of the U.N. peace keeping force.
The captain, who has not been identified, left Belgrade after the incident came to light in a Swedish military investigation. He is serving with his unit in Sweden pending an investigation, which could bring a warning, fines or criminal prosecution.
Anerud said the captain's "motivation was that he wanted to show some reality, but it's a completely false picture now and he regrets it."
Kent Wannstrom, foreign news editor for Channel 1, the state TV, said the crew was tricked.
 
 ---
VIDRERES, Spain (AP) - Rescue teams worked to recover the bodies of four people missing and presumed to have been killed in an explosion Thursday at a fireworks warehouse.
The explosion occurred shortly before noon and left at least seven people injured in this town 37 miles northeast of Barcelona.
Jose Ramon Dueso, chief of the regional fire service, said it would be difficult to determine its cause.
The building, which news reports said may have contained 10 tons of fireworks, was leveled. Fireworks were still shooting out of the rubble after the flames died down.

 

End of Document
