

International News Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
October 17, 1992, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 685 words
Dateline: TUNIS, Tunisia
Body




The PLO's Central Council voted today in favor of the U.S.-arranged Middle East peace process, giving the Palestinian negotiating team the green light to attend a new round of talks with Israel in Washington next week.
The decision of the 80-member watchdog assembly was a major triumph for Palestine Liberation Organization chairman Yasser Arafat, who had called for the meeting to silence radicals demanding that the Palestinians abandon the stalled peace process.
But in the longer term, the decision could well widen the schism in Palestinian ranks unless some progress is made quickly toward a settlement with Israel.
At Israel's insistence, the PLO has been physically excluded from the peace process, begun in Madrid a year ago. But it is known to influence the 14 negotiators.
---
KIEV, Ukraine (AP) - The crippled Chernobyl nuclear power station has begun producing electricity again to help warm Ukraine during the winter, the plant's director said.
Chernobyl was the site of the world's worst nuclear disaster in 1986, when an explosion in reactor No. 4 spread a cloud of radioactive debris over the Soviet Union, Scandinavia and Western Europe.
Reactor No. 2 was shut down after a fire in October 1991 destroyed part of its roof, and the entire plant had been idle for several months while the two operational reactors underwent routine maintenance.
Its No. 3 reactor was switched back on on Friday.
In London, the environmental group Greenpeace criticized the restart, saying the reactors could never be made safe.
The Ukrainian government plans to close the Chernobyl plant permanently next year. Earlier this month plant director Nikolai Sorokin said both reactors would operate through the winter.
Sorokin cited the need to keep Ukraine supplied with energy through the winter. The Chernobyl plant previously provided the republic with 6 percent of its electricity.
---
LAGOS, Nigeria (AP) - Plans to return Nigeria to civilian rule may be set back after the country's military leader canceled the results of presidential primaries and fired the two political party leaders.
Gen. Ibrahim Babangida cited reports of massive vote fraud and called for new primaries Friday. He said elections still would be held Dec. 5, as scheduled.
Babangida has pledged to return Nigeria, the world's most populous black nation, to civilian rule by January.
The West African nation has been ruled by soldiers for all but 10 of its 32 years of independence from Britain, with soldiers ousting two previous governments. Babangida took power in a 1985 coup.
Babangida fired Chief Tommy Ikimi, chairman of the right-of-center National Republicans, and Baba Gana Kingibe, chairman of the left-of-center Social Democrats. He said caretaker committees would be formed to clean up the party machinery.
Babangida formed the two parties himself in 1990 in a bid to establish a U.S.-style political system that would minimize the divisions along religious, ethnic and regional lines that doomed previous Nigerian governments.
---
BERLIN (AP) - Uranium seized this week in Germany could have leaked out of the former Soviet nuclear stockpile - and been on the way to the hands of terrorists.
Friedrich Palmer, head of the customs office in Munich, on Friday gave sketchy information on the case, which included the arrest of seven men, most Czechoslovakians.
On Tuesday, Palmer said, a special police commando team seized 4.8 pounds of "highly enriched uranium" from a car in a Munich parking lot, in what he called a "blow against the nuclear mafia."
Palmer said the material was smuggled via Poland from another Eastern European country, which he did not name, and was being offered for sale on the black market for $ 500,000.
The material was sent to a government laboratory for analysis, Palmer said.
David Kyd, a spokesman for the Vienna-based International Atomic Energy Agency, said in numerous previous seizures of nuclear material from the former Soviet bloc, claims by sellers that the substances were weapons-grade turned out to be false.
The Soviet Union's collapse sparked widespread concern about the future of Moscow's nuclear arsenal.

 

End of Document
