

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
April 22, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 852 words
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, South Africa
Body




In a bid for support from militant youths, Nelson Mandela visited the site of a township massacre Thursday and urged thousands of young blacks to become soldiers in the ANC's army.
"If you want to be part of an army of liberation, come to join Umkhonto we Sizwe," Mandela told a roaring crowd, referring to the ANC military wing also known as Spear of the Nation. At the same time, Mandela urged youths not to become vigilantes, saying the only way to fight the white-led government was as part of a disciplined and trained military unit.
"We are not going to give guns to individuals. We are going to give guns to an army," Mandela told a packed soccer stadium in the black township of Sebokeng, south of Johannesburg.
The speech reflected Mandela's attempt to assuage the anger of the ANC's militant youth since the slaying April 10 of Chris Hani, who was head of the Communist Party and one of the African National Congress' most popular and radical leaders.
Hani directed the military wing's armed struggle against the government for several years and was a hero to many young blacks who consider Mandela and other ANC elders too moderate and yielding to President F.W. de Klerk's white-led government.
---
PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti (AP) - A senior Western diplomat acknowledged Thursday that threats have been made to Haiti's coup leaders, but said they were only used to move along negotiations toward restoring democracy.
The U.S.-backed initiative to settle Haiti's political crisis has not failed, insisted the diplomat, who spoke only on condition of anonymity. A U.N. special envoy, Dante Caputo, left Haiti empty-handed on April 16 after four days of negotitations.
Sources close to the negotiations said the United States and United Nations have threatened the ruling army and civilian elite with cancellation of their U.S. visas, a stiffening of the weak hemisphere-wide embargo on Haiti, a tightening of the Haiti-Dominican Republic border through which much contraband flows, a substantial U.N. peacekeeping force and a halt to air traffic.
The threats were made to facilitate the diplomatic process, the diplomat said in an interview Thursday. Caputo's initiative was still alive, the diplomat maintained, adding that the threats would not be followed through until negotiations collapsed.
The army and ruling elite have rejected all previous international pressure aimed at getting them to yield power and allow the eventual return of elected President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, toppled in a September 1991 military coup.
---
LONDON (AP) - After months of parliamentary battles and maneuvering, Prime Minister John Major is within sight of getting the House of Commons to ratify a treaty on closer European union.
But confrontations lie ahead in the House of Lords, where Margaret Thatcher and other big names will fight a last-ditch battle to wreck what they see as European federalism.
The unelected Lords can delay the bills. Even if they don't, Britain is now almost certain to be the last member of the 12-nation community to ratify the Maastricht union treaty.
"I have never pretended that Maastricht is perfect but, warts and all, Maastricht makes Europe better," Major said Thursday.
Treaty opponents, he said, were motivated by frustration that Britain is no longer a world power.
A final vote in the Commons will be taken only after the Danes, who rejected the treaty last year, vote May 18 in a second referendum. Polls now point to a "yes" majority.
Disgruntled Conservatives complain of foul play and say they will press on with a battle for a referendum among Britain's 43 million voters on the treaty.
---
STOCKHOLM, Sweden (AP) - The government proposed major reductions Thursday in pillars of the welfare state, promising lower unemployment benefits, later pensions and higher health care fees.
The conservative-liberal coalition elected on an anti-tax platform in 1991 also proposed new taxes to deal with growing costs of an aging population and stagnating economy.
Hundreds of protesters gathered outside the government building, some carrying placards with the word "welfare" and a cross, symbolizing the death of a system that has been the basis of Swedish society since World War II.
"We have, as a nation, for a long time, lived beyond our means," Finance Minister Anne Wibble told Aftonbladet newspaper. "Now we have to rethink. We cannot continue to pass the costs to our children and grandchildren."
The minority government expects Parliament to approve the financial package in a series of votes, allowing the cuts to start next year. The goal is to reduce the $ 27.5 billion annual budget deficit by an average $ 2 billion a year over the next five years.
---
STOCKHOLM, Sweden (AP) - The Swedish Academy, which awards the Nobel Prize in literature, named author Birgitta Trotzig as one of its 18 members Thursday.
Of the 89 literature laureates since 1901, only seven have been women. Trotzig is the sixth woman to join the academy since it was founded in 1786.
Two other women are members.
Trotzig replaces the late author Per-Olof Sundman, who died last year. Academy members are appointed for life.

 

End of Document
