

International Briefs by The Associated Press
The Associated Press
September 23, 1992, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 728 words
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Russia is considering a plan to bury radioactive waste on the Arctic archipelago of Novaya Zemlya, a former Soviet nuclear test site, a news agency reported Wednesday.
Russia's nuclear safety agency Gosatomnadzor and a state sanitation service already have approved building an "experimental industrial complex to store solid radioactive waste," ITAR-Tass said.
The plan requires approval of the State Committee for Environmental Protection, it added.
Such a project likely would cause concern in Norway, which shares an Arctic border with Russia. Norway repeatedly accused the Soviet Union, and then Russia, of dumping nuclear waste, reactors and even whole submarines in the Barents and Kara seas, which could contaminate rich fishing grounds.
A Russian nuclear safety expert said authorities chose Novaya Zemlya because the archipelago's two major islands are permanently frozen, which rules out leakage of radioactive waste with ground water.
ITAR-TASS quoted the expert, Mikhail Filippov, as saying Russia considers the former nuclear test site unfit for other uses.
 
 JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) - A three-judge panel ruled Wednesday that South African law still permitted only whites to be drafted into the military.
A group trying to eliminate the whites-only draft had challenged it in court, saying last year's repeal of an apartheid law classifying people by race made conscription on a racial basis unlawful.
But the judges ruled that laws governing the defense forces and the draft remained intact.
The Defense Forces Act says all white males must register for military service but sets no penalty for refusing to serve.
In a case decided in March, a judge ruled the lack of a penalty meant failing to register was not a criminal offense.
The government no longer says how many white men refuse to serve in the military. In 1985, the last year figures were disclosed, a total of 7,589 men refused.
Anti-apartheid groups oppose the whites-only draft as a vestige of apartheid. Right-wing whites, angered by reforms aimed at ending apartheid, say the government should stop relying on them to do its fighting.
 
 JERUSALEM (AP) - Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin is delaying proposed legislation decriminalizing meetings with the PLO because he fears it will raise pressure on Israel to negotiate directly with the group, Israeli reports said Wednesday.
Rabin's spokesman would only confirm that the prime minister had the bill sent to the Cabinet's security committee for further study. "Any interpretation of this request is irrelevant," said the spokesman, Gad Ben-Ari.
But Etty Eshed, spokeswoman for the Justice Ministry, which prepared the bill, said Rabin wanted the security committee "to consider the timing and possible political implications of its discussion" in Parliament.
On Monday, Rabin removed the government-sponsored bill from the agenda of the Cabinet's forum for legislation, the last stop before submission to Parliament, and diverted it to the security Cabinet, the Davar and Haaretz dailies said.
Only after approval there would the bill come back to the forum for legislation, the reports said.
The bill amends a law that bans Israelis from meeting with members of terrorist groups, including the Palestine Liberation Organization as defined by Israel. The top sentence is three years in prison. Under the amendment, only meetings intended to cause harm to Israel would be banned.
Rabin fears the amendment will encourage the United States to reopen its dialogue with the PLO and invite international pressure on Israel to negotiate directly with the group, Davar quoted unidentified Rabin aides as saying.
 
 NICE, France (AP) - A baker was sentenced to life in prison Wednesday for the murder of four prostitutes whom he shot after inviting them into his car.
Jacques Jardon, 40, testified in the trial that he killed the four women in 1988 and 1989 as vengeance against his ex-wife, whom he said had been unfaithful prior to their separation in 1986.
He also was convicted of attempting to kill a transvestite prostitute, who was paralyzed by the shooting.
Psychiatric experts testified Tuesday that Jardon was sane during the period of the murders in Nice and Biot along the French Riviera. According to police, the prostitutes were killed by shots from a rifle that Jardon had rigged up in the back seat of his car to fire into the front-seat passenger.

 

End of Document
