

International Briefs by The Associated Press
The Associated Press
October 23, 1992, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 518 words
Dateline: MAPUTO, Mozambique
Body




Government forces killed about 50 rebel soldiers in a night-long battle to retake an occupied northern port, the national AIM news agency reported Friday.
Alfredo Gamito, governor of the northern province of Nampula, told AIM the Mozambique military had regained control of the port of Angoche early Thursday. Gamito, who visited the battleground, said in addition to the rebel casualties that seven civilians fleeing the area died when their boats capsized.
The government accused RENAMO rebels of killing 40 government soldiers in their seizure of Angoche early in the week and said it was one of four towns occupied by the rebels in violation of a cease-fire.
The cease-fire, signed Oct. 4, was to have ended 16 years of civil war, but each side has accused the other of violations in the northern and central parts of the country.
The United Nations' special representative in Mozambique, Aldo Ajello, has called a meeting Monday with the government and RENAMO to discuss ways of supervising the pact's implementation.
The Mozambican war killed more than 600,000 people.
 
 GENEVA (AP) - The United States and four former Soviet republics signed an accord Friday that will allow monitoring of long-range nuclear arms cuts agreed in a 1991 U.S.-Soviet pact.
The agreement was crucial to implementing a May 23 agreement in Lisbon that extended the U.S.-Soviet Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty to the four ex-Soviet states with nuclear weapons after the Soviet Union disintegrated last year. The accord cut each side's long-range arsenals by about one-third.
Officials from the United States, Russia, Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Belarus agreed in Geneva on the work procedures for a Joint Compliance and Inspection Commission set up under the May accord, the U.S. mission said.
The panel oversees compliance with the treaty, including on-site inspections.
Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Belarus have agreed to remove all long-range weapons within the seven years the treaty requires for cuts of about 38 percent, overall, in Soviet long-range nuclear missiles, bombers and submarines and about 30 percent of U.S. arsenals.
Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Belarus will eliminate more than 3,000 strategic warheads and Russia about 2,000 at a minimum.
 
 BERLIN (AP) - Chancellor Helmut Kohl put out word Friday that taxes need to be raised in 1995, and immediately ran into protests from political allies and business leaders.
Government spokesman Dieter Vogel told a news conference in Bonn that massive debts from the 1990 unification with East Germany require budget restructuring and spending cuts that would hold the problem in line through 1993 and 1994, but tax increases "will be necessary" in 1995.
Business leaders said talk of tax increases was wrong at a time when Germany's economy is stagnating.
Vogel said Germany had to deal with $ 265 billion in debts accumulated in the takeover of the East German Communist economy, which has needed wide subsidies to remain afloat in the transition to the free market.
The tax-increase proposal is to be discussed at Kohl's Christian Democratic Party convention starting Sunday in Duesseldorf.

 

End of Document
