

International News Briefs by The Associated Press
The Associated Press
October 13, 1992, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 480 words
Dateline: MAPUTO, Mozambique
Body




Mozambique's parliament on Tuesday approved a general amnesty for rebels and government soldiers, as called for by the peace accord that ended the 16-year civil war.
The AIM national news agency reported the amnesty covers rebels imprisoned or awaiting trial for war-related offenses, and soldiers court-martialed during the war.
President Joaquim Chissano said the amnesty was intended to promote national reconciliation: "Everybody should be allowed to go back to their homes. Nobody should be killed, jailed, harassed or discriminated against. There should be no settling of accounts."
The civil war killed more than 600,000 people, sent 1 million fleeing to neighboring Malawi and left half the 15 million population in need of donated food.
Southern Africa's worst drought in a century has further wracked Mozambique.
The parliament on Monday ratified the accord signed Oct. 4 by Chissano and rebel leader Afonso Dhlakama.
 
 SEVILLE, Spain (AP) - Expo '92 has closed, six months and 16 million million visitors after it opened.
According to preliminary figures, the Expo generated $ 500 million in ticket sales and $ 600 million in commercial income.
It was the largest universal exposition of the century, and the last. Universal expositions are larger than world's fairs; the previous two such expositions were in Osaka, Japan, in 1970 and Montreal in 1967.
The fair drew on Spain's connection to Christopher Columbus and the 500th year anniversary of his discovery of the New World.
About $ 12 billion was invested in Expo '92 and related infrastructure in the Seville area with the intention of revitalizing a city that has been a backwater since the decline of imperial Spain in the 16th century.
Local papers are carrying classified ads now for the sound system from the Czechoslovak pavilion and Sri Lanka's entire building.
The Antarctic iceberg in the Chilean pavilion, one of Expo's main attractions, will be lowered into the Guadalquivir River to melt away.
 
 MOSCOW (AP) - About 25 men in black uniforms bearing the old czarist insignia tied up a guard Tuesday and forced their way into the offices of a Moscow newspaper that has criticized the extreme-right, a news agency said.
Some of the men identified themselves as members of the nationalist movement Pamyat, the Interfax news agency said. The group has blamed non-Russians, foreigners and Zionists for the country's troubles.
Interfax said the intruders at the youth newspaper Moskovsky Komsomolets entered a room where an editorial meeting was underway and demanded the paper reveal the identities of reporters who had written articles about Pamyat under pseudonyms.
The interlopers gave the newspaper three days to meet their demands or the "discussion would be conducted in a different fashion," Interfax reported.
Police arrived after the group left the newspaper, Interfax said. There were no injuries or arrests reported.

 

End of Document
