

International Briefs by The Associated Press
The Associated Press
August 14, 1992, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 842 words
Dateline: NAIROBI, Kenya
Body




Kenya refused to grant visas to three members of the Robert F. Kennedy Center for Human Rights who sought to visit the east African nation, the organization's executive director said Friday.
At the same time, 103 U.S. congressional members wrote a letter to President Daniel arap Moi expressing deep concerns about whether the country was moving toward democracy, despite the government's legalization of opposition in December.
The human rights delegation was planning to conduct a fact-finding mission on human rights and Kenya's electoral process from Aug. 12-23. Their visas were denied Aug. 7, said the RFK Center's director, Kerry Kennedy Cuomo.
"The reason (Kenya) Ambassador (Dennis) Afande told me they were not allowing us in was that this was not a convenient time for Kenya," Ms. Cuomo said in a telephone interview from New York.
She said she was told by two well-placed sources that visas were not granted in retaliation for critical comments Rep. Joseph P. Kennedy II, a Massachussets Democrat, made about Kenya before a congressional committee on Africa in June.
Afande referred all comment on the matter to Kenya's foreign ministry in Nairobi where spokesman James Simani said granting visas was the government's perogative.
Ms. Cuomo said her organization sought to visit Kenya out of its concern Moi's government would not hold free and fair elections in balloting expected to be called before early next year.
The United States, along with other major Western donors, withheld millions of dollars of aid to Kenya in November pending steps to curb widespread corruption and address human rights issues.
 
 BRAZZAVILLE, Congo (AP) - President Denis Sassou-Nguesso lost in the first round of presidential voting, but he may be spared the fate of other discredited dictators.
Sassou-Nguesso has endorsed the front-runner in Sunday's presidential election, former geneticist Pascal Lissouba.
If elected, Lissouba, was expected to grant Sassou-Nguesso and his cronies immunity from prosecution on grounds it would prevent bloodshed in the Central African nation.
Sassou-Nguesso was disgraced during Congo's 1991 national conference by testimony from witnesses accusing him of corruption and involvement in assassinations of political opponents. But he retains strong support in some army units.
Lissouba, who served briefly as prime minister in 1963, received almost 36 percent of the vote in last Sunday's first round. He faces Bernard Kolelas, second with 20 percent.
Sassou-Nguesso, third with almost 17 percent, said he accepted the voters' verdict. He became the sixth African president unable to win re-election since pressure for democracy began building on the continent in 1989, forcing more than 20 one-party rulers to permit opposition parties.
Lissouba was the first Congolese to receive a doctorate in science, and had a reputation of being a hardline Marxist in the early 1960s. He soon broke with Marxists, however, quitting the government and going to work for U.N. agencies.
He heads the Pan-African Union for Social Democracy, which also won the biggest block of votes in July's parliamentary elections.
 
 BERLIN (AP) - Former East German Premier Willi Stoph has been released from pre-trial confinement for health reasons, the Berlin Justice Ministry said Friday.
Stoph, 78, has been jailed in Berlin since May 1991 as a member of former East Germany's National Defense Council, which allegedly issued shoot-to-kill orders to keep East Germans from fleeing to the West.
Justice spokeswoman Uta Foelster said Stoph had been granted immunity against investigative custody "for health reasons," and that he would be released immediately from Berlin's Moabit prison.
The release order requires Stoph to surrender his passport and report to police once a week, the spokeswoman said.
Stoph served as premier of former East Germany from 1964 until until the death of then-Communist leader Walter Ulbricht in August 1973.
After a three-year pause, Stoph was renamed premier by former East German leader Erich Honecker in 1976 and held the post until Honecker's hardline government was ousted in late 1989.
 
 BASTIA, Corsica (AP) - Rightist European Parliament deputy Yvon Briant was killed in an air crash along with his wife, child and the pilot as they headed for a meeting on Europe's union treaty, officials said.
The Cessna 172, rocked by high winds at takeoff from the airport in Calvi on this French Mediterranean island, crashed Thursday evening into a hillside six miles away and burned, rescue officials said.
Briant and his family were heading to Ajaccio, in the island's south, for a meeting promoting a "yes" vote on the union treaty in France's Sept. 20 referendum.
Briant, 38, was president of the National Center of Independents, a right-wing party, and a deputy in the European Parliament since 1989 on the side of former President Valery Giscard d'Estaing.
Briant's wife Nathalie, 30, who directed a private radio station, and his eight-year-old son Hughes also were killed along with the pilot, David Valier, 23, rescue officials said.

 

End of Document
