

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
May 19, 1993, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 723 words
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Russia's ruble keeps shrinking in value and growing in size. The Central Bank said it will issue its largest bill yet, worth 50,000 rubles, on Thursday.
The bank in the last year has come out with 10,000-ruble, 5,000-ruble and 1,000-ruble notes, trying to keep up with 2,500 percent inflation earlier this year that forced some people to carry bagloads of cash to buy everyday goods.
At the latest exchange rate of 934 rubles per U.S. dollar, the new bill would be worth a little more than $ 53.
Inflation has been attributed in part to the bank's practice of printing money to compensate for the budget deficit, although officials have said they were replacing smaller bills with larger ones.
---
WARSAW, Poland (AP) - A Warsaw court has ruled that a foreign company must apologize and pay a fine to a Polish soap maker for unfair rivalry in a television advertisement.
Advertising, virtually unknown until the Communists were toppled in 1989, has taken on a fearsome pitch in Poland as foreign products flood the market and domestic ones struggle to keep up.
In its ruling Tuesday, a Warsaw court for economic matters said Lever-Polska, the Polish venture of the British-Dutch household products giant Unilever, must apologize to the Polish company Inco Veritas twice on television and make a donation of $ 6,100 to the Red Cross, according to newspaper reports.
In its suit, Inco Veritas contended that Lever-Polska had unfaily maligned its "Ludwik" dishwashing liquid in the ads.
In the ads, a woman chats with her mother while washing dishes and tells her she has a new friend. "But what about Ludwik?" the mother asks. The daughter responds she's being taken care of by a new dishwashing liquid.
Lever-Polska contended it was new to the market and hadn't considered that "Ludwik" was the name of its rival when putting together the ads.
---
MOSCOW (AP) - President Boris Yeltsin's investigation of May Day violence has found that protesters had brought truckloads of rocks to a rally site before clashes that left one officer dead, his office said Wednesday.
The investigation was just one of three into the May 1 violence that had shocked many Russians and has fueled a power struggle between President Boris Yeltsin and his parliamentary critics.
Other investigations by the parliament and Russia's general prosecutor have not yet been disclosed.
Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin blamed the violence on "extremist political groups" and said the government should take measures "to protect society and citizens from political provocations," according to Yeltsin's office.
---
KIGALI, Rwanda (AP) - A leading politician was shot dead by two gunmen in Rwanda's capital, state radio reported Wednesday.
Meanwhile, the International Committee of the Red Cross urged the government and warring rebels to come to an agreement that might allow hundreds of thousands of displaced to return to their homes in the north of the country.
Government radio said Emmanuel Gapyisi, 41, leader of the Forum for Peace and Democracy and a senior member of the Democratic Republican Movement party, was shot as his car stopped outside his suburban home Tuesday night.
Gapyisi's wife, who was also in the car, was not injured, but his driver was slightly wounded, the radio said.
Stanislas Mbonampeka, a former justice minister and vice president of the Liberal Party, said Wednesday the killing was politically motivated.
---
BERLIN (AP) - Two former East German secret police, including a vice minister of state security, have been arrested for alleged plans to murder a border guard who fled the communist state, a justice official said Wednesday.
Gerhard Neiber, 64, a former vice minister for state security, or Stasi as the ministry was known, and a co-worker identified only as Siegfried W., were arrested on Tuesday, Berlin justice spokeswoman Uta Foelster said.
Both men are being held in Berlin's Moabit prison in connection with a plot to murder a former East German border guard who fled to West Germany in 1975, Foelster said.
Plans to murder the former border guard, identified only as Werner W., were never carried out, although investigation indicates that Neiber and other Stasi officials intended to do so, Foelster said.
The spokeswoman declined to say when charges may be filed or provide any other immediate details on the case pending further investigation.

 

End of Document
