

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
April 7, 1993, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 565 words
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Angola's government and the UNITA rebels, under intense international pressure, have agreed to resume peace talks.
The talks will begin Monday in Abidjan, Ivory Coast, U.N. spokesman Joe Sills said Tuesday.
Margaret Anstee, the special U.N. envoy for Angola, urged the antagonists to call a cease-fire before the meeting. She also made an urgent appeal for increased aid for thousands of refugees fleeing fighting between government and rebel troops in southern Angola.
Some 350,000 people died before peace accords were signed between UNITA and the government in May 1991, paving the way for the country's first multiparty elections in September 1992.
UNITA - the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola - lost the parliamentary vote to Jose Eduardo dos Santos' Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola, and dos Santos led in the presidential vote.
Fighting broke out again after UNITA leader Jonas Savimbi rejected the voting as rigged. U.N. observers said the voting was generally free and fair.
---
GENEVA (AP) - Injury rather than illness is now the main cause of death for young people in industrialized countries, and the World Health Organization says alcohol is a major contributor.
The U.N. health agency's report was published in advance of World Health Day today.
The most recent figures are from 1990, although some countries have not provided data since 1987. War-related deaths are not included. The report details deaths from homicides, suicides, accidental poisonings, falls and drownings.
The report says injuries in industrialized countries "are the main cause of death among males up to age 44 and females up to 34."
The WHO report said that in the United States, injuries were responsible for 63 percent of the deaths of those aged 15-24 and 40 percent of the deaths of those 25-44.
WHO cited a study in New York City that showed about 30 percent of suicides, 40 percent of homicides and 70 percent of deaths by drowning were linked to alcohol.
---
JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) - Nelson Mandela has acknowledged that ANC members, not just the government and his Inkatha rivals, share responsibility for the political violence that has killed thousands in recent years.
Mandela's African National Congress has repeatedly accused government security forces and the Inkatha Freedom Party of instigating the fighting.
But Mandela conceded during a speech at a political rally Tuesday that the ANC is not blameless.
"I'm not going to blame the IFP and the government only. We must face the truth - our people are just as involved in violence," he said.
Mandela's statement appeared aimed at restraining his more radical supporters.
---
UNITED NATIONS (AP) - The Security Council has begun the process of admitting Macedonia to U.N. membership.
The council's 15 members unanimously decided to refer the question to its membership subcommittee on Tuesday. The Security Council's committee on new members was to take up the issue this morning.
Greece had objected to the former Yugoslav republic using the name of a northern Greek province, contending that it implies an independent Macedonia might have future designs on that portion of Greece.
Under a compromise, Greece and the new nation agreed that it would be admitted to the United Nations under the name "the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia," with an arbitration committee empowered to resolve the question of the name.

 

End of Document
