

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
January 30, 1993, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 602 words
Dateline: OTTAWA
Body




Canada has placed provisional tariffs on U.S. steel to counter similar duties imposed by Washington this week.
Trade Minister Michael Wilson said Friday that Canada was simply reacting to complaints from Canadian steel companies about dumping, which is the sale of an imported product at lower prices than it is sold for at home.
But he acknowledged the "tit-for-tat" nature of the move, saying that such economic duels helped neither Canada nor the United States.
"It's a very integrated market, and when we take these tit-for-tat actions against each other, no one benefits," he said.
On Wednesday, the U.S. Commerce Department tentatively decided 19 nations have been dumping steel in the United States. It imposed temporary duties on steel, ranging from less than 1 percent to 109 percent, while holding hearings to determine whether to make the tariffs permanent.
---
TUNIS, Tunisia (AP) - Yael Dayan, a leftist member of the Israeli Parliament and daughter of a war hero, called on her government and the PLO to compromise.
Ms. Dayan, who met with Palestine Liberation Organization chairman Yasser Arafat Friday night, was the first Israeli official to do so publicly since the Jewish state earlier this month lifted its ban on meetings with the group.
A 1986 amendment to Israel's anti-terrorism law had banned contacts with the PLO on grounds it was a terrorist group.
The first Israeli to come to Tunis, where the PLO is headquartered, after the ban was lifted Jan. 19 was peace activist Abie Nathan.
Ms. Dayan, daughter of the late Gen. Moshe Dayan, told reporters after her meeting with Arafat that she told him both Israelis and Palestinians should "drop individual ambitions and work for peace."
---
MOSCOW (AP) - Ukraine is about to auction off weapons and military hardware ranging from gunships to submarines to surface-to-air missiles. Where it's all coming from isn't clear.
The auction will be held in the city of Kharkov, Ukraine, on Tuesday, and $ 2 billion worth of goods will be on display, the daily newspaper Commersant reports.
The inventory includes hundreds of tanks, dozens of missiles, artillery systems, fighter planes and even two Kilo class diesel-propelled submarines and a 40-ton military cargo plane.
Evgeny Blinov, the director of the Universal Ukrainian-Siberian Exchange, told the newspaper's Friday edition that the merchandise is being supplied by a Russian company on condition that none of it be sold to former Soviet republics. He refused to divulge the name of the company.
Gennady Shikunov, the deputy head of arms sales at the Russian Foreign Economic Relations Ministry, disputed the claim. He said he suspected the weapons to be sold came from army stocks inherited by Ukraine after the Soviet Union disintegrated last year.
 
 ST. JOHN'S, Newfoundland (AP) - Scientists are making little progress in determining why Newfoundland's cod stocks have so drastically declined.
About 60 international scientists ended two days of meetings Friday agreeing only that illegal fishing wasn't to blame, nor did the cod go elsewhere.
They favored three theories:
- Environmental changes such as cold water and a lack of food may have caused illness and death.
- Seals' appetite for cod may have increased.
- The stock may have been in gradual decline for some time, but the trend just wasn't detected.
The depletion of cod stocks led the government to put a two-year moratorium on cod fishing last summer. The ban was a devastating blow to the already poor province; some 19,000 of its 600,000 people are cod fishermen.
Fisheries Ministry spokesman Bill Doubleday said scientists will continue research.

 

End of Document
