

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
April 21, 1993, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 755 words
Dateline: BONN, Germany
Body




Germany's lower house of Parliament approved Chancellor Helmut Kohl's plans Wednesday to send troops to Somalia, clearing the way for a historically significant military mission.
The Bundestag, Parliament's lower house, approved dispatching the troops after a stormy five-hour debate over undoing post-war shackles on the German military. The vote was split along party lines, with 341 deputies favoring the Somalia deployment, 206 opposing and eight abstaining.
The opposition Social Democrats, who want to help Somalia but not by sending armed troops, voted against the resolution. They also said they would ask the Constitutional Court to block dispatching the troops.
Kohl sought a Bundestag vote on deployment to avoid giving the impression he was trying to skirt Parliament. A vote by Parliament's upper house is not needed for defense matters.
On Tuesday, Kohl decided to send 1,640 troops to Somalia to assist with U.N. efforts to rebuild the troubled African country. It is the first overseas deployment of German ground troops since World War II.
Kohl's political rivals contended he was militarizing Germany's foreign policy. But Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel said united Germany has new global responsibilities.
 
 ---
ROME (AP) - Prosecutors suspect that aides of the defense minister sought the Mafia's help in elections as exploding allegations of mob-political collusion reached the government, news reports said Wednesday.
The minister, Salvo Ando, a Socialist, called the allegation "a dirty trick."
The ANSA news agency said Ando has acknowledged that a reputed Mafia informant had made accusations against him. Ando said the claims were in retaliation for his sending of troops to Sicily last year as part of a major crackdown against the Mafia.
Italy's best-known political figure, Giulio Andreotti, also was on the defensive Wednesday. The seven-time former premier appeared a third time before a Senate committee considering whether to recommend that the full body lift his parliamentary immunity from prosecution.
In a 15-page defense read to the committee, Andreotti, a Christian Democrat senator-for-life, denied an informer's claim that Mafia "boss of bosses" Salvatore Riina once bestowed a kiss of respect on Andreotti.
Ando is the first member of Premier Giuliano Amato's government to be touched by allegations of collusion with the mob, but similar claims have hit other leading figures. The most prominent is Andreotti.
As a member of Parliament, Ando also enjoys immunity from prosecution unless the legislature agrees to lift it.
The allegations have come out during a scandal involving corruption and mob ties in which some 2,600 people have been arrested or placed under investigation.
 
 ---
ABIDJAN, Ivory Coast (AP) - Angolan peace talks lost their diplomatic edge Wednesday when a government delegate accused UNITA of deceit and suggested U.N. sanctions against the rebels if there is no breakthrough.
"We would like to speak to people who honor their word. We are tired of this conniving," Gen. Higino Carneiro told reporters on the ninth day of U.N.-mediated talks.
Negotiations to end the 18-year conflict that has taken 400,000 lives have deadlocked over the mechanics of a cease-fire.
The government of President Jose Eduardo dos Santos wants a formal cease-fire, as does the United Nations and observers from the United States, Russia and Portugal. The rebel National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, or UNITA, wants a temporary suspension of hostilities while negotiations continue.
Delegates are under pressure of an April 30 deadline for the U.N. mandate in Angola. U.N. Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali threatens to withdraw U.N. peacekeepers in the southern African nation unless a cease-fire is agreed to so food can be delivered to an estimated 3 million starving people.
 
 ---
BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) - At least 19 people were killed, among them soldiers, guerrillas and alleged members of the Medellin cocaine cartel, in 24 hours of violence, police and army reports said Wednesday.
Heavy combat Tuesday between the army and guerrillas near the city of Cucuta on the eastern border with Venezuela left four soldiers and eight rebels dead, an army report said.
Two rebels were killed and one soldier was wounded in a separate battle the same day in Uraba, a banana growing zone in northeast Colombia, said the Defense Ministry.
Meanwhile, Medellin police blamed the paramilitary group called the Pepes, or "People Persecuted by Pablo Escobar" for kidnapping and murdering five men Tuesday.

 

End of Document
