

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
June 23, 1993, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 632 words
Dateline: VATICAN CITY
Body




Pope John Paul II's spokesman on Wednesday blamed the sexual abuse of minors by priests on society's heavy emphasis on sex.
The pope has appointed a panel of Vatican and U.S. Catholic church officials to study whether it should be easier to dismiss such clergy from the priesthood. Earlier this month, he sent U.S. bishops a letter saying he is aware how much suffering the sex scandals are causing Catholics.
"One has to ask, in this affair, if the principal suspect isn't an irresponsibly permissive society, the overinflated buildup of sexuality, capable of leading to serious immoral acts even persons who have received for years a solid moral formation that has educated them in the cult of virtue," spokesman Joaquin Navarro said.
Navarro said there are some 400 recognized cases of sex abuse by U.S. priests, or about 1.2 percent of the population of priests in the country. He said it was unacceptable if "moral evil is allowed to be used as an occasion for sensationalism."
The pope is scheduled to travel in August to an international youth gathering in Denver.
---
TYRE, Lebanon (AP) - Two Israeli helicopters fired warning shots at a Lebanese navy gunboat Wednesday when it strayed into waters off Israel's declared security zone while chasing fishermen illegally using dynamite to catch fish.
Security sources, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the gunboat was not hit. It was the first time Israeli helicopters had fired on a Lebanese naval vessel.
The sources said the Lebanese fishermen were fishing with dynamite, a common practice in Lebanon, off the coast of Rashidiyeh 5 miles north of the security zone when the gunboat spotted them.
They immediately fled south in their three fishing boats.
After two Israeli gunboats off the security zone tried unsuccessfully to stop the Lebanese vessel from heading further south, the helicopters opened fire, forcing it to go back to Rashidiyeh, according to the sources.
They said the fishermen were later arrested.
---
KIGALI, Rwanda (AP) - President Juvenal Habyarimana's government said Wednesday it will not sign a peace agreement this week to end a 33-month insurgency in the tiny Central African nation.
The signing was scheduled for Thursday in the northern Tanzania town of Arusha where government and the Rwandese Patriotic Front negotiators have been meeting intermittently since June 1992.
Hundreds of people have been killed and an estimated 1 million forced to flee their homes by the fighting in northern Rwanda during the civil war, which broke out in 1990.
Last week, Habyarimana told foreign diplomats in Rwanda he was prepared to sign the agreement on schedule.
But the Cabinet rejected two proposals agreed to by its negotiators in Arusha: the withdrawal of troops from the capital, Kigali, and the choice of the district headquarters of Byumba near Uganda's border as the seat of a transitional government.
Some political parties in Habyarimana's coalition government have accused the insurgents of wanting the government near Uganda to enable them grab power by force.
---
MANAMA, Bahrain (AP) - The central Gulf island state of Bahrain has joined a growing number of desert countries opting for all-grass golf courses.
Crown Prince Sheik Hamad bin Khalifa heads a committee that is supervising the plans for Bahrain's 18-hole course, to be completed by 1996, officials said Wednesday.
The bustling southern Gulf port of Dubai has developed two 18-hole courses and hosts international professional tournaments. Abu Dhabi will finish one by the end of 1994, and Qatar by the end of this year.
A desalination plant will be the most expensive part of the project, which will include a clubhouse and a hotel.
Golf is the favorite pastime of only a small number of Arabs, but the courses are attractions for tourists and businessmen.

 

End of Document
