

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
January 16, 1993, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 572 words
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




About 500 state enterprises will be privatized next month as Russia continues its slow transformation into a private, market-driven economy.
Russians are having trouble grasping the concept of privatization, Deputy Prime Minister Vladimir Shumeiko told a Friday news conference, at which the privatizations were announced.
"For the people in the street it is a hard deal because they cannot get accustomed to it quickly enough," said Shumeiko, who joined the Cabinet under now-ousted acting Prime Minister Yegor Gaidar.
The Russian government began distributing vouchers worth 10,000 rubles - more than a month's average wages - to every citizen last October. Russians will be able to use them to buy shares in companies being privatized.
But many ordinary Russians are skeptical that strong, profitable companies will be sold to the public. Many have been selling their vouchers to speculators for less than face value.
---
PARIS (AP) - Three days of signing ceremonies have ended with 125 countries agreeing to a treaty banning chemical weapons. But the absence of most Arab states and North Korea left big holes in the pact.
The Convention on the Prohibition of Chemical Arms commits the United States and Russia to destroying their chemical arsenals and will prevent most of the world from acquiring them.
America and Russia were among the first to sign. But the world's only other declared chemical weapons power, Iraq, stayed away from the ceremonies.
About 20 nations are thought to have chemical weapons.
Ambassador K.M. Shehabuddin of Bangladesh, the last speaker at the signing ceremonies, declared Friday, "This is a major achievement of humanity.
The treaty bans the production, use, transfer and stockpiling of chemical weapons - the first pact eliminating an entire class of weapons of mass destruction.
---
MOSCOW (AP) - Ukraine President Leonid Kravchuk says he will join the nuclear non-proliferation treaty and reiterated a promise to sign the START I strategic arms reduction pact.
During a Friday meeting in Moscow, Kravchuk and Russian President Boris Yeltsin pledged to "continue efforts to reduce and eliminate nuclear weapons" after Yeltsin promised security guarantees to Ukraine.
The men also agreed on oil exports to Ukraine and said they had moved closer to agreement on rescheduling shares of the Soviet foreign debt.
The leaders have met several times since the Soviet Union collapsed a year ago. Yeltsin said he hoped Friday's meeting would "help make 1993 the year of stabilization, primarily economic, both in Russia and Ukraine."
Ukraine's insistence on compensation or security guarantees for giving up its nuclear missiles has raised fears that tension between the former Soviet republics would undo arms control efforts.
---
JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) - A secret Afrikaner group believed to hold considerable influence in the government and society should disband because it opposes democracy, the African National Congress says Friday.
The ANC, the nation's leading black group, was responding to a report Friday in The Star newspaper about the Afrikaner Broederbond, or brotherhood.
According to The Star, a Broederbond meeting last week focused on how to maintain Afrikaner influence when white minority rule ends in South Africa. It also said the group intended to preserve its all-male, Afrikaner membership.
No specific plans for achieving its goal were outlined at the Broederbond meeting, The Star reported.

 

End of Document
