

International News Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
October 20, 1992, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 704 words
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




The United States has pledged $ 3 million to help to save scores of antiquities damaged in last week's earthquake. The University of Michigan will contribute technical support to the effort.
Pharaonic monuments, Egypt's earliest synagogue, five ancient churches, the Coptic Museum and more than 100 mosques and other Islamic monuments were damaged in the Oct. 12 quake, which killed 550 people.
Ibrahim Bakr, Egypt's chairman of antiquities, estimated Sunday the initial cost of repairs will be $ 66 million. He said the meticulous work required to preserve the damaged monuments could take 20 years.
The Agency for International Development, foreign aid arm of the United States, said $ 3 million would be given to the Culture Ministry, which includes the Egyptian Antiquities Organization, for work on the quake-damaged monuments.
Mark Easton, director of the American Research Center in Egypt, said he has contacted 42 U.S. museums and universities affiliated with the non-governmental center on Egypt's behalf.
The University of Michigan's Engineering School was the first to respond, he said. Experts familiar with earthquake damage will bring specialized equipment to assess structural damage to various monuments.
Bakr said such technology is unavailable in Egypt and is desperately needed.
---
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) - Cuba has halted gas rations to private vehicles for the month of December, acknowledging it does not have enough foreign currency to buy more fuel.
The announcement from Cuba's Industry Ministry was carried Monday by the official Cuban news agency Prensa Latina.
Cuba has been plagued by shortages since the collapse of the Soviet Union, which had supplied half its oil needs. The last scheduled sugar-for-oil contract with Moscow expired July 1, and daily power outages have been reported since. Most Cubans now travel on buses or bicycles.
Cuba needs fuel to process its critical sugar crop from November to May, reported Prensa Latina. The dispatch said fuel would be used in transporting food for health services.
 
 MEXICO CITY (AP) - Nobel Peace Prize winner Rigoberta Menchu says she is pleased by the Guatemalan government's apparent change of heart about the award.
The 33-year-old Indian rights activist had a hastily arranged meeting with Guatemalan President Jorge Serrano on Monday, in which he said the Nobel "symbolizes the racial mix of our nation."
Guatemalan government officials had said before the prize was awarded last week that she did not deserve the Nobel.
After meeting with Serrano, Menchu flew to Mexico, where she has lived in exile for 11 years.
"I'm glad that recent declarations are in support of dialogue, to support my playing a role in the peace process," Menchu told reporters after meeting with Mexico's President Carlos Salinas de Gortari.
Menchu did not specify what her role in the peace process would be.
Peace talks on ending the 32-year-old civil war have stalled. Most of the 120,000 people killed in the war were Indians.
---
VILNIUS, Lithuania (AP) - A leak of radioactive steam at Lithuania's only nuclear power plant last week was caused by a 0.4-inch leak in a pipe, officials say.
Chief engineer Gennady Negrivoda was quoted by the Baltfax news agency Monday as saying the breakdown was fairly serious.
"The reactor uses 3,200 pipes of this kind, and we have never come across accidents like this before," he was quoted as saying.
The incident at the Ignalina nuclear plant Thursday forced the shutdown of the plant's No. 2 reactor. Officials said the radiation leaked only in the reactor building and not into the atmosphere.
The reactor was to be restarted today, employees told Baltfax. The plant's other reactor has been shut down since a leak this summer.
Ignalina, which provides 60 percent of Lithuania's electricity, uses RBMK reactors like those in the Chernobyl plant, site of the world's worst nuclear disaster.
In 1989, an International Atomic Energy Agency mission reported that Ignalina was operated at internationally acceptable standards and had one of the world's lowest rates of unplanned automatic shutdowns.
But many environmental groups and nuclear experts say the RBMK plants cannot meet international safety standards and should be closed immediately.

 

End of Document
