

International Briefs by The Associated Press
The Associated Press
August 11, 1992, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 672 words
Dateline: DUBLIN, Ireland
Body




Foreign Minister David Andrews on Tuesday promised to lobby for more U.N. and European Community aid to Somalia, "a land that God has forgotten."
Andrews, on a three-day visit to the Horn of Africa nation, said it was "very traumatic to see people dying before your eyes and more particularly young children."
"It is something that the world community will have to address and address with some immediacy," he said in an interview from the capital, Mogadishu, with Irish state-run RTE radio.
"Whilst the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina is an obscenity, what's happening out here - if you can have degrees of obscenity - must be a worse obscenity."
Andrews, whose fact-finding mission was organized by Irish aid organizations, said he will report to the British government, current holder of the rotating EC presidency, and to the U.N. Secretary-General.
 
 MOSCOW (AP) - Russia expressed its "deep concern" Tuesday over the Armenian-Azerbaijani fighting and urged the warring sides to cease bloodshed before the situation gets out of hand.
But clashes continued Tuesday along the Armenian-Azerbaijani border, with at least three people reported killed and dozens wounded.
The recent round of fighting began last week with both sides launching offensives and counter-offensives in the disputed enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh, a predominantly Armenian area controlled by Azerbaijan since 1923.
It later spread to the area of Artsvashen, an enclave Armenian village northeast of Nagorno-Karabakh. Armenians have succeeded in establishing a land corridor linking Armenia with Artsvashen but the village was recaptured by the Azerbaijanis on Saturday.
Armenia, which considers Artsvashen and its surroundings to be its own territory, called the Azerbaijani attack aggression and appealed to other members of the Commonwealth of Independent States for help.
A Russian Foreign Ministry spokesman, Alexander Rozanov, said Russia was deeply concerned over the escalation of fighting.
"The confrontation has reached an extremely dangerous line, and if the sides cross it, they risk losing control over the situation," he said in a statement.
 
 JERUSALEM (AP) - Masked Palestinians in the occupied Gaza Strip shot to death a fellow Arab Tuesday who was suspected of collaboration with the Israeli authorities.
Abdel Wahab Ghattas, 49, of Deir El-Balah was shot in his car while driving to work in the morning, the army reported. Another man riding with him was shot in the legs, Arab sources said.
An enforcement squad affiliated with the PLO's mainstream Fatah wing claimed responsibility for the killing, Arab reports said.
Ghattas used his connections with Israeli authorities to run a business in which he helped Palestinians obtain permits to visit Jordan and Egypt, the reports said.
Ghattas' death brings to 613 the number of Palestinians killed by fellow Arabs during the 4 -year uprising against Israeli rule in the occupied territories. Most of the victims have been accused of collaboration with Israel.
Another 946 Palestinians have been killed by Israeli soldiers or civilians since the uprising began and 98 Israelis have died in the violence.
 
 ANNECY, France (AP) - Searchers found the body of a German mountaineer Tuesday as officials, prompted by a surge in deaths, warned climbers in the French Alps to take extra care this year.
Helicopters flying over the Alps near Chamonix found the body of Adelheid Hillmaier, 25, of Garmish-Parten-Kirchen, Germany, two days after she was swept away by a storm-triggered avalanche.
Hers was the latest in a series of deaths blamed on unstable weather this summer, aggravated by inexperienced climbers. At least 19 alpinists died in July, compared to six in the same month last year.
Upper Savoy Prefect Jean-Paul Frouin issued a communique warning climbers to contact professional guides and police before attempting an assault of the region's peaks.
They were advised be aware of the latest weather reports in the region, not to climb alone, to wear a helmet and to leave a planned route of their climb with authorities.

 

End of Document
