

International News Briefs by The Associated Press
The Associated Press
October 21, 1992, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 518 words
Dateline: PRETORIA, South Africa
Body




The police commissioner, under pressure to shed the force's racist image, announced Wednesday the first promotion of a black to the rank of major general.
An Indian and a mixed-race officer also will become the first members of their races to hold the rank, Gen. Johan van der Merwe said.
The promotions, which take effect Dec. 1, follow a pledge by the government in August to move non-whites into the upper echelons of the security forces and restore trust in the police.
More than half the 114,000-strong police force is black, but the highest position non-whites had attained previously was that of brigadier general, a rank below major general.
The promotions of 13 whites to the post also were announced.
Non-white officers were denied promotions in the past on racial grounds and at one time were given brown uniforms, instead of the blue outfits worn by white colleagues.
 
 POTSDAM, Germany (AP) - In a crackdown on neo-Nazis, police raided scores of apartments and arrested seven people in eastern Germany, authorities said Wednesday.
In a related development, police arrested Thomas Dienel, leader of the ultra-rightist German National Party who is under investigation for suspected desecration of a synagogue and other crimes.
In raids late Tuesday, police raided apartments in the state of Brandenburg and seized firearms, munition, other military equipment and neo-Nazi propaganda, the state Interior Ministry said.
Dienel was returned to investigative custody, following an earlier release, to prevent possible escape. He is under investigation for suspected desecration of the Erfurt synagogue, an attack on a Anne Frank exhibition and for belonging to group that attacked shelters for asylum-seekers, authorities said.
Since late August, neo-Nazis and other rightist extremists have been attacking refugee shelters almost daily, particularly in the economically depressed eastern Germany.
 
 JERUSALEM (AP) - The Israeli army began distributing new gas masks to every resident of Israel on Wednesday - but masks for Arabs in the occupied territories will be kept in storage, army officials said.
The 5.5 million new masks, to be distributed over a year, will replace gas masks distributed to Israelis prior to 1991's Gulf War. Saddam Hussein had threatened to use chemical warheads against Israel.
Iraq launched 39 Scud missiles at Israel, none of them with chemical warheads. But Israel's failure at the time to equip Palestinians living in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip led to international criticism.
After international criticism, Israeli authorities distributed masks to Palestinians living in some areas bordering Israel toward the end of the war.
Home Front commander Maj. Gen. Zeev Livneh would not explain the decision to keep the masks for the territories in storage other than to say it was taken on the "political" level.
After the Gulf War, a state comptroller's report found that many of the masks that had been distributed were outdated and ill equipped to counter chemical attacks. The army promised to address the problem, and the replacement project launched Wednesday is the result.

 

End of Document
