

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
July 2, 1993, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 943 words
Dateline: MEXICO CITY
Body




High-level negotiations to conclude the North American Free Trade Agreement are to resume in Mexico City next week, despite a U.S. judge's order threatening the treaty.
Commerce Secretary Jaime Serra Puche announced the fifth round of talks will take place from Thursday to Saturday and said negotiators were seeking to resolve the last obstacles to side agreements on jobs and the environment.
The Clinton administration has demanded side accords to protect American jobs and the environment as a requisite to approving NAFTA.
The announcement served notice that the three governments were mounting a bid to put the politically buffeted treaty back on track and secure the world's largest trade zone by Jan. 1 as scheduled.
A U.S. district court ruled on Wednesday that the law requires a detailed environmental review of the agreement's impact before Congress can approve it. Such a review could take months or even years.
 
 ----
JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) - Winnie Mandela on Friday paid an oustanding fine imposed by an appeals court for her kidnapping conviction, a court official said.
An arrest warrant for Mrs. Mandela, the estranged wife of African National Congress leader Nelson Mandela, was issued this week because she had failed to pay the $ 4,500 fine imposed June 2.
Mrs. Mandela was convicted in 1991 of kidnapping and being an accessory to assault in the beating of four young black men at her Soweto home in December 1988.
She was sentenced to six years in jail, and the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court upheld the kidnapping conviction last month but reversed the assault conviction.
Instead of a five-year prison term, Mrs. Mandela was given the option of paying the fine or spending one year in jail. She was also ordered to pay $ 1,500 to each of the surviving victims. The fourth was found dead in 1989.
 
 ----
LAGOS, Nigeria (AP) - Security agents detained a leading human rights leader Friday after he called for mass protests and strikes to force Nigeria's dictator to release results of annulled presidential elections.
Dr. Beko Ransome-Kuti, leader of the Campaign for Democracy, was taken away by agents who ransacked his house and took away news releases and files, his secretary, Segun Jegede, said.
Ransome-Kuti's organization, a coalition of 42 human rights and grassroots groups, also urged the man believed to have won the election, Moshood K.O. Abiola, to install an alternative government.
Scattered protests have been confined to Abiola's southwestern tribal homeland since Nigeria's ruler, Gen. Ibrahim Babangida, voided the results of June 12 balloting that was to end a decade of military rule.
 
 ---
UNITED NATIONS (AP) - Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali says the United Nations, mired in red ink for peacekeeping, is running out of money and won't be able to pay its bills.
"It is highly probable that in the coming months the organization will not be able to meet its day-to-day obligations," he said in a report Thursday to the Security Council.
Boutros-Ghali said the peacekeeping arrears totaled $ 1.2 billion in mid-June and that the regular operational budget, which does not include peacekeeping costs, is running a $ 2.2 billion deficit.
The United Nations frequently warns of financial problems but has been bailed out in the past by members who pay some of their overdue bills or others who pay the following year's dues in advance. Dramatically mounting peacekeeping costs, however, make the situation more difficult.
 
 ----
FRANKFURT, Germany (AP) - U.S. military radio in Europe started on July 4, 1943, when Cpl. Syl Binkin spoke into a microphone at 80 Portland Place in London: "This is the Armed Forces Network."
AFN is celebrating its 50th birthday this Independence Day weekend, still broadcasting to a dwindling number of U.S. troops in Europe and many steady European fans of its rock music and American lingo.
The station, since rechristened American Forces Network, held a birthday bash Friday at a concert hall in Frankfurt.
AFN even has admirers among political opponents of the U.S. troop presence in Europe.
When U.S. withdrawals began in 1990, Joshka Fischer, a leading member of the anti-NATO Greens party, commented, "They can pull out all of the Americans as long as they leave AFN."
 
 ----
MOSCOW (AP) - Leaders of President Boris Yeltsin's home region threatened on Friday to stop paying their share of the federal budget unless they win recognition for their self-proclaimed Ural Republic, news reports said.
The threat came a day after officials in the Sverdlovsk region of the Ural Mountains, attempting to boost the area's status, declared it a "republic" within the Russian Federation.
Sverdlovsk is just one of the numerous regions that want their rights to be equal to those of Russia's national republics.
 
 ----
MEXICO CITY (AP) - Cuban President Fidel Castro has suggested that Cubans might be able to legally own dollars. The move would end a policy that bars them from the island's only well-stocked stores, intended mainly for tourists.
The official news agency Prensa Latina reported on Friday remarks Castro had made earlier in the week to a special session of the island's parliament.
Castro's remarks hint at rising tensions and resentment among Cubans faced with skimpy rations and empty markets. The only well-stocked stores and restaurants are patronized by customers with foreign currency that most Cubans cannot legally own.
Castro did not advocate ending the ban on foreign currency. But he said the legislature could study it as a way to help Cubans cope with an economic crisis that has caused catastrophic shortages of nearly all foods, fuels, fertilizers and spare parts.

 

End of Document
