

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
January 5, 1993, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 648 words
Dateline: NAIROBI, Kenya
Body




Somalia's food emergency is easing thanks to military-led relief efforts, but 19 other African countries face food emergencies this year, the United Nations said today.
The international community must spread the aid net wider if the countries most seriously affected by civil war and drought are to make it through 1993 without widespread loss of life, said Edouard Saouma, director-general of the Food and Agriculture Organization.
War, drought, and displacement from previous conflicts have left people vulnerable in at least eight countries, Saouma said.
Sudan, Liberia, Kenya and Ethiopia face the gravest crises, with some 10 million people needing help in those countries, Saouma, who is based in Rome, said in a statement released in Nairobi.
Several countries have enjoyed good harvests but much will depend on developments in southern Africa, which is still suffering the effects of severe drought last year, the FAO report said.
 
 ---
TORONTO (AP) - Prime Minister Brian Mulroney appointed Canada's first woman defense minister in a Cabinet shakeup that shrank the number of ministers by four to 35.
The four ministers removed Monday had served since Mulroney took office in 1984.
The new defense minister, Kim Campbell, is a former justice minister who has been suggested as a replacement for the unpopular Mulroney as head of the Progressive Conservative Party.
The Vancouver lawyer takes over the Defense Department at a time when Canada's U.N. peacekeeping commitments overseas are growing but military spending is being cut.
Removed from the Cabinet were Defense Minister Marcel Masse, Energy Minister Jake Epp, Secretary of State Robert de Cotret and Veterans Affairs Minister Gerald Merrithew. De Cotret had recommended shrinking the Cabinet by merging some departments and eliminating others.
Mulroney, who must call a national election by November, promised to shake up the Cabinet again before the election.
 
 ---
ROME (AP) - Pope John Paul II urged psychiatrists meeting in Rome to safeguard their patients' spirituality and said some mental illnesses are linked to a crisis in values.
The psychiatrists asked the pope to lend his moral weight to their gathering on Monday to end the stigma of mental illness. Psychiatrists hailed the meeting as an important sign of Vatican support.
John Paul welcomed representatives of the American Psychiatric Association, the World Psychiatric Association and other psychiatric groups at a private audience at the Vatican.
The audience was arranged with the help of Archbishop John P. Foley, a Vatican official who is a high school friend of the president of the American Psychiatric Association, Dr. Joseph T. English.
 
 ---
MEXICO CITY (AP) - President Carlos Salinas de Gortari dumped some prominent officials in a major Cabinet shakeup apparently designed to combat charges of human rights violations and election fraud.
Salinas, who has been pushing reforms of the country's judicial and electoral systems, named a new attorney general, interior minister and energy minister on Monday.
He appointed Jorge Carpizo, the head of the governmental Human Rights Commission, as the new attorney general, replacing Ignacio Morales Lechuga.
The attorney general's office, whose duties include the war on drugs, has consistently led the list of agencies criticized for rights violations.
Salinas also replaced Interior Minister Fernando Gutierrez Barrios with the governor of Chiapas state, Jose Patrocino Gonzalez Blanco Garrido.
Gonzalez Blanco Garrido has been heavily criticized for human rights violations in his southern state, even though the number of political killings and religiously motivated expulsions has dropped significantly under his administration.
Salinas also said Fernando Hiriari, head of the Ministry of Energy, Mines and Parastate Industries, will be replaced by the head of the Mexican Social Security Institute, Emilio Lozoya Thalman.

 

End of Document
