

International News Briefs by The Associated Press
The Associated Press
September 28, 1992, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 576 words
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina on Monday objected to Yugoslavia's flag flying outside U.N. headquarters, saying it does "not represent anything or anybody any more."
The Yugoslav flag flying outside the U.N. building with 178 other nations' banners has provided a mini-metaphor for the dissolution and anarchy gripping the former Yugoslav republics.
The General Assembly voted 127-6 on Sept. 22 to bar Yugoslavia - now comprising only Serbia and Montenegro - from voting or speaking in its chambers or committees, effectively ousting the Serb-dominated state.
Last Wednesday, U.N. Protocol Chief Aly Teymour of Egypt gave orders that the flag not be flown.
But by noon, higher-ups had reversed the orders and the flag of the old Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was run up the flagpole. General Assembly spokesman Alexander Taukatch explained the snafu as a "technical misunderstanding."
On Monday, Croatia and Bosnia objected, saying in a letter to the assembly:
"At this moment, there is no doubt that the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is not a member of the United Nations any more."
 
 SRINAGAR, India (AP) - A fundamentalist guerrilla organization Monday ordered all foreign tourists to leave the Kashmir Valley within three days.
The rebels said they suspected Israeli intelligence agents were in the area working for the Indian government.
The order came from the Hezbol Mujahedeen, the militant wing of the Pakistan-based Jamaat-e-Islami, in a statement in the Urdu language distributed to reporters.
The Hezbol Mujahedeen is the most powerful rebel group fighting for the accession of the predominantly Muslim Jammu-Kashmir state to Pakistan.
The economy of the Kashmir Valley, a picturesque Himalayan region, depends on tourism and the handicrafts sold to visitors.
India accuses Pakistan of training and arming the rebels who have been fighting for secession from India. Islamabad denies the charge.
The rebellion has claimed more than 5,000 people, including at least 1,453 this year.
 
 DAMASCUS, Syria (AP) - Experts from Syria, Iraq and Turkey began three days of talks Monday on how to divide waters of the Euphrates and Tigris rivers, a subject that has caused considerable tension in the region.
The two Arab countries want Turkey to increase the amount of water from dam projects on the rivers.
The Euphrates flows from Turkey through Syria to Iraq, where it merges in the south with the Tigris, which also originates in Turkey.
Syria and Turkey are bound by two agreements in the fields of security and economy, which were signed in Damascus in 1987 by then-Prime Minister Turgut Ozal, now Turkey's president, and former Syrian Premier Abdul Ra'uf al-Kasem.
Those agreements called for Turkey to let 500 cubic meters of Euphrates water per second flow from the giant Ataturk Dam, which was recently completed.
Syria and Iraq have tried to persuade Turkey to increase that amount.
 
 RHODES, Greece (AP) - Firefighters, troops and planes on Monday brought under control a four-day fire that burned more than 10,000 acres of forest and killed one man on this Aegean island.
Firefighting officials said the blaze had burned forest, some agricultural tracts, farms and small outlying buildings. It also destroyed power and telephone lines. A local resident was burned to death Friday.
Rhodes is one of Greece's most popular resort attractions and is visited annually by tens of thousands of people.
Officials said none of the resort areas were burned.

 

End of Document
