

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
May 1, 1993, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 573 words
Dateline: TOKYO
Body




Money-related suicides rose 25 percent last year, and the total number of suicides rose for the first time in six years, police said.
In all, 22,104 people, killed themselves in 1992, up 5 percent from the year before, the National Police said in an annual report released Friday. A total of 2,062 killed themselves in despair over financial problems, the report said.
The number of suicides had declined for five straight years to 21,084 in 1991.
Also notable in 1992 was that suicides among children under 14 more than doubled to 92 from the previous year's 42. The report blamed the increase mainly on bullying at school.
 
 ----
HONG KONG (AP) - The worst snowstorms to hit the Tibetan plateau in 100 years have left about 30,000 farmers suffering from frostbite, snow blindness and other maladies, an independent Hong Kong newspaper said today.
Government officials in Qinghai, a vast grassland province high on the Tibetan plateau in west China, said operations to get food, clothing and fuel to trapped herdsmen were under way, the Ming Pao Daily News reported.
The newspaper did not say when snows started but quoted an official as saying the storms "were violent and lasted a long time."
Parts of Qinghai, bordering Tibet and on the same plateau, are up to 22,300 feet high. The sparsely populated province is home mainly to nomadic herdsmen, many of Tibetan descent.
 
 ----
LUCERNE, Switzerland (AP) - Western governments agreed on new steps to clean up East Europe's environmental mess but said the former Communist countries must shoulder much of the cost themselves.
A 49-nation conference agreed Friday to form a committee to seek funding for new environmental projects in Eastern Europe.
A conference resolution pledged more East-West cooperation, including more investment and technology transfer by the West to improve Eastern Europe's environment. Eastern European governments, meanwhile, were urged to shut down unsafe nuclear power plants and to impose taxes on fossil fuels.
Western countries pledged about $ 50 million for the new committee, including $ 10 million by the United States.
 
 ----
KARACHI, Pakistan (AP) - Gunmen charged into the bedroom of a prominent political leader shortly before dawn today, killing him and wounding his wife, police said.
No one immediately claimed responsibility for the shooting, but police said they suspected political rivals.
The victim, Azim Tariq, 45, led a breakaway faction of the militant Mohajir Qami Movement, which represents Indian Muslims who immigrated to Pakistan after the Indian subcontinent was partitioned in 1947.
He was said to be a moderate among the leaders of the MQM, considered to be Pakistan's most militant political group.
 
 ----
N'DJAMENA, Chad (AP) - Chad's interim government has arrested soldiers accused of massacring civilians and will bring them to trial.
The arrests were considered a bold move. The accused soldiers are from the Republican Guard that reports directly to President Idriss Deby, the military ruler who has ignored demands for investigations into the killings.
Prime Minister Felix Moungar, who announced the arrests Friday, sent a commission of inquiry to southern Chad last week.
At least 200 civilians were killed there, Moungar said. One member of the commission told The Associated Press the number was at least 300, with 100 more missing.
Troops began killing civilians in the south after a rebel group attacked the garrison in Doba town last August.

 

End of Document
