

Israel Rounds Up 400 Islamic Activists But Gestures to the PLO
The Associated Press
April 19, 1994, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 650 words
Byline: By NICOLAS B. TATRO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Secret service agents and soldiers arrested more than 400 Arabs and seized automatic weapons in a predawn sweep Tuesday against an Islamic fundamentalist group that terrified the nation with suicide bomb attacks on commuter buses.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, who ordered the crackdown, hinted there could be further moves if the attacks persisted, and officials said Hamas political leaders could be targeted next.
"We will fight those who continue terror with all the means that are available to us. The only limitation is the limitations of the law," he said on Israel TV.
Rabin balanced his crackdown with gestures to Yasser Arafat's PLO. He confirmed Israel would allow the return of 20,000 to 30,000 Palestinians, most relatives of the PLO police force, once agreement with the PLO was reached.
Israel also allowed the return Tuesday of six fugitives from Arafat's Fatah faction, who crossed from Egypt into the Gaza Strip.
"Their return is a sign that the peace process is continuing despite the obstacles," said Sufian Abu Zayde, a PLO spokesman.
PLO officials said the roundup of Islamic activists, the largest since Israel deported nearly 400 Palestinians to Lebanon in December 1992, was particularly ill-timed because it came while PLO negotiators were seeking the release of prisoners of all factions. About 3,500 Hamas activists are among the 10,500 inmates Palestinians say are held by Israel.
Palestine Liberation Organization officials said the sweep was unlikely to force a suspension in Israel-PLO talks but would undercut support for the peace process.
"These arrests are certainly not going to contribute in any positive way. On the contrary, they feed the skepticism and the convictions people have that this peace process is merely a reorganization of the occupation and won't lead to real peace," said Hanan Ashrawi, a PLO spokeswoman.
She added that the arrests set back PLO efforts to persuade Islamic activists to participate in self-rule elections and the process of reconstruction.
The focus of the raids, carried out in a dozen fundamentalist strongholds in the Gaza Strip and West Bank, were young activists and a few key preachers of Hamas and the smaller Islamic Jihad faction. Hamas sources some key leaders had fled earlier to Egypt.
"The aim was to strike a severe blow at the operational structure of Hamas to disrupt their operations," said Col. Renaan Gissin, an army spokesman, adding Israel was sending a "clear message to Hamas that we will not let go of them and won't tolerate such activities."
Gissin said the weapons seized included aging Karl Gustav rifles and modern Israeli-made Uzi submachine guns and U.S. M-16 automatic rifles.
Armed cells of Hamas called the Izzedine Al-Qassam Brigades carried out recent attacks on commuter buses that have shaken Israelis and led to outcries about the lack of public security. Hamas is blamed for most of the attacks that killed 40 Israelis since the Israel-PLO accord was signed Sept. 13.
"I don't think the arrests will thwart Hamas much, at least not to the extent of paralyzing the movement and its operations," said Sheikh Ahmed Bahar, a preacher who was among the Islamic activists deported to Lebanon.
Hamas leaders arrested overnight included Taysir Tamimi, head of the Islamic court and prayer leader at the West Bank mosque where up to 30 Muslim worshipers were shot by a Jewish settler Feb. 25.
Also detained was Sheikh Bassam Jarrar, a charismatic preacher from the West Bank.
Hamas has said it will carry out five attacks to revenge the mosque massacre in Hebron. It took responsibility for two bombings and an ax attack on buses since April 6. Twelve Israelis died and 77 were wounded in the three attacks.
"Leaders of the Jewish state must know that the brigades of Al-Qassam and the fighters of Hamas will not sleep or halt their activities until the end of the occupation," a Hamas leaflet issued Tuesday declared.
 Load-Date: April 19, 1994

 

End of Document
