

Israel at 43: The Dream Remains Strong but Changes are Profound
The Associated Press
April 15, 1991, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 917 words
Byline: By MARCUS ELIASON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KIBBUTZ NIR ELIAHU, Israel
Body




Every Saturday, the urban middle class converges on Kibbutz Nir Eliahu to milk cows and tour orange groves by donkey cart at $$5 a head.
They represent the new Israel in search of the old - prosperous yuppies with Volvos and video cameras on a Sabbath outing in search of that old-time Zionism.
This kibbutz in the heart of Israel is a telling metaphor for the Jewish state as it puts out the flags for its 43rd birthday, beginning Wednesday evening, and remembers the saga that brought it into existence as a haven for world Jewry.
The quiet, grassy kibbutz is evocative of the early 1950s, when young Jewish pioneers banded together to live out the collective ideal on a hostile border, prone to bombardment and guerrilla attack from the neighboring West Bank.
Israel's capture of the West Bank from Jordan in 1967 pushed that threat away, but a new threat has emerged - the 3 -year-old Palestinian uprising that is raging next door to Nir Eliahu.
On top of that, the economic woes besetting Israeli agriculture have forced the kibbutz to seek new sources of cash, such as the Saturday open house at Nir Eliahu.
The rise of a leisured middle class is just one of the signs that an impossible dream has succeeded.
Immigrants from 70 countries, including the survivors of Hitler's Holocaust, have come together to speak a single language: Hebrew. They eat Israeli food, dance to Israeli pop music, send Israeli basketball teams to Europe.
Yemenites and Moroccans have married Poles and Belgians, and have begun to produce what can be called an Israeli race: swarthy, self-assured and classless, speaking a slang peppered with Yiddish and Arabic, drawing surnames from the Bible that are ethnically neutral, like Evron and Gavish.
War and peace are their perennial preoccupations, but so are more mundane issues like the water shortage and mercy killings and surrogate motherhood.
Inevitably, Israel has not lived up to every expectation, but it has given its people a home and a sense of belonging, which many say they could not find elsewhere.
"I like to turn on the TV and have the announcer wish me Shabbat Shalom (Good Sabbath). I feel good about that," says Felicity Swerdlow, who immigrated to Nir Eliahu 17 years ago from South Africa.
Yet just as Israel seemed on the verge of normalcy, along came a wave of hundreds of thousands of Soviet Jewish immigrants, and a Gulf War that brought Iraqi missiles crashing into the streets of Tel Aviv.
"We Israelis can live only at the level of 'impossible,' 'unthinkable,' and 'totally absurd'," Ido Dissentshik, editor of the Maariv newspaper, wrote recently. "Anything… that approaches the routine, the accepted or the symbolic gives us chest pains."
The intefadeh, or uprising, has claimed the lives of 817 Palestinians killed by Israelis and another 360 killed by fellow Arabs as alleged collaborators with Israel.
The Israeli death toll of 65 pales alongside the 17,150 killed in all of Israel's five wars. But the uprising has produced a deep sense of insecurity, especially after October, when it entered a new phase of knife attacks on Jews.
"Things I could do as a boy can't be done now - go out with a knapsack and tent and sleep wherever you like," says author Ito Aviram.
Aviram, who writes for the youth weekly Maariv Lanoar, says many youngsters are now arming themselves with Mace or knives. "The intefadeh bothers them. They talk of anxieties, of feeling insecure wherever they go."
The army, Israel's most revered institution, has had to devote huge resources to quelling stone-throwing Palestinian kids, seemingly reversing the David-and-Goliath image and criticism both abroad and at home.
Politically, the country is divided between those who see the West Bank as their shield against the Saddam Husseins of the world, and those who say it is morally wrong for Jews to rule over 1.7 million rebellious Palestinians.
Opinion polls say a majority of Israelis would trade at least some territory for peace, but "There is a consensus of three nos: no Palestinian state, no talks with the PLO, no withdrawal to the 1967 borders," says Hanna Levinson of the Guttman Institute of Applied Social Research.
The debate has hardly changed since Israel captured the West Bank and Gaza Strip, and even U.S. Secretary of State James A. Baker III's diplomacy looks unlikely to break the mold until the Israeli public becomes convinced that the Arabs want peace.
Many Israelis see the Gulf War as a watershed. Aviram finds that it opened minds among the young, who previously leaned toward extreme nationalism.
"The war was something of a shock to these people. It's hard for them to digest that they had to sit at home in gas masks and shelters.
"They're open to new approaches, to listen to things like peace, negotiations. You see that suddenly there is a sort of fondness and sense of common fate with Saudi Arabia, Egypt, even Syria," the Arab countries that fought Iraq.
The fact that Israelis did not demand retaliation for Saddam's Scud barrages, and that many Tel Avivians simply left town when the missiles started falling, signaled a massive change in social norms.
Historian Dina Porat of Tel Aviv University finds a stunning irony in the fact that it was the younger Sabra generation, many of them war veterans, who got out of town, while older people, many of them survivors of the Nazi Holocaust, stayed put.
It was "a sort of coming full-circle" from the heroic days of state-building, when the Sabra soldier defended the helpless survivor from Auschwitz, she says.

 

End of Document
