

It's Mostly Business as Usual in Somalia, Despite the Marines
The Associated Press
December 20, 1992, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1257 words
Byline: By G.G. LaBELLE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOGADISHU, Somalia
Body




The sign on the Digfer Hospital gate was very specific: "All kinds of weapons (whatever it is) are not allowed inside the hospital & it is forbidden."
The driver of a truck with a heavy machine gun mounted over the cab didn't seem to notice. He wheeled his "technical," painted black with yellow polka dots in a fanciful, fake camouflage, into the hospital grounds without a glance at the sign, lettered in Somali and English.
Half a mile away, U.S. Marines atop a bulging Bradley fighting vehicle watched the street for guns and trouble while French foot soldiers scanned the traffic
None saw anything. Probably there was nothing to be seen at the Kilometer Four traffic circle, where foreign troops keep regular watch.
Beyond the soldiers' view, however, Somalia is the same old melange of guns and madness.
On Wednesday, as Marines entered the famine-ridden town of Baidoa without a shot fired, U.N. officials learned that one of their Somali drivers had been shot to death the night before near Bossasso, in the north.
At Bardera, another destination on the Marines' march to ensure safe delivery of food to the hungry, a car taking relief supplies to a displaced persons' camp was blown up by a mine and three people were injured. It appeared to be revenge by looters who were unable to break into a food warehouse.
None of this means the more than 12,000 American and other foreign soldiers are not helping beleaguered Somalia.
In Baidoa, townspeople cheered the prospect of being freed from the rule of looters. In Mogadishu, the nightly symphony of gunfire has been reduced to an occasional toot.
The job ahead is enormous, even if only to fulfill the basic mandate of making sure food gets past armed gangs to the starving. But Somalis want the foreign soldiers to do much more.
At Digfer Hospital, Dr. Mohamed M. Ali expressed relief that the staff could get past the nightly horror of gunshot wounds and back to treating the sick, but worried about how long the peace would last.
Ali, the hospital director, said Digfer used to receive 30 to 40 wounded a day from the clan battles and thievery in Mogadishu. Only four gunshot victims arrived the night after the Marines landed and 12 the following night.
"For three days, we got not a single case of gunshots," Ali said with a broad smile, but added: "We are keeping the staff on an emergency basis."
His reasoning was simple: The soldiers are not collecting most of the guns in Mogadishu, let alone in the rest of the country. Trouble could start again.
"It's a whole national problem," he said. "It's not only in Mogadishu. it's not only in Baidoa."
Upstairs in the wards, Abdi Abdellahi El-Bukar expressed the same feeling while standing by the bed of his 14-year-old daughter, Rahmah, whose right leg had to be amputated after she was hit by a stray bullet.
"I think it will be necessary for the foreign troops to search the houses and collect all the weapons so people will be safe from the bandits," he said.
Not surprisingly, the soldiers are reluctant to try to seize all the weapons, which must total hundreds of thousands.
Because Somalia was once perceived as an asset in the Cold War - it sits on the Indian Ocean across from the Middle East's oil - it was adopted by both Moscow and Washington at various times.
Most gunmen carry the Soviet-design AK-47 assault rifle, but others have American M-16s and some carry the Belgian G-3. Their "technicals," or homemade battlewagons, are outfitted with heavy machine guns, recoilless rifles or anti-aircraft guns. Clan militias have mortars, artillery, even tanks.
For now, the Americans have cleared the weapons out of Mogadishu's port and airport.
They patrol a dogleg route between the two that runs north from the airport to the Kilometer Four circle, then south again to the remains of the U.S. Embassy compound. The Embassy was dedicated in 1990 and stripped by looters the next year, after dictator Mohammed Siad Barre was ousted.
Along the patrol route, there are a Belgian checkpoint, an International Red Cross charity kitchen, a Swedish feeding center for malnourished children and a makeshift market of stalls that sell meat, mangos, melons and other goods to those who can afford them.
No weapons are seen along the patrol route. The guns appear a short distance into the shadows.
At the "Green Line" dividing the rival militia territory of north and south Mogadishu, young men with guns emerged to demand money from journalists who wanted to look around and take pictures. Since the journalists' driver would not go into the area without his own gunmen, an argument ensued.
The leader of the youths demanding money looked to be 14 or 15. He wore a blue T-shirt that said Sahara Desert, a sarong-like skirt called a maawi, and sunglasses too big for his thin face.
He smiled brightly and his friend displayed a crisp $ 100 bill, the price for taking a picture.
As the argument grew heated, a shot rang out. The boys on the Green Line said it was only an accident and the shot kicked up dust close enough to the shooter's own foot to make that believable. The number of one-legged men in Mogadishu is testimony to such accidents.
Few people were on the street to notice the encounter, although this was once the center of Mogadishu. A triumphal arch put up in 1927 by the Italian colonizers stands nearby, across the way from the ruins of the largest bank and the Jirdeh Hussein Building, once the capital's business hub.
Now, all is desolation. Artillery has knocked down the walls, hardly a window has glass in it and every surface is pocked by small-arms fire.
The devastation was wrought in a struggle for power after Siad Barre was overthrown. Gen. Mohamed Farrah Aidid and Ali Mahdi Mohamed fought for control of Mogadishu, destroyed the downtown area and split the city between them.
Many relief workers contend that, since the outside world supplied the weapons that caused the havoc, it should seize the guns.
Aden M. Ali, a former teacher who works for the U.N. Children's Fund, said most Somalis are confused about whether the foreign forces will collect the arms.
They listen nightly to the arguments reported on the British Broadcasting Corp. Somali Service: The United Nations says disarming Somalia is part of the mission; the United States says the soldiers are only committed to escort convoys delivering food to the starving.
"This is the main issue for Somalis - demilitarization, whether the troops will disarm the militias," Ali said.
In the charity kitchens - the Red Cross alone runs about 300 - the arguments are more basic.
The thousands of people subsisting on one or two meals a day of rice, beans and oil want to go home.
Many are farmers chased off their land by marauding militiamen who stole their grain stores and seeds. They hope the foreign troops will get them back to the land.
At Kitchen No. 55, Hasan Abdi Bilal said he had been down the road half a block to see the U.S. Marine checkpoint, but that no Marines had come to the kitchen, which feeds hundreds of people living in shacks covered with plastic sheets.
When asked whether the arrival of the American and other soldiers changed her life, Hamar Issab, 40, had a ready answer: No.
She fled her village near Baidoa about a year ago because there was no food and the people had been unable to farm for two years before that. Her husband and five of her eight children died of starvation or disease.
She wants to go home, but must have help to do it.
"I need first seeds. I need clothes," she said, pulling her rag of a sarong around here. "I need money to travel."

 

End of Document
