

Klinsmann, Brazil, Ajax Rise Above the Gloom
 The Associated Press
December 18, 1995, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 1209 words
Byline: By ROBERT MILLWARD, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Juergen Klinsmann's goals and the standout play of Brazil and Ajax of Amsterdam brightened up an otherwise depressing year for soccer, which repeatedly hit the headlines for the wrong reasons.
From bribery allegations in Malaysia, England and Ukraine, to Eric Cantona's kung-fu kick on a fan, the violent deaths of fans in Genoa, Paris and Birmingham, and the riot by English fans in Dublin, soccer put on its ugly face again.
A court ruling in favor of little-known Belgian player Jean-Marc Bosman threatened to throw Europe's transfer system into chaos. And the heads of FIFA and UEFA, soccer's world and European governing bodies, showed they were in stark conflict over how the game should be run.
Klinsmann, Brazil and Ajax managed to rise above all this.
The German World Cup star had a spectacular season in English soccer, scoring almost at will and producing performances that had the Tottenham fans screaming for him to stay longer. Instead he went to Bayern Munich and even scored four goals in one match against another big club, Benfica, in the UEFA Cup.
Brazil, winner of the World Cup the year before for a record fourth time, looked even better in '95.
With newcomers Juninho, Ronaldo, Edmundo and Roberto Carlos joining regulars Dunga, Zinho, Aldair and Jorginho, Mario Zagalo's new-look team bewildered opponents with swift passing and spectacular goals.
After outplaying England 3-1 at Wembley, Brazil went to the Uruguayan capital Montevideo and lost to the home team on a penalty shootout after a 1-1 tie in the final of the Copa America.
Despite that loss, Brazil was easily the best national team of the year and stayed atop the FIFA rankings.
Ajax proved itself the best in Europe, beating AC Milan 1-0 in the Champions Cup final in Vienna and capping the year by defeating Brazil's Gremio 4-3 on penalty kicks for the unofficial world club championship in Tokyo.
Coach Louis Van Gaal has assembled a squad of entertainers who also get results, like going through the entire Dutch season unbeaten, winning the Champions Cup, and then starting off with an unbeaten 15-game run so far in the domestic standings.
Striker Patrick Kluivert scored the winner against Milan and is one of the rising stars in world soccer. But he was surrounded by so many more on the Ajax team: Finnish forward Jari Litmanen, Finidi George of Cameroon, Nigeria's Nwankwo Kanu and Dutch stars Marc Overmars and Clarence Seedorf.
If only FIFA could devise a competition in which Brazil could play against Ajax.
Diego Maradona made a much-publicized return after a 15-month ban for drug-taking and had the fans returning in droves to Boca Juniors without making much of an impact on the field at age 33.
But Maradona's career of highs and lows seemed to reflect 1995 as a whole.
Players and officials in Malaysia were banned after investigations showed games had been rigged, and three English league players - Southampton's Zimbabwean goalkeeper Bruce Grobbelaar, Wimbledon's Dutch goalkeeper Hans Segers and Aston Villa striker John Fashanu - were charged with match-fixing. All three deny the charges and are awaiting trial.
Arsenal fired manager George Graham, who had led the Gunners to six trophies in eight years, after the club discovered he broke the rules by receiving a $ 670,000 gift from an agent during transfer dealing.
Dynamo Kiev was kicked out of the Champions Cup by UEFA after a referee revealed the Ukrainian club had tried to bribe him with fur coats before a game against Panathinaikos of Greece.
Cantona did not kick a ball for eight months yet made huge headlines for attacking a fan.
The volatile Frenchman made a flying-kick on a Crystal Palace follower who had taunted him after his expulsion. On top of the eight-month ban, the Manchester United star was sentenced to two weeks in jail, although that was reduced on appeal to 120 hours' community service.
A fan of Italian club Genoa was stabbed to death, a supporter of an amateur team in Paris was fatally shot, and fans brawling before the Manchester United-Crystal Palace cup semifinal in Birmingham left a Palace fan dead under the wheels of a bus.
In Dublin, English fans rioted barely 28 minutes into an exhibition game against Ireland, ripping up seats and throwing them down onto the fans below. The match had to be abandoned.
FIFA and UEFA appeared on course for a head-on collision about how the game should be run. UEFA, with its Swedish president Lennart Johansson leading the way, called for FIFA's structure to be reshaped so that individual confederations had a bigger say in the running of the game. FIFA described UEFA's policy document as divisive and counterproductive and effectively rejected it.
At least the two organizations are united in their opposition to the Bosman verdict in the European Court of Justice.
Advocate General Carl Otto Lenz declared that the player was a victim of a restraint of trade when he could not transfer from Liege to French club Dunkerque because the fee was too high.
If the full European Court backs Lenz, every out-of-contract player becomes a free agent and UEFA fears the ruling will cause chaos to a transfer system it says works perfectly well.
The transfers of Klinsmann to Bayern, Seedorf to Italy's Sampdoria, Bulgarian Hristo Stoichkov from Barcelona to Parma and Romario from Barcelona to Brazil's Flamengo, were eye-catching moves.
But the significant trend was the persistent march of star players to England's wealthy Premier League, which appeared to overtake Spain and even match Italy in terms of attracting top players.
Ruud Gullit moved to Chelsea where he played as a sweeper and Dutch countryman Dennis Bergkamp went to Arsenal. Frenchman David Ginola moved from Paris Saint Germain to Newcastle and Sweden's Tomas Brolin switched from Parma to Leeds.
But the biggest transfer coup was by Middlesbrough. The club which has never won a major trophy paid $ 6.2 million to capture Juninho, the "new Pele" from Sao Paolo.
Arsenal failed in a bid to become the first club to retain the Cup Winners Cup, losing 2-1 to Real Zaragoza, whose winning goal by Moroccan Nayim was an audicious 50-yard chip over the goalkeeper's head in the final minute of extra time.
Parma maintained Italy's dominance in the UEFA Cup, beating Juventus, which triumphed in the Italian league.
Blackburn, guided by former Liverpool star Kenny Dalglish and with millions to spend, won the English title for the first time in 81 years but fell in the Champions Cup.
Real Madrid triumphed for the 26th time in the Spanish league, Borussia Dortmund was triumphant in Germany and Nantes upstaged PSG to win the French title.
Gremio beat Colombia's Nacional 4-2 on aggregate (3-1, 1-1) to win South America's Liberators Cup. Unbeaten River Plate won Argentina's title for the 24th time. Penarol was champion in Uruguay.
Croatia scored a notable victory over World Cup runner-up Italy by finishing above the Italians in a qualifying group for next year's European Championships in England.
Turkey and Switzerland also qualified for the first time. Among the surprise non-qualifiers were Sweden, which placed third in the World Cup.
Japan and South Korea set out their cases for staging the 2002 World Cup and Norway beat Germany in the final of the women's World Cup in Sweden.
 Load-Date: December 18, 1995

 

End of Document
