

Kuwaitis Celebrate End of the Main Firefighting Effort
The Associated Press
November 6, 1991, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 524 words
Byline: By DONNA ABU-NASR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BURGAN OIL FIELD, Kuwait
Body




With the push of a lever, Kuwait's emir capped a well today that had been reignited for a celebration marking the end of the worst oil fire disaster in the world.
"By capping with your own hands the last oil well fire, you are declaring to the people of Kuwait and the future generations that our national resources are safe now," Oil Minister Hamoud al-Rquba told the emir, Sheik Jaber al-Ahmed al-Sabah.
No mention was made at the elaborate ceremony of two recalcitrant wells still blazing during the festivities.
Later, however, Canadian firefighting teams doused the two - Well No. 48 in the northern field of Sabriyya and a second well in the neighboring field of Rawdatein. The first had never been doused, and the second had reignited.
In all, 732 wells were sabotaged by Iraqi troops just before U.S.-led forces drove them out of Kuwait.
The morning ceremony took place in the southern fields, in front of the well No. 118 in Burgan oil field, one of the largest in the world.
It was attended by the oil ministers of Syria, Egypt and the Gulf Cooperation Council, grouping Saudi Arabia, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain, Kuwait and Oman.
American Ambassador Edward Gnehm Jr. described the occasion as "extremely historic and one that makes us all happy … (and) uplifts our soul."
The field looked festive and colorful. Gone were the midnight-black skies that shrouded the field a few weeks ago when hundreds of burning wells spewed tons of unburned oil and other pollutants into the atmosphere.
The sun shone brightly through clear, blue skies as men waving swords performed traditional Kuwaiti celebration dances.
The oily black sand that had covered the area around Burgan 118 had been replaced with clean, white sand.
An assembage of equipment used by the different firefighting teams, who call themselves the Kuwait Kill Package Co., lined one side of the road leading to Burgan 118.
At 8 a.m., the well was reignited. It was later extinguished by the Kuwaiti firefighting team and representatives from other teams.
Then, to the sound of bagpipes, tambourines and ululations, the emir walked on a red carpet to a blue podium, where he pushed a lever that stopped the flow of oil.
The firefighting effort - by teams from the United States, Canada, Iran, France, Britain, Hungary, Romania, the Soviet Union and China - ended four months before the projected date set by Kuwait.
The rapid progress was attributed to an increase in the number of firefighting teams, greater availability of equipment and more plentiful water supplies.
Despite dangers from mines, unexploded ordnance, blazing oil wells, oil lakes and blinding smoke, there were no fatalities among the firefighters. Only a few injuries have been reported.
Al-Rquba told reporters the effort has so far cost $ 1.5 billion. He said it would be difficult to assess the damage to the oil reserves at this point.
He said 10 percent of the wells had been filled with cement, but that this didn't mean they would never be productive again.
Al-Rquba said Kuwait is following an "aggressive" plan to go back to its pre-invasion quota of 1.5 billion barrels a day by the end of December 1992.
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto KUW2

 

End of Document
