

Looking Down the Barrel of the Gun Craze
The Associated Press
July 5, 1993, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 611 words
Byline: By TINA SUSMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, South Africa
Body




A newspaper told of a family on vacation who stopped at a routine police checkpoint. The father was asked if he had a gun.
No, he replied. The officer exclaimed, "Why not?" and lectured the man on the dangers of traveling unarmed in South Africa.
Urban legend? Possibly. But in this land of Wild West-style shootouts, carrying a concealed weapon is not only legal, but expected.
Not long ago, at the entrance to a government building, I handed my purse to a guard for checking. "Your gun's in here?" he asked with a smile, and returned it without looking inside. There was no gun.
An average of 537 gun permits have been issued daily for three years in South Africa, an indication of growing fear - particularly among whites - that crime is out of control. Murder, robbery and rape, old plagues in black townships, have begun encroaching on exclusive white neighborhoods.
Even Gen. Johan van der Merwe, the national police commissioner, acknowledged that "South Africa has become gun crazy."
Never a fan of guns, but jittery after an attempted break-in at 3:30 a.m., I decided to join the craze and signed up for a firearms course.
A course was not a requirement for a license until April, which meant most gun owners had deadly weapons they did not know how to use. Of the 10 people in my nine-hour course at the Academy of Marksmanship, six had guns and most had never fired a weapon.
The students reflected the diversity of South African gun owners, and the new nervousness of whites.
There were a waitress in her early 20s, a wealthy-looking couple in their 50s, three single professional women, a married couple in their 30s and two middle-aged men.
All but one were white. Police have issued permits to some blacks in recent years, but there are many unlicensed guns in black townships, most of them smuggled from neighboring Mozambique.
Gordon Holmes, the instructor, said the composition of our class was typical for a midweek evening. Daytime and weekend courses are 90 percent black, he said, because daytime transport is better from the black townships.
Class attendance began to soar a year ago, along with the crime rate, said Holmes, a former policeman who wears a .45-caliber semi-automatic on his waist. When he is sleeping, it rests under his pillow.
"A lot of these people already had guns, and they suddenly realized they might actually have to use the thing, so they're taking the courses," he said, leaning across a glass display of .38 specials, shiny black 9mm semi-automatics and .44 magnums.
His course, a combination of lectures and practice that costs $ 80, covers such basics as loading and unloading, cleaning and aiming. Lectures on gun laws shed light on the country's relatively lax attitude toward firearms.
A person as young as 16 can buy a gun with parental permission. Guns must be concealed. Police say this prevents weapons theft, but it also allows anyone to walk through town with a concealed gun ready to fire.
Strict laws govern the legal use of firearms, but few people know them and wild shootouts on crowded streets are common.
On the final day of class, we were ready to fire live ammunition under the close watch of Holmes and another instructor.
A tall German woman in leopard skin-patterned tights, with an unnerving habit of carelessly pointing unloaded guns at people, loaded her revolver with shaking hands. One by one, the rest of the class crept toward the exit.
But she fired uneventfully, as did the rest of us. We gained confidence with each round, eventually blasting away with gusto as Holmes invited us to try everything from a .22-caliber to a .44 magnum like the one that made Clint Eastwood's day in the "Dirty Harry" movies.

 

End of Document
