

Marines Hit the Beach, Find No Opposition; 'What a Relief'
The Associated Press
December 9, 1992, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1271 words
Byline: By WILLIAM C. MANN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOGADISHU, Somalia
Body




A U.S. Marine landing force, on a mission of mercy to a starving land, quickly took control today of key points in Mogadishu, where the streets were suddenly free of the terror of mobile gangs.
Just hours after the Marines hit the beaches, giant Air Force transports and the first food-relief flight in six weeks touched down at the crippled city's airport.
The Marines and Navy commandos, sweeping in before dawn by sea and air, met no reported resistance.
Instead, thousands of Somalis, some in rags, flocked to the shoreline to gaze in awe at a superpower's might - and to shake its helping hand.
The youthful gunmen who long terrorized Mogadishu apparently had melted away into the city's ruins or into the countryside.
But word of new unrest came from the southern Somali port of Kismayo, where a night of looting and shooting forced the U.N. World Food Program to evacuate 13 foreign aid workers by air.
Later in the day, the United Nations confirmed that a civilian worker for the U.N. peacekeeping operation was shot in the arm outside U.N. headquarters in the Somali capital. Juan-Carlos Brandt, a U.N. spokesman in New York, said the worker was hospitalized in stable condition. Brandt did not identify the worker or give any details about the shooting.
In Mogadishu, the Marines swiftly secured the airport and seaport, gateways for the planned effort to re-establish a food pipeline to the hundreds of thousands threatened by famine in this war-torn nation.
Other nations will help, and about 80 French soldiers arrived today and began deploying around a crossroads that is one of the main routes to northern Somalia.
Under U.N. sponsorship, the American-led foreign troops will guard aid deliveries that have been hostage to thousands of armed extortionists, some loyal to rebel factions, some simply free-lance thieves.
Looting of food shipments and interference by rebel leaders had paralyzed the relief effort, and 300,000 Somalis died of starvation, disease and warfare.
The pictures of famished women and children shocked the world.
The Marines, an 1,800-man vanguard of more than 30,000 U.S. and other troops arriving in the coming days, also moved out from the airport and set up three checkpoints on the road into the city.
Ordinary Somalis greeted the friendly invaders, crowding rooftops and hillsides to watch the helicopters, hovercraft and other military behemoths crisscross their beaches and roadways. Some rushed up to the young Americans and shook their hands.
Abdul Mohamed Arale had waited for the Marines for three days at the airport, in pinstripe suit and polka-dot tie.
"I just want to meet the Americans and welcome them," the former Somali Airlines employee said. "I would like to show my respect."
Somalis poured into the airport by the thousands to watch the troops descend from their monstrous amphibious vehicles and deafening aircraft.
Residents swarmed across the runway, and the soldiers responded by pushing them away from military gear, mostly in a calm manner, and eventually out the gate of the airport.
"Gadal Uba!" shouted Lance Cpl. Danny Sheng. The phrase means "get back" in Somali, and each time Sheng yelled it, the curious broke into broad smiles and chanted it back to him.
"They're being cooperative," said Sheng, who had written the foreign words in ink on the palm of his hand. "They are friendly, yes, definitely friendly."
The first relief flight in a month and a half was a C-130 cargo plane laden with Unimeal, a powdery mix of sugar, beans, flour, cereal and oil. The food was loaded onto two trucks and deposited in a warehouse. But unlike other convoys, this one needed no armed militiamen to ensure its safety. The presence of the Marines was sufficient.
The opening moves of Operation Restore Hope appeared to go off like clockwork. More pictures were taken than prisoners.
But special U.S. envoy Robert Oakley said the next move, deeper into Somalia, could prove more troublesome. "When you get farther into the interior, you get people who want to make trouble," he said.
It remained unclear whether U.S. forces would aggressively try to disarm the Somali clans, who have fought for control of the country since toppling authoritarian President Mohamed Siad Barre in January 1991.
"Disarming the Somalis is not our stated mission," Col. Fred Peck, a U.S. military spokesman in Mogadishu, told NBC's "Today" show. "Obviously we're going to end up disarming some Somalis. But those will be Somalis we run into."
The point men of the American landing, staged from a three-ship Navy force offshore, were two dozen Navy frogmen and Marines who crawled up Green Beach, adjacent to the airport, just after midnight.
The commandos, faces smeared with black and green camouflage cream, found no opposition - only scores of waiting journalists.
The glare of television lights, spoiling the stealth of the advance team, led Pentagon officials to complain. But the TV networks pointed out that the Marines told them they could freely cover the beaches.
Before dawn, the main force began arriving, rumbling up out of the Indian Ocean in camouflage-painted amphibious vehicles, and over the dunes to the airport. Marines leaped out and took up positions at the control tower, and soon Navy transport helicopters were bringing in platoons of Marines.
The by-the-book Marines took no chances. At one point they detained a half-dozen Somalis at the airport, making them lie on the ground, but they were eventually freed when it was determined they were airport employees.
A U.N. contingent of 500 Pakistani soldiers has been bottled up at the airport since September.
About the same time as the beach landings, other Marines clambered over shoreline rocks at Mogadishu's seaport. There, too, they encountered about 50 journalists and ordered them to lie flat.
Gunfire broke out, but the circumstances were unclear. Reporters said Marines fired warning shots over their heads, trying to get them to back off.
Pvt. Oliver Greenwood of Banashee, Calif., said he heard gunfire as he was arriving in the port, but he didn't know if it was directed at the Marines.
Marine Col. Fred Peck, the spokesman for the U.S. forces, said he knew of no violence against U.S. troops in the landing area.
The Marines did not move immediately into central Mogadishu, a whitewashed, equatorial city of a half-million people. But the capital was unusually quiet - especially with the absence of "technicals," the gun-mounted vehicles favored by the young Somali marauders.
Mohamed Farrah Aidid, whose followers hold southern Mogadishu, said he had urged his men to stay away from the airport and seaport. Scores of clansmen roared away from the airport Tuesday before the American arrival.
Many young gunmen were reported heading to the southern Somalian hinterland, where Aidid's forces hold sway and the famine is deepest.
The next U.S. objective is to secure the airport at Baidoa, a town 200 miles inland where aid officials say 70 people were killed in clan battles earlier this week.
Within several days, some 16,000 Marines from Camp Pendleton, Calif., are expected to arrive in Mogadishu. After that, 10,000 light infantrymen from the Army's 10th Mountain Division, based at Fort Drum, N.Y., are to fly to Baidoa.
The first 80 of 2,000 French troops committed to the operation arrived today from the neighboring African nation of Djibouti. Smaller contingents have been promised by Turkey, Egypt, Mauritania, Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, Canada and Italy.
The French rushed to set up checkpoints before nightfall in the area around what is called "Kilometer 4," a crossroads that troops will use to deliver food to the north.

 

End of Document
