

Mitterrand: Still Doing It His Way on the World Stage
The Associated Press
July 8, 1994, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 813 words
Byline: By SALLY JACOBSEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NAPLES, Italy
Body




Departing from other world leaders who say priority must go to financial hardships at home, French President Francois Mitterrand said today it is morally wrong to ignore the world's poor.
In what will be the last appearance for the dean of the annual economic summits, Mitterrand is again going his own way.
Receiving an honorary degree at a university in Naples, site of this year's summit of leading industrial nations, Mitterrand said it would be "not only morally and socially unacceptable but also suicidal for our countries" to refuse to provide aid to the poor nations of the world.
Underscoring that theme, he recently dispatched 2,500 troops to Rwanda in a controversial mission to protect civilians caught in the ethnic warfare sweeping the Central African nation.
And just days before the summit, he became the first foreign leader to visit South Africa since Nelson Mandela took power in the once-shunned nation. Returning home, Mitterrand said he would plead South Africa's cause at the summit.
"I saw huge towns stripped of everything and (yet) their populations maintained hope," he told French television. "It is impossible for the world to remain insensitive."
Once again, Mitterrand, despite his 77 years and delicate health, showed his knack for upstaging other Western leaders in the international arena.
"France does have a special role," said Jonathan Eyal, director of studies at the Royal United Services Institute, a London think tank. "When it comes to the vision thing, the French speak with an authentic voice."
Mitterrand attended his first economic summit in July 1981 in Canada, shortly after becoming the first Socialist to lead his nation in 23 years.
He began his political career immediately after World War II, when he escaped from a German prison camp and was a resistance leader.
Now near the end of his second seven-year term, he is the oldest and longest serving of the seven leaders attending the summit. Participating nations are Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the United States.
"He's really the doyen of the summits," said Robert Hormats, vice chairman of Goldman Sachs International in New York.
"He projects a great dignity. There's a lot of wisdom there," said Hormats, who helped U.S. presidents prepare for eight previous summits.
Over the years, Mitterrand has gained a reputation for the unexpected.
"People always listen to him with great, great interest," said Henning Christophersen, a European Union vice president who often sits in on the closed-door meetings.
At last year's summit in Tokyo, Mitterrand made an appeal for the besieged Muslims in war-torn Bosnia-Herzegovina. "Who will defend them?" he asked his colleagues. "We must do it."
He caught President Boris Yeltsin off guard by demanding to know why Russian experts had taken blueprints from a Lithuanian nuclear power plant during the breakup of the former Soviet Union.
A flabbergasted Yeltsin, who was a visitor at the Tokyo conference, said he knew nothing about it. But Mitterrand persisted, and the plans were eventually returned.
Mitterrand still is remembered for his fearless trip into the embattled Bosnian capital of Sarajevo in 1992. He flew by helicopter into the airport, saying he wanted to see for himself what was going on.
While he may be cheered by the underdogs, he can be annoying to the top dogs - the Americans.
He has used the summits to tussle repeatedly with the United States - whether Ronald Reagan, George Bush or Bill Clinton - over trade issues.
For years, he rebuffed American demands for deep cuts in European farm subsidies, stalling negotiations on a new world trade agreement.
The French finally agreed to modest trims, opening the way for the trade accord reached last December by 123 nations in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
But Paris stood firm in demanding trade protection for the European film industry against Hollywood imports.
While Mitterrand's star may still shine on the world stage, it has been tarnished at home. His Socialist party was trounced in elections last year, forcing him to share power with a conservative premier, Edouard Balladur.
Battered by the polls, the Socialists are scrambling for a new chief to lead them to victory in presidential elections next spring.
"Mitterrand hasn't got very much to do at home now," said Eyal. "He's yesterday's man. (But) on the international stage, he still has a voice."
And he intends to use that voice at his last summit to appeal for $ 130 billion in health, education and other aid for impoverished nations.
"How can we accept that millions of men, women and children in the poor southern countries continue to die in front of our television cameras?" he wrote in a recent article distributed by the Los Angeles Times Syndicate.
"I will ask my colleagues to pick up their courage to face this most pressing challenge at the end of the 20th Century," he said.
 Load-Date: July 8, 1994

 

End of Document
