

Mohamed Farrah Aidid: The Hunted or The Hunter?
The Associated Press
September 12, 1993, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 753 words
Byline: AP Photo NY115, By REID G. MILLER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOGADISHU, Somalia
Body




He's wanted by the United Nations for crimes against humanity, there's a price on his head and he's in hiding. But by some accounts, Gen. Mohamed Farrah Aidid thinks he's ahead of the game.
The fugitive warlord has largely bottled up 15,000 of the U.N.'s 25,000 peacekeepers behind fortified positions in this seaside capital and created sharp differences among their ranks.
He has eluded capture for nearly three months, despite a high-tech effort by the United States to bring him to heel using sophisticated electronic evesdropping gear and airborne cameras known as "Eyes Over Mogadishu."
His aim, U.N. officials concede, is to peel away support for the costly multinational humanitarian mission in Somalia through an urban guerrilla war.
In one of the deadliest clashes, U.S. helicopter gunships fired machine guns and rockets Thursday at Somalis who ambushed Pakistani troops and American engineers. Aidid supporters said at least 125 men, women and children were killed.
Congress already is questioning American involvement. Italy, Saudia Arabia and other nations have accused the United Nations of losing sight of its original mission in an attempt to punish Aidid.
"He thinks he's winning," said an African diplomat who played a key role in brokering a peace agreement among all of Somalia's major clans in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, earlier this year.
A Western official, who like the African diplomat spoke on condition of anonymity, said Aidid's people claim the warlord is ebullient.
That's a far cry from the picture of Aidid painted by Jonathan Howe, the retired U.S. admiral who heads the U.N. operation in Somalia as a special representative of U.N. Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
Howe describes Aidid as a man on the run, never sleeping in the same place twice, worn and nervous from lack of rest and reportedly suffering from high blood pressure.
"He's against the whole world. He's on a losing string," Howe said in a recent interview. "I think more and more of the people who count, from his calculations, are leaving him that kind of message."
Howe issued an arrest warrant for Aidid and put a $ 25,000 bounty on his head after 24 Pakistani peacekeepers were killed in a series of ambushes on June 5.
In all, 48 peacekeepers have died and more than 175 have been wounded since May, when the United Nations assumed leadership of the task of rebuilding Somalia. Famine, disease and fighting took some 350,000 Somali lives last year, prompting Washington to launch the international aid effort in December.
Hundreds of Somalis, including civilians, have died in the clashes between Aidid's forces and the blue-helmeted troops. Howe blames all the bloodshed on Aidid.
If Aidid is not supported by the majority of Somalia's people and clans, there is no solid evidence that he has lost the loyalty of his own Habre Gedir subclan. The African diplomat said the subclan has coalesced around him.
Habre Gedir make up most of the population of the southern half of Mogadishu. Many of them arrived in the capital from the interior only after the overthrow of dictator Mohammed Siad Barre in January 1991.
Aidid's fighters were instrumental in that victory. Most of them are what long-time city dwellers refer to as "camel boys," a derisive term for the largely illiterate young nomadic herdsmen of the interior.
Until Aidid led them in triumph into the capital, the Habre Gedir were considered one of the weaker, less influential subclans among the dozens of clan groupings in Somalia. The subclan now regards Aidid as its ticket to power and wealth, the African diplomat said.
Aidid first opposed, then accepted the arrival of a U.S.-led military coalition to safeguard food deliveries to the starving. "The Americans are working, we believe, for the unity of the Somali people," he said at the time.
But Aidid became increasingly hostile to the Americans and, subsequently, to the United Nations as their diplomats maneuvered to lessen his grip on power and distribute it more equitably among all clans.
Robert Oakley, Washington's former envoy to Somalia, once said Aidid "was convinced that, in part because he had ousted Siad Barre, he was destined to be the next leader of Somalia."
Rakiya Omaar, a Somali who co-founded the London-based human rights oganization African Rights and has criticized both U.S. and U.N. actions, has described Aidid as shrewd, ruthless and manipulative.
"He is not the sort of person who goes to international conferences to battle for a fair share of the power," she said. "He wants it all."
 Load-Date: September 12, 1993

 

End of Document
