

Moments in the Rwandan Civil War
The Associated Press
June 8, 1994, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 608 words
Byline: By JEFFREY ULBRICH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KIGALI, Rwanda
Body




The little boy appeared to be no more than three, standing there so straight, trying to look tough as he gnawed on half an apple.
Barefoot. Filthy blue shirt. Pants that once were white but now leaned toward ocher. There was something terribly sad and incongruous about the cheery message stitched on the pocket: "Gone Fishing."
This nameless boy was found wandering around Kigali airport, shut down by the brutal civil war ravaging this tiny African nation and now under the control of rebels from the Rwandan Patriotic Front.
"He has no mother or father," said the Ghanaian soldier the boy seemed to have adopted. The soldier, holding an old rifle, stood vigil outside the airport terminal building. The young lad stood at his side, wordless, chewing, watching.
The soldier, part of the 450-man U.N. force in Rwanda, took the boy to refugees huddled in a nearby airport building and turned him over to a woman. But the woman brought him back. He wasn't her child, she said. She didn't want him. She had enough problems of her own. So there they stood, the boy and the soldier, wordless, expressionless.
Both clearly were taking their jobs very seriously. One was providing security at the terminal. The other was working very hard on survival.
 
 ---
He doesn't look much like a priest.
First there is the sports shirt and slacks. But what really grabs your eye when you first meet the Rev. Wenceslas Nunyeshyaka is the 9 mm automatic stuck in his belt.
Nunyeshyaka is parish priest at Sainte Famille Roman Catholic church in Kigali, a compound that once included a school and other services. Now it is a refugee camp with 7,000 to 8,000 terrified people trying to escape the civil war and ethnic massacres that have swept the country.
The red brick church is perched on a hillside in the part of Kigali still under the control of government troops. Rebels of the Rwandan Patriotic Front pound the area steadily with artillery and mortar fire.
More than a dozen of Nunyeshyaka's ballooning flock have died from the shelling. Yet God has smiled on the young priest. He grabs a visitor by the arm and takes him around the corner, pointing animatedly to a building adjoining the church.
Just three days ago a shell crashed through the tin roof over his spartan room at the church compound. "But I was not there," he smiled.
Yes, God was looking out for Nunyeshyaka. But the priest also seems to be looking out for himself. The visitor nods at the automatic.
"What do you expect?" he asks. "This is war."
 
 ---
Just outside a village called Kabuga, the sun shines brightly on rolling green hills.
Were it not for the occasional swatches of banana trees, one could easily think this was the Burgundy region of France. It's so beautiful. So peaceful. So quiet. Ghostly in fact.
Long-horned cattle browse along the red dirt road that runs up the hill through the greenery where a rebel general is hosting a high-powered meeting.
It's not so much the rebel gunmen in their varied uniforms that break the spell of quiet beauty. Rather, it's the smell. The sickening, overpowering odor of rotting corpses.
That smell seems to symbolize Rwanda today. It's inescapable. Death and rotting flesh. It is the product of the incomprehensible ethnic hatred that has swept this densely populated central African country over the past two months. Hatred that has led to unbelievable massacres of innocent civilians. Women and children.
This is where the massacres began, says a rebel soldier. Here in Kabuga, about 10 miles outside Kigali, the capital. The corpses are no longer visible to the casual visitor. But they are there. Every breeze, every puff of June air brings further evidence.
 Load-Date: June 8, 1994

 

End of Document
