

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
August 26, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 836 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: PETERSBURG, Va.
Body




When Kareem Abdul-Jabbar left basketball and went into moviemaking, the transition was relatively easy.
While playing for the Milwaukee Bucks and Los Angeles Lakers in a 20-year NBA career, he appeared in at least a dozen pictures and television shows, including "Airplane," "Fletch," and "Mannix."
"Going to UCLA and having connections in Southern California didn't hurt. I got roles when I was playing," Abdul-Jabbar said while taking a break from a television movie on which he is co-executive producer.
The two-hour movie chronicles the story of the late Rev. Vernon Johns, a hero of the civil rights movement, and stars James Earl Jones.
When Abdul-Jabbar retired as a player in June 1989, he had more valuable player awards - six - and more regular season points - 38,387 - than any player.
Now, at 46, he plays basketball only when his son asks for help.
Kareem Abdul-Jabbar Jr., 17, is a junior guard-forward at the Brentwood School in Los Angeles. "I don't know if he's going to be in the NBA, but he'll be a good college player," his father said.
---
SOWETO, South Africa (AP) - Some wore tank tops and sneakers, while others scrambled across the basketball court Thursday in long pants and street shoes.
They dribbled the ball off their feet, off their heads, off any part of the body that got in the way as they desperately raced back and forth.
In the middle, three giants towered over the controlled mayhem, barking instructions and leaping to help out where needed.
For the 200 or so teen-agers, most of them from this sprawling black township, it was a learning session - big time - from past and present NBA players.
Bob McAdoo and Alex English, along with Zairean-born Dikembe Mutombo of the Denver Nuggets, stressed ball-handling, hard work and dedication in the one-day seminar at a Soweto gymnasium.
Commissioner David Stern watched with satisfaction.
"We're really here just to encourage the growth of the sport and the messages that come with it," Stern said of the NBA-financed tour.
The league has visited other countries to promote basketball, but this year brought the first stop in racially divided South Africa.
The NBA also wants to play a role in helping South Africa shift from apartheid to a multiracial democratic government.
"I thought that this really was an important statement of support for the NBA and basketball in terms of bringing people together," Stern said.
---
DENVER (AP) - Linebacker Karl Mecklenburg has to survive a flight to Phoenix this week, and then survive a game, before the Broncos can be sure of his availability this season.
Mecklenburg has missed the first three preseason games and has been a limited participant in practice because of an inner-ear problem.
He is scheduled to make his first exhibition appearance Friday night in Phoenix - but only if the flight goes well.
"The airplane ride should be a tell-tale thing for us," defensive coordinator Charlie Waters said, noting the air pressure in the cabin. "If he's a little dizzy, we're probably not going to play him."
Waters said the plan for the game is to "play him for one series and see if he survives. We're going to play that by ear, if you'll pardon the pun."
Unless Mecklenburg has a strong outing against the Cardinals, he probably won't start in the regular-season opener against the Jets on Sept. 5.
----
LONDON (AP) - Jackie Joyner-Kersee will race against Olympic and world champion Sally Gunnell in a 400 meters hurdles race at a meet in Sheffield on Sunday.
The Olympic and world champion heptathlete has raced the distance before and has a personal record of 55.05 seconds compared with Gunnell's world record of 52.74.
Gunnell set the world mark at the World Championships in Stuttgart last week.
---
ZAGREB, Croatia (AP) - IOC president Juan Antonio Samaranch paid his respects at the grave of Drazen Petrovic Thursday while on a visit to meet members of the Croatian Olympic Committee.
Petrovic, a star for New Jersey Nets, was killed in an automobile accident June 7 in Germany.
The IOC president was asked to comment on the controversy over payments to track competitors at major events. He said prize money would not be on offer at the Olympics.
Some top athletes demanded prize money along with gold medals at the World Championships this month in Stuttgart, Germany.
Track's world governing body, the International Amateur Athletic Federation, refused, and, instead, gave each winner a Mercedes.
"But we would like to keep our tradition that taking part at the Olympic Games is really an honor for athletes to defend their country at the most important event in the world," Samaranch said.
---
PORTLAND, Ore. (AP) - Trail Blazers star Clyde Drexler will appear in the season premiere of the FOX television show "Married … With Children."
The episode, being taped this week, is to air Sept. 5.
In the show, the main characters attend an All-Star basketball game. Drexler has a couple of lines and shoots a layup.
Vlade Divac of the Los Angeles Lakers and Xavier McDaniel of the Boston Celtics also appear in the show.

 

End of Document
