

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
April 8, 1992, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 719 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: ANN ARBOR, Mich.
Body




The baseball museum at Domino's Farms has recovered one of two stolen jackets belonging to former Detroit Tigers pitcher Hal Newhouser,
The jackets were reported missing from a storage area at the museum on Friday, said George Ralph, company security director.
Jeff Mugerian, a Traverse City restaurant owner, called Ralph on Tuesday with information about someone who tried to sell him one of the jackets. That information led to its recovery.
The second jacket, dark blue with beige sleeves, orange piping and an orange Olde English "D," is still missing.
Ralph said a museum worker and an outsider conspired to steal the jackets. Domino's security and the Washtenaw County Sheriff's office are investigating, he said.
Newhouser was elected to the Hall of Fame last month. He pitched for Detroit from 1939-53 and starred in the 1945 World Series in which the Tigers defeated the Chicago Cubs.
---
KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) - Lisa Boddicker, the wife of Kansas City Royals pitcher Mike Boddicker, gave birth to the couple's fourth child on Wednesday.
The boy was named James Harold Boddicker.
The couple's other children are Corey, Stephanie and Brittany.
--
LONDON (AP) - If anything can motivate Rosa Mota to win the London Marathon on Sunday, it's that she lost her last marathon.
That defeat at the World Championships last September in Tokyo ended a streak that went back to the 1984 Olympics in Los Angeles. After that, she went on to win world and Olympic marathon titles and three European Championships.
"What happened in Tokyo had a bad psychological effect on me," the 33-year-old Portuguese runner said Wednesday.
"Physical problems often lead to psychological problems, but I'm sure I've managed to get over that now."
Mota had a minor international operation in May and they may have induced psychological problems by the time she pulled out after 15 miles of the World Championships marathon.
"It was disappointing to have a bad day, but it doesn't mean my career is over," said Mota who defends her London Marathon title and then aims for the Olympics in Barcelona.
"London is very important to me - I wanted to do a marathon before Barcelona, and I like this course."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Morocco's Said Aouita, holder of five outdoor world records and one indoor mark, will compete in the mile - the only middle-distance event in which he does not own a world record - at the New York Games May 24.
Aouita, 32, the 1984 Olympic gold medalist and 1987 world champion at 5,000 meters, holds outdoor marks at 1,500 meters, 2,000 meters, 3,000 meters, two miles and 5,000 meters.
His most recent record was the first he ever set indoors. It was over 3,000 meters at Piraues, Greece, on March 11, when he was timed in 7 minutes, 36.76 seconds.
In the outdoor mile, Aouita owns the second-fastest time ever - 3:46.76, just behind the world record of 3:46.32 by Britain's Steve Cram.
The New York Games, the second stop on the 18-meet Mobil Grand Prix circuit, will be held at Columbia University's Wien Stadium.
---
ORANGE PARK, Fla. (AP) - Originally the team was named the Angels. The switch to the Twins became inevitable when four sets of twins joined the Orange Park Athletic Association tee-ball team.
Coach Tom Lafferty, the father of twin sons Sean and Nick, said things can get a little confusing on the field. Three of the pairs are identical twins.
And, if it's not hard enough to keep track of all the little look-alikes, the team has two Adams, two Matts and two with names that sound alike - Shawn Padgett and Sean Lafferty.
"The only way I don't get confused is to ask then when they come to practice what their names are," manager Brian O'Donnell said. His child is fairly easy to pick out. Megan is the only girl on the squad.
---
MEXICO CITY (AP) - Puerto Rican super-lightweight Angel "Pelayito" Hernandez says Mexico City's air pollution is interfering with his training for a World Boxing Council title bout with Julio Cesar Chavez.
Hernandez complained he has been affected by the bad air even while training in Puebla, some 70 miles east.
He says Chavez won't be bothered because he's from Mexico City and is used to it.
Hernandez also was upset by the promoters' decision to hold the weigh-in on Thursday rather than Friday, the day of the bout.
"It seems to me this favors Chavez, who looks to be a little fat," he said.

 

End of Document
