

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
January 9, 1992, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 814 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: LONDON
Body




American-bred Arazi made a big impression on European handicappers.
The colt was voted the best 2-year-old ever to run on European courses.
A panel of five European handicappers gave the French-trained colt the highest mark for juvenile horses since classifications for 2-year-olds began in 1978.
"Arazi is the jewel in the crown in an era when superlatives have become debased," Michael Byrne, chairman of the International Classification Committee, said after the results were published Thursday.
"Excellence in the true sense of the word can be ascribed to Arazi as the undisputed world champion of 1991."
"Arazi may not have beaten vintage horses in America," said the British Jockey Club's senior handicapper Geoffrey Gibbs.
"But his spectacular (Breeders Cup Juvenile) victory, coming on the back of five straight wins against virtually the best in Europe, must mark him as exceptional."
---
ALGIERS, Algeria (AP) - Hassiba Boulmerka, the women's world 1,500-meter track champion, is considering moving from her native Algeria to avoid political problems.
Boulmerka said in an interview with the Italian newspaper La Republica that she has been denounced by the high religious leaders of the Islamic Salvation Front for 'running with naked legs in front of thousands of men."
The front, the main force in Algeria's Muslim fundamentalist movement, is ready to take control of Parliament after a landslide victory Dec. 26 in first-round elections.
According to La Republica, Boulmerka, 23, indicated she wants to live in Siena, Italy, if the Salvation Front completes its victory in second-round run-offs next Thursday.
Boulmerka, a winner at the World Championships last August, has a number of Italian connections. She has trained in Italy and has an Italian agent who also manages a number of African athletes.
---
HAMBURG, Germany (AP) - World champion sprinter Katrin Krabbe angrily denied a charge by a former East Germany teammate that she took performance-enhancing drugs.
Krabbe won gold medals in the 100- and 200-meters at last summer's world championships in Tokyo.
The latest allegations came from Brigitte Berendonk, a former East German discus thrower and author of a book about sports doping, and were printed in the Berlin newspaper Kurier am Morgen on Wednesday.
In an interview with the mass-circulation Bild newspaper on Thursday, Krabbe also said it was outrageous to say she had moved her training site to South Africa to conceal alleged illegal drug use.
Berendonk later told another Berlin newspaper that she had "nothing concrete" on which to base her suspicions about Krabbe. She claimed her earlier comments had been misinterpreted.
"We Eastern athletes will have to endure these accusations until the end of our careers," Krabbe was quoted as saying Thursday.
She said she worked out in South Africa to avoid the Germans winter.
---
GRENOBLE, France (AP) - Want to buy a used ski jump? Cheap?
The management of the Saint-Nizer jump, built for the 1968 Winter Olympics, is ready to sell the deteriorating structure for one franc - about 19 cents.
In its current condition, the 90-meter jump is no longer considered safe enough for use.
The syndicate which operated the jump doesn't have the $ 600,000 to pay for demolition and removal of the concrete, let alone the estimated $ 2 million needed for renovation.
The jump and the surrounding site would be given away for a symbolic one franc to any investor willing to undertake the restoration, but thus far there are no takers.
Saint-Nizer, 15 miles from Grenoble, has 575 residents who are proud of the jump and don't want it torn down. They think it should be a national monument.
The national government has rejected requests for financial help. It has invested heavily in the upcoming Winter Games in Albertville, including construction of new 90-meter and 120-meter jumps at Courchevel. France has too few ski jumpers to require two 90-meter jumps.
---
KIAMESHA LAKE, N.Y. (AP) - Former New York Yankees star Joe Pepitone was charged with misdemeanor assault Thursday after a scuffle police said was triggered when Pepitone was called a "has been."
Pepitone, 51, was sitting with a friend in the lounge of the Concord Hotel early Thursday morning when John Capurso began talking to the two, state police trooper Randall McGregor said.
Capurso, 21, accompanied by two brothers and two friends, apparently began asking Pepitone questions and wouldn't leave him alone, McGregor said.
Capurso was said to have used the phrase "has been," which prompted the melee between the two groups of men. All suffered minor cuts and bruises except for Pepitone.
Pepitone was arraigned in town court and released after he posted $ 75 bail.
Capurso, his brother, Frank, and their friend, Raymond Jacobson, were charged with third-degree assault. Raymond Langella and a third Capurso brother, Ralph, were charged with disorderly conduct, McGregor said.

 

End of Document
