

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
May 11, 1995, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 735 words
Dateline: HOUSTON
Body




The wife of Houston Mayor Bob Lanier, angry about the officiating in the Rockets loss to Phoenix in the opening game of the playoff, took her wrath straight to the top of the NBA.
Elyse Lanier called the New York office of commissioner David Stern on Wednesday to lodge her complaint about Clyde Drexler's second-quarter ejection by referee Jake O'Donnell. The Rockets lost to the Suns 130-108 in the opening game of the Western Conference semifinal.
Mrs. Lanier said Stern was out of the office when she called, but she left a message saying she thinks O'Donnell has it in for the Rockets.
"This guy doesn't like the Rockets," Mrs. Lanier said. "It's clear he doesn't. By the time you get to the playoffs, you have to be extra careful. I don't know as much about basketball as many, but when it's so obvious it's bias."
"This guy is very controversial; he doesn't like the Rockets; he apparently doesn't like Hakeem Olajuwon, who is a wonderful human being. And Clyde is as wholesome as apple pie."
It's not the first time the mayor's wife has come to the Rockets' defense. Last year, when Sports Illustrated decided it wouldn't print a commemorative edition for Houston's NBA title, she joined thousands of fans in complaining to the magazine. A commemorative edition eventually was printed.
---
NAIROBI, Kenya (AP) - Kenya's top track coach, Mike Kosgei, was fired by the country's Amateur Athletics Association, which accused him of politicking and failing to perform his duties.
Association chairman Isaiah Kiplagat said Thursday that Kosgei had failed to develop a national training program and institutions and was "involving himself in sports politics."
"He is a civil servant and we cannot condone such activities," Kiplagat said.
He said Kosgei does not coach Kenyan runners, who are actually trained by different institutions, including the armed forces, the police and prisons department.
"Kosgei has always hitched himself on safe quarters," Kiplagat said.
Kosgei is an employee of the Ministry of Culture and Social Services and was second to the association, which overseas track and field. Kiplagat said the association asked the ministry to assign Kosgei elsewhere.
Kosgei was reported to be at his upcountry home and could not be reached by telephone.
Kosgei is credited with recent successes by Kenyan runners in international meets and is known to side with athletes in their disputes with the association, especially over their financial gains.
---
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - You might say it was a hug gone awry.
The Phillie Phanatic, the Phillies' ubiquitous, rotund, green and furry ham-of-a-mascot, is accused of "engaging in unlawful or offensive touching" at a church fair.
Seventy-two-year-old Carl G. Seidel says the costumed creature knocked him over with either his trademark floppy belly or projectile nose during a 1991 carnival at the Maternity Blessed Virgin Mary Catholic Church.
The retired bus driver says the episode aggravated an old back problem and has made walking nearly impossible. Seidel wants the Phillies organization and owner Bill Giles to pay $ 525,000 in damages.
The man in costume, who was filling in for the regular Phanatic, is not a defendant in the lawsuit, filed in 1991 and scheduled for an August trial in Common Pleas Court.
Seidel says the Phanatic willfully, recklessly, wantonly, outrageously, negligently and carelessly caused him trauma, shock, pain, humiliation and loss of life's pleasures.
Plaintiffs cite "an excessive zeal for and uncritical attachment to the cause of the Phillies."
Phillies lawyer Marc Zingarini said Seidel's claims are extreme.
"Obviously, it's all denied," Zingarini told The Philadelphia Inquirer. "The man did fall down. But all this about the Phillies creating a monster, it's all denied. I'll be you that Santa Claus has been sued somewhere for something, too."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Malik Sealy of the Los Angeles Clippers has connections, and he used them to advantage for a good cause.
Sealy grew up in New York's impoverished South Bronx, and was a camper in the Police Athletic League day-camp program. He later went on to play basketball in the PAL summer leagues.
So, when he heard a PAL community center needed refurbishing, Sealy used his connection with Dutch Boy to get 100 gallons of paint donated.
Sealy then got Nike to donate 200 T-shirts to the PAL.
"Young people are the future, and I want to make sure the future is bright," he said.
 Load-Date: May 11, 1995

 

End of Document
