

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
March 31, 1995, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 679 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: MESA, Ariz.
Body




Baseball's expansion Arizona Diamondbacks reportedly will play in a stadium named for the state's largest bank when the team debuts for the 1998 season.
Tribune Newspapers quoted three Maricopa County officials as saying the downtown Phoenix field will be called the "Bank One Ballpark." The announcement is expected Wednesday.
Steve Roman, a spokesman for the bank in Phoenix, declined comment on the story Friday.
The newspaper quoted the sources as saying the bank will pay $ 1.3 million for the first year to put its name on the stadium archways.
The payment will increase about 3 percent a year over the 30-year period of the name lease.
---
MONTE CARLO, Monaco (AP) - Olympic 800-meter champion William Tanui of Kenya failed a drug test in 1993, but escaped suspension because of a "mistake."
International Amateur Athletic Federation spokesman Christopher Winner said Tanui tested positive for the banned stimulant norephedrine at a meet in New Delhi, India, on Sept. 14, 1993.
Use of that substance normally carries an automatic 3-month suspension, but the penalty was never imposed because of a mix-up in communications between the drug-testing lab and the IAAF.
Winner said the samples were tested at the IOC lab in Moscow, but track's governing body was not notified of the result until 10 weeks later.
The Russian lab then tested the "B" sample without notifying the IAAF, and without Tanui or a representative of the Kenyan Amateur Athletic Association being present.
"By now more than four months had passed," Winner said.
The IAAF decided to put the positive drug test into its records but not to impose a ban or make it public.
"We made a mistake," Winner said. "It's embarrassing. Something fell through the net."
A second offense by Tanui would result in a two-year ban.
---
INDIANAPOLIS (AP) - Rob Pierce of Conifer, Colo., and Steve Taylor of Blacksburg, Va., will be the only experienced runners on the 10-member U.S. team that will compete in the World Cup Marathon April 9 at Athens, Greece.
Pierce finished 36th in 1993 and Taylor was 40th in 1991.
Other members of the men's team are Dave Dunham, Londonderry, N.H.; Dave Petersen, Bend, Ore., and Paul Rosser, Salt Lake City.
The women's team will be Kellie Archuletta, Las Vegas; Marie Boyd, Albuquerque, N.M.; Mary-Lynn Currier, Norwich, Conn.; Wendy Nelson-Barrett, Lebanon, Pa., and Deborah Torneden, El Dorado, Kan.
---
LITTLE ROCK, Ark. (AP) - The stand-in chaplain at the Arkansas House invoked divine help on Friday for the Arkansas basketball team.
Tommy Freeman, pastor of the Star City First Baptist Church, wrapped up his prayer this morning by asking God to "Please smile on the Razorbacks tomorrow."
Freeman was guest chaplain in the House.
Arkansas, which won last year's national championship, plays North Carolina in Seattle in Saturday's NCAA semifinals. The winner plays in Monday's championship game.
Before Friday's legislative session started, someone placed red-and-white pompons at each of the 100 lawmakers' desks.
---
STOCKHOLM, Sweden (AP) - Rock singer Rod Stewart will sponsor a Swedish first division soccer team this season.
"Rod liked the idea when we told him about what kind of soccer Hammarby represents. It's "positive" soccer," said Lars Nylin, director of promotions for Stewart's record company.
Stewart, an avid soccer fan who often watches Scotland's matches, will sponsor the Hammarby team of Stockholdm, and hopes to be at a home game June 26.
"Hopefully, Rod can make a ceremonial kick-off before the game," Hammarby official told the Aftonbladet newspaper.
---
BOSTON (AP) - Defending champions and world record-holders Jean Driscoll and Heinz Frei will head the largest wheelchair field in Boston Marathon history.
Race organizers announced Friday a wheelchair entry field of 100, including 13 women, for the April 17 race. This is the 20th year the wheelchair athletes will be competing at Boston.
The field also includes Bob Hall, the only competitor in the first wheelchair event in 1975. Hall also won in 1977.
Another top entry is Jim Knaub, the winner in 1982, 1983, 1991, 1992 and 1993.
 Load-Date: March 31, 1995

 

End of Document
