

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
March 22, 1994, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 871 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: OAKLAND, Calif.
Body




Olympic gold medal winner Dan Jansen will throw out the first pitch for the Oakland Athletics home opener with the world champion Toronto Blue Jays on April 11.
The speedskater won the 1,000-meter race last month in Lillehammer, Norway, ending a string of agonizing defeats in three previous Olympics.
"He never stopped believing in himself even when things were the most difficult," said A's manager Tony La Russa.
---
ATLANTA (AP) - Andre Cason, the top-ranked 100-meter sprinter in the United States and No. 2 in the world, has joined the list of track and field athletes who will compete in this year's Goodwill Games.
"The chance to compete against the world's best will be the highlight of my season and help me prepare for the 1996 Olympic Games," said Cason, the silver medalist in the 100 at last year's World Outdoor Championships and the 1993 U.S. champion.
Cason's victory at the U.S. championships marked his comeback from a career-threatening injury - a torn calf muscle - suffered during the 1992 Olympic trials. The injury forced him to miss the Barcelona Games.
Other track and field stars who have accepted invitations to the July 23-Aug. 7 Goodwill Games at St. Petersburg, Russia, include Carl Lewis, Jackie Joyner-Kersee, Michael Johnson, Britain's Colin Jackson and Sally Gunnell, Germany's Hieke Drechsler, Jamaica's Merlene Ottey and Kenya's Moses Kiptanui.
---
SAN ANTONIO (AP) - An Atlanta woman is suing Dennis Rodman, claiming the San Antonio Spurs star infected her with the herpes virus.
Lisa Beth Judd, 22, in a lawsuit filed Monday in state court in Fulton County, Ga., alleged Rodman transmitted the virus to her during a sexual encounter in January 1993.
Judd, a dancer for the Atlanta Hawks when she met Rodman in 1991, says in court documents Rodman had told her he did not have any sexually transmittable diseases.
"We have tried for weeks to get this resolved discreetly and confidentially," Judd's lawyer, Mark Trigg of Atlanta, said in Tuesday's San Antonio Express-News. "But our requests have fallen on deaf ears."
Rodman and his attorney declined to comment on the allegations.
Spurs coach John Lucas told the Express-News: "I support Dennis in the matter, but I really know very little about it. We will get through this, too."
---
LONDON (AP) - A senior British race-walking official is threatening to withdraw from this summer's European Championships unless an Italian judge is suspended for his actions at last year's World Championships.
Peter Marlow, a member of the IAAF's walking committee for 18 years, said Tuesday that the International Amateur Athletic Federation has refused to uphold his panel's recommended suspension of Nicola Maggio.
Maggio was in charge of judging for the 20-kilometer men's walk at the World Championships in Stuttgart, Germany, last August. The race ended in chaos, with five competitors disqualified in the last 400 meters for breaking contact with the ground.
Among those disqualified was Daniel Garcia of Mexico, who was on course for the silver medal. As a result of his disqualification, the silver medal went to an Italian, Giovanni De Benedictis.
The walking committee found that Maggio committed several breaches of judging regulations, including leaving his post outside the stadium and running onto the track to disqualify Garcia.
The committee notified Maggio of his suspension, but the IAAF hierarchy has refused to endorse it. Marlow said he hoped the IAAF, whose president Primo Nebiolo of Italy, was not attempting a coverup.
Marlow said he was considering withdrawing as one of three chief judges for the walking events at the European Championships in Helsinki, Finland, Aug. 7-14.
"I'd hate to go into a race with Mr. Maggio still there after a complete whitewash," he said. "There's nothing worse in any sport if the athletes don't trust the judging."
---
ANAHEIM, Calif. (AP) - UCLA will play in the first John R. Wooden Classic, named for the man who coached the Bruins when they dominated college basketball.
UCLA will play Kentucky and Kansas will meet Massachusetts Dec. 3 at the Anaheim Arena.
"In honor of coach Wooden, our goal is for the John R. Wooden Classic to become second only to the Final Four in stature," said Randy Ryan, the classic president.
Wooden, 83, coached UCLA for 27 years. He retired in 1975 after the Bruins beat Kentucky 92-85 for their 10th NCAA championship in a span of 12 years. Kentucky and UCLA haven't played each other since that game.
---
DETROIT (AP) - The Hanson brothers, the fictional rough guys from the movie "Slapshot," tried to give the Detroit Red Wings a few tips.
The Hansons, played by Dave Hanson, Steve Carlson and Jeff Carlson, stopped by Joe Louis Arena on Monday, demanding a go-round with Red Wings enforcer Bob Probert.
Probert came out in street clothes.
"Scotty Bowman won't let us skate with these guys. He thinks we'll get hurt," Probert said.
"These guys are my idols."
The three, who played the glasses-wearing brothers coached by Paul Newman in the 1977 film about the fictional Charlestown Chiefs, are trying to launch a sports-bar comedy act.
Hanson played with Detroit for part of the 1978-79 season. Steve Carlson played in the World Hockey Association. Jeff Carlson played minor-league hockey.
 Load-Date: March 22, 1994

 

End of Document
