

Names in the News
The Associated Press
January 14, 1992, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 816 words
Byline: AP Photo NY14, Ashcroft, Williams
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Rock singer Bob Geldof was arrested and taken off an airliner when he and other passengers rebelled after waiting five hours to disembark, police said.
Two officers took Geldof - given an honorary knighthood in 1986 for raising millions of dollars for African famine victims - off the Boeing 727 at Stansted Airport and put him in a police car on Sunday, airport police said Monday.
Geldof was released without being charged. Other passengers also had grown restless and demanded to be let off the plane, but Geldof was the only one arrested, police said.
He, his wife, Paula Yates, and their 5-year-old daughter were returning from a vacation in Morocco. Heavy fog caused the plane to be diverted from Heathrow Airport to Stansted, 30 miles north of London, where runway traffic kept the jet from taxiing to the terminal for hours.
---
JEFFERSON CITY, Mo. (AP) - Gov. John Ashcroft says he'll count the popular vote instead of Andy Williams' solo voice in rating the country music shows in Branson.
Williams recently described some of the shows as "crap."
"My view is that the American people have indicated their assessment of the value of Branson as a wholesome place of family entertainment," Ashcroft said Monday.
The governor has performed gospel music in Branson and on the Grand Ole Opry in Nashville.
Promoters say about 4 million people visit Branson each year.
Williams' $ 8 million Moon River Theater opens in Branson in May.
---
PRINCETON, N.J. (AP) - Mary Stuart Masterson is recovering from a bout with the flu that forced a Princeton playhouse to cancel Sunday's show after the audience was seated.
Masterson is playing Irina in Chekhov's "The Three Sisters."
"Flu has swept through the company and Mary Stuart Masterson … was the last to get it," said David Mayhew, director of marketing for McCarter Theatre. He said she would be back on stage Wednesday night.
Her movies include "Immediate Family" and "Some Kind of Wonderful."
---
Eds: Also moving on sports lines.
 
 By The Associated Press
Michael Jordan, who led the Chicago Bulls to the NBA championship last season, has been named The Associated Press Male Athlete of the Year for 1991.
"I've had lots of awards, but when it comes from writers and the media, it's special," he said Monday in Deerfield, Ill., where the Bulls practice.
The 28-year-old Jordan got 46 of 122 first-place votes cast by AP-member sports writers and broadcasters. He finished with a total of 348 points.
Long jumper Mike Powell was second with 134. Carl Lewis, a six-time Olympic gold medalist and two-time AP Male Athlete of the Year, was third with 80.
---
MIAMI (AP) - Two founding members of 2 Live Crew sued Luther Campbell, the rap group's leader, claiming he cheated them out of more than $ 1 million in royalties.
David Hobbs, 28, and Mark Ross, 25, filed the lawsuit Monday in federal court.
Last month they filed a $ 2 million lawsuit in state court, claiming Campbell owed them royalties from record sales, concerts, merchandising, licensing and song publishing.
Hobbs and Ross, known respectively as Mr. Mixx and Brother Marquis, are the group's producers and songwriters. They say they started the group two years before meeting Campbell in 1986.
"He used our friendship as a tool to manipulate us," Hobbs said.
Campbell has denied wrongdoing.
In 1990, a federal judge in Fort Lauderdale ruled the group's album "As Nasty As They Wanna Be" was obscene. The rappers were later acquitted of obscenity after being arrested for performing songs from the album.
---
BURBANK, Calif. (AP) - Two songs by Queen were released as a single to benefit the Magic Johnson AIDS Foundation and pay tribute to Freddie Mercury, the rock group's lead singer who died of AIDS.
"I admire Mr. Mercury for revealing his condition before his untimely passing and lending his name to the fight against the terrible disease," Johnson said in a statement Monday.
The basketball star retired in November after testing positive for the AIDS virus.
Mercury announced he had AIDS a day before dying of the disease Nov. 24 in London. He was 45.
Hollywood Records will donate proceeds from the sale of "The Show Must Go On" and "Bohemian Rhapsody," said record company spokeswoman Kathy Acquaviva.
---
WASHINGTON (AP) - Ronald Reagan, the onetime broadcaster whose flair for politics put him in the White House, will receive the Distinguished Service Award from the National Association of Broadcasters.
The Great Communicator will receive the association's highest honor April 13 during its annual convention, the group announced Monday.
Reagan began his career as a radio broadcaster and "during his presidency pushed for deregulation of the broadcast industry and realization of full First Amendment rights for broadcasters," the association said in a statement.
The former president is already in the association's Broadcasting Hall of Fame.
The radio and TV industry association is based in Washington.

 

End of Document
