

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
February 24, 1995, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 770 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: DUBAI, United Arab Emirates
Body




Britain's Princess Anne rode across 22 miles of rough, dusty desert flats Friday, but her mount finished the gruelling horse race far back.
She was accompanied by the United Arab Emirates' crown prince, Sheik Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum, during the race that took her about one hour and 15 minutes to complete.
Princess Anne was riding an Arabian and dismounted once during the rough stages to give her colt a rest before finishing 16th among 36 participants in the Desert Challenge Endurance Ride.
She was presented with a gold medal by Sheik Khalifa bin Sultan Al Nahyan, president of the U.A.E. Equestrian and Horseracing Federation, during a Ramadan dusk party to signify the end of the day's Muslim fasting.
A day earlier, the keen horsewoman was chief guest at the nighttime thoroughbred races in Dubai, during which Bashaar, a 3-year-old colt, won the Dubai Triple Crown. Bashaar is owned by Sheik Mohammed.
---
JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) - Former South African world cross-country champion Zola Budd is pregnant, but still wants to run in the World Championships next month in Durham, England.
Budd, 28, made her debut as a 17-year-old barefoot runner, breaking the world junior 5,000 meter record. She told reporters Thursday that she was "delighted" with the news of her pregnancy.
"My gynecologist has informed me that I do not have to withdraw from the South Africa cross-country team to go to Durham, but I will be chatting to the selectors within the next couple of days to see if I am mentally and physically in shape to run world championships," she said.
Budd said that until she finds out whether she will run the race next month, she will continue running local road and track races.
Budd took British citizenship in 1984 to skirt an anti-apartheid international ban on South African athletes. She collided with Mary Decker in the 3,000-meter final of the Summer Olympics that year, knocking the American out of the race.
---
WEST LAFAYETTE, Ind. (AP) - Leroy Keyes, a member of the National Collegiate Hall of Fame and voted Purdue's all-time greatest player in 1987, is rejoining the Boilermakers as an assistant coach.
Head coach Jim Colletto announced the hiring of Keyes, 48, on Friday and said he would be in charge of running backs.
Keyes, a first-round draft pick in 1969 who played eight years in the NFL with the Philadelphia Eagles and Kansas City Chiefs, has never coached in college or pro footbal. He has coached 10 years with the Penrose Park Youth Association in Philadelphia, working with 14-and 15-years olds in the summer football league to prepare them for high school.
Keyes played tailback and defensive back for the Boilermakers and led the team to the 1967 Big Ten championships. He is still the school's all-time leader in points, rushing touchdowns and total touchdowns.
In recent years, Keyes has been a desegregation specialist for the Philadelphia school district and been involved in civic duties.
---
DENVER (AP) - Jerry McMorris, co-owner and president of the Colorado Rockies, said Oren Benton's 23 percent share of the team won't be put up for auction as a result of Benton's declaration of bankruptcy on Thursday.
McMorris said he and general partner Charles Monfort had the right of first refusal to buy out Benton's share of the team.
Benton, a uranium tycoon, declared bankruptcy and has more than $ 400 million in debts. His share of the Rockies is worth at least $ 33 million, making it one of his most valuable assets.
While the Rockies have other investors, Monfort and McMorris probably would take Benton's share.
The Coors family has an investment in the team but doesn't have a hand in the day-to-day management of the club. Denver businessman Cary Teraji is the team's fourth general partner.
McMorris said he wasn't surprised that Benton filed for bankruptcy.
"I've had a sense for some time now that Oren has been distressed and that he was having some difficulties in the world uranium market," he said.
---
BIRMINGHAM, England (AP) - World 200-meter champion Frankie Fredericks of Namibia is skipping next month's world indoor championships in Barcelona, Spain.
Fredericks said Friday he does want to risk injury and will concentrate on defending his title at this summer's outdoor world championships in Goteborg, Sweden.
"I got injured the last time I competed in the championships and lost a lot of the strength I had built up," he said. "The 200 indoors can be dangerous if the track is not laid right. You only need to hit a bad spot and it can cost you the whole season - even your career."
Fredericks will run Saturday in the KP Invitation indoor meet in Birmingham.
 Load-Date: February 24, 1995

 

End of Document
