

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
February 18, 1992, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 765 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: DENVER
Body




Nuggets rookie Dikembe Mutombo is the latest winner in the shoe wars. He signed a contract with Adidas worth at least $ 1 million for his own signature shoe and a line of athletic clothing that will bear his logo.
The agreement, signed last week, is similar to a contract Michael Jordan of the Chicago Bulls has with Nike Inc. and one Larry Johnson of Charlotte has with Converse.
"The one thing Dikembe has is he can have a signature line," said Sonny Vaccaro, Mutombo's agent. "That's the key. The merchandise bears his own logo and brand, and he gets back royalties from those particular items. To get royalties is a major cause."
Vaccaro declined to specify how much the contract is worth, but said it could be worth at least $ 1 million.
The marketing promotion is in the hands of the same man who helped mastermind Jordan's Air Jordan campaign for Nike - Peter Moore, now with Sports Inc. in Portland, Ore.
The shoe campaign will be based on the theme, "Mutombo The African," Moore said. The shoe will be set off with Mutombo's symbol, a geometric pattern.
It is expected to be in the stores by next January.
"We are going to market 'The African' to the African American," Moore said. Mutombo is from Kinshasa, Zaire.
"We don't think he can compete with Air Jordan and the $ 25 million Nike campaign," Moore said. "We don't have anywhere near the funds … but I think in Europe, Mutombo will be big."
---
LONDON, Ontario (AP) - Wayne Gretzky's plan to operate an Ontario Hockey League expansion franchise in Toronto has been put on hold until the 1993-94 season, the agent for the Los Angeles Kings star says.
Gretzky and actor John Candy wanted to put a team in Maple Leaf Gardens this fall but the timing has not been right, Mike Barnett said.
Gretzky has been unable to find a buyer for his Hull Olympiques of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League. He is required to sell before he can buy another junior team.
Gretzky, Candy and King's owner Bruce McNall own the Toronto Argos of the Canadian Football League.
---
EDMONTON (AP) - A loose screw could sideline Edmonton Oilers winger Esa Tikkanen for the rest of the NHL season.
One of two screws placed in Tikkanen's shoulder to help repair a broken bone have come loose and could neccessitate surgery, Oiler trainer Ken Lowe said Monday.
"Some time down the line, they'll have to go in there and take the screws out," Lowe said. How much the screw has loosened will determine when the operation must take place.
It will ultimately set back Tikkanen's rehabilitation and when he can return to the Oiler lineup. If the operation is next week, it could mean the difference between playing this season or not.
Tikkanen was injured Jan. 4.
---
LONDON (AP) - Former English soccer star Jimmy Greaves will drive a classic car in the World Cup Rally in November.
Greaves, now a television presenter in Britain, plans to drive the 10,000 miles from London to Cape Town in a 20-year-old replica of the Ford Escort he took to sixth place in the first World Cup Rally in 1970 from London to Mexico.
With him will be Tony Fall, his co-driver from the 1970 event.
The rally's route includes the Sahara desert and the jungle tracks of Cameroon and the Congo.
It will be the longest challenge ever for classic cars - all two-wheel drive and of a type made before the end of 1970.
---
DENVER (AP) - Detroit Tigers manager Sparky Anderson has some advice for baseball fans in Colorado who will be rooting for the Rockies when they join the National League in 1993: Just enjoy watching the visiting teams play and ignore the losses that are inevitable for expansion teams.
"What a great thing it's going to be for the city of Denver," Anderson said at sport dinner Monday night. "The city is ready for it, it's primed for it, and you deserve it."
But he cautioned fans not to be impatient with the on-field results.
"In fact," he said, "hope you finish last for the first five years, because then you'll get the No. 1 draft choices."
--
CINCINNATI (AP) - Joe Nuxhall, who pitched for the Cincinnati Reds as a 15-year-old and for the past 25 years has been a Reds broadcaster, underwent prostate cancer surgery Tuesday.
"We accomplished everything we expected to and the outlook is good," Dr. Dale Bennett said.
Nuxhall, 63, expects to resume broadcasting late in spring training.
"We were all very glad to hear that the cancer was detected in the early stages," Reds owner Marge Schott said.
Nuxhall made his big league debut in 1944 as the youngest player in major league history. After finishing high school, he played in the Reds' farm system until 1952, when he was promoted to the Reds.

 

End of Document
