

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
December 8, 1993, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 820 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: LOUDONVILLE, N.Y.
Body




Being a 21-year-old college freshman in a foreign land is hard. Playing Division I basketball for the school is harder still. But Harel Gadot is accustomed to challenges.
Gadot spent three years as an officer in the Israeli Army, Artillery Division.
"My job was to keep the peace on the border in Egypt," he said.
Now, the 6-foot-2 guard from the village of Magshimim, west of Tel Aviv, battles for playing time at Siena College in suburban Albany.
"He's adjusting very well to the intensity and complexity of American basketball," Siena coach Mike Deane said.
Gadot averaged 12 points and five assists last season for Maccabi Ramat Gan of the Israel League's first division. He said he yearned to play in America because his friend Nadav Henefeld starred at Connecticut in 1989-90.
A video cassette featuring Gadot and fellow Israeli player Doron Sheffer was sent to several U.S. colleges this year.
Connecticut signed the 6-foot-5 Sheffer. The 22-year-old former soldier averages 10 points as a freshman point guard for the Big East team.
"Doron's got a very good feel for the game. He's one of the best newcomers in our conference," Connecticut coach Jim Calhoun said.
Siena (4-1) was the only college to offer Gadot a scholarship.
A physical player with a good shooting touch, Gadot said he enjoys playing for the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference school.
"The players are bigger in Israel, but here the players press more, they're more athletic and the game is much quicker," he said.
In a 91-73 victory over Holy Cross Saturday night, Gadot played 15 minutes and scored seven points. Nothing to write home about, but encouraging for Deane whose only criticism of the former soldier is his reluctance to shoot.
"He has to look for his shot more to be an effective point guard," the coach said. "When he played in Israel, he had to look for the two American players on the team and he shot only when he was left alone.
"We're giving him the opportunity to be a complete player. Three years from now, he's going to be a very attractive prospect for the Israeli pro league."
---
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - He hit the ice, he felt good, and he said he'd be playing again soon. It was only practice, but Philadelphia Flyers center Eric Lindros was back.
For the first time since he tore a ligament in his right knee nearly four weeks ago, Lindros practiced with the Flyers on Monday. He was reluctant to set a date for his return.
"I never once felt uneasy out there," Lindros said. "It all came right back to me."
Wearing a black hinged brace on each knee - he suffered the same injury to his left knee last season - Lindros skated in circles, sprinted up and down along the boards and took a few dozen shots.
"No pain," he said.
Lindros tore the ligament in the first period of a Nov. 11 game against the New Jersey Devils during a collision with Bill Guerin.
Coach Terry Simpson said he would decide when Lindros was ready.
"There is no date," Simpson said. "There are a lot of fingers in the equation."
---
BOULDER, Colo. (AP) - Worried about the cost and her safety, University of Colorado officials on Tuesday said mascot Ralphie III will not be traveling to the Aloha Bowl.
"All things considered, it's best not to take her along," Athletic Director Bill Marolt said. "We took a serious look at it, and the reasons for not taking her came down to Ralphie's safety and the cost involved. We want to protect the animal, and we are trying to streamline things and save money."
Ralphie and her other buffalo predecessors had made every bowl trip with the team since 1967. Colorado plays Fresno State in the Aloha Bowl on Christmas Day.
"We know there is a lot of tradition and love for Ralphie, so it was a tough decision," Marolt said. "But hopefully everyone will realize it's the right one and the best for her."
Ralphie isn't the only one that doesn't get to go to Hawaii. The CU marching band isn't going, also because of financial constraints, Marolt said.
The smaller cheerleading squad that traveled with the team during the season will make the trip, Marolt said.
---
HACKENSACK, N.J. (AP) - A man who wore a hockey puck costume as the New Jersey Devils team mascot will not face charges that he molested three female vendors, if he completes a one-year program that includes counseling.
Brad Ebben, the 24-year-old former mascot, was admitted into the pretrial program at a brief court hearing Monday.
The program also requires Ebben to pay $ 125 in court fees and to avoid contact with the women who said he fondled them.
In April, Ebben was charged with grabbing one vendor's breast with the glove he wore as part of his "Slap Shot" costume. He was also charged with grabbing the buttocks of another vendor, and touching a third female vendor's hair, back and face in an offensive manner.
Prosecutors said all three incidents happened during Devils home games.
Ebben resigned after the charges were filed. The team mascot now wears a devil's costume.
 Load-Date: December 8, 1993

 

End of Document
