

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
September 18, 1993, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 947 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: VANCOUVER, British Columbia
Body




Wayne Gretzky hopes to play another three seasons in the NHL, although his pending new contract with the Los Angeles Kings will pay him over a longer period of time.
"I'm only going to play as long as I can play at my best ability," Gretzky said Friday. "Mr. McNall understands all that."
Gretzky, 32, is the NHL's all-time leading scorer and last spring led the Kings to their first appearance in the Stanley Cup final.
Bruce McNall, owner of the Kings, had promised Gretzky he would always be the league's highest-paid player.
Mario Lemieux of the Pittsburgh Penguins signed a seven-year contract last season valued at $ 42 million to become the highest-paid NHL player.
Gretzky earned about $ 3 million last year from the Kings. The new agreement will not be for $ 30 million, as reported by some news outlets this week, Gretzky said.
"Don't believe everything you read and half of what you hear," Gretzky said about the speculated $ 30 million over three years figures.
He indicated his new deal will cover a five-year period, although he doesn't expect to play that long.
In the playoffs, Gretzky led the Kings to series victories over the Calgary Flames, the Vancouver Canucks and the Toronto Maple Leafs before Los Angeles lost in the Stanley Cup final to the Montreal Canadiens.
Gretzky called the new agreement fair to both himself and the Los Angeles organization.
"I'm willing to spread it over a period of time so that we can pay as many other guys as possible. My salary over the next three years wouldn't be a big difference to what I made the last two years."
Gretzky's all-time NHL totals are 765 goals, 1,563 assists and 2,328 points.
---
HOUSTON (AP) - Houston Rockets center Hakeem Olajuwon, now a U.S. citizen, may not be able to play for the U.S. Olympic team in 1996 because of a paperwork snafu, the Houston Chronicle reported Friday.
Olajuwon, a native of Nigeria, became a U.S. citizen on April 2 but he still is not eligible to play for the U.S. Olympic team until proper documents have been filed with the Federation Internationale de Basketball.
FIBA requires a new citizen to follow certain procedures in changing his basketball nationality. Proof of the player's new country and a statement from the new country must be presented.
The Chronicle quoted a source close to Olajuwon as saying the player never received the documents.
Olajuwon has said he'd be honored to play on the U.S. team but wondered if he'd be too old by 1996. He'll be 33.
NBA deputy commissioner Russ Granik said the league would assist in helping Olajuwon become eligible.
"We'll make sure he and his representatives have all the proper forms and we'll help fill that out if need be," Granik said.
---
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) - Diego Maradona, soccer's biggest name of the 1980s, was left off Argentina's national team roster for a two-game series with Australia that will determine which country plays in the World Cup.
A spokesman for the Argentine Soccer Association said Friday the 33-year-old midfielder, who recently returned to his native country to play professionally, could still be added to the team.
Maradona led Argentina to the 1986 World Cup title and a second-place finish in 1990.
Maradona completed a season in Spain with Sevilla in June. He returned to Argentina and announced he was retiring, a promise he has made and broken several times since the spring of 1991, when he was suspended for 15 months because of a positive drug test.
He has played just two games for Argentina's national team since the 1990 World Cup - Feb. 18 and Feb. 24 this year.
Argentina must play a home-and-home, total-goals series with Australia in order to advance to next summer's 24-team World Cup to be held at nine sites in the United States. The first game is Oct. 31 at Sydney and the second Nov. 14 at Buenos Aires.
---
ATLANTA (AP) - Atlanta Olympics chief Billy Payne said Friday he doesn't believe China will boycott the 1996 Games, despite indications from Chinese officials that a boycott is possible.
Payne suggested that a statement by a Chinese official, raising the possibility of a boycott if Beijing is not awarded the 2000 Summer Games, may have been prompted by shaky nerves as the announcement of the next Olympic city nears.
"I think what we're hearing now is some difficult times and statements and a lot of pressure that everybody gets under immediately before the vote," Payne said. "I don't remember all the stupid things I said before the vote, but I guarantee you there were a bunch."
---
DALLAS (AP) - The Dallas Stars' new public address announcer, Sari Zalesin, is believed to be the first woman holding such a job in the NHL, the team said Friday.
The only other major league team to have a female PA announcer is the San Francisco Giants, where Sherry Davis has been at the microphone since the start of this season.
Sari, who uses only her first name professionally, grew up in the Detroit area, where she was a fan of the Red Wings and competed in figure skating for 12 years.
"I'm thrilled to be a part of the National Hockey League making its mark in the Dallas-Fort Worth area," said Sari, 28. "The Stars will create a lot of excitement in the Metroplex this season and I'm proud to be a part of it."
Sari (which rhymes with berry), will continue working as an on-air personality on KZPS(FM) radio, where she announces rock'n'roll songs and is the host of the daily Classic Cafe program.
She also does commercial voice-over work for many clients including American Express, NBC Sports, beer companies and record labels. She has been a public address announcer for events in the Silverdome and Detroit's Joe Louis Arena as well as Dallas' Reunion Arena, where the Stars will play.
 Load-Date: September 18, 1993

 

End of Document
