

New Liverpool Gallery Commemorates the Suffering of Slaves
The Associated Press
March 8, 1995, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 903 words
Byline: By SUE LEEMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LIVERPOOL, England
Body



---
"I was soon put down under the decks and there I received such a salutation in my nostrils as I had never experienced in my life, so that, with the loathsomeness of the stench and crying together, I became so sick and low that I was not able to eat. I now wished for the last friend, death, to relieve me." Reminiscences of freed slave Olaudah Equiano.
--- In the dark and dank hold of a ship, men, women and children writhe in chains, the darkness echoing the sounds of their collective anguish.
A few steps away, the haunting songs of Africa ripple through a field of sugar cane.
Displays of such scenes are part of Britain's first national exhibition on trans-Atlantic slavery, on display in a refurbished dockyard where thousands of slave ships once left for the Americas.
"Slavery transformed society at all levels, but it has not been talked about enough," said exhibit promoter Garry Morris. "Now we have the political climate to do it."
Writer Maya Angelou opened the gallery Oct. 25.
The exhibit begins with a punch: "In the 400 years between about 1500 and 1900, Europeans enslaved many millions of Africans . ..," runs the opening text.
"They shipped them across the Atlantic in conditions of great cruelty, to lead lives of degradation and brutality. Millions died in the process."
Nothing is glossed over: Glass cases contain steel shackles, wrought iron "punishment" collars and the irons some slave owners used to brand human beings. Tableaux show desperate Africans being bartered for guns and polishing plantation owners' ornate silver tableware.
But the gallery also highlights the slaves' rich west African cultures - they came from highly organized societies in which economic activity flourished, and family and education played major roles. These cultures also were complex, having developed centuries ago during the great empire-kingdoms.
The exhibit has displays of carvings, musical instruments, ceremonial masks and precious jewelry. Put a "sound stick" to your ear for a recording of resistance songs still sung by members of the Yoruba tribe in Nigeria and Benin.
The exhibition is the idea of Peter Moores, son of the Liverpool family that made millions out of mail order catalogs and football pools.
Several other museums turned him down before Liverpool's Merseyside Maritime Museum agreed to house the project.
"I had been conscious for some time that the subject of slavery is taboo," he said. "I felt it was time that this barrier between historical events and our acceptance of their significance for ourselves was removed."
The Peter Moores Foundation donated $ 780,000 for the project.
The museum, in Liverpool's restored Albert Dock, looks at nearly 500 years of trans-Atlantic slavery and its consequences. Some 5,300 slaving voyages left from Liverpool between 1700 and 1807, more than from any other European port.
Lord Pitt of Hampstead, a black member of Britain's upper chamber, the unelected House of Lords, chaired an advisory panel that included members of black organizations and academics to research the subject. He died Dec. 18.
Eleven academics, seven of them black, wrote the text for the gallery.
Slavery has a long and horrific history. In Egypt from 2686 to 2160 B.C. it was common for children to be sold to pay debts. Slavery also surfaced in ancient Greece, the Roman Empire, China, Japan and the Middle East.
But the greatest slave trade was between Europe and the Americas from the 16th to the 19th centuries.
Some experts put the number at between 12 million and 20 million people, although some scholars believe the real total, including the dead and those enslaved in Africa, is between 50 million and 100 million.
Portuguese captains imported the first black slaves from North Africa into Europe in 1444 and the practice spread to neighboring Spain. After Europeans began settling the Americas, African labor was brought in to the islands of the Caribbean and then to what would become the United States.
Sugar and coffee harvested by slaves was exported to Europe. The introduction of tobacco and rice increased the demand for slaves in America's Southern states. By 1754, there were 263,000 slaves in Virginia alone. The rising cotton industry added to the demand.
The journey to the Americas took up to eight weeks. Epidemics of fever, dysentery and smallpox were common during the middle passage and those who died were thrown overboard. Groups of slaves revolted, but seldom succeeded in escaping. Some committed suicide by jumping into the sea.
Cruelty was common; in 1781 the captain of the Liverpool slave ship Zong threw 131 people overboard in an attempt to claim insurance.
In their new homes, slaves went through 2-3 years' "seasoning," forced to learn new customs and languages and given new names.
In 1807, Britain and the United States abolished the slave trade, although slavery remained legal. The United States outlawed slavery in 1865.
Anne-Marie Sharman of Anti-Slavery International said her group will use a small room adjoining the gallery for an occasional exhibition explaining "that slavery still goes on, from child slaves to domestic workers who are deprived of their rights."
Wrote one visitor, Evelyn Asante-Mensa, in the gallery's visitor's book: "It is not enough to hate the way black people were treated in the 'old' days - you must acknowledge the way we are treated now! The racism continues, it must be fought. This exhibition is a beginning."
 Load-Date: March 8, 1995

 

End of Document
