

No Comment on Report of Mandela Split  A London newspaper reported Sunday that Nelson and Winnie Mandela plan to separate over new allegations about Mrs. Mandela's activities while her husband was in jail. The Sunday Times of London, quoting unidentified ANC sources, reported in a front-page story that the couple's 34-year marriage was over. In Johannesburg, ANC spokesman Pallo Jordan said, "I don't think it would be proper for the ANC to comment on these matters. Mr. and Mrs. Mandela are entitled to a private life."
The Associated Press
April 5, 1992, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 229 words
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, South Africa
Body




There was no comment from the Mandelas, and attempts to reach them by telephone were unsuccessful.
According to the Sunday Times, the couple will separate but no divorce is planned.
Mandela, 73, the ANC president, was released two years ago after serving 27 years in prison for trying to overthrow the white government. He married Mrs. Mandela, 57, in 1958 and they had two children before he went to prison.
During his incarceration, Mrs. Mandela was banned by the government, placed under house arrest and jailed.
Last year, she was convicted of kidnapping and being an accessory to assault in the abduction and beating of four teen-agers at her Soweto home in 1988. Mrs. Mandela was sentenced to six years in prison but freed on bail pending an appeal. Two others were also convicted.
One of the four youths, 14-year-old Stompie Seipei, was killed later, and Mrs. Mandela's chief bodyguard was convicted in 1990 of the slaying.
The Sunday Times said one of Mrs. Mandela's co-defendants, Xoliswa Falati, recently told ANC officials that she had lied at the trial to protect Mrs. Mandela. The newspaper said Mrs. Falati now accuses Mrs. Mandela of ordering the assault of Seipei and operating "hit squads" in the Soweto black township.
News reports in South Africa last week said Mrs. Falati had been living at the Mandela house but was moved away after a dispute with Mrs. Mandela.

 

End of Document
