

No Electricity? No Big Deal - The Stolen Car Was The Last Straw
The Associated Press
June 12, 1993, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 402 words
Byline: By MICHELLE FAUL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LAGOS, Nigeria
Body




Like many Nigerians, Josephine Ademola endures power blackouts, pandemic corruption, increasingly violent crime and a collapsed economy where water can cost more than gasoline.
But when armed robbers held a submachine gun to her head and stole the new car she'd spent months paying off, her resilience - a trait Lagos residents are known for - broke down.
Like millions of other Nigerians, Ademola refused to vote in Saturday's elections for this West African nation's first civilian president in a decade.
"That was it," she said in an interview. "I've got no hope left for this country and no faith that any new government, civilian or military, can get us out of the mess."
Ademola said she had long been discouraged by military ruler Gen. Ibrahim Babangida's manipulation of the scheduled transfer to civilian rule, now three years overdue.
"Who are we voting for? Two parties built by the military and two candidates who are friends of Babangida. What kind of government will that produce?" she asked.
When state television aired Nigeria's first presidential election debate, she could not watch it because her apartment block, like half of Lagos, had no power. There was a strike by oil workers who supply the city's generators.
Two days later, when the vice presidential candidates debated, she still had no electricity.
Without power for her water pump, Ademola has been hefting buckets of water up six flights of stairs to wash dishes, clothes and herself.
When she reported the car theft to police, they responded with mocking laughter.
"The police won't help, they commit a lot of the crimes around here, and the government won't help," she said.
So Ademola contacted friends with connections in the criminal underground in hopes of buying back her car from the thieves.
There was no way she could afford another car. "In the four months since I bought it, the price has gone up from 230,000 naira (about $ 11,000) to 320,000 ($ 15,200)."
Worst of all, the thieves made off with a portfolio of photographs of furniture that Ademola sells from a small factory she started two years ago.
She took out her frustration with a hiss at a passing vendor who offered a packet of water: "Who you try cheat now-o?" she cried in street lingo.
The water sold for 90 kobo (less than half a cent) - a bit more than the price of Nigeria's cheapest gasoline.
Then she remembered another reason not to vote: "They stole my voting card."

 

End of Document
