

Notorious Terrorist Carlos the Jackal Arrested
The Associated Press
August 15, 1994, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1041 words
Byline: By TERRIL JONES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




Carlos the Jackal, the most wanted terrorist of the past 20 years, was arrested in Sudan and flown to France, where he stands convicted of killing two counterintelligence agents, authorities said today.
Carlos, 44, born Ilich Ramirez Sanchez in Venezuela, had been under surveillance in Khartoum, the Sudanese capital, on suspicion of planning attacks on foreign targets before France asked Sudan to arrest him, Sudan said.
Sudanese government spokesman Abubaker al Shingieti told The Associated Press in London that Carlos was arrested "in the past few days" along with several other people. He refused to say how many others were arrested, where they were from, or whether they were still in Sudan.
A flamboyant gun-for-hire with a penchant for the high life, Carlos has been connected to many of the most audacious terrorist actions of the 1970s and numerous attacks in France and Germany, generally linked to conflicts in the Middle East.
Intelligence reports have linked him to the massacre of 11 Israeli athletes at the 1972 Munich Olympics, a 1975 attack on OPEC headquarters, and the 1976 hijacking of an Air France plane to Entebbe, Uganda.
He has reportedly teamed up with some of the world's most notorious groups: Germany's Baader-Meinhof gang, the Japanese Red Army, the Turkish Popular Liberation Front, the Basque separatist movement in Spain and various Palestinian organizations.
Sudan said Carlos entered Sudan on a false diplomatic passport from an Arab country and was traveling with a group also carrying Arab passports. It did not name the countries involved.
Authorities had Carlos under surveillance because they doubted the validity of his passport and later learned his identity from France, the interior minister, al-Tayeb Ibrahim Mohamed Khier said.
Khier said Carlos and his associates planned to attack foreign targets so Sudan would be blamed for supporting international terrorism. It was not clear why Carlos and his group would seek to impugn Sudan.
After the arrest, the Sudanese justice minister, Abdel-Azziz Shado, urged the United States to reconsider its decision to put Sudan on list of states that sponsor terrorism, Egypt's Middle East News Agency reported.
The plea could explain Sudan's motive for turning Carlos over. By labeling Sudan a sponsor of terrorism in August 1993, Washington cut off most American aid and made it difficult for the economically troubled country to get loans from the World Bank and International Monetary Fund.
According to the agency's report from Khartoum, Shado also said Carlos had been in Sudan about six months.
The French interior minister, Charles Pasqua, said Carlos arrived at the Villacoublay air base outside Paris accompanied by French counterintelligence agents. A ministry statement said he would be brought before a French court today.
Sudanese authorities informed France on Sunday that they had positively identified Carlos in Khartoum, Pasqua said, but neither he nor Khier said when Carlos was taken into custody or brought to France.
Carlos had dropped out of sight in recent years, and antiterrorist experts had believed he was in Syria.
Born Oct. 12, 1949, Carlos is the son of a wealthy communist Venezuelan lawyer, Jose Allagracia Sanchez, who gave each of his three sons one name of Russian revolutionary leader Vladimir Ilyich Lenin.
A man who answered the phone at his father's house told The Associated Press, "I don't know anything sir, excuse me."
But Caracas radio, without broadcasting a taped recording, said Carlos' father told them: "If you want to know about him, interview him. Aside from that I can tell you simply that I am a Communist, Marxist Leninist, and I will stay one until I die."
Carlos has been announced captured many times before.
In 1981, Mexico City police claimed the world's attention for several hours by saying they'd captured Carlos. Their "Carlos" turned out to be a frightened armed robber with only a passing resemblance to the terrorist.
Carlos began his infamous career in 1970, when he joined the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.
He got his nom de guerre early on - reportedly after British tabloids learned a copy of Frederick Forsyth's 1971 novel, "Day of the Jackal," was found in a safehouse Carlos used in London.
Some intelligence reports have linked him to the massacre at the Munich Olympics by Palestine Liberation Organization factions operating under the name Black September.
But Yigal Carmon, a former adviser on terrorism to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel, said Carlos had nothing to do with the attack.
In 1992, Carlos was sentenced in absentia in France to life in prison for shooting to death two counterintelligence agents investigating attacks on Israel's El Al airplanes at Paris' Orly Airport.
He also is suspected in the 1974 takeover of the French Embassy in The Hague, Netherlands and the 1975 attack on the headquarters of the OPEC oil cartel in Vienna, Austria, in which three people were killed and 11 taken hostage.
One hostage was Ahmed Zaki Yamani, then Saudi Arabia's oil minister, who called Carlos a "ruthless terrorist who operates with cold-blooded, surgical precision."
By 1981, Carlos was reported organizing covert operations for Syria aimed at overthrowing the Iraqi government. Some reports said he led a Libyan hit squad sent to kill President Reagan in 1981.
In March 1982, Carlos threatened to strike the French government unless it freed two of his suspected agents, Bruno Breguet, a Swiss, and Magdalena Kopp, a West German, arrested the previous month in Paris.
The threat came in a letter bearing his fingerprints, verified by French police. It was the first proof in six years that he was alive.
Later that month, a bomb exploded aboard the Paris-Toulouse express, killing six people and wounding 15.
In April 1982, a bomb exploded just off the Champs Elysees, killing a pregnant woman and wounding 63 other people.
On New Years' Eve, 1983, bombs exploded in Marseilles' main railroad terminal and on the Paris-Marseilles express, killing five people and wounding 50.
Kopp and Breguet were released in May 1985. Kopp flew to Damascus to join Carlos, and the two were married. Since then, as far as was known, he had lived in Damascus with his wife and their daughter, Rosa.
 Load-Date: August 15, 1994

 

End of Document
