

Now Comes the Hard Part for the 42nd President
The Associated Press
January 20, 1993, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 756 words
Byline: By TOM RAUM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Clinton's inaugural address was the easy part. His next step is to deliver on his declaration that "to renew America, we must be bold."
Clinton will find, as other presidents have, that being bold takes a lot of work - no matter how noble the oratory. But he starts with a clean slate and has an advantage accorded no other incoming president for 16 years: both houses of Congress controlled by his own party.
In a 14-minute address that drew from Thomas Jefferson, John F. Kennedy, Martin Luther King and Ross Perot, the new Democratic chief executive reprised the major themes of the campaign that propelled him to the White House.
"Raised in unrivaled prosperity, we inherit an economy still the world's strongest, but weakened by business failures, stagnant wages, increasing inequality, and deep divisions among our people," Clinton said.
True to the word of a candidate who called fixing the economy his No. 1 priority, Clinton dwelled mostly on domestic challenges: cutting the deficit, "investing" in the nation's infrastructure and job skills, universal health insurance, a national youth service program.
But, in a nod to the foreign policy crises that clamor for attention, Clinton said: "When our vital interests are challenged, or the will and conscience of the international community is defied, we will act - with peaceful diplomacy when possible, with force when necessary."
That was, primarily, a message to Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein, from the first president to take office with U.S. forces in harm's way since Richard Nixon in 1969.
"The brave Americans serving our nation in the Persian Gulf, in Somalia, and wherever else they stand are testament to our resolve," Clinton added.
With the exception of Harry Truman, who assumed office in 1945 while World War II was still raging, "Bill Clinton is inheriting the biggest batch of foreign-policy confusion … in my memory," former President Jimmy Carter said in a post-inaugural interview with CNN.
And the candidate who criticized former President Bush during the campaign for focusing on foreign policy at the expense of domestic concerns told Americans as president:
"There is no clear division today between what is foreign and what is domestic - the world economy, the world environment, the world AIDS crisis, the world arms race, they affect us all."
Wayne Fields, a professor at Washington University in St. Louis who specializes in presidential rhetoric, gave Clinton generally high marks for the speech. "It's relatively consistent with the larger themes of the campaign: Renewal, family, reconciliation, the whole business of inclusion," he said.
The theme of inclusion could also have described the speech itself, drawing form many American voices.
Borrowing from Thomas Jefferson, Clinton told Americans "to preserve the very foundations of our nation, we ...need dramatic change from time to time. Well, my fellow Americans, this is our time. Let us embrace it."
Kennedy's "now the trumpet summons us again" echoed in Clinton's "We have heard the trumpets, We have changed the guard. And now - each in our own way, and with God's help - we must answer the call."
The president's "from this joyful mountaintop of celebration, we hear a call to service in the valley" recalled passages by slain civil rights leader King.
And "Let us give this capital back to the people to whom it belongs" was Clinton's variation on a message sounded by independent challenger Perot.
Like many presidents before him, Clinton's inaugural address presented a broad-brush vision for America - no real specifics. They will come later. "He has eased off very specific promises. It was very, very general," said James Thurber, a political scientist at American University.
But seldom have presidents made major legislative proposals in inaugural addresses.
"Unless the nation is in some kind of crisis and the oratory is eloquent, inaugural addresses are best forgotten," said Erwin Hargrove, a political scientist at Vanderbilt University.
"We won't be able to really assess Clinton's inaugural until we see him in retrospect," Hargrove added. "Inaugurals are a portent for the future presidency."
But are they also a portent for future speeches?
Clinton broke at least some new ground with the address: It was the shortest major speech of his career - 14 minutes, just one fourth the length of his acceptance speech last July at the Democratic National Convention.
 
 ---
Editor's Note: Tom Raum covered the Bush presidency and is now covering the Clinton White House for The Associated Press.

 

End of Document
