

Orania: The Afrikaners' Last White Hope
The Associated Press
November 21, 1993, Sunday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1204 words
Byline: By TINA SUSMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ORANIA, South Africa
Body




What you notice first about Orania are the roses: fat, brilliantly colored, bobbing like giant berries in the desert breeze.
Equally striking is the sight of those who work the soil: white-skinned men and women toiling in the sun, down on their knees in the dirt of a land where such labor had always been left to poorly paid blacks.
Here in the heart of nowhere, a few white pioneers are pursuing their dream of a racially pure Afrikaner homeland that does not even allow the black gardeners and maids who once symbolized white privilege.
Their hope is to expand across the desolate northern half of the Cape Province and secede from what is certain to become a black-ruled country after the first multiracial election in April.
Ironically, the spot where they decided to settle was designed for the very people they want to avoid.
Orania, on the Orange River 600 miles southwest of Johannesburg, was built in the 1970s to house black laborers building a dam nearby. When the dam was finished, the prefabricated houses, municipal swimming pool, school and churches were abandoned to tumbleweeds and squatters.
Then in 1991, Danie van Rensburg, a Pretoria businessman, saw a "town for sale" ad in a newspaper and thought Orania might be suitable as the nucleus of the Afrikaner homeland white conservatives had in mind.
He and a few others pooled their money and bought it for 1.5 million rand, worth about $ 500,000 at the time, thus creating a private town where they could make their own rules. They drove out the squatters and transformed the neglected houses into neat bungalows with thriving gardens.
Van Rensburg and his approximately 350 fellow Oranians say the Afrikaners' only hope for survival lies in a homeland where their language and culture, viewed by most blacks as symbols of oppression, can be preserved.
"We have no choice," said Van Rensburg, dressed in khaki shorts and knee-high white socks, the male uniform of choice in Orania. "We must go for our own nation. We're the only group in South Africa that doesn't have a place we can call our own."
The Afrikaners, descendants of Dutch settlers, number 3 million in an overwhelmingly black population of 40 million. They designed the apartheid system of racial separation and had been in power 40 years when President F.W. de Klerk, viewed in Orania as a traitor, began his reforms in 1989.
Racial "homelands" are not a new idea in South Africa. In the 1960s, Prime Minister Hendrik Verwoerd created black homelands - generally in desolate areas - to keep the races apart.
The African National Congress, which fought a guerrilla war against apartheid and is expected to lead the next government, opposes an Afrikaner homeland. But its president, Nelson Mandela, has said he will consider a region around Pretoria with a white majority if residents of other races have equal rights there.
Even though blacks are not allowed to live in Orania, one of the most common statements among residents seems to be: "I am not a racist."
Some, like Nico van den Berg, who says he supports de Klerk's reforms, are quite convincing.
"I'd like the blacks to have all the rights and privileges I have," said van den Berg, who moved to Orania from Pretoria. "So that's why I think this is a good idea, because for the first time, the whites are saying, 'We're going to take this small piece of land that no one else wants, and you can have the rest.' It's racial in a certain sense, but I'm not a racist."
Then there are the others.
"You CANNOT live together, you can't, you can't, you can't!" said Jacoba Volschenk, whose auto-parts store is on the commercial strip along the two-lane highway that runs through town. "Imagine if you go to stay in a hotel and there's a black lady in the swimming pool. I wouldn't like it! I wouldn't do it, never!" she said.
A few minutes earlier, the owner of a tearoom around the corner had chased off a black man she accused of loitering. The man had been passing through town, which is legal, but apparently had paused longer than she thought proper.
The whites sipping tea and eating sandwiches in the shop either were oblivious to the altercation or decided to ignore it.
Among them was Orania's oldest and most famous resident: Betsie Verwoerd, widow of apartheid's mastermind. Her husband was stabbed to death in Parliament in 1966 by a demented page while in the midst of implementing his homelands plan.
To his 92-year-old widow and many other residents of Orania, Verwoerd was South Africa's last great leader and was grossly misunderstood.
"Apartheid is misinterpreted, very much so," the white-haired widow said in her elegant living room, which is dominated by a portrait of the slain leader. "His idea was independence for every group.
"When my husband died, his successors did not carry out his ideas. I personally believe that if he had the chance to carry out his beliefs, things would not be as troubled as they are now."
Verwoerd's supporters say he would have given blacks far more and better land than his successors did. That failure to carry out his plans properly, they contend, stirred the poltiical unrest that forced reforms.
De Klerk may be the most hated man in Orania. Some residents even say Mandela is a better leader.
At least, Mandela is "looking out for his people," said Tim Vaughan, an American who settled in Orania two years ago.
Vaughan, a red-haired, bearded man originally from Ventura, Calif., and his wife, Brenda, from San Jose, Calif., are among the few non-Afrikaners in Orania. He said he brought his family to the town because the Afrikaners' strict moral code matches his own.
"The only way for Calvinism to last is in an Afrikaner context, and the only way for Afrikaners to last is through self-determination," Vaughan said. His 33-year-old wife, pregnant with their sixth child, sat silently beside him, nodding agreement.
Their politics are radical Afrikaner. The murder of ANC leader Chris Hani by white extremists "made a lot of people around here happy," Vaughan said with a grin. His wife belongs to the the Afrikaner Resistance Movement, known for its swastika-like symbol and fierce racism.
In accordance with Orania's religious code, there is no liquor store and the guest house does not serve alcohol. The Bible is displayed prominently in many homes. An unmarried couple who moved into a house together in January received a letter from the Town Council telling them to get married or leave. They got married.
There is no privacy. The six-member Town Council, elected annually, must rule on each application for residence. Oranians take turns patrolling the streets at night, noting whose car is in whose driveway, whose lights are on.
Many rise at dawn, before the heat closes in, to work in their gardens and clean house before going to jobs in one of the shops or small factories, or in nearby towns. By 8 p.m., the streets are silent.
Most residents say they are armed to the teeth and ready for war. Some have stockpiled food and other supplies just in case.
Vaughan jumped up from his tattered living room sofa and pretended to rattle off rounds with an automatic rifle. His biggest fear, he said, is that the Afrikaners won't fight. But if they do - he grinned again - "South Africa will go up in smoke."
 Load-Date: November 22, 1993

 

End of Document
