

Out of the Wreckage, New Fears Haunt French Capital
 The Associated Press
October 17, 1995, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 819 words
Byline: By WILLIAM J. KOLE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




Mocking the efforts of desperate police, the bombers terrorizing France blew up another crowded subway car Tuesday, turning it into a mass of mangled steel and thrashing injured.
The bomb wounded 29 people, blowing off the legs and feet of some riders. Authorities described it as a steel canister filled with explosives and hex nuts - the trademark device of Algerian insurgents who have waged a terror campaign in the French capital since midsummer.
Rush hour was nearing full swing when when the blast shredded the second car of the RER regional subway train at 7:05 a.m., just as it passed the Orsay Museum in the heart of Paris.
Silver-helmeted firefighters carried writhing victims on stretchers out of the Orsay Museum station, where commuters described a darkened tunnel filled with smoke and cries for help from injured passengers.
Red-and-white police tape ringed the entrance to the station next to the art museum, and fire, police and rescue vehicles filled the street. Helicopters airlifted out the most seriously hurt.
The site of the attack seemed to mock authorities' efforts to halt the terror campaign by Algerian extremists, who have claimed responsibility for seven other deadly bombings or attempts. Islamic militants object to France's financial support of the military-installed government in Algeria, a former colony.
The explosion occurred between the St.-Michel and the Orsay Museum stations along the Seine River in central Paris and across from the Louvre Museum. The subway line is a main artery used by commuters living in middle-class suburbs south and west of the French capital.
"We're all a little bit traumatized right now. It's happened too many times," said Anne Guescoux, who fearfully took the same subway line to her suburban home late Tuesday.
"There's a psychosis now among the population. No one knows what to do."
Officials issued an alert for a dark blue BMW with three people aboard that had been spotted in the area, but no arrests were made.
The bomb was a commercially available steel gas canister, a slightly smaller version of the propane containers used on many barbecue gas grills. Police say the terrorists unscrewed the valve, packed the canister with hex nuts and explosive powder and replaced the valve, attaching a detonator activated by a timer.
Shrapnel from the bomb severed the feet of several passengers, according to Olivier Lamour, a doctor on the scene.
President Jacques Chirac, cutting short a trip to central France, expressed his "indignation" at the latest attack and he said he was determined "to do everything to prevent and repress this fanatic violence."
Premier Alain Juppe told a hushed National Assembly that France "will not let itself be intimidated" and "will not capitulate in the face of barbarism.
"France has been targeted, France has been directly threatened, France has been heinously challenged by blind and cowardly terrorism," the prime minister said.
France's wave of bombings began July 25 at the St. Michel station, when a similar device killed seven people and wounded 84. Tuesday's bombing raised the injury toll since then to at least 155.
Interior Minister Jean-Louis Debre said police - already omnipresent with 14,500 extra soldiers and police on the streets - would step up patrols further and that more identity checks would be conducted. The government has already made 1.8 million checks since the first bombing.
Reflecting the frustration, Jean Bergougnoux, head of the French national railroad, announced even tighter security and vigilance on all subways and commuter trains. But he noted the difficulty of policing a network of "385 stations and 5,000 trains that transport 2 million travelers every day."
By the evening rush hour, the daily grind had resumed even near the blast site, where youngsters ran around and skated. Both commuters and travelers took comfort in the notion that terrorists would not strike twice in the same spot - at least not on the same day.
"They've already hit this station so it's pretty safe to be here," said Janette Alexander, a tourist from Charleston, S.C.
The extremist Armed Islamic Group based in Algeria has claimed responsibility for most of the other bombings.
The group also has staged attacks in Algeria aimed at sabotaging a presidential election Nov. 16. Algerian President Liamine Zeroual, a retired general appointed to the office, is favored to win the vote.
Algerian militants are also angry at Chirac's plans to meet with Zeroual in New York this month during ceremonies honoring the 50th anniversary of the United Nations.
Juppe insisted Tuesday that the meeting "is in no way backing a candidate, but is a contact with a head of state like numerous others around the world."
More than 30,000 people have died in an Islamic insurgency in Algeria that began in January 1992, when the government canceled legislative elections the Islamic Salvation Front party was expected to win.
 Load-Date: October 17, 1995

 

End of Document
