

PART I: The U.N., 'Impossible Dream,' Begins Second Half-Century
 The Associated Press
October 14, 1995, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1329 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




High above Manhattan's midnight streets, in a small room hung with maps and clocks, a lonely pair of military men keep quiet watch on the world, their computer screens and televisions tuned in to the global ebb and flow of war and peace.
"It may not look like much," Michael Dolezik, a German lieutenant colonel, says of the U.N. peacekeepers' Situation Center. "But you should have seen what we had before."
Next week, presidents and prime ministers from more than 150 countries converge on the United Nations to celebrate its 50th birthday, in a diplomatic extravaganza offering photo opportunities and rapid-fire speeches, but little new direction for the world body.
Behind the scenes at U.N. headquarters, however, and in African villages and bombed-out Balkan towns, the organization is inching forward into its second half-century on its own. It's breaking new ground: reinforcing peacekeeping staff and organizing elections, prosecuting war criminals and rebuilding governments. And it's slowly whittling away its own deadwood.
Critics would rather see an ax swung at the forest of U.N. agencies and committees. But even a skeptic like Dick Thornburgh, the former Pennsylvania governor who left a U.N. leadership post in frustration in 1993, sees an organization making mixed progress.
"It's kind of two steps forward and one step back in many respects," he said.
In one respect, the United Nations has taken a big step forward: It may be under fire and under-financed, but the organization once dismissed as irrelevant is now at least under the spotlight again.
 
 "Two telephones!" said Belgian officer Jean-Marie LeClerc. "That's what we started with."
From that beginning in 1993, the U.N. peacekeepers' New York hub has expanded to a battery of around-the-clock computer, voice and fax connections to 17 peacekeeping missions and links to a world of news media sources.
Peacekeeping Operations, a department once staffed by just eight military officers, now has 120, serving as rear echelon to 70,000 peacekeeping soldiers worldwide. Most New York officers and all of the troops are on loan from member governments.
The peacekeepers' blue flag has become the symbol of a newly muscular United Nations, whether in successful missions like Cambodia and Mozambique or in troubled operations like Somalia and Bosnia.
Some, like Romeo Dallaire, want to make it more muscular still.
During last year's Rwanda genocide, the Canadian general had to stand by with a tiny U.N. force as a half-million people were slaughtered. Nineteen nations ignored a U.N. call for troops to pacify the African nation.
"If I had gotten 2,500 to 4,000 effective troops in the first month, hundreds of thousands of people would have survived," Dallaire told The Associated Press.
To supply that ready muscle, the Dutch government proposes an infantry brigade of 5,000 international volunteers, "owned" by the United Nations, who could respond within days to emergencies. The idea has strong appeal in some quarters.
"It would be great," said Kofi Annan, U.N. undersecretary-general for peacekeeping. But the soft-spoken man from Ghana knows the rapid deployment force faces formidable enemies.
"Some of the big boys" - that is, the Americans - "have not been too keen to give the U.N. that capacity," Annan said.
Money is a major obstacle, an estimated $ 500 million a year to maintain such a force, on top of $ 500 million in start-up costs.
The Canadians are pushing a fallback proposal: A rapid-deployment headquarters "cell" of 30 to 50 officers in New York who could plan for an emergency and then deploy with peacekeeping troops contributed by U.N. members.
But, again, the United States and others will watch the bottom line.
Peacekeeping has ballooned into the biggest chunk of U.N. spending - $ 3.3 billion in 1994, compared with $ 1.3 billion for the core U.N. budget - and it provides auditors with a steady stream of horror stories, like the 750 excess minibuses bought for the Cambodia operation.
But peacekeeping is just one area where U.S. and other critics find wasteful U.N. spending:
-The organization spawns too many committees and agencies that do duplicative work, they say - in the fields of women's problems, Palestinian issues and emergency relief, for example.
-Such U.N. operations as translation, printing and messenger services could be privatized at large savings.
-Auditors have long complained that too many contracts are awarded without bidding, at extra cost.
The man in command of reshaping the U.N. bureaucracy, which he says is "afflicted with chronic slowness," sometimes feels like a captain at sea.
"Changing an organization is like turning a battleship," said Joseph E. Connor, Thornburgh's latest successor as undersecretary-general for administration and management.
In his first year, the retired chief of the U.S. accounting firm Price Waterhouse has made headway, presenting the first two-year U.N. budget, for 1996-97, that actually cuts spending, by $ 110 million.
Over the next two years, he intends to eliminate duplication in agencies, and then to look at the remaining programs to determine "whether there's sufficient value in what's being delivered."
But Washington remains unsatisfied. Over and over, U.S. diplomats call for greater "accountability."
They complain that a key budgetary panel remains closed to outside scrutiny; that most money allocated to the U.N. system goes to agencies, like UNICEF, beyond General Assembly oversight; that staffing is weak at the new U.N. inspector-general's office.
To back its complaints, Washington cuts off funding periodically. That has snowballed into a $ 1.4 billion U.S. debt to the United Nations, and that, in turn, has drawn fire from such Third World spokesmen as Julius K. Nyerere.
"We all want to see the U.N. well-managed," the former Tanzanian president said in a recent speech. "But it is not a business. Its operations cannot be judged solely by 'efficiency' in money terms."
These U.N. defenders note that the worldwide system staff of 50,000 is smaller, for example, than the state public service of Hawaii. And the core U.N. budget of $ 1.3 billion is barely more than the loss the Pentagon may incur from a recent error in ordering U.S. Army missiles.
But Third World reaction has deeper roots, too, in what many see as growing neglect of the U.N. Charter's commitment to "promote social progress and better standards of life."
One example: "Reform" studies suggest shutting down the U.N. Conference on Trade and Development, a 450-employee agency in Geneva that studies and promotes Third World development. The idea angers leaders of poor nations.
The agency should be strengthened instead, to become a better advocate of poor nations and "to question the existing world economic order," contends Indonesia's foreign minister, Ali Alatas.
Dissatisfaction runs in many directions, at many levels, both outside and inside the United Nations.
Ex-British soldier Rae McGrath worked in the U.N. program to remove land mines in Afghanistan, until bureaucratic inertia drove him to quit.
"In a way, the U.N. is an impossible dream of an organization," he said, "with lots of individuals in it doing their best, but tied up with the jealousies and bickering of all the countries and people involved."
The dissatisfaction is broad. But it's not new.
U Thant once lamented when he was secretary-general, "The United Nations has 10 years to become effective or perish."
That was in 1969. A quarter-century later, his institution, if battered and short on cash, is beginning to look imperishable. Even U.N. boosters sound less nervous these days about its future.
In a 50th-anniversary report, one panel of pro-U.N. experts sponsored by the Ford Foundation predicts the world will eventually accept even the need for a U.N. rapid deployment force, more muscle for the duty officers in Room 3260.
Granted, it won't happen tomorrow, they say. But certainly by the next birthday bash, in 2045.
 
 NEXT: Part II - U.N. as Helping Hand.
 Load-Date: October 14, 1995

 

End of Document
