

Patience In Bosnia, Force In Somalia: What's The U.N. To Do?
The Associated Press
July 18, 1993, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 839 words
Byline: By ROBERT H. REID, Associated Press Writer
Body




It's a tale of two missions: force in Somalia, patient negotiation in Bosnia-Herzegovina. Neither operation has stopped the bloodshed. Both appear in danger of collapse.
Such is the dilemma facing the United Nations as it evolves into the role of global policeman after the end of the era of superpower confrontation.
What is the right mix of force, diplomacy and humanitarian assistance to achieve peace? Clearly, the U.N. has not found the formula.
"The good old days of traditional peacekeeping are long gone, I think forever," said retired Canadian Gen. Lewis MacKenzie, former U.N. commander in Bosnia-Herzegovina. "Nobody knows what to do."
In Somalia and Bosnia, the U.N. has found that when it comes to force, it's a matter of "damned if you do, damned if you don't."
The 15,000 U.N. troops in Bosnia provide security for food distribution and other humanitarian aid. This involves escorting convoys through areas of conflict and ensuring the safety of U.N. personnel.
But the U.N. military operation began last year without a clear political strategy for ending the conflict. Its troops have neither the authority nor the means to stop fighting among Serb, Croat and Muslim forces, apart from bluff and persuasion.
That has severly impaired the humanitarian mission. With Sarajevo and other major cities under siege, hundreds of thousands of Bosnians survive on U.N. humanitarian aid.
But Croat and Serb militias from time to time refuse to allow aid convoys through their lines. U.N. officers wind up begging militia commanders for permission to perform the job given them by the Security Council in far-off New York. Often, permission is denied.
But events in Somalia show that force too has its limitations. Somalia was the first time since the Korean War in which U.N. forces were mandated to impose peace by force.
With that mandate, the U.N. refused to negotiate with those branded as "terrorists" and launched airstrikes on strongholds of warlord Mohamed Farrah Aidid. The attacks have failed to dislodge Aidid and instead brought reprisal attacks in which more than 30 U.N. peacekeepers have been killed since June 5.
Italy, the former colonial power in Somalia, has threatened to pull out of the 27-nation force because of objections to the hardline strategy. Critics argue the U.N. should place more emphasis on humanitarian operations.
U.S. special envoy David Shinn, the top coordinator for Somalia in the State Department, admits the operation in Somalia has led to "some negative lessons" which will force a re-evaluation of the U.N. strategy in the East African country.
But the experience in Bosnia-Herzegovina raises questions whether a humanitarian mission can function effectively without a degree of force.
Bosnian government officials complain bitterly that for all of its supposed authority and power, the United Nations, and by extension the entire international community, has allowed itself to become hostage to bands of unruly gunmen.
U.N. officials in Bosnia fear privately that humanitarian donations will eventually dry up because of frustration over the lack of progress toward a settlement.
Much of the problem with U.N. peacekeeping operations lies in the structure of the international organization itself.
The mandate, goals and rules of engagement for peacekeeping forces must be approved by the Security Council, dominated by the five permanent members: the United States, Britain, France, Russia, and China.
"The decision-making process within the Security Council is 45 years out of date," MacKenzie said. "Decision by committee results in a policy of the lowest common denominator acceptable to all parties."
Furthermore, non-permanent Security Council members such as Canada, India, Spain and Italy, which have contributed sizeable forces to U.N. operations, feel bypassed in decisions which effect the lives of their own troops.
MacKenzie and others believe that in Somalia and Bosnia-Herzegovina, the U.N. strayed dangerously past the limits of its 1945 charter, which sanctions involvement in civil conflicts if they threaten international peace.
But it is debatable whether the crises in Bosnia and Somalia, horrible as they may be in human terms, constitute such a threat.
Instead, the world was spurred to action in both countries by terrible pictures of emaciated children and mass murder shown daily on the world's television screens.
"It is policy driven more by pictures on the late news than by rational discussions by governments and rational proposals given to the Security Council," MacKenzie said. "This fulfills a desire to be seen doing something, but no one knows what that something should be."
Without a consensus, each government contributing troops to the multinational force has its own ideas on how the mission should be carried out and what are the limits of acceptable risks.
 
 ---
EDITORS NOTE: Robert Reid, AP chief of bureau in Manila, Philippines, recently completed a two-month assignment in Bosnia and has reported on U.N. operations in Cambodia, Lebanon and the Sinai Peninsula.

 

End of Document
