

Peaceful Egypt-Israel Border: Model For the Future?
The Associated Press
January 22, 1992, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 718 words
Byline: By KARIN LAUB, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RAFAH CROSSING, Occupied Gaza Strip
Body




A minor crisis at this border crossing between former enemies: The gate on Israel's side is half closed, a technical violation of the carefully phrased peace treaty with Egypt.
"Tell the guard to open it all the way," Lt. Col. Moshe Dayan instructs a subordinate. The treaty requires an open border, and Dayan is a stickler for detail.
The placid scene at Rafah illustrates that, despite occasional upsets, the 1979 peace treaty is working and could become the model for a broader Middle East peace.
Bargaining for the wider peace, which began Oct. 30 in Madrid and moved on to Washington, is in its infancy. If and when negotiators consider opening the Lebanese, Jordanian and Syrian borders with Israel, they may well look to the U.S.-brokered agreement between Egypt and the Jewish state.
"Violations of the treaty are rare and incredibly minor," said Maj. Roger Kaplan of the 2,800-member Multinational Force and Observers that oversees the 135-mile frontier.
"Violations tend to be unintentional. An Egyptian soldier may cross into the wrong zone, or an Israeli pilot may make his turn a little too wide."
At the Rafah crossing, on the edge of the Israeli-occupied Gaza Strip about 60 miles southwest of Tel Aviv, day-to-day problems are handled by Dayan and an Egyptian counterpart.
Almost every day, Dayan walks 150 feet from his barracks to the Egyptian's office to chat. When a group of Israelis came to plant trees near the border to mark Tu Bishvat, the Jewish Arbor Day, he advised the Egyptians in advance to avoid any misunderstanding.
"We sometimes have lunch together in our offices," said Dayan, who is not related to the late Israeli war hero, Moshe Dayan. "We discuss current events all the time. Since the Madrid peace conference, we have talked a lot about our hopes for peace."
Still, there is a residue of mistrust rooted in the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Israelis complain of a "cold peace" and accuse Egypt of observing the treaty merely in letter, not in spirit. The Egyptians say things would warm up if Israel made more concessions for peace with its other Arab neighbors.
Such weighty disagreements are not evident in the routine of this tranquil, tree-lined checkpoint.
Three busloads of Israel-bound travelers arrived at the Egyptian side. The passengers trundled their baggage through an X-ray machine, got their passports stamped and were bused 100 yards to the Israeli arrivals hall.
The whole process took less than an hour, barely enough time to reflect on the fact that the two countries fought four wars in 25 years.
When Israeli passengers arrive in Egypt, they get an armed escort because they are vulnerable to Islamic extremists who oppose the peace treaty. In February 1990, two gunmen killed nine Israelis in a tour bus.
Israeli tourism to Egypt declines after each attack, but usually rebounds quickly because Egypt is cheap and nearby. Authorities in Cairo don't encourage Egyptians to visit Israel, which is too expensive for most of them anyway.
In the first eight months of last year, 40,000 Israelis entered Egypt via Rafah and only 2,750 Egyptians traveled to Israel through the checkpoint.
At the Nizzana cargo crossing, 30 miles south of Rafah, the scale tips the other way. In the same period, 951 Egyptian trucks brought building blocks, sunflower seeds and candies to Israel, while just 58 Israeli trucks carried plastics and irrigation equipment to Egypt.
Israeli and Egyptian watchtowers are placed along the border, which stretches from the desert plains of the Mediterranean over rugged mountains to the Red Sea crossing at Taba.
There are stretches of barbed wire, sometimes three rows deep, and sand strips are swept frequently for the footprints of infiltrators, but most of the boundary is marked only by numbered stones.
The multinational force was deployed in 1982 when the border opened, and is paid for by the United States, Egypt and Israel.
It staffs 32 observation points in the Sinai Peninsula. Fifteen civilian observers in orange jumpsuits, most of them retired U.S. State Department or military personnel, review compliance with the treaty.
"Border troubles occur between all countries in the world," said Mahmoud Abul-Nasr, a former assistant foreign minister of Egypt who helped negotiate the treaty. "What matters is that they are settled by peaceful means."

 

End of Document
