

Peaceful Minister One of the Faceless Victims of Township Violence
The Associated Press
November 1, 1993, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 744 words
Byline: By DONNA BRYSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TOKOZA, South Africa
Body




Rev. Johannes Nhlabithi never allowed the chaos around him to enter his home or his heart. But he could not stop it from taking his life.
Nhlabithi was abducted from the streets of one of the country's most dangerous townships as he drove his youngest son to the store to buy a toy.
Neighbors say he chose a shortcut down a "no-go" street - territory controlled by Zulu hostel dwellers who have come to look for work. Their feud with other residents of Tokoza is a bloody mirror of the rivalry between South Africa's two main black groups, the African National Congress and the Zulu Inkatha movement.
Nhlabithi's murder on Oct. 13 came during a week that saw more than 20 other people stoned or shot or burned to death in Tokoza and other townships.
Political violence over the past three years has killed more than 11,000 people, almost all of them black. They included factory workers commuting from jobs in nearby Johannesburg, homemakers shopping at street stalls, schoolchildren whose T-shirts betrayed an allegiance to the wrong faction - and ministers who stumbled down the wrong streets.
Sizakele Nhlabithi said she is tempted to go to the hostel herself, "to ask them why they did that to my husband."
The hostels are home to mostly Zulu men who have left their families hundreds of miles away in search of work in Johannesburg. The bleak, barracks-like buildings have become strongholds of the mainly Zulu Inkatha Freedom Party. Residents of the surrounding homes are likely to embrace the more broadly based African National Congress.
The ANC accuses the government of fanning the violence to destabilize the black opposition, who will have to cooperate to help run the country after the first multiracial elections on April 27. Both the ANC and the governing National Party have vowed they will not let the violence disrupt or delay the vote, but it is sure to keep some from going to the polls.
"He was a very kind man," said a neighbor, Elizabeth Tladi. "He never thought something like this would happen, that someone would just kill somebody for no reason. That's why he took that chance and crossed that road."
The 62-year-old father of five preached at a Church of Christ in the neighboring township of Katlehong. He never allowed his children to discuss politics, saying it would only lead to trouble.
"My father was a Christian guy," said his eldest son, 22-year-old Jablane. "The week before he died we were there at the church. Each and every Sunday, we went to church."
The Rev. Nelson Mavuso said his old friend was killed simply because he didn't belong to the hostel.
Mavuso is proud to show his ANC card, and said ministers are associated with the organization. But he said Nhlabithi, who himself came to Johannesburg some 30 years ago from neighboring Swaziland in search of work, was not interested in politics.
Mavuso said Nhlabithi brought the ministers in the area together for prayer meetings each Tuesday.
"It's another way to stop the violence," Mavuso said.
When Nhlabithi was not at work or in church, he was home tending to his family or working in the garden, Mavuso said.
His roses and pansies still flourish; bars cover the windows of the tiny stucco home. To reach the house, a visitor must drive around an overturned, blackened garbage bin that may have served as a burning barricade during one of the battles that periodically sweep Tokoza.
Inside, Mrs. Nhlabithi sits cradling their 7-year-old son, Gift.
"This small boy was standing just there, he saw everything," Mrs. Nhlabithi said as Jablane translated from Swazi.
The attackers blocked the minister's path with another car, then took him and his son into a hostel. They discussed killing them both; Gift later told his family how his father had saved his life.
"The old man pleaded, 'You may take my life, my car, everything. But please spare the life of my child. I love him very much,"' Mrs. Nhlabithi said.
Gift was forced to watch the attackers shoot his father in the head. Then the child was chased from the hostel.
Mrs. Nhlabithi worries about the boy, who cries for his father at night. She also worries about providing for her other children, and keeping up payments on her home on a maid's pay. Besides preaching, her husband had worked as a bus inspector.
Before his death, he had talked of moving to a safer area, his widow said.
Now she cannot decide.
"We will see," she said, her voice trailing off. "Even today, there are those people who kill other people. There is no peace."
 Load-Date: November 1, 1993

 

End of Document
