

Peace Ideas Are Old, So Why the Big Delay in Starting Talks?
The Associated Press
October 30, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 655 words
Byline: By ALEXANDER G. HIGGINS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MADRID
Body




The road to Madrid is littered with failed attempts to bring peace to the Middle East.
The ideas haven't changed, but the world has:
The Cold War is over; Palestinians are newly assertive after four years of an uprising in Israeli-occupied territories; the Palestine Liberation Organization has been weakened by siding with Iraq in the Gulf War.
For the first time in more than 30 years, an American administration has been consistently and bluntly critical of Israeli policies.
Many Israelis believe that with the decline of Soviet power in the Middle East, the Jewish state is no longer a strategic asset and the United States is tilting to the oil-rich Arab states.
Israel needs U.S. aid to provide homes and jobs for hundreds of thousands of Soviet Jewish immigrants, and that gives President Bush an additional diplomatic lever.
The most striking evidence of the change wrought by the end of the Cold War is Syria's joining the coalition that invaded Iraq and its presence at the peace conference.
Once Moscow's staunchest ally in the Middle East, Syria now must look elsewhere for financial backing.
Soviet sponsorship of hard-line Arabs has evaporated, and with it the East-West element to the Mideast dispute. Moscow has established full diplomatic relations with Israel for the first time since 1967.
The basis of the talks, as Bush outlined them on Wednesday, is the resolution adopted by U.N. Security Council after the 1967 Middle East war, urging peace for Israel in exchange for return of captured lands.
Israel never did pull out, and talks never got going.
Then came Egypt's surprise attack on Israel across the Suez Canal on Oct. 6, 1973.
U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger invented shuttle diplomacy after the 1973 war to get Egypt, Israel and Syria to pull back from their front lines. However, an international peace conference that was to involve all the parties never got off the ground.
The 1978 Camp David talks, sponsored by President Jimmy Carter, were the previous notable attempt to find a basis for regional peace. But only Israel and Egypt signed on.
Carter, Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel and President Anwar Sadat of Egypt agreed that Jordan should represent the Palestinian people to negotiate autonomy for the Arab populations of the West Bank and Gaza Strip, but Jordan never stepped forward.
Palestinians in the occupied territories deferred to the PLO and never joined in either.
The PLO refused to recognize Israel's right to exist, and Israel rejected any contacts with the organization it regarded as a band of terrorists.
Israel's invasion of Lebanon in 1982, followed by Syrian attacks against mainline PLO forces, routed the Palestinians. President Reagan seized the moment to offer his own peace initiative, calling for Israel to give up occupied territory to be used for a Palestinian homeland in confederation with Jordan.
Israel, angered that Reagan announced his initiative without first advising them, rejected the proposal out of hand, and Secretary of State George Shultz never found any serious interest, despite several trips to the Middle East.
Palestinians were never able to capitalize on the worldwide sympathy after the 1982 Lebanese massacre of Palestinians in the refugee camps of Sabra and Chatilla in Israeli-held territory on Beirut's outskirts.
Shultz failed the following year to win a Syrian withdrawal from Lebanon in conjunction with the Israelis' pullout from most of the country.
When PLO chief Yasser Arafat in 1988 finally acceded to U.S. pressure to accept Israel's right to exist, the United States began direct talks with the organization, but nothing developed. Washington broke off the relationship when the PLO refused to condemn terrorist acts.
Even as the Gulf War was winding down this year, Bush set his administration on the course of reorganizing the region on the basis of the coalition that opposed Iraq.
With Soviet help, he had found the road to Madrid.

 

End of Document
