

People in the News
The Associated Press
December 12, 1993, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 823 words
Byline: AP Photos NY44, Mandela, Russell and Houston
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




Grammy-winning singer Whitney Houston is the latest NAACP "Entertainer of the Year."
The NAACP Image Award recognizes celebrities for their positive portrayal of blacks, said William F. Gibson, board chairman of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
The announcement came Saturday in advance of the 26th annual Image Awards ceremonies in January. In addition to her career performing on stage and acting in films, Houston's charity work was noted.
Houston's non-profit organization, the Whitney Houston Foundation for Children, assists homeless children and youngsters with cancer and AIDS. It also sponsors child abuse prevention and literacy programs.
Houston, 30, whose hits include "I Will Always Love You," will receive the award Jan. 5 at the Pasadena Civic Auditorium. The show will be taped for broadcast on NBC-TV on Jan. 22.
 
 LOS ANGELES (AP) - Charlton Heston's voice, known to part the Red Sea and perform other movie miracles, entertained 150 needy children with Christmas tales and poems.
There was a bit of squirming and whispering as the actor read "A Visit from St. Nicholas," better known as "'Twas the Night before Christmas," and other classics Saturday to children at the Los Angeles Mission. But Heston was forgiving.
"They did well. They can be restless, little children especially," he said with a laugh. "I love reading to children."
The children sang "Jingle Bells" and "We Wish You a Merry Christmas" to the actor as he and his wife entered the mission.
The couple joined in some of the choruses before beginning the stories. Heston, 69, thanked the children for "our first Christmas presents."
Heston played Moses in "The Ten Commandments" and won an Academy Award for best actor in 1959 for "Ben-Hur." He also starred in the 1968 futuristic film "Planet of the Apes."
 
 JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) - Winnie Mandela is back.
Separated from husband Nelson Mandela and shunned by some after a kidnapping conviction, Mrs. Mandela's personal political strength remains undiminished.
After resigning several influential African National Congress positions last year, she was elected head of the ANC Women's League last week, providing stunning proof of her rank-and-file support.
In a weekend interview with The Sunday Star, Mrs. Mandela said she's devoted to the people who brought her back to power.
"I come from the grassroots and I cannot let them down now," she said.
She doesn't expect to join Parliament if, as expected, the ANC wins the nation's first multiracial elections, slated for April 27.
"The people need someone they can trust," she said. "But how can I be in Parliament before the goods that were promised during the struggle are delivered?"
Her husband, the ANC president and Nobel Peace Prize winner, announced last year that he and his wife of 34 years were separating.
Mrs. Mandela said they remain friends, and told the Star that he called to congratulate her on her women's league victory. But she remains her own woman.
"I have never regarded myself an extension of Mandela," she said. "We have always been different individuals."
 
 WEST DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) - Author Robert Waller is fighting writer's cramp - and his temper - as he tours the nation signing copies of the best-seller "Bridges of Madison County."
An arm brace told a tale of physical stress, while the emotional stress of weeks on the road surfaced as well Saturday at Border's Book Shop. Waller shouted at a newspaper reporter when she tried to question him.
"God, I get sick of that. You can only take so much," he yelled before turning back to his shocked fans. "Well, Merry Christmas, anyway," he said, picking up a new stack of books to sign.
Waller has owned top spot on The New York Times' best-seller list since January. "Bridges of Madison County" has been a best seller for 70 weeks and was only knocked out of No. 1 by his new novel, "Slow Waltz In Cedar Bend." "Bridges" was No. 2 on the Dec. 12 list.
The brief emotional outburst didn't prevent the author from thanking those standing in line for buying his books.
"That's how success happens," he said.
 
 WEST LAFAYETTE, Ind. (AP) - Political satirist Mark Russell has to give a civics lesson with each performance.
"I think it would be easier to be a comedian who makes fun of the things that everyone knows, that everyone goes through, as opposed to the Senate Judiciary Committee," says Russell, who's playing his zinging political tunes for the 18th season on PBS.
One way Russell keeps the audience interested is poking fun at names they know - the Clintons, the Gores, Ross Perot and, lately, Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders.
Elders' humor value rose considerably last week when she suggested legalizing drugs might reduce drug-related crime, Russell said.
"The Republicans got an early Christmas present with that one. They couldn't have been happier if she'd delivered the eulogy for Pablo Escobar or been singing backup for Michael Jackson," he said.
 Load-Date: December 12, 1993

 

End of Document
