

People in the News
The Associated Press
May 11, 1995, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 744 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




For CNN war correspondent Christiane Amanpour, journalism was an accident.
Years ago, Amanpour went to get a refund for a journalism class her sister had enrolled in but decided not to take. The school wouldn't give the money back, so Amanpour asked if she could take the course instead.
The rest is history - Bosnia, Rwanda and the Gulf War.
"It was almost like a blind date that turned into true love," she said in a "60 Minutes" interview to be broadcast Sunday.
The award-winning journalist said that she has turned down many offers from the Big Three networks - including $ 1 million a year from NBC - out of loyalty to CNN and because she likes the worldwide exposure.
Asked whether she wants to move into the big leagues, she replied: "I am in a big league."
---
ENFIELD, Conn. (AP) - A group trying to raise money for a Purple Heart museum has enlisted actor James Garner, who was shot in the rear end by his own side in Korea.
Garner was wounded in 1951 when his unit was fired at by U.S. fighter jets who "thought we were Chinese."
"All hell broke loose. I got hit in the butt and my rifle was blown up," Garner wrote in March to the National Purple Heart Museum Committee.
The star of "Maverick" and "The Rockford Files" is an honorary chairman of the museum project, which has land but needs to raise $ 20 million.
Hundreds of thousands of soldiers have received the Purple Heart, which is awarded to anyone wounded or killed in combat.
The museum will contain war artifacts and a collection of medals. Enfield was selected because it's where one of the medal's first recipients, Sgt. Elijah Churchill, enlisted during the Revolutionary War.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - During his five years playing a New York City cop, Chris Noth of "Law & Order" discovered a whole new group of critics: the officers of the New York Police Department.
"Cops come up to me all the time," Noth said in Sunday's issue of Parade magazine. "They tell me things I did wrong. Such as when I lifted a gun by putting a pencil inside the barrel. One cop said, 'No! You don't do that!'
"It disturbs the rifling or something."
The cops won't have Noth to kick around after this year. This season is the 37-year-old actor's last on the NBC series; he's hoping to get into the movies.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Hal Gurnee, the guy up in the booth who trades wisecracks with David Letterman, is stepping down as director of "The Late Show."
Gurnee, who has been Letterman's director for 15 years, will remain with Worldwide Pants, Letterman's production company, as a consultant and director of prime-time specials, CBS said Thursday.
"Now it's time to return to my real passion - the autoharp," Gurnee said.
Gurnee started with Letterman in 1980 on NBC's short-lived daytime "David Letterman Show" and stayed at the network for the entire 11 -year run of "Late Night with David Letterman." He moved to CBS with Letterman in 1993.
"Hal Gurnee is the guy I always wanted to be," Letterman said. "Give me Hal, and I could do a show on the moon."
No successor was announced.
---
LONDON (AP) - Rupert Murdoch has chastised the editor of his racy News of the World for going too far.
The media magnate criticized the tabloid for its report on Princess Diana's sister-in-law Victoria and her treatment at an addiction center.
The Press Complaints Commission, a voluntary watchdog group set up by newspapers, had censured the 4.6 million-circulation newspaper for an April 2 story headlined: "Di's sister-in-law in booze and bulimia clinic."
"While I will always support worthwhile investigative journalism as a community responsibility, it is clear that in this case the young man went over the top," Murdoch said.
---
ROME (AP) - A warm "Buon Giorno!" and a bowl of pasta are something Mario Cuomo can always count on in his ancestral land.
The former New York governor arrived to applause at the airport Thursday. He is invited to have lunch on Friday with Rome's mayor, Francesco Rutelli.
In 1992, hundreds of people turned out when Cuomo visited his mother's birthplace in Cesarano, south of Naples.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - A five-hour history of the Beatles featuring the world premiere of two "new" songs by the Fab Four will air in November on ABC.
Paul McCartney, George Harrison and Ringo Starr added vocals and music to unreleased recordings by John Lennon of "Free as a Bird" and "Real Love."
The two-night special will include interviews with the living band members and rare footage of the Beatles in their youth, ABC said Wednesday.
 Load-Date: May 11, 1995

 

End of Document
