

People in the News
The Associated Press
November 4, 1994, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 749 words
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




Is Branford Marsalis' hiatus from "The Tonight Show" as rosy as his spokeswoman made it sound?
Working as the "Tonight Show" bandleader is "not my idea of wonderful musical creativity," Marsalis told the music magazine BAM. "We play the music exactly the way they (the producers) want, but we're laughing the whole time."
There's more.
The bandleader and saxophone player said in the magazine's recent issue that "as long as everybody toes the line in mediocrity, it's cool."
Marsalis' spokeswoman, Annie O'Hayan, had said Wednesday that his indefinite leave of absence from the show starting early next year doesn't reflect unhappiness with the job or host Jay Leno.
In BAM, Marsalis said the on-screen chemistry between him and Leno will never be what David Letterman and Paul Shaffer have because "I'm not the kind of person that's gonna kiss Jay's … and say everything he does is right."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Mickey Rourke wins the celebrity room-trashing sweepstakes over his pal Johnny Depp.
Rourke's total at the ritzy Plaza Hotel was $ 20,000, said Donald Trump, owner of the Plaza. The $ 5,000-a-night suite was so damaged Thursday it had to be closed to guests for repairs.
"His behavior was completely irresponsible, and it cannot and will not be tolerated," Trump said in a statement.
The actor checked into the Plaza three weeks ago and was kicked out after he "went berserk" and "broke furniture that was unbreakable," the New York Post said, quoting an unidentified Plaza source.
A source in Trump's office said Rourke was banned from the Plaza for life.
No charges were filed, but Rourke should expect a bill.
His spokesman didn't immediately return a call.
Depp was arrested in September after trashing a room at the Mark Hotel. The charge was dropped after he agreed to pay for nearly $ 10,000 in damage.
---
JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) - Zulu dancers and child singers greeted Whitney Houston at a museum Friday, and the singer pledged about $ 281,000 to help children in South Africa.
Houston will perform three concerts in South Africa beginning Tuesday.
"Children in South Africa deserve a safe place to live, good health and someone to hold them when they go to sleep," she said at a news conference.
Her donation will support work in children's health, homelessness, education and also go toward advocacy groups.
The concerts will be broadcast by Home Box Office.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - In the whatever-happened-to category, we have Jaye Davidson.
The Oscar-nominated gender-bender known for his surprise turn in "The Crying Game" said his androgynous look has been a damper on job offers.
"I don't really have a star career ahead of me because basically, what are they going to do with me?" he said in an "Entertainment Tonight" interview to be broadcast Monday.
"I'm very hard to cast," Davidson said. "I'm not going to be co-starring along with Sylvester Stallone as the next action hero!"
Davidson said he accepted the role of an intergalactic ruler in "Stargate" because he needed the money.
"I didn't have any money at all," he said. "I thought, 'Well, if I ask for $ 1 million, there's no way I'm going to get it.' And then I can say to myself, 'Well, they wouldn't pay me enough, that's why I wouldn't do it."'
He got the $ 1 million.
---
WINSTON-SALEM, N.C. (AP) - The media of the '90s have created an "idiot culture," Carl Bernstein says.
Journalists have abandoned their mission to pursue the "best obtainable version of the truth," focusing instead on the sensational, the lurid and the titillating, the former Washington Post reporter said Thursday at Salem College.
Bernstein won a Pulitzer for breaking the Watergate story with Bob Woodward.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - "60 Minutes" is taking a long, hard look at Jana Wendt, the Jane Pauley of Australia.
"We are now talking about the possibility of her joining us at some time in the future as a regular correspondent," "60 Minutes" executive producer Don Hewitt said Friday.
Wendt, anchor of her own nightly public affairs show on Australian TV, already has taken on three assignments for the CBS newsmagazine, Hewitt said.
The hiring of Wendt, who is in her mid-30s, would alleviate some demographic problems for the "60 Minutes" talent pool: Apart from Lesley Stahl, it's mostly male and aging.
Hewitt, Mike Wallace and Andy Rooney are in their 70s, and Morley Safer is in his mid-60s. At 49, Steve Kroft is the youngest male correspondent.
"60 Minutes" has been on the air since 1968 and has been a Top 10 show for a record 17 consecutive seasons.
 Load-Date: November 4, 1994

 

End of Document
