

People, Not Nature, the Villain in Famine-Wracked African Horn
The Associated Press
September 27, 1992, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1114 words
Byline: By WILLIAM C. MANN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: FERFER, Ethiopia
Body




It was here in the Ogaden desert 15 years ago that the Horn of Africa's reputation as a place of brutality, mindless violence and desperate, dying people began.
That war over a wretched expanse of red sand and scrub between Ethiopia and Somalia, two of the world's poorest countries, lasted off and on for 11 years. But it was only a precursor of a seemingly never-ending march of war and famine that have devastated the region.
The disasters are a creation of man and nature, human violence greatly exaggerating natural vagaries like drought. Poverty and political inexperience make many Third World peoples prey to famine and other natural disasters. But in the Horn, violence has made their suffering that much worse:
-Somalia started, then lost, the Ogaden war. Turmoil followed, civil war leading to clan wars leading to anarchy. Close to 1 million Somalis have fled in the 1990s. Two million more are starving at home. More than 100,000 already have starved to death.
-Ethiopia's civil war caused hundreds of thousands to flee to Sudan and Somalia in the 1980s, many to starve. A million died of famine at home. The government forcibly relocated up to 900,000 more, purportedly for their benefit but more likely to get rid of potential rebels. Many died in the process.
-A third of the 6 million southern Sudanese have trudged north or into towns to escape a civil war that began in 1983. With nobody left to farm, famine ensued. Estimates of the dead in 1987-88 alone range from 250,000 to 500,000.
-Kenya has long boasted one of Africa's most stable societies, but nearby violence brought so many refugees that it was unable to overcome food shortages from this year's drought. In Kenya, as in the other Horn countries, gangs have taken to plundering relief supplies.
Arthur Kibisu, director of the Hagadera refugee camp just inside Kenya near the border with Somalia, said the region's problem - in Ethiopia, Somalia and Sudan - is "too many warlords."
The solution?
"A very crude way of saying it is to chop all the heads of those leaders," Kibisu said.
Multitudes of skeletal people set out across borders in search of sanctuary even during the Ogaden war. After a decade and a half of famine-causing conflict, the world is being called on to save a third of Somalia's 6 million survivors and hundreds of thousands of Somalis, Sudanese and Ethiopians dispersed through the region.
Marwan Khoury, a Lebanese who is spokesman for the U.N. refugee effort in Ethiopia's capital, Addis Ababa, said international pressure must be exerted "to convince the governments, the warlords, to find a solution to these problems."
"The war going on in southern Sudan - that's one problem. The wars going on in Somalia - another problem. As far as drought is concerned in southern Ethiopia, for the last three years every year has been worse than the last," he said.
The world is most focused on the crisis in Somalia, which began with a civil war that grew out of the war in the Ogaden. The country struggled through the January 1991 ouster of longtime dictator Mohamed Siad Barre, then degenerated into the anarchy of clan fighting that has made Somalia a nation in name only.
Gunmen steal aid shipments. Fighting prevents nomads from reaching urban markets with their livestock to trade for grain and from water and grazing lands. Farm families, unable to plant because of a lack of both rain and security, survive by eating seed grain and work animals. Lack of food kills other animals. Starvation follows.
Osman Hussein, 48, was a sorghum farmer in central Somalia. He fled the drought with his wife, Ebela, and their nine children to seek help in Belet Huen, 30 miles south of the Ethiopia border crossing at Ferfer.
In the family's first two months at Belet Huen, the two eldest children died. The eldest surviving daughter, 12-year-old Doley, wears a red plastic band on her bone-thin right arm, put there by Britain's Save the Children to show she is among the most severely malnourished.
"The drought came from Allah," Hussein said stoically, hunkered down with two other refugee men outside his tukul, an igloo-like hut made of sticks. "It's punishment for our wars, with everybody killing his brothers."
Somalia is far from unique.
Both sides in the vicious Sudanese rebellion that began in 1983 use food as a weapon, denying relief to the starving for political reasons. The war caused famine by driving people from their farms and sent hundreds of thousands into neighboring countries.
In widespread areas of Ethiopia, rebels whose own civil wars had simmered since the early 1960s exploited the Marxist government's Ogaden turmoil and went on the attack in the late 1980s. After President Mengistu Haile Mariam fell to a united opposition in May 1991, the victors forced into Sudan up to a half-million of the Marxist regime's soldiers and Sudanese rebels and sympathizers who sheltered under a friendly Mengistu government.
Ethiopia has been a constant emergency since long before the official end of the Ogaden war in 1988, said Khoury, the U.N. refugee official. "People have forgotten that it's been like this for a long time. This is the same emergency."
Only now it envelops all the Horn from west of the White Nile in Sudan, south to northern and eastern Kenya and east to Djibouti and the Gulf of Aden. All of Somalia, which is the point of the Horn jutting into the Indian Ocean, is included. Everywhere, people are on the move.
"We've had droughts before, but this is one of the first times there's been such a huge movement," said Panos Moumtzis, a U.N. official in Nairobi, Kenya. "And we've never had fighting on the scale as that now in Somalia."
"People think of this as just another African famine. It's not," said Phoebe Fraser, an Australian who oversees CARE International's relief effort at Baidoa, Somalia. "It's worse than anything I've seen. Worse than anything a lot of people have seen."
Western nations stepped up emergency aid in August, but the relief effort so far has only kept the death toll from becoming even more horrendous.
"Each one of these people has a mother or a father, or mothers die leaving children," Miss Fraser said of the hundreds who die every day in Baidoa. "We can never even begin to deal with the psychological impact of this."
In Nairobi, Moumtzis said: "One thing that's hardly been touched is the psycho-traumatic fear, the pressure on women who have seen their husbands killed, who have buried their children. And the earlier malnourishment occurs, the more likelihood of a lack of brain development, of schizophrenia, of other brain damage."
But the immensity of the famine means that all efforts have to go to keeping people alive, Moumtzis said.

 

End of Document
