

People in the News
The Associated Press
February 11, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 781 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Critics blew raspberries at a new television film about Prince Charles and Princess Diana, though some added that the film was good enough for Americans.
"Diana: Her True Story," is being shown in Britain on Feb. 14 and 16 on Sky satellite television. NBC has scheduled the film for April 4-5 in the United States.
The movie is based on the book by Andrew Morton, which largely gave Diana's side of the unhappy marriage. It stars Serena Scott Thomas as Diana and David Threlfall as Charles.
"The whole soppy saga is clearly aimed at American audiences. It's shallow as a toddler's play-pool," The Sun's television critic wrote in Wednesday's editions.
The Daily Mail called the film "unbelievable" and said the audience at a preview showing on Tuesday was "veering between hysterical laughter and sheer embarrassment."
"The royal household are portrayed as the Addams Family on acid with the queen taking the leading role," the Daily Mail said.
The Daily Mirror was kinder.
"The building resentment between Charles and Diana, which grows into loathing, is alarmingly well done," said the newspaper's royal reporter, James Whittaker.
 
 WASHINGTON (AP) - "Major Dad" star Gerald McRaney will play Cupid next week for American troops in Somalia - delivering valentines from celebrities and well-wishers.
"Mac's visit will remind them that we still care about them and, most importantly, we are grateful for their services on our behalf," said Chapman Cox, president of World USO, which provides recreational and other services to American military personnel worldwide.
The week-long mission is McRaney's second USO tour. He went to Saudi Arabia during the Persian Gulf War.
McRaney is to arrive in Mogadishu on Tuesday. Included among the cards he'll distribute are messages from country music star Lee Greenwood, comedian Steve Martin and game show host Alex Trebek.
Country music star Clint Black is to visit the U.S. troops in Somalia on behalf of USO later in the month.
 
 MONROEVILLE, Pa. (AP) - Bill Murray got a good review from Punxsutawney Phil, his furry co-star in the movie "Groundhog Day."
"Phil says he likes the movie," said Dr. Paul Johnston, a member of the Punxsutawney Groundhog Club's Inner Circle who acted as translator for the rodent.
"Phil had a lot of fun making the movie," Johnston said. "He liked Bill Murray. He liked working with the crew."
The Columbia Pictures movie with Phil starring opposite Murray and Andie McDowell opens nationwide Friday. The furry forecaster attended an invitation-only premiere in suburban Pittsburgh on Wednesday.
Murray plays a weatherman from a Pittsburgh television station who is sent to Punxsutawney to cover Groundhog Day and relives the day over and over again. He eventually kidnaps the rodent.
On Feb. 2, the Inner Circle decided that Phil saw his shadow, meaning winter this year would last six more weeks.
 
 PORTLAND, Ore. (AP) - Six-year-old actress Mariah Milner loses top billing to two dogs and a cat in "Homeward Bound: The Incredible Journey," but she's not complaining.
"I enjoyed playing with the animals," she said.
In the film, Mariah plays Molly, who gets lost in the woods and is found by the main characters - two dogs and a cat. The foursome has a series of adventures before Molly and her parents are reunited.
Mariah got her first break in 1990, when she was chosen to be a lead singer and dancer in the Sesame Street Kids' Concert.
She auditioned for "Incredible Journey" in the summer of 1991.
Mariah, who lives in Portland, spent two days in filming in the Columbia River Gorge and then two more weeks in Bend. With her were her parents and her cousin, 8-year-old Carrie Clark, who served as her double.
Among her goals are to become an actress and movie star - as well as a farmer and a fisherman, she said.
But for now, Mariah says she wants to spend the money she made from the film to have a castle built in her back yard.
 
 STOCKHOLM, Sweden (AP) - Burmese opposition leader and Nobel Peace Prize winner Aung San Suu Kyi is among the 80 guests invited to an international conference on human rights in Sweden.
"We think it is important to remind her and the Burmese authorities that the world has not forgotten about her and her brave fight for human rights," development minister Alf Svensson said in a statement.
Ms. Suu Kyi, who has been under house arrest in Burma since 1989, was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1991. Her party won a landslide victory in a 1989 general election, but the military junta has refused to honor the results.
She has not replied to her invitation to the conference, scheduled for Feb. 22-24.
"We fear that she has not even been informed about the invitation by the authorities," Svensson said.

 

End of Document
