

PLO Veterans Prepare For New Mission: Keeping The Peace
The Associated Press
September 18, 1993, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 766 words
Byline: By ED BLANCHE, Associated Press Writer
Body




In a half-dozen Arab countries from Egypt to Yemen, thousands of veterans of the PLO's long war against Israel are preparing for a new mission: keeping the peace in Yasser Arafat's emerging mini-state.
That may mean having to fight those among their own people who feel betrayed by Arafat's landmark peace pact with Israel.
But PLO officials believe that the threat of inter-Palestinian bloodletting has been exaggerated, and that the biggest task the Central Security Force will face is curbing extremists determined to go on fighting the Israelis.
"I think you'll find that both sides will crack down hard on their own outlaws," said Ahmed Qurei'a, a close Arafat aide who was a key figure in the secret negotiations that led to the peace pact.
"It's an absolute necessity for both sides to maintain a tight grip on security because it's necessary to lure investment and foreign aid," said Qurei'a.
In the critical initial stage of the pact, the Israelis will withdraw from the turbulent Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho. Later, limited self-rule is to be expanded to other areas of the occupied West Bank, and the two sides will sit down and negotiate a permanent solution.
But many Palestinians, including the Iranian-funded Muslim fundamentalists of the Hamas movement, oppose the plan. They believe it makes too many concessions to Israel without guarantees of an eventual independent state.
Mouhamad Hardan, a senior Fatah official in Gaza involved in forming the new force, said it will be drawn mostly from Arafat's own Fatah faction and the Palestine Liberation Army, or PLA.
The PLA was formed in 1964 as the PLO's conventional military arm with battalion-sized "brigades," most of them with a few hundred men each, attached to Arab armies in Syria, Jordan, Egypt, Iraq and elsewhere.
These brigades are nominally under Arafat's command, but they are effectively controlled by the host armies.
PLO officials are planning for a 20,000-strong force. Some would prefer a bigger one. But the Israelis are leery of having a large paramilitary organization within the occupied territories.
Before the Palestinian uprising against Israeli rule in the occupied lands erupted in December 1987, the Israelis had some 5,000 troops there. That rose to some 15,000 after the violence began.
The Palestinian force's formation, commanders, mission, deployment, even its uniforms, are now under discussion by PLO-Israeli liaison committees. But the general outline is taking shape.
A senior PLO official in Jordan involved in the negotiations said the force would not have artillery or weapons heavier than machine guns.
Limiting the Palestinians' firepower will prevent any potential military threat to the Jewish state and help calm Israeli fears of armed Palestinians in their midst.
PLO officials said some 200 Palestinians have completed police training in Jordan and Egypt and are ready to move into Gaza and Jericho once the Israelis pull out. Whether they will be enough during the initial phase is unclear.
The Palestinians say that not only do they have to keep the lid on their own zealots, they also have to be able to defend themselves against Israeli hard-liners.
These include tens of thousands of well-armed Jewish settlers who are vehemently opposed to surrendering the land they have acquired since the 1967 war, when Israel seized the occupied lands.
Most PLO officials are reluctant to discuss what will happen to Palestinians who attack Israelis and seek refuge in the autonomous zones, or what the security force will do when they arrest people wanted by Israel.
But Bassam Abu Sharif, one of Arafat's closest advisers, said: "Confidence-building measures are most important to make this thing work.
"So if anyone from our side tries to jeopardize security, we'll have to handle it - and handle it with force, as we expect anyone from the Israeli side who attacks us to be firmly dealt with."
Palestinians opposed to the accord fear the security force will be used to suppress Arafat's political rivals.
Hardan said: "Our people have had enough suppression over 26 years of Israeli occupation. If we're ordered to fight our own people, I'll be the first to resist that."
But Capt. Mustafa Faityoumi, 42, a veteran Fatah guerrilla in the sprawling Ein el-Hilweh refugee camp in south Lebanon, said he will volunteer for the new force and would not balk at having to fight Arafat's radical foes.
The 3,000-strong Fatah militia in Lebanon will likely supply hundreds of men for Arafat's force. "We're a disciplined body. When we receive an order, we obey it," said Faityoumi, a company commander.
 Load-Date: September 18, 1993

 

End of Document
