

PLO Is Changed, But How Deep Does The Change Go?
The Associated Press
October 1, 1991, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 663 words
Byline: By WILLIAM C. MANN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ALGIERS, Algeria
Body




It looked like a different PLO that met last week to chart the Palestinian movement's future. But the new postures displayed have yet to be tested.
The bombast that characterized the PLO for so long was missing during the week-long meeting of the Palestine National Council, the Palestinians parliament-in-exile.
Leaders went out of their way to show the "new" Palestine Liberation Organization is flexible and realistic. In actions, if not words, they discarded the "Three No's" that have been the PLO's creed since 1967: "No to negotiations, no to recognition, no to reconciliation" with Israel.
The first break in that solid wall appeared in 1988, when PLO leader Yasser Arafat, desperate to talk with the United States, reluctantly recognized the Jewish state's right to exist.
A hint of desperation was in the air this time, too, as Arafat and his lieutenants maneuvered to maintain their traditional central position in the Middle East peace equation.
The council endorsed a U.S.-organized peace conference planned for this month. It yielded to Israeli demands that the PLO not flaunt its role in choosing Palestinian negotiators and reportedly agreed that all come from within the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Previous PLO "conditions" for participation, like Israeli withdrawal, were announced as apparently negotiable "aims."
Change is nothing new to the PLO. As most Arab countries lined up against Iraq in the Gulf War, the moderate PLO of 1988 transformed itself into Saddam Hussein's ally. And just last month, the PLO praised coup plotters in the Soviet Union, apparently hoping for a return to Moscow's patronage.
Walid Kazziha, a professor at The American University in Cairo, sees weariness over the occupation, which has lasted 24 years, as the key to the latest shifts within the PLO.
"The PNC is not reflecting the wishes of the Palestinians in the diaspora so much as the feelings of those living under Israeli occupation," Kazziha said.
"Those people living under Israeli occupation have modest demands. They would like to wake up one morning and see that those Israeli soldiers are not looking at them over the barrel of a gun."
"I don't see any change of heart in the PLO, but there's a practical change. It's plain that this is tactical," said American PLO expert Barry Rubin.
Rubin, a fellow at the Foreign Policy Institute of Johns Hopkins University, said: "They're undoubtedly hoping the peace conference will break down, but they're going along because they have no choice. … They did what they had to do to survive."
He cited catastrophic losses of financial and political support from the PLO's traditional Arab patrons as well as a de facto withering of its control of Palestinians in the territories.
Arafat himself, who brought on much of the PLO's woes with his decision to side with Iraq in its showdown last year with the West, spoke plaintively of his organization's predicament.
"Don't you see how difficult these days are which you yourselves are experiencing?" he asked recalcitrant colleagues. "We are facing only two options, and both of them are suicide."
When the ballots were counted, 96 percent of the 331 council members who voted approved the statement authorizing Palestinian negotiators to attend the peace conference in a joint delegation with Jordan. It was another major concession for the PLO.
But the document papered over deep rifts within the organization, some within Arafat's own Fatah faction. Speaker after speaker at the council meeting railed at the distasteful vote that lay before them.
Despite the Palestinian movement's current turmoil, Arafat appeared to emerge from the Algiers meeting with his leadership firmly in place.
The 62-year-old chairman and many others spoke repeatedly of improving democracy within the movement. But any mention of change at the top, even by hard-line opponents, was directed not at him but at those around him. The prevailing feeling appeared to be that there's nobody else to take the reins.

 

End of Document
