

Pope Hails Easter Light After the Dark 'Shadow' of War
The Associated Press
March 31, 1991, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 739 words
Byline: By FRANCES D'EMILIO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: VATICAN CITY
Body




Pope John Paul II said Sunday that the Persian Gulf War had cast a dark shadow over humanity but that Easter, marking the resurrection of Jesus Christ, was a day of "light, strength and hope."
In his Easter address to tens of thousands of people packed into St. Peter's Square, the pontiff called on world leaders to solve disputes peacefully.
He also appealed for compassion for the downtrodden peoples of the world, singling out the Palestinians and the Kurds.
The Kurdish rebellion against the government of Saddam Hussein, which broke out after last month's allied victory, is being crushed by Iraqi government troops.
Tens of thousands of U.S. troops remain in the Persian Gulf, and many marked the Easter holiday. Near Kuwait's border with Iraq, Col. James Bluett, a chaplain for the 3rd Brigade of the 3rd Armored Division, conducted seven Masses in 24 hours for his troops.
Many of the soldiers were being sent north, deeper into Iraq. At one of Bluett's open-air services, the roar of helicopters and armored personnel carriers filled the air.
In his Easter message, the pope hailed Albanian Catholics for clinging to their faith during years of oppression and urged them to "take courage anew." Albania's Communist government has recently loosened restrictions against religion, and Albanians voted Sunday in their first multiparty elections since 1944.
In eastern Germany, which has been grappling with high unemployment since toppling its Communist government and merging with West Germany in October, an Easter march for world peace drew only 50 people in the city of Leipzig. Tens of thousands gather weekly in the city to protest rising joblessness.
In Jerusalem, Roman Catholic patriarch Michel Sabah, a Palestinian, urged Israeli leaders to come to terms with the 1.7 million Palestinians in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, who have waged a 40-month-old uprising against Israeli rule.
Sabah noted that the Jewish celebration of Pesach, or Passover, which began Friday, marks the deliverance of the ancient Hebrews from slavery in Egypt.
"The message of Pesach is a message of liberation for all people, for the Israeli people and the Palestinian people as well," Sabah said. "This means courage and means not to be afraid of peace."
Sabah said Mass in the Church of the Holy Sepulcher, built over the sites where tradition holds that Jesus was crucified and buried. At the same time, Orthodox Christians - who observe the Julian calendar and will celebrate Easter next Sunday - were marking Palm Sunday.
Cuban radio broadcast an Easter service for the first time since Fidel Castro's Communist forces took power 30 years ago, apparently easing official policies of atheism.
It was only the second time a religious service was broadcast on state-run radio, the official Prensa Latina news agency said. The first was last Christmas.
The pope delivered his Easter Mass on the steps of St. Peter's Basilica under a canopy surrounded by flowers. St. Peter's Square held about 30,000 people as Mass began, but as the sun warmed up the chilly morning air, the crowd grew.
It had more than doubled by the time the pope appeared at noon on the basilica's central balcony to deliver his traditional "urbi et orbi" message - Latin for "to the city of Rome and to the world" - and to give Easter greetings in 55 languages.
While not specifically identifying the Persian Gulf War, the pope clearly alluded to it when he spoke of "darkness which … recently cast a shadow over the whole human community when a choice was made of aggression and the violation of international law, when it was presumed to solve the tensions between the peoples by war."
But Easter, he said, was "a day of light, strength and hope, which makes the darkness menacing the earth recede."
The pontiff called on world leaders to act wisely "in this difficult moment of history."
"Only upon an international order in which law and freedom are indivisible for all can the society we all hope for be founded," he said.
"Lend an ear, humanity of our time, to the long-ignored aspiration of oppressed peoples, such as the Palestinians, the Lebanese, the Kurds, who claim the right to exist with dignity, justice and freedom, legitimate requests repeated in vain for years," the pope entreated.
He prayed for nations aspiring to more freedom and democracy, and decried guerrilla wars in Africa that have intensified the misery of people already threatened by poverty and hunger.
 Graphic



 
LaserPhotos ROM2,4,6

 

End of Document
