

Practicing American-Style Medicine on the Clyde
The Associated Press
September 11, 1994, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1260 words
Byline: By RANDI HUTTER EPSTEIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CLYDEBANK, Scotland
Body




To the thousands of foreigners who visit Scotland for golf, castles and whisky, some expatriate Americans hope to add the affluent ill.
In June, surgeons Raphael Levey and Angelo Eraklis, formerly of Harvard, opened Health Care International, a 260-bed, $ 270 million private hospital and luxury hotel on the outskirts of Glasgow.
Their dream is a global hub for medical care that offers the latest technology and first-rate physicians at lower prices than in the United States. Harvard Medical School is considering whether to lend its prestige to the venture in return for a share of of the profits.
Levey and Eraklis are in the vanguard of a growing trend in American health care to look abroad for opportunity.
Labor is cheaper in Europe, and Americans have a competitive edge in some high-tech equipment and expertise. In Britain, most National Health Service hospitals buy services from private institutions, including Health Care International, because they cannot afford state-of-the-art technology.
At first, HCI lured patients from the Middle East, Asia and North Africa. Now it seeks deals with American health insurers, offering packages that include round-trip air transportation, golf at Gleneagles and shopping sprees in London or Paris for accompanying family members.
HCI sells its services through branch offices in Cairo, Athens, Milan, London and Boston. L. James Wiczai, the chief executive, said HCI had treated about 400 patients so far, most of them from outside Britain.
On a recent press tour of the hospital, reporters saw many empty rooms and just one patient, a 15-year-old girl from Abu Dabai.
Some critics say Glasgow is the wrong location for a hospital that seeks wealthy patients.
"The place is doomed to fail," said Dr. Karol Sikora, chief of clinical oncology at Hammersmith Hospital in west London. "That kind of client wants to be close to Harrods," the famous London department store.
Hammersmith also is in the international market, but Sikora said foreigners prefer Cromwell, a private hospital in central London.
HCI has caused controversy in Glasgow by selling services to the National Health Service, Britain's free-to-all medical system.
Under new market-oriented policies, government hospitals may buy services from private hospitals instead of purchasing their own costly equipment and hiring specialized staff. The Scots, who cherish their health system, would rather the government modernize the existing hospitals.
Eraklis and his American physicians liken themselves to Peace Corps doctors dispensing U.S. expertise on foreign terrain. That sort of talk rankles the Scots, who see the Americans as merely out to make money.
According to Eraklis, the slow start was expected and prophecies of doom are the product of jealousy.
"American doctors at this moment are in deep trouble," he said. "They are a very unhappy lot. They all wish they had thought of it first."
The prospect of U.S. reforms that could mean less revenue for hospitals and lower pay for doctors is prompting American providers to look abroad just as several European countries, particularly Britain, warm to private care. British patients, tired of waiting months or years for treatment, are increasingly willing to pay for private services.
"I think we are going into the superregionalization of health care, in that some diseases require expensive high technology and highly trained people that cannot be in every hamlet," Eraklis said. "It takes a large population to justify the kind of investment and expertise at the cutting edge, and that's the niche HCI is programmed to fill."
HCI can beat American prices because labor, which accounts for 70 percent of hospital costs, is about one-third cheaper in Europe. But doctors at HCI earn at least as much as in the United States, starting at about $ 300,000 a year plus bonuses.
Other U.S. hospital owners and universities also are looking abroad. Salick Health Care, which has a chain of cancer centers in the United States, has discussed deals with the National Health Service and American Medical Holdings, owner of 35 hospitals, wants to buy back foreign centers it sold in the 1980s.
"If the U.S. goes to more socialized medicine, as we anticipate, we think we'll see many of our doctors willing to go overseas and earn as much or more in a six-month stint," said Mike Skinner, director of development at Mid-America Healthcare Group. The Dallas company owns three U.S. hospitals and is considering overseas expansion.
HCI was conceived in August 1979 while Eraklis and Levey, friends since student days at Harvard Medical School, were bemoaning the future of American medicine. They foresaw increasing bureaucracy, government intrusion, and more priority for cost over quality.
"One night when we were grilling our T-bone steaks, we said wouldn't it be great to build a hospital not encumbered by all these economic and political distortions, and do it as a service to people?" Eraklis said.
They wanted an English-speaking country and considered Ireland first, but Scottish agencies lured them with $ 42.5 million toward building the hospital and hotel, plus 47 acres near the Glasgow airport.
Friends at Harvard also helped out.
Harvard Management Company, which controls the university's endowment, owns 21.5 percent of HCI with an investment of $ 11.3 million. Montgomery Medical Ventures, founded by a former Harvard physician, owns 26 percent. Eraklis and Levey together hold 11 percent. And several investors account for the rest.
Besides the two founders, HCI employs several doctors from Harvard. The former chief of radiology there runs HCI's radiology department. Brigham and Women's chairman of surgery, Dr. John Mannick, is an adviser for choosing staff, as is Dr. W. Gerald Austin, chief of surgery at Massachusetts General. Austin also is on the HCI board.
Eraklis and Levey would like their hospital to become a Harvard affiliate, much like Brigham and Women's Hospital and Massachusetts General. That would allow it to use Harvard's name to attract patients, and Harvard to share in the business.
"We're in the international market, but don't have the educational side," said Victor Yick, senior director of medical staff, formerly a vice president of Brigham and Women's. "Harvard has the educational side and the name, but not the international market. If we could join hands, we'd both succeed."
Daniel Tosteson, dean of Harvard Medical School, was "impressed and seriously considering" an arrangement after a visit in June, said associate dean Suzanne Rauffenbart.
Meanwhile, HCI has a way to go to fill empty beds and make friends in the neighborhood.
Newspapers have printed several hostile articles, accusing it of undermining the National Health Service by stealing staff from Glasgow hospitals and using their blood supplies.
Wiczai, the chief executive, said HCI had been careful not to take too many doctors and nurses away from any one hospital and was buying blood from the Scottish Blood Transfusion Service.
Many Glaswegians are angry at their government for giving money to an American venture when their own hospitals need fixing.
"I foresee it as a Trojan Horse for the NHS (National Health Service)," said Sam Galbraith, a Labor Party legislator from the Clydebank area.
Wiczai blames much of the trouble on politics:
"People here are very committed to the National Health Service, and because of that (HCI) is a convenient political football. … The local people are always sniping about the Tories (Britaih's governing Conservative Party) and we frequently get dragged into the war."
 Load-Date: September 11, 1994

 

End of Document
