

Primates Replace Tourists Amid the Anarchy of Rwanda
The Associated Press
August 26, 1994, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 651 words
Byline: By DENIS D. GRAY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: AKAGERA, Rwanda
Body




Visitors once called Hotel Akagera "a little corner of paradise." These days they break into your car, hurl champagne bottles to the floor and defecate atop dining tables.
A colony of Olive baboons has taken over this stunning, hilltop safari lodge within one of Africa's great wildlife parks, taking full advantage of Rwanda's bloody chaos and resultant tourist exodus.
Dozens of the baboons, often aggressive and growing up to 3 feet tall, are living in some of the 60 rooms and suites, and most spend part of the day lolling around the now-slimy swimming pool and poolside bar.
This week, as one baboon slid along the diving board on his rump, flies buzzed around the bloated body of another floating face down in the murky water.
Only months ago, well-heeled guests from Europe and North America sipped martinis and Camparis here while admiring spectacular views of Lake Ihema and the broad savannah below.
Before the marauders and massacres and machetes, when Rwanda was still called "the Switzerland of Africa" and "The Land of 1,000 Hills," this 1,000-square-mile reserve was one of the country's top draws. Foreign tourists came to encounter a splendid array of wildlife, including the world's last mountain gorillas living among volcanic peaks and tribes of Colobus monkeys in the Nyungwe rain forest.
Now the Hotel Akagera is a surreal, tragic symbol of what Rwanda was and the abyss into which it has plunged since April when Hutus went on an orgy of killing. Half a million or more people, mainly Tutsis, their tribal rivals, died in the slaughter.
A few decomposed corpses still sprawl along the road leading to the southern entrance of Akagera National Park, 75 miles east of Kigali, the capital. The village there, Nyagakonji, is deserted, its inhabitants dead or refugees in nearby Tanzania. Rumors abound that carnivorous animals, including the baboons, are gorging on the corpses.
Maize, cassava and beans wither in untended fields in a long valley.
Two reporters were recently escorted into the park by six members of the Tutsi-led Rwandan Patriotic Army. The escort is necessary, says Sgt. Patrick Hamuhanda, because Hutu militiamen have infiltrated the park from the Tanzanian refugee camps. They come to steal from the few villagers returning to Nyagakonji and have created more havoc at the hotel than the wild beasts, he said.
The rooms have been stripped of virtually everything, including light bulbs, mini-refrigerators and mattresses. Empty wine bottles and "Do Not Disturb" signs litter floors.
In the kitchen, an almost unbearable stench arises from chunks of rotting meat left on chopping blocks when the staff fled in April. In the dining room, tables once spread with fine linen and French food are filthy with baboon droppings.
The jungle is creeping back into the once-manicured lawns and neat flower beds, and the sergeant says Cape buffaloes, lions and other animals wander the hotel grounds. The eerie still is broken by the wind slamming a door shut and soughing through shattered window panes.
On the floor of the lobby, strewn with Christmas decorations, stuffed birds and smashed crockery, a guestbook contains effusive praise of the lodge in half a dozen languages.
"Exceptional sight, hospitable management, charming service, delicious food, comfortable rooms. Pure excellence!" reads one entry.
"We spent a wonderful night in this small corner of paradise called the Hotel Akagera," says another.
"I will return," declares a third bygone guest.
Just outside the hotel entrance, where the soldiers and reporters have parked a pickup, one of the huge monkeys leaps into the truck's open window then jumps out as quickly and casually saunters away with a shopping bag.
Near the hotel's barbecue pit, the thickset baboon sits down and nimbly opens a bag of dried peaches. Finishing the stolen lunch, he and a mate give a few parting barks to the unwanted hotel visitors and amble away.
 Load-Date: August 26, 1994

 

End of Document
