

Rabin Signs Historic Document Recognizing The PLO
The Associated Press
September 10, 1993, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 946 words
Byline: By ALLYN FISHER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Israeli and PLO leaders made peace today, but angry militants on both sides swore the plan would never get off the ground.
As Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin signed a letter recognizing the PLO as the representative of the Palestinian people, hundreds of Israelis demonstrated outside the prime ministry, which was surrounded by 1,000 police.
"God will punish this insult!" opposition legislator Hanan Porath shouted through a megaphone. He told the protesters Rabin had committed blasphemy, citing God's pledge that the Land of Israel belonged to the Jews.
Hours earlier in Tunis, Tunisia, PLO chairman Yasser Arafat announced with a broad smile that he had signed a document in which the PLO recognizes Israel's right to exist in peace and security and renounces violence. There was no public ceremony, and three members of the PLO's Executive Committee resigned afterwards.
In east Jerusalem, dozens of Palestinians celebrated by raising a 15-foot red, white, and green Palestinian flag on an office building and setting off fireworks. Until now, the flag has been illegal.
In Gaza, demonstrators outside the Martyrs mosque in Gaza City burned an Israeli and an American flag. One banner read, "American collaborators, you are not one of us because you bargained with our homeland."
Abdel-Aziz Rantisi, a spokesman of the militant Muslim group Hamas, vowed to continue attacks against Israeli targets as long as Israeli soldiers occupied Palestinian land.
"I say to the PLO that history will not forgive them and also tell them that the struggle will not stop," Rantisi said in a telephone interview from south Lebanon. Rantisi was among 400 Muslim militants deported by Israel last year. About 180 were allowed back Thursday.
There were fears of a Palestinian civil war over the agreement, but Rantisi said Muslim militants would avoid fighting PLO supporters.
The mutual recognition, worked out in months of secret meetings in Norway and a final burst of round-the-clock bargaining, is the biggest breakthrough in Mideast diplomacy since the 1979 peace treaty with Egypt.
It cleared the way for the signing in Washington on Monday of a separate agreement giving Palestinians a measure of self-rule in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank city of Jericho, occupied by Israel since the 1967 Middle East war.
President Clinton, who called the recognition agreement "very brave and courageous," announced in Washington today the resumption of American-PLO contacts, which were suspended in 1990 after a Palestinian attack on Israelis. Washington eventually could give the PLO full diplomatic recognition.
"Today marks a shining moment of hope for people in the Middle East and indeed the entire world," Clinton said. He vowed the United States would remain a "full and active partner to ensure this promise of peace is realized."
The PLO's Executive Committee was preparing to vote on the autonomy pact.
Israelis and Arabs have been at each others' throats long before the PLO was created 29 years ago. The first war broke out soon after Israel became an independent state in 1948.
"The Israelis have realized they cannot brush aside our national identity or negate us, and we have realized that we cannot make Israel disappear off the map," said Hanan Ashrawi, spokeswoman for the Palestinian delegation to the Middle East peace talks.
"We hope it will be binding, but there will be opposition. Nobody can wave a magic wand and say 'that's it,"' Ashrawi said in Washington.
After signing the letter "Y. Rabin," the Israeli prime minister said he hoped the agreement "will bring about an end to 100 years of bloodshed and misery between the Palestinian people and Israel."
"I see this as a moment of importance with many opportunities, but not a few risks. … All of this is being done with the assumption that the other side will also fulfill all its obligations," he said.
In a measure of the distrust that still bedevils relations, Rabin took out his glasses and carefully read the full-page letter from Arafat as the audience of officials, uniformed army officers and journalists waited in silence.
Outside the ministry, one placard read, "Our homeland is not for sale." Another protester threw a smoke bomb toward the gate of the prime ministry, while others blew whistles or banged on pots in protest.
Housing Minister Benjamin Ben-Eliezer, a former army general who was military governor in the West Bank from 1978-81, said he believed most Israelis accepted the need to talk with the PLO.
"The majority of people are satisfied, I can't say happy, but thankful and praying for the success of this experience," he told The Associated Press.
But Ariel Sharon, the right-wing former defense minister, said he believed Arafat should be brought to Jerusalem to stand trial as a war criminal.
In the Syrian capital, Damascus, radical Palestinian guerrilla commander Ahmed Jibril predicted Arafat would be assassinated.
PLO militants saw the plan as a surrender to Israeli conditions that ignored key issues such as Israeli settlements in the occupied lands, the status of Jerusalem and the future of refugees in the diaspora.
Sources in Tunis said Farouk Kaddoumi, whom the PLO considers its foreign minister, boycotted the executive committee meeting Thursday night when Arafat won approval 8-4 of the mutual recognition agreement.
They said he objected to winding down the Palestinian uprising in Israeli-occupied territories before any tangible steps have been taken to implement self-rule.
At the Orient House in east Jerusalem, where Palestinians have been preparing for autonomy in the occupied lands, several dozen Palestinians danced with pictures of the PLO leader. "Long live Yasser Arafat," they chanted.

 

End of Document
