

Rabin, Arafat Return To Harsh Realities Of The Middle East
The Associated Press
September 15, 1993, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 740 words
Byline: By SERGEI SHARGORODSKY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




The euphoria of Washington quickly fading, Yitzhak Rabin and Yasser Arafat came back to their separate, troubled realities Wednesday pledged to peace in a Mideast still fraught with conflict.
Returning from a surprise trip to Morocco that did not bring hoped-for relations, Rabin encountered an Israel locked in holiday security and embroiled in new unrest.
Seven Palestinians and four Israelis have died in Israel and the occupied territories over the past four days in a wave of attacks blamed on Muslim fundamentalists and Palestinian groups opposing the Washington agreement.
The army announced a four-day closure of the occupied Gaza Strip, the area of future Palestinian autonomy, for the Jewish New Year weekend. Thousands of police officers spread over the country to provide security for the holiday.
Army Chief of Staff Lt. Gen. Ehud Barak warned that the accord might entail "complex security realities" and huge army redeployment costs. Skepticism was high in advance of next week's parliamentary battle over the agreement's approval.
Hard-line opponents assailed Rabin with giant newspaper ads.
In a radio interview, Rabin praised the treaty and told his critics it could lead to peace with Jordan and Lebanon soon. But he immediately blasted Syria, as if to drive home the point that business continues as usual in the Middle East.
"One hand is supposedly outstretched to peace while the other opens fire," Rabin said, blaming Damascus for supporting radical Palestinian and Muslim groups opposed to the peace process.
In Washington, President Clinton also urged Syrian leader Hafez Assad in a telephone call to help curb opposition to the pact by political extremists, said an administration official, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
The Damascus-based leaders of a few of the groups were on the road looking for support. George Habash, head of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine and Nayif Hawatmeh of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine were in Tripoli negotiating with Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi, a sworn enemy of Israel.
Jordan's radical Islamic Action Front attacked the Israeli-Jordanian framework for a peace treaty, signed Tuesday in Washington, and called for a "national mourning week."
Arafat also slipped back into his familiar costume and language. Landing in Tunis Wednesday, he emerged wearing his trademark olive green fatigues, a pistol in his hip-holster. Arafat had given up the weapon during the trip to Washington to stress his peace mission.
Although he echoed Rabin by promising Israel peace with Jordan, Lebanon, Syria and other Arab nations, Arafat said he would not stop at self-rule in Jericho and Gaza. Autonomy, he said, would be followed by "the establishment of our independent Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital."
Israel and the United States oppose an independent Palestinian state, and Israel has vowed to keep Jerusalem united as its eternal capital.
Like in Israel, security was tight in Tunis. Both states feared one enemy: the opponents of Washington agreement.
A large police force lined the roads leading to the airport, guarded by elite Tunisian anti-terrorist police. Plainclothes Tunisian and PLO security officers stopped the crowd of well-wishers from approaching Arafat and scores of policemen were deployed around the suburban PLO headquarters.
Arafat faces the difficult task of healing a rift in the Palestinian leadership. Five of the 18 members of the PLO executive committee have quit in protest of the agreement.
Both Arafat and Rabin also face a maze of unresolved questions linked to the establishment of Palestinian autonomy, and both will have to confront the influential Islamic movement in the occupied territories, spearheaded by Hamas and Islamic Jihad groups.
In Gaza, Arafat's doubters include people such as 60-year-old Islamic activist Jadallah Jadallah, just allowed by the Israelis to return after being deported to Lebanon. Jadallah does not believe the PLO leader's prediction.
"Gaza and Jericho are not the first step on the road to Jerusalem," he said angrily.
A PLO activist in Gaza was shot dead by unknown assailants, but the rumor mill immediately blamed it on Hamas starting a civil war.
And certainly the rhetoric hadn't changed.
The mass-circulation Jordanian daily Al-Ra'i said peace could not be achieved "without the elimination of Zionism," since Israel represented "Zionist hatred … and appetite for Arab blood."
 Load-Date: September 16, 1993

 

End of Document
