

Ready or Not, The Election Approaches
The Associated Press
April 14, 1994, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 734 words
Byline: By TINA SUSMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PHOLA PARK, South Africa
Body




Attempts to bring democracy to this squalid camp of shacks and sewage ponds failed miserably, as a swarm of ANC supporters sent candidates fleeing in armored vehicles.
Luckily, no one was hurt. Sadly, noted angry candidates and elections workers, what happened Wednesday is evidence that the country is far from ready to stage the first all-race elections in just two weeks.
The obstacles are daunting as April 26-28 nears:
-Candidates from smaller parties are routinely run out of black townships by angry youths who see the African National Congress as the only acceptable choice.
-Zulu nationalists have yet to join the election, making it impossible for the Independent Electoral Commission to finalize voting stations in Zulu regions.
-Piles of voter registration documents lie unclaimed, raising fears many people will be barred from voting for lacking proper papers.
Trying to oversee it all is the IEC, which was given four months to manage an election that will expand voting rights from 3 million whites to a multiracial, multilingual mass of nearly 20 million people.
"There is total chaos - I've never experienced such chaos. But people are managing to pull it all together," IEC spokeswoman Niki Moore said after Wednesday's failed mission to Phola Park in part of the commission's attempt to allow campaigning in areas wracked by violence between rival factions.
"This is hardly the ideal situation," said Reg Austin, a spokesman for the United Nations Observer Mission who oversaw the 1993 Cambodian elections.
"Something normally done in a period of years has to be done in a very short period, and of course this all has to be done in an environment in which the ground rules of democracy are actually being put in place," he said.
The first of the millions of national ballots have arrived in South Africa from Britain, where they were printed, and the rest are due by April 17. When voting begins, the IEC will have more than 190,000 people staffing about 9,000 polling stations, ushering first-time voters who in many cases will be illiterate and cowed by years of political oppression.
Still, Moore says recruiting of poll workers is on schedule.
"We are ready," she said. "Two weeks might not sound like a heck of a lot of time, but it is, actually, because most of the structures only have to be in place three days before the election."
The country's fluid political situation, however, is threatening to leave the IEC in limbo in KwaZulu, the Zulu homeland where Inkatha Freedom Party leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi is boycotting the vote. If he changes his mind, that would force revision of ballot papers. If he sticks to the boycott, the IEC will have to arrange alternate ways of voting for KwaZulu.
As Wednesday's operation showed, KwaZulu is not the only area where the concept of democracy has yet to sink in.
IEC workers and candidates from other parties arrived in Tokoza township in a convoy of minivans, accompanied by police pointing automatic rifles out of their armored vehicles.
"This is the IEC. Our mission is simple - to provide free and fair elections," an IEC worker shouted through a megaphone as the convoy passed through the notorious Inkatha neighborhood lined with Zulu hostels.
So cautious were police and the IEC that they would not stop the convoy until they reached the site of the rally in Phola Park.
Candidates began taking turns reading statements through the megaphone, often in languages not understood by many bewildered listeners.
When several hundred ANC supporters learned there was no ANC candidate in the convoy, they swarmed past the vans, shouting "ANC! ANC!" and marched through the dust to line the road leading out of the camp.
Not even the venerable Helen Suzman, a prominent IEC official and anti-apartheid heroine, was spared the indignity of being bundled into one of the police vehicles to be driven out of town under armored protection.
Behind her went candidates from President F.W. de Klerk's National Party, the Pan Africanist Congress, the Federal Party, the Democratic Party and the African Christian Democratic Party. The ANC candidate never showed up, leading to suspicions from rivals that the ANC planned the walkout.
"We were ambushed," fumed National Party candidate Xolani Gumede.
John Barrington of the Federal Party was disgusted.
"I don't believe we're ready for a democratic election," he said. "This is the result - an exercise in futility."
 Load-Date: April 14, 1994

 

End of Document
