

Risky From the Start, Somalia Mission Took Several Wrong Turns
The Associated Press
October 9, 1993, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 946 words
Byline: By ROBERT BURNS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




One of the first signs that Somalia risked becoming a quagmire for the U.S. military came even before President Bush sent in the Marines last December: A once-secret diplomatic cable from the U.S. ambassador to Kenya advised the president not to "embrace the Somali Tarbaby."
The ambassador's point was to leave Somalia to its own devices, even though famine had killed tens of thousands and it looked as if 2 million more might die.
The advice was rebuffed. But as Americans look back at 10 months of bloody and frustrating U.S. military involvement in Somalia, the ambassador's message serves as a vivid reminder of how dangerous the mission was from the start.
"Somalis … are natural-born guerrillas," wrote Smith Hempstone, U.S. ambassador to Kenya at the time. "They will lay ambushes. They will launch hit-and-run attacks. They will not be able to stop the (humanitarian) convoys from getting through. But they will inflict - and take - casualties."
They did lay ambushes. The deadliest - in which 24 Pakistani soldiers were killed June 5 while guarding a food distribution center in the Somali capital of Mogadishu - was one of the turning points in the Somalia saga.
One week after that assault - which U.N. and Clinton administration officials blamed on forces loyal to Somali warlord Mohamed Farrah Aidid - American-led U.N. troops began retaliatory raids against Aidid's militia.
The violence rode an upward escalator, and U.S. forces never were able to get off.
That wasn't the way it was supposed to go. And Defense Secretary Les Aspin admitted as much after President Clinton announced Thursday that more emphasis would be placed on achieving a political reconciliation in Somalia before U.S. troops withdraw.
On Friday, Clinton signaled that he would be willing to drop a demand for Aidid's capture if he agreed to a cease-fire. U.S. special envoy Robert B. Oakley, dispatched to Ethiopia on Thursday, was given a wide range of instructions aimed at ending the fighting in Somalia, according to administration officials. They included the overture to Aidid, one official said on condition of anonymity.
The mission that Bush defined in December when he ordered 1,800 Marines to land on the beaches outside Mogadishu had seemed simple: Ensure that emergency food supplies get through to the starving.
At first, things went relatively smoothly. Food convoys began moving, the starvation began receding. And few Americans noticed when 23-year-old Marine Pvt. Domingo Arroyo of Elizabeth, N.J., became the first U.S. casualty. He was killed Jan. 12 by Somali gunmen in an attack near Mogadishu's airport.
Although Operation Restore Hope, as the mission was called, did not proceed as quickly as Bush had predicted, the United States on May 4 handed over command to the United Nations.
That, too, was a turning point. The American military presence was reduced, from a peak in January of about 25,000 to about 4,000 by May. And only about 1,100 U.S. combat forces were kept there. The rest were communications and logistics specialists.
Then came the killing of the 24 Pakistanis, and the decision by the United Nations to put a bounty on Aidid's head. The focus became Aidid, and the U.N. mission became one of rebuilding Somalia - economically and politically - without Aidid.
The U.N. Security Council passed Resolution 837, which authorized U.N. forces to use their firepower to make the "arrest and detention for prosecution, trial and punishment" of "those responsible" for the June 5 attack.
"It just became a question of whose military was winning" rather than a more balanced approach that stressed the importance of resolving the political problems which lay at the core of Somalia's civil strife, said Peter Rodman, a National Security Council staffer in the Bush and Reagan White Houses.
It had been expected that the U.N. peacekeeping force in Somalia, comprised of troops from nearly 30 countries, could cope with the Aidid forces without relying heavily on American firepower. But it didn't turn out that way.
The rising dangers to American soldiers there came about "because of our attempt to capture Aidid," Aspin admitted Thursday on ABC's "Nightline."
"We had something going there that kind of atrophied … over the months beginning with the late spring and early summer," Aspin said. He seemed to be referring to the handover of command to the United Nations in May and the June attack on the Pakistanis.
Public outrage rose again when four U.S. soldiers were killed Aug. 8 in a bomb blast in Mogadishu. The Pentagon and State Department blamed Aidid's men.
Four days later, Clinton sent to Somalia a contingent of 400 Army Rangers trained in attacks on political targets and a variety of other tactics of unconventional warfare. Their obvious, but undeclared, orders: Capture Aidid.
The American public began wondering: What happened to the humanitarian mission? Is this war? How many more American soldiers will be killed before it's over?
The administration sought to counter the impression of an open-ended commitment in Somalia.
Aspin, in an Aug. 27 speech, said U.S. combat troops would withdraw once three aims were met: establish "reasonable security" in Mogadishu, get heavy weapons out of the hands of the rival warlords, and set up credible Somali police forces.
None of those goals has been met yet, but when at least 15 U.S. soldiers were killed and 77 wounded in a firefight in Mogadishu on Oct. 3 - and the corpse of one American soldier dragged through the streets by cheering Somalis - the Clinton administration decided it had to do more than hope for an early exit. The president announced Thursday that U.S. troops would leave no later than March 31.
 Load-Date: October 9, 1993

 

End of Document
