

Romancing the Jungle
The Associated Press
December 3, 1993, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 705 words
Byline: By KENDALL J. WILLS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CHANUTE, Kan.
Body




Nothing in the jungles of Borneo or the wilds of Africa so threatened Martin Johnson as the idea of being tethered to a sedentary life in Kansas, where he spent his boyhood almost a century ago.
So it's all the more unlikely The Martin and Osa Johnson Safari Museum would end up in this southeast Kansas town of 10,000 people, where folks trace family roots for generations and take comfort in familiar surroundings.
But touring the museum in Osa's native Chanute gives visitors a glimpse of the forces that lured the couple to exotic foreign lands from which they thrilled millions of Americans with tales of adventure.
"They were like the boy and girl next door who left middle America and led an exciting and romantic life in Africa and the Pacific," museum director Conrad Froehlich said. "Up until then it was only the rich or royalty who went off to Africa on safaris."
Relics of their 15 years in Africa and multiple trips through the South Pacific islands are displayed at a Santa Fe Railroad depot renovated to house the museum. A smaller Safari museum operated since 1961 in a warehouse about half the size as its new home, which opened this summer.
Sharing space with the Johnsons' material are African masks and other artwork collected by Pascal James Imperato, a World Health Organization doctor who headed an immunization program in Mali and Guinea. A biographer of the Johnsons, Imperato credits his own interest in Africa to reading their books as a teen-ager.
The Johnsons were masters of promotion as much as devotees of high adventure, and recorded their trips in films, photographs, books and souvenirs used in promotional tours to help finance their journeys.
A generation was transfixed by their lecture tours and the films that followed each trip.
Even today the museum draws people whose imaginations were piqued by stories of unknown tribes and villagers in faraway places.
"I read 'I Married Adventure' (written by Osa) in the 1940s .. . and it had a big impact on me," said one recent museum visitor.
Part of the couple's appeal was they were unshackled by the ties that kept most Americans homebound in the 1920s and '30s. The Johnsons lived adventures others caught in the economic binds of the Depression could only dream about.
The Johnsons' films, including "Head Hunters of the South Seas," "Trailing African Wild Animals" and "Wings Over Africa," played to enthusiastic audiences in movie houses across the United States, as well as in London and Paris.
One of their first features, "Among the Cannibal Isles of the South Pacific," was a spinoff from a trip Martin arranged by hiring on as a cook on Jack London's ship, the Snark.
By the end of their travels, the Johnsons were cruising the skies over Africa in two Sikorski amphibious planes they learned to fly. They covered more than 30,000 miles.
Martin learned about cameras as a boy growing up in Independence, Kan., where his father had a Kodak franchise. He was working as a photographer in Chanute when he met Osa in the early 1900s. They married in 1910, when he was 26 and she was 16.
Through daring exploits, Osa built a reputation as a crack shot with a rifle. On the home front, she was included in a list of the 12 best-dressed women of America in 1940.
"Although they were celebrities, they didn't act like celebrities," Froehlich said. "They came back often to southeast Kansas during lecture tours around the country."
The museum upholds the romantic view of the Johnsons and avoids mention of Osa's alcoholism, which despite efforts to hide it from her adoring fans, became a problem that limited her public appearances.
What's more, seen from the perspective of the 1990s, the couple's films are far from the anthropological studies that today's generation might expect after growing up with National Geographic specials. Indeed, some are strikingly demeaning to the people whose lives the Johnsons barged in on to make their films.
Despite significant shortcomings, their dozens of films and tens of thousands of photographs have lasting value and are used today as stock material for documentaries, says Froehlich.
"Their legacy is in leaving some of the earliest, best footage of African wildlife. They captured the vanishing wilderness of Africa."
 Load-Date: December 3, 1993

 

End of Document
