

Russian Art, Artifacts Make Up 'Catherine the Great' Exhibit
The Associated Press
April 8, 1991, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 728 words
Byline: By WOODY BAIRD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MEMPHIS, Tenn.
Body




Mississippi towboats churn past outside with their dingy barges of coal and grain, but in the quiet coolness of a riverfront hall, the air fills with the sparkle of Russian gold.
The coronation carriage of Catherine II stands in lavish brilliance, newly restored to its 1760s splendor. Huge oil paintings of ancient masters grace the muted walls. A 12-foot gilded carving of a warrior saint presides in victory over a speared, snarling dragon.
The paintings, jewelry, tapestries and engravings make up an exhibit called, "Catherine The Great: Treasures of Imperial Russia." It is Memphis' second venture into the realm of major shows of art and artifacts.
The first, "Ramses the Great," drew more than 675,000 visitors to Cook Convention Center, the same exhibition hall where "Catherine" will be displayed from April 10 through Sept. 8.
The 287 items in the show are from The State Hermitage Museum of Leningrad and are being seen for the first time outside the Soviet Union. They include jewel-encrusted icons, miniatures of the czarina's coronation regalia and numerous items of everyday life at court.
Primary advertising efforts for the exhibit focus on states within a 500-mile radius of Memphis, but visitors are expected from throughout the country. The Ramses display drew viewers from all 50 states and 20 foreign countries.
One of Russia's most famous rulers, Catherine was known for her ambition and intelligence and her taste for young, attractive men.
In a coup organized by a lover, she snatched the throne from her neurotic husband, Peter III, and ruled Russia with a strong hand from 1762 to her death in 1796. Peter was assassinated shortly after Catherine's rise to power.
An avid patron of the arts, she built the Hermitage in 1764. It now holds one of the greatest collections of art in the world.
Memphis is underwriting the $$5.8 million-budget for the Catherine exhibit with primary corporate help from the Federal Express Corp., the Kroger Co. and Delta Airlines Inc.
The success of Ramses in 1987 made the Russian exhibit possible, according to Mayor Richard Hackett. While the Ramses exhibit went to other cities, the negotiations that brought it to North America began with Memphis. The city draws its name from an ancient capital of Egypt.
The Catherine exhibit is scheduled to return to the Soviet Union after the Memphis showing, Hackett said.
Through an ongoing project called "WONDERS: The Memphis International Cultural Series," the city is working on future exhibits from Turkey, the Vatican and France.
With the Egyptian exhibit, Memphis financed the restoration of a 25-foot statue of the Pharaoh Ramses II. It is now on display at a national museum in Egypt.
For the Catherine display, the city paid $$250,000 for restoration of the czarina's carriage. It will return to the Hermitage as a permanent reminder of the Memphis exhibition.
"Restoration of such treasures is a nice way to make a lasting people-to-people exchange," Hackett said. "If at all possible, this will be done for each of our exhibitions."
The 22-foot-long carriage is expected to be a star of the show.
Historians say it probably was built by Peter The Great around 1720. Elaborately carved and totally gilded, it is 10 feet tall with rear wheels six feet in diameter.
The gold-embroidered upholstery of the carriage is red velvet and side panels carry paintings believed to be the work of Francois Boucher, the court painter for Louis XV of France.
Stored at the Hermitage in World War II, the carriage was heavily damaged by a German artillery shell. Restoration began last year when plans for the Memphis exhibit were put in motion. The work required the talents of more than 40 workmen specializing in 15 crafts.
To break even, the Catherine exhibit must attract 500,000 visitors. City officials are confident it will.
The Ramses display turned a $$1.5 million profit, which was spent on low-income housing. It had an estimated total impact of $$83 million on the Memphis economy.
But the effects of such projects cannot be counted in dollars alone, Hackett said. The general quality of life in the city is affected, too, as is its overall image.
As with Ramses, the Memphis schools will offer history lessons to correspond with the exhibit. More than 100,000 students are expected to see the display.
"They'll already know what they're looking at when they get here," Hackett said.
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto

 

End of Document
