

Rwanda's War Hits 'Gorillas In The Mist' Research Station
The Associated Press
August 30, 1994, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 620 words
Byline: By TONY SMITH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KARISOKE RESEARCH CENTER, Rwanda
Body




Shards of glass and torn files litter the forest floor, evidence that Rwanda's deadly civil war has reached high into the Virunga Forest, home to half the world's rare mountain gorillas.
In the forest that straddles Rwanda's border with Zaire and Uganda, the research camp featured in the movie "Gorillas in the Mist" stands ransacked and nearly deserted.
But what has happened to the shy primates themselves?
Only about 600 mountain gorillas remain on Earth. Some 320 lived in Virunga Forest before the civil war erupted anew in April.
A group of Rwandan trackers returned in early August and have traced the base's three gorilla groups used for research. But about 60 gorillas usually shown to tourists are still missing.
"There's no reason for major worry right now," said Jose Kalpers of the International Gorilla Conservation Program, which helps run Karisoke.
"As long as there's no disturbance in the forest, the gorillas have no reason to move - it's not as if they're listening to the radio.
"But there's no surveillance at all and the potential risks are quite high," he added.
In mid-July, Karisoke's 30 employees and another 80 Virunga Forest rangers fled advancing Rwandan Patriotic Front rebels and are now refugees in Zaire.
The victorious rebels now form Rwanda's government and are encamped just south of the forest. Over the border, Rwanda's defeated Hutu army feverishly plots revenge.
The forest is a tense no man's land, parts of which are said to be mined. Without rangers, it is open to antelope and buffalo poachers, who can kill or ensnare gorillas on purpose or by mistake.
Up to 3,000 Rwandan villagers and their livestock fled through the forest in July, but Kalpers said gorillas probably took refuge up the slopes only to return later to their home ranges.
Leonidas Munyatarama was equally confident as he stepped through the debris at the camp founded by Dian Fossey, the American naturalist.
"Even if they fled over the border, they'll be back. Gorillas don't need passports," he said.
Fossey, whose campaign to protect the gorillas was the basis for "Gorillas in the Mist," was murdered in 1985 and buried at the camp among the remains of some of the animals she loved.
Her grave was untouched by the latest upheaval, but her cabin, where her successors continued research work until July, was ripped apart: chairs and desks overturned, files scattered on the floor, windows smashed.
"We don't know if it was soldiers or poachers," said Munyatarama, who returned to Karisoke last week, the first research student back since the staff's panicked flight.
"The first thing is to get all the trackers back, so we can start searching for all the gorillas, start research, start patrolling."
Easier said than done.
An attempt by the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees to ferry the trackers home ended in disaster Aug. 24 when thugs loyal to Rwanda's old government attacked them as they waited for U.N. trucks.
Tracker leader Jean-Bosco Bizumurenyi, who said at the time he wanted to return "because gorillas are more peace-loving than men," was nearly beaten to death with rocks. The other trackers and their families fled and the repatriation plans were suspended.
Rwanda's new government hopes to generate revenue by rebuilding the tourist industry that had grown up around the gorillas and is urging the trackers to return.
But, with the country ravaged by war, unstable and broke, the government lacks means to persuade tourists and Rwandans alike to come back. And with both armies in and around the forest, the future of the camp is unknown.
"If the RPF and the ex-army stay in these positions, we could soon have guerrillas, as well as gorillas, in the forest - and that would be very dangerous," Kalpers said.
 Load-Date: August 30, 1994

 

End of Document
