

Rwanda's Children, Left Behind, Roam The Battlegrounds Alone
The Associated Press
July 15, 1994, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 786 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER McDOUGALL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUTARE, Rwanda
Body




About one shell shot from the front lines, six barefoot, raggedy children pattered down the road behind a Tutsi rebel riding a bicycle.
When the group hit a guerrilla checkpoint, the rebel dropped off to join his men. The little band of children walked on up the road alone.
Watching them go, the rebel said he didn't know where they came from or where they were going.
"They just showed up on the road and stuck with me," he said. "I guess they're looking out for each other."
While the rebel Rwandan Patriotic Front grinds down the Hutu army and panicked refugees flee, aid officials estimate as many as 100,000 children roam the country on their own, among the mines, the corpses and the devastation.
The Red Cross calls them "unaccompanied children" - not orphans - because no one knows if their parents are dead, alive, wounded, fled or fighting.
They're survivors of the death squad massacres that have killed an estimated 200,000 to 500,000 Rwandans in the last three months, since the Central African nation's civil war resumed.
Many of the children saw their families hacked to death before their eyes, and they themselves bear the scars of clubs and machetes.
The death squads were formed by Hutu extremists who feared that the once-dominant Tutsi minority would again take power over the Hutu majority.
This wasn't Rwanda's first Tutsi massacre. Thousands had been killed in the early 1960s, and the children of those who fled into exile banded into a formidable guerrilla army.
"The crazy ones couldn't believe the rebels wanted peace," despite signing a treaty with the government in August 1993, said Assan Ildefonse, a Tutsi patient at Butare Hospital who had both his Achilles tendons slashed by a machete. After most of the doctors were killed, the hospital was abandoned and Ildefonse now hobbles around trying to care for about 40 children.
When Hutu President Juvenal Habyarimana died April 6 in a mysterious plane crash, militias across the country descended on the Tutsis and anyone suspected of collaboration.
The rebels launched a new offensive so furious that within three months they had run the death squads and the army from two-thirds of the country.
But not before many children were dead - or left alone.
"The militias called the Tutsi babies future rebels and killed them too," Ildefonse said.
Those who escaped, now terrified of adults and uniforms, often hide and keep to the wilds. When rebels captured Butare and drove off the death squads, they had to recruit women to help coax the children out of their hiding places in back rooms and banana groves.
Among the first to join the rescue effort was Gertrude Kanakuze, who lost her left arm and 30 members of her Tutsi family in one night of Hutu militia hell, including her husband, daughters, sons and parents.
Nursing the stump of her arm in Butare Hospital, Kanakuze, 27, has taken under her wing four foundlings who were discovered hiding in the woods.
"I don't know how I could live if i didn't have someone else to think about," she said, stroking the head of Liliane, whom Gertrude guesses is 4 years old. "Praise God, we are many and we are surviving."
Marc Vatieri has taken in more than 200 of Rwanda's wandering children at an orphanage he set up in an abandoned school in the capital, Kigali.
The 40-year-old Frenchman, with gentle eyes and long hair and beard, came to Rwanda over a year ago to nurse terminally-ill AIDS patients and found himself taking care of their children after they'd died.
Vatieri, a former clothing salesman who said God called on him to work in Rwanda, stuck it out in Kigali throughout the siege. As rebel mortars and militia revenge attacks killed more than one-third of the city's population, he opened his door every day to another solitary child.
"Some chidren came to us from the hospital, sometimes people found them and brought them to us, but many little ones just arrived alone and banged on the door," Vatieri said.
As he struggles to feed and calm the children, he fears his biggest problem is that all those who could help him were among the militias' prime targets.
"They have no families, no teachers - who will help them through this?" Among Vatieri's charges is Eric, 11, who shyly lifted his baseball cap to show the raw red machete scars on the back of his head.
Eric's composure as he recounted the death of his family was typical, said Vatieri and Red Cross nurse Carrie Baas.
"They saw their parents killed and they tell you - but they seem to feel no emotion," Baas said. She bunks wounded kids shoulder-to shoulder, 23 to a tent, behind the Red Cross field hospital.
"We don't have the time to teach them much besides to care for each other," Baas said. "And they seem to learn that very quickly."
 Load-Date: July 16, 1994

 

End of Document
