

Scenes From a Cataclysm: Life and Death Under the Volcano
The Associated Press
July 26, 1994, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1002 words
Byline: By MORT ROSENBLUM, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: GOMA, Zaire
Body




At first glance, it is just a busy market day in this backwater crossroads, with all of the routine haggling, honking and thievery that fades into late-night laughter.
The Two Seasons Restaurant is chockablock with truckers wolfing down spicy beans and rice, a whitewashed hole in the wall by the packed stalls of women selling bananas, chilis and bright cloth.
Goma's golden youth hang out at the hotels, emptying quart-size bottles of Primus in beery oblivion. Around midnight, the Feeling Club jams to overflow in ear-splitting, gyrating revelry.
All is normal under the volcano, in a breathtaking setting on Lake Kivu, a few steps from the heart of darkness, not far from where Stanley met Livingstone and gorillas romp in the mist.
Then you notice that the bundles by the road aren't blankets. People who seem to be napping in the sun will not wake up. The smell that seeps into every cranny, putrid and acrid, is death en masse.
On any road out of town, there is no missing the cataclysm. This is something for which "hell" is a paltry understatement.
No one knows whether the sudden tide of Rwandans that washed over Goma is the worst humanitarian calamity ever. A million have come, and thousands are dying. But numbers alone mean nothing.
The problem is not a lack of food, despite all the publicity over a botched U.S. airdrop that ended up adding only five tons of stocks to a camp that is well-supplied by road.
Cholera, the doctors say, is just a fancy word for virulent dysentery caused by people drinking the only water they can find after their desperate flight - feces-laced, mud-colored goo.
As bad as the camp is, only a few are leaving. Mostly, in the end, Rwandan refugees are dying from fear.
Despite the assurances by outsiders who have come to help, the people of Goma do not expect this biblical exodus to reverse itself anytime soon. Ethnic cleansing over the border is nothing new.
Valentin Lubao, in a white shirt and important person's suit, supervises the outdoor market in the heart of town, a focal point for Rwandans seeking a handout or a piece of tin roof for shelter.
The strain on this city has driven up the price of food staples threefold in a few weeks.
"They must go back," he told a visitor, while admitting that most probably would not leave for at least six months. "We are catching their diseases. Their bodies litter our streets."
As the visitor left, Lubao had questions of his own: "Why did Clinton, the others, all wait so long? Couldn't they see what was happening? Didn't they care?"
In squalid, cheek-by-jowl camps outside of town, refugees are settling in to stay. Water tanks are appearing. Plastic sheets and sticks turn into huts. But the lava rock is too hard for latrines.
On most days, the refugees have taken away the volcano. Smoke from cookfires blots out the view of Nyiragongo, a perfect cone looming high above luxuriant vegetation.
Fuel is whacked by machete from the nearest trunk, leaving ugly stumps and fatally wounded trees over vast roadside stretches. Goma's shade and natural decor are going fast.
At the circular park in the center of town, early one morning, a young man stretched, stepped over a body in the dust and walked over to urinate on the last living oleander.
Everywhere, the contrasts are startling.
Outside the Hotel du Grands Lacs, a corpse lay untouched for days. Inside, 250 wedding guests in Sunday finery whooped it up in raucous opulence.
Along the lakeside Corniche, color-coordinated bougainvillea spills over the walls of elegant houses left from colonial days. On the banks, refugees cover every inch of ground, and they jostle to draw water with bodies floating nearby.
On a clear day at Katale, up north, you can lift your eyes from squalor and see hibiscus and birds of paradise. Far beyond, Nyiragongo epitomizes the soaring beauty of Central Africa.
At the Hotel Nyira in Goma, Mitzi Koutses had to trim her menu because of the crisis. But "extra-soft smoked salmon," osso bucco, chocolate mousse and her best Bordeaux wines survived the cut.
She apologizes to customers for the slow service.
"Everyday a waiter comes in with a sore back, a headache, and cannot work," she explained. "It is all psychological. These bodies, all the people everywhere, it is making them crazy."
On Goma's crowded streets, people wear scarfs over their faces, like Old West bandits, or surgical masks to filter the deadly dust and blunt the stench.
Refugees and townsfolk alike carry five-gallon yellow plastic jerry-cans to collect water whenever the taps happen to run.
To see the real effect, you must walk into a camp, if your system will bear it. The weak lean against the stiffened limbs of the dead. The sick wait hours for a moment with a volunteer doctor.
Aid workers say many lives could have been saved had wealthy governments acted more quickly to provide water and health care. But this is Zaire, they add, where nothing is easy.
When one relief flight arrived last week, a visiting Zairian colonel demanded a payment of $ 17,000 to let it leave. After haggling, he settled for $ 400. Later, his own plane would not start, and he asked for help. The price was $ 400.
Although cameras focus on the desperate, refugees include young intellectuals, soldiers carrying looted booty, wheeler-dealer businessmen and ex-cabinet ministers with full pockets.
At the Feeling Club, "Cousin" the D.J. laughed when asked if the refugee influx had dampened business. "Who do you think is spending all the money?" he replied.
These higher-profile refugees will likely be the last to return. Instead, the deposed elite may dig in just over the border and plot their return to power.
As a backdrop to the calamity, the volcano Nyiragongo seems to be belching and bubbling more than usual, adding an element of tension to a situation that does not need it. At night, it glows ominously.
"Someone described the scene around here as hell without fire," observed Ron Redmond of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees office. "If the volcano blows, they will have that, too."
 Load-Date: July 26, 1994

 

End of Document
