

Shuttle Radar to Scan Rwanda for Gorillas in the Mist
The Associated Press
August 13, 1994, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 844 words
Byline: By MARCIA DUNN, AP Aerospace Writer
Dateline: CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla.
Body




The most advanced civilian space radar can penetrate the Earth's ice, sand and vegetation. It sees with ease through mist, and this week NASA hopes to peer through the mists of Rwanda to track the imperiled mountain gorilla.
Human trackers who normally keep tabs on the foraging gorillas are gone, evacuated from the Dian Fossey research camp in April when the tiny African nation imploded in an orgy of slaughter.
The $ 366 million radar system made its orbital debut that same month aboard the space shuttle Endeavour, scanning the fog-bound volcanoes of Rwanda, Zaire and Uganda where the gorillas live.
Naturalist Fossey spent almost 20 years of her life studying the gorillas and protecting them from poachers, who cut off heads and hands for cruel trophies. She was killed nine years ago by a machete-wielding intruder who was never caught.
The poachers' threat has diminished, but now the gorillas' shrinking habitat is being squeezed by tens of thousands of Rwandan refugees. Space researchers hope to ease their plight with fresh radar images sent from Endeavour on a 10-day environmental mission that begins with Thursday's launch.
"The ability to do this remotely is not something I think she would have ever imagined," said H. Dieter Steklis, executive director of the Dian Fossey Gorilla Fund and a primatologist at Rutgers University. "I think she would have imagined we would always be somehow yoked to using traditional techniques, that the only way to physically protect gorillas was by having people out there.
"While we still do that, and it's very important," he said, "this adds a dimension that allows us to better manage the resource, to actually plan a conservation strategy."
Steklis plans to overlay the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's images with data collected from navigation satellites and standard topographical maps to create an extremely detailed overview of the terrain the gorillas roam to ascertain their preferred habitat.
In the four months since ethnic slaughter forced millions of Rwandans to flee either government Hutu forces or rebel Tutsis, hordes of displaced Rwandans have encroached on the gorillas' territory, Steklis said.
Refugees have tramped through the rain forest en route to Zaire and back. Some, afraid of disease in the camps but terrified of execution if they return home, have built crude shelters nearby, cutting down trees and stands of bamboo for firewood, Steklis said.
There's no evidence they are killing any mountain gorillas for food, he emphasized.
"We are quite excited about the possibility that in this current flyover we might actually be able to detect … the negative impact on the forest," Steklis said.
Studying mountain gorillas is just one of the unusual tasks assigned to the radar system, which was originally intended for traditional environmental monitoring.
On this flight, it will map the habitat of endangered pandas in China for the National Geographic Society, survey stagnant pools in areas with malarial outbreaks, scan the Saudi Arabian sand for traces of oil and minerals, and search in Israel, Egypt, Oman, Cambodia and China for hidden archaeological treasures.
"The main goal of our program is still monitoring the climate and the Earth's health and how it's changing," said Diane Evans, project scientist at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif. "But my goodness, if we can help other people, I think that's what we should be doing."
In this case, the intended beneficiaries are Fossey's beloved mountain gorillas, described in her 1983 book "Gorillas in the Mist," later made into a movie with Sigourney Weaver playing Fossey.
Fewer than 650 mountain gorillas survive. The last census was in 1989; Rwandan rebels became active in the countryside and border areas the next year.
"The one thing we worry about and have no data for are the effects of the war," Steklis said. "Regions of the forest, we have heard from time to time, have been (land) mined since 1990. We have not been able to get into those regions at all."
That's where space radar comes in.
Aircraft and traditional satellites are virtually useless for mapping central Africa's mountainous rain forests because of the constant mist and clouds.
Until they were evacuated in April, workers at "Karisoke," the Fossey research camp, followed the gorillas while carrying hand-held radar receivers linked to Global Positioning System satellites. When a receiver was pointed toward a GPS satellite, the worker's position on Earth was noted and bounced back, with accuracy as close as 10 feet.
When this virtual step-by-step evidence of the gorillas' travels is combined with computer images of vegetation patterns, researchers gain knowledge of why the gorillas favor one area (it has the lushest vegetation or best shelter) or avoid another (it may be littered with antelope snares).
"What we really want to know is what's considered gorilla-usable habitat. What is it that appeals to the gorillas?" Steklis said. "It may turn out that gorillas avoid certain regions because they encounter traps or poachers."
 Load-Date: August 13, 1994

 

End of Document
