

Sights, Smells of Death Shroud the Living in Refugee Camps
The Associated Press
July 28, 1994, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 760 words
Byline: By MICHELLE FAUL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MUGUNGA, Zaire
Body




The young couple stood on a rocky outcrop to take in the sights: A vermilion sunset cresting the green mountain, a majestic stand of eucalyptus, and below, hundreds of rotting bodies.
Gently, the man stroked the woman's head and turned it away from the stench of death and fear that fouled a balmy evening breeze.
That wasn't enough. Up close, there was yet another body.
Six men carried the corpse of a 20-year-old woman wrapped in a rattan sleeping mat. They gasped under the weight of their burden and nearly dropped it as one of them slid on excrement and vomit.
"Everywhere you look, there is horror," the man said to the woman, and they walked away.
In the camp, people wrapped kerchiefs over their faces or pulled shirts up high. Still, they could not block out the stench as they ran the gantlet of bodies that grows by the hundreds every day.
When the field in front of the tent hospitals overflowed with corpses this week, people began piling their dead at one side, along a road created by pounding feet.
A million Rwandans sought safety in this Zairian border area, and a third of them now make up this camp on a plain leading to the volcanic crater lake from which Mugunga gets its name.
When corpses crowded both sides of the road through camp Tuesday, yet another mound was started beneath the outcrop.
They were wrapped in mats, blankets or colorful local cloth. Some lay uncovered. A man's face was frozen in a pained grimace, clawlike hands reaching out. A young boy seemed only asleep on his side, his head resting on an arm adorned with a beaded bracelet.
A foot away from a baby's body at the edge of the pile, an old man put his head on his sack of belongings, arranged his black umbrella to shield his face from the sun, and waited for death.
People ignored him as they walked past to join a crowd of thousands around a French Army water tanker. There is never enough clean water, and an angry, shouting scuffle erupted.
A French soldier yelled that water would stop flowing if there was trouble. The noise level dropped back to the muted hum of despair and desolate wails of babies that hangs over Mugunga.
Beyond the medical tents near the camp entrance, haphazard homes stretch for nearly a mile, and the outer circle seems to grow by the hour. Families squat on the hard rock, barely inches apart.
A family of newcomers tied sticks together to form a beehive-shaped frame that they would cover with a sheet of plastic and a blanket. They will not be able to lie down without thrusting their feet into their neighbors' hut, fancier and covered with green leaves.
But lying down is what people here do most - even the children, although their beds are hard lava rock covered in coal-like pebbles.
Everyone seems to be ill, thousands with deadly cholera. They lie helpless, vomiting where their heads rest, soiled with excrement from the cholera-induced diarrhea that spreads the disease.
A baby defecated in his mother's lap. She wiped her skirt with a dirty rag, then used the same rag to wipe a young boy's runny nose.
"Shut up! Shut up!" she snapped at the youngster. He continued to wail.
The grass that covered the rock has been worn away. Only a small grove remains of the tall eucalyptus trees that covered the plain. Refugees chopped down the rest for shelters and cooking fires.
As the sun set, women built pyramids of wood inside circles of rocks on which they rested their tin pots.
Dancile Nyirabariyanga wailed in frustration as she found a pile of feces in her cooking spot.
"It is too much," she cried. That morning, her daughter Madeleine, 16, joined the pile of bodies. "My husband took my son to the hospital," she told a visitor. "He's dying, I know it, and both the other children are vomiting and have diarrhea."
The makeshift hospital offers no meals, only plastic bags of fluid attached to intravenous tubes.
Tents set up by an international aid group are so crowded that patients overflow into the open. They lie on the dirt in dozens of rows. Relatives stand by like sentries, holding bags of rehydration fluids because there is nothing to attach them to.
Before dark, the relief workers leave the camp, a danger zone at night. Two men were stoned to death this week, accused by the Hutu refugees of being infiltrators of the rival Tutsi-led rebels who defeated the Rwandan army.
Exiled soldiers and militias go to work after dark, spreading propaganda.
"They say if we go home the Tutsis will kill us, and that if we even try to leave that they themselves will chop us up, slaughter us," whispered a refugee too frightened to give his name.
 Load-Date: July 28, 1994

 

End of Document
