

Somalia's Still On The Map, But It's Hardly A Country
The Associated Press
August 25, 1992, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1104 words
Byline: By MORT ROSENBLUM, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: MOGADISHU, Somalia
Body




The airport sign says "Welcome," and no one bothers travelers for a visa or a customs check. Somalia these days is a name on a map and a nightmare, but it is no longer a country.
Although one-fourth of all Somalis may starve to death by November, an enterprising few are making money hand over fist. The rest of the country survives as if in another time, by cooking fires, quick wits and fatalistic patience.
Four years of insurrection against a diehard dictatorial president narrowed to a vicious clan war when President Mohammed Siad Barre finally fled in April. A drought, the worst in memory, administered the coup de grace.
"This is the only country where sociology allows you to predict human behavior," observed Seifulaziz Milas, a Mozambican professor working for the U.N. Children's Fund.
He meant that man, left to the most basic instincts, is essentially a predatory mammal.
Something far more complex than civil war has taken Somalia to an eerie neo-Stone Age. The only institution still functioning is the trade in khat, a narcotic leaf.
Among 6.5 million Somalis, survivors are the fittest, the nomads who took their flocks beyond the reach of warlords' jeeps, barter traders in makeshift markets, potentates who buy power, and road warriors with rocket launchers.
Nearly a million people have fled, most to squalid refugee camps. Others have died by the tens of thousands. By August, the estimated death toll rose to more than 2,000 a day.
There is a measure of chaos, but mostly there is systematic plundering by anyone rich enough, smart enough or well enough armed to corner a market.
Real industries and utilities have been looted to oblivion, giving rise to a new sort of enterprise, such as one jokingly referred to as the National Copper Mining Corporation.
Somali has no copper, but businessmen - reputedly some in the ineffective interim government - had workmen dig up miles of copper cable under Mogadishu to be sold as scrap in the Middle East.
In the rich farmlands along the Juba river, irrigation pipes were chopped into sections and sold. Draught animals were rustled, and seed was looted for food.
Townsfolk who find a strip of cardboard to replace stolen tin roofing take it with them on their daily search for food lest it, too, get stolen.
Against this backdrop, foreign relief officials struggle against Somalis to save Somalis from starving.
At Mogadishu port, the Rattana Naree has waited since Aug. 10 to drop off 10,000 tons of desperately needed sorghum. Only Monday, after weeks of struggle by the World Food Program, did workmen unload the first 1,000 tons.
Asked to explain the delay, Tom Lecato, a veteran WFP aid specialist from Ft. Pierce, Fla., offered a helpless shrug. It is a common response, meaning: This is Somalia.
Somalia's condition makes a mockery of such hopeful pronouncements as the the United States' plan to ship 145,000 tons of food sometime after October. No one knows who will be here to eat it, or how it will get to them.
The United States has given Somalia $ 77 million in the past two years, mostly in food aid, and last week began an airlift of food to Somali refugees along the border in northeastern Kenya. The airlift's first flights into Somalia itself are expected later this week.
Many aid workers and Somalis have questioned why the U.S. airlift, and similar flights funded or operated by Germany, Italy and Britain, have come so late, after so many have already died.
Thoughtful Somalis, looking beyond the nightmare at hand, wonder if their old tradition-bound, Islamic society will ever find its roots again.
"Before, we never had this violence, rape, looting, disrespect for elders," said Hashim Abdi, a Somali living in Kenya, where many second-tier intellectuals and civil servants sought refuge. "What have we come to?"
The first tier are in Europe, the United States, and the Persian Gulf. Many are pocketing huge rents for villas housing United Nations agencies and a dozen volunteer organizations.
Somalia was stitched together after World War II from Italian and British colonies, with distinct tribes and clans speaking similar dialects. Independent in 1960, Somalia soon slipped into the Soviet orbit.
Moscow abandoned Somalia for its enemy, Ethiopia, in 1978, and Washington moved in. Both superpowers left Siad Barre with bristling arsenals of modern weapons.
As the dictator's grip loosened, clan leaders within the large Hawiye clan rose against him. Their United Somali Congress deposed him after 21 years and took revenge on his minority Marehan sub-clan, which ran much of the country.
In the north, Isaak tribesmen declared independence for a moderately peaceful and relatively well-fed Somaliland Republic, which no one has recognized.
In the center and south, clans, sub-clans and sub-sub-clans rekindled feuds that date back to biblical times. Teen-aged gangs ruled their turf with heavy weapons.
And in the capital, two chieftains waged unremitting war. Gen. Mohamed Farrah Aidid, who led rebel Hawiye forces, and Ali Mahdi Mohamed, a hotelier who bankrolled them, soon fell out.
With personal hatred as their only ideological rift, they pounded the charming old city into another Beirut, complete with a "Green Line" dividing south from north.
Ali Mahdi has the title of president, but he barely commands a piece of Mogadishu. A television crew had trouble interviewing him recently because gunfire outside ruined their sound recordings.
There are no policemen, tax collectors, dogcatchers, lawyers or firefighters. The homeless make up a silent majority.
The banks, the cathedral, shopfronts and villas are blown apart. The Hotel Croce de Sud, where a courtly Italian owner and his wife once served pasta under flowering trees, is a charred skeleton on a post-nuclear landscape.
But the flowering trees are still there, bougainvilla spilling vivid oranges and purples, and towering flame trees softening the damage with bright green foliage.
The unexpected beauty heightens the sense of unreality in a country that put itself out of business.
Food aid is the only motor of the economy. Armed youths known as "technicals" shepherd relief workers and journalists through streets that can erupt suddenly into mayhem.
Each night, the only lights in town blaze behind chained-up compounds flying gigantic blue U.N. flags or bright red crosses.
By day, no one avails themselves of the airport "Welcome" sign except relief workers coming to help and newspeople coming to watch.
On one recent flight, Nina Nobel of the Washington-based Visions in Action was reading the book she selected for her stay in Somalia. It was Chinua Achebe's novel, "Things Fall Apart."

 

End of Document
