

Somaliland Tries To Separate The Boys From Their Guns
The Associated Press
January 25, 1994, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 659 words
Byline: By MICHAEL M. PHILLIPS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HARGEISA, Somalia
Body




The immigration procedures at Hargeisa International Airport are straightforward: You get off the plane and give $ 40 to a kid whose buddies lounge in the background with AK-47 assault rifles.
He then stamps your passport with the quasi-official Republic of Somaliland imprint, splits the money with his friends and politely inquires when you might be passing his way again.
It's difficult to just say no to a teenager with a rifle, and around northwestern Somalia, in the self-declared Republic of Somaliland, very few dare to try.
"It's survival of the fittest," says Somaliland presidential spokesman Abdi Idris. "If everyone has a gun, the one with the biggest gun survives."
Somaliland is the only region of Somalia that has managed to set up a real government, establish a real peace and begin to build a real future. But the one thing Somaliland has not been able to do is separate 50,000 boys from their guns.
The United Nations and its peacekeepers tried - and largely failed - to disarm the clan militias of Mogadishu and southern Somalia. Somaliland, which was the first region to rise up against dictator Mohamed Siad Barre, never wanted U.N. troops on its soil or U.N. solutions to its problems.
Instead, the region chose the traditional path to peace: lengthy negotiations among politicians, military commanders and clan elders.
The results are impressive. The capital, Hargeisa, is trying to rebuild from the devastation wrought by Siad Barre's troops and the people are proud of the peace they have created.
But even they cannot deny that the region will never be completely stable as long as competing militias cruise the towns and man the checkpoints in vehicles mounted with anti-aircraft guns.
Just last week, the Edagale clan militia that controls Hargeisa airport traded artillery fire with the Habre-Younis militia that controls checkpoints along the nearby roads. The dispute was over who will receive the "tax revenue" from imports of the popular narcotic plant, khat.
Two people were killed before the police and clan elders managed to intervene, negotiating the return of a captured Edagale vehicle and the closure of new Habre-Younis checkpoints. The government is still hoping the Edagale militia will someday actually cede control of the airport to the government.
"When a young boy has a gun, has lost his parents and maybe has a family to support, there's a tendency to take advantage of his gun," explained Somaliland police commissioner Gen. Abdi "Sahardid" Mohamed.
"The whole country is full of guns," he added. "There has to be a way to disarm the Somaliland people."
The government, backed by the U.N. World Food Program, has brought 6,000 militiamen to a demobilization camp in Mandera, 60 miles northeast of Hargeisa, as a trial run. Those men will become the core of the new National Guard as well as the police and prison departments.
But the Somaliland government, which usually eschews outside intervention, says it cannot demobilize the remaining 44,000 militiamen without help from the United Nations or other donors. The government has drawn up a demobilization and retraining plan that calls for $ 36 million in foreign contributions.
"What the Americans and the United Nations couldn't do in the south, we have done on our own in the north - national reconciliation among tribes," says Somaliland Vice President Abdirahman Aw Ali. But "to reach final stability, we have realized it's of paramount importance to demobilize and disarm our people."
Disarmament, however, must go hand-in-hand with job creation, or boys like those manning the airport immigration office will never give up their source of easy income.
"If we get jobs, we'll throw our guns away," says 24-year-old Ahmed "Toothless" Mohamed, who drives a truck mounted with twin anti-aircraft cannons for the Saad Musa clan militia.
That will be no mean feat for a government that has to get permission from a gang of teenagers so the president's plane can land.
 Load-Date: January 26, 1994

 

End of Document
