

South Africa: Violence on the Road to Democracy
The Associated Press
October 23, 1993, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 847 words
Byline: By JOHN DANISZEWSKI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, South Africa
Body




Violence so pervades South Africa that not even the dead are safe.
The burial of 43 bodies that had accumulated at a morgue, many burned beyond recognition, was delayed three times by gunfire and threats. It took police in armored vehicles, themselves shooting, to escort the victims to rest in the barren red clay of a paupers' graveyard.
The armed funeral procession was another grotesque example of the daily slaughter in the teeming black townships near Johannesburg, in rural Natal province and at taxi stops where commuters provide convenient targets.
Experts differ on the causes, culprits and cures, but one thing is clear: Someone is doing a lot of killing, and each political step toward a more equal society seems to bring more.
"There are no innocents in South Africa," said Lloyd Vogelman, director of the Center for the Study of Violence and Reconciliation at the University of Witwatersrand. "Every single political organization is responsible for violence at some level or other. All political parties have made use of violence for their own ends."
Nearly all the victims are black and few of the killers are caught, which adds another layer of terror and despair even as oppressive white rule nears its end.
Many South Africans believe their country is unraveling as it moves toward what could be its greatest opportunity: the first nonracial elections, on April 27.
Chances are slim for a decline in bloodshed before then, Vogelman said. He thinks it may even increase as right-wing whites, dissident blacks and elements of the security forces try to disrupt the elections, and as political factions use intimidation in their campaigns.
"Unless the violence stops, the reality is that the elections are not going to be free and fair," Vogelman said, voicing a fear shared by many politicians. But not holding them, he added, could propel the bloodshed to "absolutely shocking" proportions.
Political violence took 2,131 lives in the first nine months of 1993. The average from June through August was more than 12 bodies a day. Since Jan. 1, 1990, the toll is 11,630.
Hideous killings underline the hatred among combatants often barely out of their teens, uneducated and hungry for a taste of power: victims "necklaced" with burning tires, hacked to death with axes and machete-like pangas, blown to pieces with bursts of fire from the ubiquitous AK-47s.
The murder of American student Amy Biehl by a mob and the familiar chant of the militant black Pan Africanist Congress - "one settler, one bullet" - have raised the fear level of minority whites as well.
In the comfortable white suburbs, nerves are fraying. Walls grow higher, turning homes into fortresses. Armed private guards sit in cars parked at intersections, only a panic button away, ready to fight off intruders.
All mainstream political parties condemn the violence, but there is little consensus beyond that.
Leaders of South Africa's largest black group, the African National Congress, allege a conspiracy involving elements of the security forces.
"Who benefits by derailing the negotiating process?" Allan Boesak, head of the organization in Cape Town, asked rhetorically. "Who has the capacity to execute these deeds with a military precision? Who has the capacity to cover up?"
ANC leader Nelson Mandela, who calls South Africa "the most violent society in the world today," bristles at claims that the cause is rivalry between his group and the Zulu-led Inkatha Freedom Party. When masked gunmen mow down a line of commuters, he told a rally in September, they cannot know whether the targets belong to Inkatha or the ANC.
He views such attacks as an effort by right-wing whites to sow terror and confusion before the elections. The ANC prescription is to press ahead with elections while forming a new peacekeeping force not controlled by the white government.
President F.W. de Klerk, whose National Party has gone from enforcing apartheid to negotiating its demise with the ANC, blames most of the political violence on ethnic and ideological rivalries between Inkatha and the ANC.
Speaking with The Associated Press, he also pointed to a "lost generation" of uneducated, unemployed young blacks for whom bloodshed has become a way of life.
De Klerk suggested that only a new government elected by all the people would have enough credibility to take the harsh steps needed to end the violence.
Right-wing white groups have a different explanation for the killing: They accuse the ANC and its ally, the South African Communist Party, of a campaign to eliminate opponents - with the government's silent complicity.
The black Pan Africanist Congress, whose military wing often claims responsibility for attacks on whites, says the real reason behind the killings of blacks is a lack of justice in the land it calls "occupied Azania."
Even a combination of free elections, land redistribution and punishment for apartheid could not bring a quick end to the violence, said Theo Mabusela, the group's organizer in Cape Town.
"The injuries inflicted over all these years will remain septic for some time to come," he said.
 Load-Date: October 23, 1993

 

End of Document
