

SOUTHERN SUDAN: Hard to Get the World Interested in Disaster
The Associated Press
January 26, 1994, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 802 words
Byline: By GEORGE MULALA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TAMBURA, Sudan
Body




Angelina Mrumbe spread a tattered sack between the roots of a tree and arranged her merchandise: a small mound of raw peanuts she hoped to barter into a meal for her nine children.
But on that day, as on most others, little business was done in Tambura, a line of rusted tin shacks and decrepit brick buildings on a single dirt street.
None of the few inhabitants, many wearing only loincloths or skirts of grass, was willing to trade food for her peanuts, so Mrs. Mrumbe would have to grind the peanuts to feed the children.
"Life is very bad," she said. "My children are naked. There is not enough to eat. This is home, but it is no better than the refugee camps we left."
Tambura, on Sudan's remote southwestern border with the Central African Republic, was once a relatively prosperous trading post. Now it is a primitive settlement controlled by the rebel Sudan People's Liberation Army.
Its plight highlights many of the difficulties facing southern Sudan, a vast, undeveloped region undergoing what the United Nations describes as one of the great humanitarian disasters.
Life is unrelenting hardship for the Zande tribe, one of the largest ethnic groups in southern Sudan.
In 1990, fighting between rebels and government forces destroyed what commerce remained and cut the road running southeast to Uganda. The road had been the main source of clothing, soap, tools, cooking utensils, blankets and medicines and other goods.
Here and elsewhere in southern Sudan, there is no electricity or telecommunications system. The few vehicles that pass through Tambura belong either to aid workers or the rebel army. There are no paved roads.
In the town clinic, dirty, unkempt patients lie on wire-mesh beds without mattresses. There is no medicine.
Behind the dilapidated shops, on the day Mrs. Mrumbe could not trade her peanuts, a mother brewed a home remedy for a vomiting child with diarrhea.
"These people are not starving, but they are barely making it," said Dorothy Schaffer, a health coordinator for the World Vision relief agency of Monrovia, Calif.
Tambura and nearby Yambio, once off-limits to relief workers because of fighting, now are the objects of aid and development sponsored by U.N. Operation Lifeline Sudan.
Schaffer said the towns need development help more than food.
"We are trying to give the economy a kick-start," she said. "We are introducing chickens, soap manufacturing from palm, and encouraging production at all levels."
Although the soil is rich and there is a vast tropical forest of mango, acacia and teak trees, the people remain on the edge of starvation.
Mrs. Mrumbe, a 53-year-old widow, and her children are among thousands who fled the war, seeking refuge in the neighboring Central African Republic and Zaire or elsewhere in Sudan.
She and many others who have returned live in grass huts around Tambura. They distrust the rebels, whom they see as oppressive occupiers.
"There is nothing resembling a civil administration," said Samuel Baabe Ranzi, 59, paramount chief of the Zande tribe. "It is a military town and all decisions are made by the military.
"This war has not benefited the Zande people. Before the war, there was some form of trade. Now there is nothing but poverty."
Southern rebels started fighting the Muslim-dominated government in the north in 1983 for more autonomy and economic development in the south, which has a predominantly black population of Christians and animists.
Fighting has intensified in the last two years, and the government has made territorial gains. The insurgents also have begun fighting among themselves and have split into at least three factions.
The government in Khartoum, 800 miles to the northeast, has a long record of neglecting the south, where an estimated 3.5 million people live in a region twice the size of Texas.
Rich oil and mineral deposits are believed to lie beneath the tropical forests, marsh and scrubland, but years of fighting have halted exploration.
By U.N. estimate, 1.5 million people in the south need some form of aid.
"In some ways, it's worse" than the disasters in Yugoslavia, Angola and Somalia "because the conflict in Sudan is a 27-year conflict," said Phillip O'Brien, head of U.N. Operation Lifeline Sudan.
Fighting first broke out between Sudan's north and south in 1956, and has continued for all but 10 years since.
Despite the magnitude of the disaster, it is hard to get the world interested, said O'Brien, interviewed in Nairobi, Kenya.
"It's a very difficult one to get hold of," he said. "The Somalia thing, at one level, was more simplistic: mass starvation and clearly a breakdown of civil order.
"In Sudan, it isn't a breakdown of civil order, just. It's a combination of religious factors, ethnic factors, self-determination - a whole compendium of things. It doesn't lend itself to easy presentation."
 Load-Date: January 26, 1994

 

End of Document
