

Stamps In The News: Tanzanian Stamps Concern Endangered Species
The Associated Press
January 3, 1992, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 575 words
Body




Eds: Special Features Illustrations - Mailed print subscribers get 1 b&w photo, l col, lion and impala herd
 
 By SYD KRONISH
For AP Special Features
Concerted efforts to preserve the rare and endangered species of wildlife are being publicized by many nations via recent stamp issuances. The latest country to release such a series of stamps is Tanzania, a former British mandated territory in East Africa, where many endangered species are found.
The new set of stamps emphasizes the importance of national parks and game reserves in helping to preserve the wildlife and birdlife of Tanzania.
The 25 shillings depicts both the greater kudu and the African elephant grazing on the grounds of the Ruaha National Park.
The 50 shillings shows the wildebeest and the leopard inside the borders of the world famous Serengeti National Park. The 90 shillings features the tall giraffe and the white-starred bush robin enjoying the protected habitat of the Ngurdoto Crater National Park.
The 250 shillings illustrates the lion and a small herd of impala in the Lake Manyara National Park.
The souvenir sheet pictures, in its stamp portion, the oryx bird and the paradise whydah within the grounds of the Mkomazi Game Reserve. The value of the souvenir sheet is 400 shillings.
In a separate set of stamps, Tanzania flies from the endangered wildlife in the game preserves to the ubiquitous butterflies of the area.
The 15 shillings depicts the blue-spot commodore (male and female varieties). The 35 shillings shows the male orange admiral. The 100 shillings pictures the male Jackson's leaf butterfly. The 300 shillings illustrates the crawshay's sapphire blue. A 400 shilling souvenir sheet features the noble swallowtail. Each of the species are identified on the stamps by their English names and Latin names.
Topical collectors who specialize in wildlife and butterflies, respectively, will welcome these additions. Your local dealer should have them in stock.
---
Eagle and Shield theme for U.S. bulk rate stamp
The U.S. Postal Service has issued its new Eagle and Shield non-denominated coil stamp with a value of 10 cents.
The new design features a stylized, open-winged eagle in gold tones with a red, white and blue shield across its chest. The words "Bulk Rate" in blue and "USA" in red, are seen below the eagle.
This 10-center is for use by permit mailers on presorted bulk mail pieces. Additional postage will be paid by the mailers at the time of mailing, depending on the level of sortation used to prepare the mailings.
The eagle and shield stamps are available in coils of 500, 3,000 and 10,000.
First day cancellations can be obtained in the usual two methods.
The easiest way is to buy the new stamps at your local Philatelic Center (or post offices that serve permit mailers) and affix to your envelopes. Remember to affix additional postage to meet the first class rate of 29 cents. Then address the envelopes, place in a larger envelope, and send to: Customer Affixed Envelopes, Eagle and Shield Nondenominated stamp, Postmaster, 315 Pershing Rd, Kansas City, Mo. 64108-9991.
If you prefer to have the USPS do the affixing, send your self-addressed envelopes and 29 cents per envelope in check or money order, to: Eagle and Shield Nondenominated Stamp, 315 Pershing Rd, Kansas City, Mo. 64108-9992. The Postal Service will affix one 10-cent Eagle and shield stamp and one 19-cent Fishing Boat stamp per envelope.
All orders must be postmarked by Feb. 11, 1992.

 

End of Document
