

Stamps In The News: Riverboats Keep Rollin' Along on Gambian Stamps
The Associated Press
February 5, 1993, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 554 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




Riverboats have been popular means of transportation as well as sightseeing in many countries throughout the world. Riverboating also is a popular subject for topical stamp collectors.
"Riverboats of the World" is the theme of the latest set of stamps and two souvenir sheets by the tiny former British colony of Gambia situated in West Africa. Each stamp identifies the name of the riverboat, the river it sailed on and the national flag of the country operating the boat.
The 20 bututs shows the Gambian riverboat "Joven Antonia" sailing on the Gambia River. The 50 bututs depicts the German riverboat "River Elbe" on the Dresden River. The 75 bututs features the British riverboat "Medway Queen" on the River Medway. The 1 dalasy pictures the Gambian boat "Lady Wright" on the Gambian River. The 1.25 dalasy displays the Czechoslovakian boat "Devin" on the River Vitava.
The 5 dalasy illustrates the U.S. riverboat "Robert Fulton" on the Hudson River. The 10 dalasy shows the Australian boat "Coonawarra" on the Murray River. The 12 dalasy features the Canadian riverboat "Naksup" on the Columbia River. The 15 dalasy shows the British boat "Lucy Ashton" on the Firth of Clyde.
One souvenir sheet illustrates the 19th century American riverboat "City of Cairo" sailing down the Mississippi to New Orleans. The other sheet has a view of the German boat "Rudesheim" on the Rhine.
---
 
 Philatelic 'Who's Who'
"More Who's Who on U.S. Stamps" by Richard Louis Thomas - the sequel to "Who's Who on U.S. Stamps" has just been released by Linn's Stamp News.
Like its predecesor, this book features capsule biographies of those people who are honored but not pictured on U.S. stamps. The two books thus contain the bios of virtually every individual depicted or honored on U.S. stamps between 1847 and 1992.
The 288-page book is arranged alphabetically from William "Bud" Abbott to Count Ferdinand von Zeppelin.
Biographies of the following are among those included in the "Who's Who":
Charles Lindbergh, the famous American aviator whose plane is pictured on a 1927 airmail stamp; Henry Clayton Stutz, whose Stutz Bearcat is seen on a Transportation coil stamp in 1985; Thomas Carlyle, the Scottish essayist whose name and quotation "Labor is Life" are shown on the 1956 Labor Day stamp.
---
Five-volume Catalog for 1994
The 1993 editions of the Scott Catalogs are only recently off the presses - but the Scott Publishing Co. is talking about its 1994 editions.
The 1994 editions will be expanded into five volumes rather than the previously released four volumes.
Volume I will include the U.S., United Nations, Canada, Great Britain and the British Commonwealth. Volume II will include countries of the world A-C. Volume III will include countries of the world D-I. Volume IV will include countries of the world J-Q. Volume V will include countries R-Z. Each will retail for $ 32.
---
A complete mint set of the Gambian riverboat stamps costs $ 16.95, the souvenir sheets are $ 15.95 from the Transportation Collectors Society, PO Box 480655, Los Angeles, Calif, 90048.
---
"More Who's Who on U.S. Stamps" is available in softcover for $ 14.95. A hardbound library edition with gold stamping is available for $ 30. Prices include postage and handling. The book may be ordered directly from the publisher, Linn's Stamp News, Box 29, Sidney, Ohio 45365.

 

End of Document
