

Stamps In The News: Netherlands Reprints Coveted 'Blue Mauritius' Stamp
The Associated Press
March 3, 1995, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 630 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body



For AP Special Features
The "Blue Mauritius" comes alive again on a special stamp by the Netherlands.
In 1847, the British colony Mauritius became the seventh country in the world to issue its own stamps. Two stamps were issued. The Blue Mauritius was originally worth 2 pence. Today, in mint condition, it has become one of the most sought-after stamps in the world.
The first 500 stamps were printed with the allegedly incorrect phrase "Post Office" instead of "Post Paid." The second batch was printed correctly and includes the words, "Post Paid."
There are only four known mint Blue Mauritius stamps and six canceled. The mint stamps belong to the following: The British Library, the British Royal Family, the state of Mauritius and the Netherlands Postal Museum in the Hague.
The Netherlands has reprinted its Blue Mauritius with a side tab of 80 cents and the date 1995.
The Netherlands Mauritius stamp is available from PTT Filatelie, P.O. Box 30051, 9700 RN Groningen, Netherlands, or from the Europe Collectors Society, P.O. Box 28503, Philadelphia, Pa. 19149.
Or check with your local stamp dealer.
---
New Stamps Salute Australia Day
Australia Day is honored by the Australian Post with the issuance of four new stamps featuring artworks of its Queensland Art Gallery and the Art Gallery of Western Australia. This year marks the centenaries of both galleries. The issue continues a series, started in 1993, depicting Australian paintings.
Paintings by Russell Drysdale, Ian Fairweather, Guy Grey-Smith and Robert Juniper appear on the stamps. Drysdale was one of the first painters to discover the Australian "Outback" as a subject. Fairweather specialized in modern sketches. Grey-Smith pictured his native Western Australia landscapes. Juniper developed an affinity for the semi-arid regions of the gold fields.
Also issued by Australia is a set of three 45-cent stamps for St. Valentine's Day. The new designs depict a contemporary treatment of the traditional hearts and roses theme.
Australia's Indian Ocean Territory of Christmas Island released two stamps and a miniature sheet commemorating the lunar New Year, or Chinese New Year. Since this is the Year of the Pig, the stamps feature a pair of decorative pigs. Half of Christmas Island's population of 2,000 are Chinese.
These Australian stamps are available from the Exotic Collectors Society, P.O. Box 60042, St. Petersburg, Fla. 33784.
Or check with your local stamp dealer.
---
Camellia Society's Congress Honored
The Bailiwick of Jersey in the English Channel offers a philatelic salute to the Camellia Society's biennial Congress to be held there in March and April. Delegates from the United States, Great Britain, Australia, New Zealand, China, Japan, South Africa and many European countries will attend.
To mark the occasion, Jersey has issued a set of five stamps that illustrate camellias grown on the island. The 18 pence shows the Captain Rawes camellia. The 23 p depicts the Brigadoon camellia. The 30 p has the Elsie Jury camellia. The 35 p portrays the Augusto L'Gouveia Pinto camellia. The 41 p features the Bella Romana camellia.
The beautiful flower stamps of Jersey can be obtained directly from the Department of Postal Administration, Jersey, Channel Islands, JE1 1AA.
---
American West Commemorated
The U.S. Postal Service has issued many stamps honoring the people and places that made the American West great. From 1898 to 1994, the USPS released 20 adhesives commemorating our Western heroes and historic locations.
In 1898, three stamps were issued dedicated to Farming in the West, Hardships of Emigration and Western Cattle in a Storm.
In 1994, there were two portraying the much publicized West. One featured the famed Buffalo Soldiers while the other was a pane of 20 depicting "Legends of the West."
 Load-Date: March 3, 1995

 

End of Document
