

Stamps In The News: Canada Honors Ex-Prime Minister and United Nations
 The Associated Press
November 17, 1995, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 471 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




In a combination salute to the United Nations on its 50th anniversary and to former Prime Minister Mackenzie King, Canada has released a special 45-cent stamp. King signed the U.N. Charter on June 26, 1945.
The Charter became effective Oct. 24, 1945, and thus heralded the birth of the international organization created to maintain world peace and security and to work for social progress.
The design features Mackenzie King signing the Charter with the flags of various U.N. members in the foreground.
Canada is proud of its accomplishments as a member of the United Nations during the past half-century. Lester Pearson, one-time Canadian ambassador to the United States, played a prominent role in peacekeeping initiatives during the Korean War and was elected president of the U.N. General Assembly in 1952.
Canada Post, equivalent to the U.S. Postal Service, is making available this stamp and first-day covers from its National Philatelic Center in Ottawa. You can order the items or get information on other Canadian stamps by calling (800) 565-4362.
---
Stamp Honors Former President Polk
James K. Polk, 11th president of the United States, is honored on a new 32-cent commemorative stamp. The stamp also celebrates the 200th anniversary of his birth. The featured design has a portrait of Polk.
Polk was sworn into office in 1845 and is considered by historians to have been a farsighted and energetic leader. During his presidency, the United States extended its borders to the Pacific and added new states.
First day of issue postmarks may be obtained by purchasing the stamps at your local post office, affix the stamps to envelopes, address the envelopes and place in a larger envelope, addressed to: Customer Affixed Stamps, James K. Polk Stamp, Postmaster, Columbus, Tenn. 38401-9991.
Requests must be made by Dec. 1.
---
Wildlife Species Highlighted
The Republic of Togo, a former French colony in West Africa, has released a series of stamps highlighting the rich wildlife species found within its borders. The issuance consists of a sheetlet of nine stamps combined to form a unified design image of various animals, a block of four showing species of monkeys, and a souvenir sheet.
The sheetlet depicts the spotted hyena, the rock hydrax, the mongoose, the African elephant, the mandrill, the okapi, the hippopotamus, the flamingo, and the forest hog.
The block of four illustrates the nervet monkey, the red columbus monkey, the black mangarey monkey and the yellow baboon.
The souvenir sheet features one animal - the potto.
Togo also has issued two sheetlets of stamps and a souvenir sheet honoring winners of the Nobel Peace Prize. The stamps were issued in conjunction with the 100th anniversary of the prestigious awards created by Alfred Nobel of Sweden.
The stamps of Togo can be purchased at your local stamp dealer.
 Load-Date: November 17, 1995

 

End of Document
