

Stamps In The News: U.N.'S 'World Heritage' Stamps Plug Conservation
The Associated Press
December 20, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 602 words
Body




Eds: Special Features Illustrations - Mailed print subscribers get 1 b&w photo, l col, Great Wall of China stamp.
 
 By SYD KRONISH
For AP Special Features
The effort to conserve and protect many of the world's awe-inspiring sites is an integral part of a United Nations program entitled "Treasures of Our World Heritage."
In January, the United Nations Postal Administration will issue a set of six stamps featuring some of the world's shared wonders. This special issue will be the UNPS's contribution to a series of events which will commemorate the 20th anniversary of the adoption of UNESCO's World Heritage Convention throughout 1992. World Heritage UNESCO is the second set of stamps issued by the UN to honor the efforts to protect our world heritage.
Each of the new stamps reproduces a different location. Here are the depictions:
- The Great Wall of China. It is the longest structure ever built. Erected entirely by hand, the Great Wall crosses northern China, between the east coast and north central China. Construction began in the 5th century B.C. and continued on and off until 1600 A.D.
- Uluru National Park, Australia. It is best known as the site of Ayers Rock, recognized worldwide. To the indigenous aboriginal tribes, the Rock is sacred.
- Sagarmatha National Park, Nepal. It is located in the Himalayas near the Tibetan border and is home to Mount Everest, the highest mountain in the world.
- Stonehenge, United Kingdom. It is a manmade formation of huge rocks dating back to 2800 B.C. Although little is known about this circle of stone, it is believed to have been constructed as an observatory and religious site.
- Iguaca National Park, Brazil. Its name comes from the Rio Iguaca, one of the many large rivers in the southwest corner of Brazil. Depicted is one of the world's most outstanding waterfalls, Iguaca Falls.
- Abu Simbel, Egypt. Located on the Nile River, it is the site of two ancient temples carved into cliffs rising from the river valley. Built by the Pharoah Ramses II, it features four statues of the king.
For information on obtaining these stamps, write to United Nations Postal Admistration, United Nations, New York, N.Y. 10017.
---
Stamps Feature Hummel Figurines
The Maldives, a former British protectorate in the Indian Ocean, has released a set of four stamps and a souvenir sheet featuring the famous Hummel figurines.
The 2 rifiyas depicts the Hummel figurine "School Girl." The 3.50 rifiyas shows the Hummel figurine "The Book Worm." The 8 rifiyas illustrates the Hummel figurine "Little Brother's Lesson." The 10 rifiyas portrays the Hummel figurine "School Girls."
Berta Hummel was born in Massing, Germany, in 1909. She studied at the Munich Academy of Fine Arts and met with the Sisters from the Convent of Siessen and decided to become a Franciscan nun. There she continued her sketches of children that were made into cards. A porcelain manufacturer liked Hummel's work and thus began the making of the famed figurines.
Reproduced in the souvenir sheet are the designs of the four stamps with a denomination of 5 rufiyas each.
---
Giant Clams Get Postal Spotlight
Giant clams make their appearance on postage stamps being issued by the Republic of Palau in the Pacific. A sheetlet of five stamps helps publicize the conservation and cultivation of the giant clams.
The clams are a valuable food source for the Pacific islanders, but poachers diminished the supply and forced the Palau government to establish the Micronesian Mari-Culture Demonstration Center to protect the endangered marine life with emphasis on the giant clams.
The five stamps in the set are 50 cents each.

 

End of Document
