

Stamps in the News:Uganda Displays 'The Lion King' on 27 Stamps
The Associated Press
September 30, 1994, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 695 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body



For AP Special Features
The lion leaps from the jungle to the motion picture screen and, finally, with a familiar roar, to the stamp world.
"The Lion King," the new Disney animated film is re-created in a giant issue of 27 stamps from the East African nation of Uganda. The new stamps come in three sheetlets and three souvenir sheets.
Sheetlet No. 1 contains nine different 100 shilling stamps depicting the major characters of the movie.
Included are the Baby Lion Simba, the Lion King Mufasa, the Lion Prince Simba and the Lion Queen Sarabi, the young lion Simba and lioness Nala, Timon the Meerkat, Rafiki the old Baboon and Mystic, Pumbaa the Warthog, the Hyena - Shenzi, Banzai and Ed, the lion usurper King Scar, and Zazu the Hornbill bird and adviser to Mufasa.
Sheetlet No. 2 has nine different 200 shillings stamps featuring scenes from the new film. Sheetlet No. 3 is composed of nine different 250 shilling stamps also portraying a variety of scenes from the animated feature.
The souvenir sheets illustrate the major characters in "The Lion King."
---
The entire set of 27 stamps (three sheetlets) is available for $ 9.50, or the set of three souvenir sheets for $ 12.00. The three sheetlets and three souvenir sheets cost $ 15.00, from the Shield Stamp Co., 460 W. 34th St., New York, N.Y. 10001.
---
U.S. Stamp Guide
The U.S. Postal Service has released the latest edition of the "Postal Service Guide to U.S. Stamps," which provides market-based values (and color photos) of every major U.S. stamp ever printed.
The guide is considered one of the best values in the world of stamp collecting. The 432-page soft cover book is printed on heavy, glossy paper and sells for $ 9.95 at most post offices.
The USPS proudly claims that the guide serves as a complete reference for those interested in stamps. Special sections of the book feature an introduction to stamp collecting, a glossary of stamp collecting terms, explanations of stamp pricing, and extensive lists of stamp collecting organizations and periodicals.
New features in the 1994 book include hundreds of new listings, prices and improved images, plus 100 new illustrations.
Your local post office should have the guide for sale now.
---
Trade & Development
The last set of United Nations stamps for 1994 will be issued on Oct. 28. The six stamps being released portray the theme of "Development Through Partnership" commemorating the 30th anniversary of the U.N. Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD).
UNCTAD is the principal organ of the U.N. General Assembly in the field of trade and development. It was established as a permanent intergovernmental body in 1964 with a view to accelerating economic growth in developing countries.
Each of the six designs depicts the outline of the countries of the world with "UNCTAD 30th Anniversary" at the top and "United Nations" at the bottom. Superimposed on the map are different patterns of sweeping interconnected bands of color symbolizing the concept of partnership.
For information concerning the availability of the new stamps, you may write to the United Nations Postal Administration, P.O. Box 5900, Grand Central Station, New York, N.Y. 10163-9992. Or call toll free 1-800-234-UNPA.
---
Merry Christmas!
If you are interested in acquiring a collection of U.S. Christmas stamps for yourself, or as a gift at holiday time, the U.S. Stamp Collectors Society is offering all of the regular Christmas stamps from the first one in 1962 through the 1993 issue.
The first stamp in 1962 showed a simple Christmas wreath. Included in the collection are stamps depicting the White House Christmas tree, a holly and mistletoe and the poinsettia.
Various Madonna paintings by the master painters of the world have appeared. Different Currier and Ives scenes are included. Santa Claus in many poses, Christmas trees in needlepoint and beautiful winter scenes are noted.
Each collection is mounted and displayed on 3-by-5-inch black display cards. A companion 9-by-12-inch collectors album to house the collection also is available.
The Christmas collection is $ 12.95, the album is $ 19.95, both for $ 29.95 from the U.S. Stamp Society, P.O. Box 4103, Hollywood, Calif. 90078.
 Load-Date: September 30, 1994

 

End of Document
