

Stamps in the News: Tanzania Honors 20th Century's 'Great Women'
The Associated Press
January 7, 1994, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 657 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




In tribute to "Great Women of the 20th Century," the African nation of Tanzania (bordering on the Indian Ocean), has issued a set of eight new vertical stamps and one souvenir sheet.
The 20 shillings depicts Valentina Tereshkova of the former Soviet Union, honored as the first woman in space. The 40 shillings illustrates Dr. Marie Curie, Nobel Prize winning physicist. The 50 shillings shows Indira Gandhi, former prime minister of India. The 70 shillings portrays Wilma Rudolph of the United States, who won three track medals in the 1960 Olympic Games held in Rome.
The 100 shillings pictures Margaret Mead of the United States, renowned anthropologist. The 150 shillings depicts Golda Meir, former prime minister of Israel. The 200 shillings features Dr. Elizabeth Blackwell, who was born in England but whose family moved to the United States. Blackwell received acclaim as the first woman to gain a medical degree in the United States. The 400 shillings shows Margaret Thatcher, ex-prime minister of Great Britain.
The souvenir sheet (500 shillings) features portraits of Mother Teresa, winner of a Nobel Peace Prize for her work in helping the poor in India.
The Tanzania stamps are available from the Inter-Governmental Philatelic Corp., 460 West 34th St., New York City, N.Y. 10001.
---
Sports Stamps Abound in 1994
Sports fans and topical collectors who specialize in "sports on stamps" are looking forward to a great 1994. In addition to the Winter Olympics in Norway, the World Cup of Football (soccer) - which is held every four years in a different country - will take place this summer in the United States. It will be the first time the World Cup has been held in the United States.
The U.S. Postal Service will be releasing stamps for both occasions to hail the sporting events. Countries all over the world will be issuing similar philatelic tributes.
The Central American nation of Nicaragua is honoring the World Cup with seven new stamps. Depicted on the Nicaraguan set are famous players from participating nations.
Illustrated in action scenes are: Tomas Brolin of Sweden, Maxime Bossis and Michael Platini of France, Jan Karas of Poland and Antonio Luis Costa of Brazil, Harold Schumacher of Germany, Andoni Zubizarreta of Spain, Lothar Matthaeus of Germany, Diego Maradona of Argentina, Bryan Robson of England and Carlos Santos of Portugal.
The Nicaragua stamps are available from the Shield Stamp Co., Box 2977, Grand Central Station, New York City, N.Y. 10163.
---
Subjects Excluded from Stamps
In answer to many requests from readers concerning the issuance of new U.S. stamps, the Postal Service affirms that "new items will not honor cities, towns, municipalities, counties, primary schools, hospitals, libraries or similar institutions due to the vast number of such requests, because it would be difficult to single out any one for commemoration."
While many other countries issue semi-postals (added values) for worthy causes, again the Postal Service says "due to the vast number of worthy fund-raising organizations in existence, it would be difficult to single out specific ones to receive such revenues."
---
Nobel Prize Winners Noted
The Caribbean island nation of Redonda hails Nobel Prize winners with a set of eight stamps and one souvenir sheet.
The honorees depicted on the stamps are Dag Hammarskjold, secretary general of the United Nations in 1951; Guglielmo Marconi of Italy for his work in radio waves in 1909; Milton Friedman of the United States for economics in 1976; Albert Schweitzr in 1952 for his medical missionary work; German chemist Emil Fischer for chemistry in 1902; Alexander Solzhenitsyn for literature in 1970; Ivan Palov for medicine in 1904, and Winston Churchill for literature in 1953.
The souvenir sheet is a tribute to Albert Einstein, winner of the physics award in 1921.
The Redonda stamps can be obtained from the Shield Stamp Co., Box 2977, Grand Central Station, New York City, N.Y. 10163.
 Load-Date: January 7, 1994

 

End of Document
