

Stamps In The News: 'Star Trekkies' Should Enjoy Guyana Issues
The Associated Press
February 10, 1995, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 602 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body



For AP Special Features
"Star Trekkies" will delight in the latest series of stamps saluting the new motion picture "Star Trek - Generations" issued by the Republic of Guyana in South America. The set consists of 19 different stamps in three sheetlets, a single souvenir sheet plus a gold stamp souvenir sheet.
The basic story line of the film on which the stamps are based starts out in the time period of the original "Star Trek" (23rd century) on the occasion of the christening of a new model starship. Capt. Kirk (William Shatner) as well as Scotty and Chekov of the original cast are also aboard.
The time period changes to the next generation featuring Capt. Picard (Patrick Stewart) and his cohorts as seen on TV. Picard and Kirk join forces for the exciting finale of the film.
The stamps in the sheetlets depict familiar faces to Star Trek viewers including Riker, Dr. Crusher, Lt. Worf, Geordi, Data and Soran. The souvenir sheet features the movie poster art of "Star Trek - Generations." The gold stamp souvenir sheet portrays Stewart and Shatner plus the movie poster.
The Star Trek stamp set is available from the exclusive agents of Guyana - the Inter-Governmental Philatelic Corp., 460 W. 34th St., New York, N.Y. 10001. The phone number is (212) 629-7979.
---
Maldive Islands Highlight Monuments
Famous "Monuments of the World" are highlighted on the latest series of stamps from the Maldive Islands in the Indian Ocean. There are eight stamps and two souvenir sheets in the set.
The 7 lauras depicts the Taj Mahal in Northern India, recognized as one of the most beautiful buildings in the world. The 10 lauras shows the Washington Monument in Washington, D.C. The 15 lauras features the Mount Rushmore National Memorial in the Black Hills of South Dakota. Another 5 lauras illustrates a view of the Arc de Triomphe in Paris.
The 50 lauras pictures the Great Sphinx at Al Jizah in Egypt. The 5 rufiyas displays the El Castillo Monument at Chicken Itza in Mexico's Yucatan. The 8 rufiyas depicts a Toltec Warrior stone carving in a temple at Tula, Mexico. The 12 rufiyas has the Victory Column in Berlin near the Brandenburg Gate.
One souvenir sheet features monolithic Stone Heads of Easter Island. The other sheet shows Stonehenge in southern England.
The stamps are available at your local stamp dealer.
---
 
 International Olympic Committee Honored
Gibraltar has released a set of two stamps commemorating the centenary of the International Olympic Committee in an endeavor to promote Gibraltar's application to the Olympic movement. The 49 pence depicts a discus thrower while the 54 p shows a javelin thrower.
Also issued by Gibraltar is a set of four stamps illustrating lively songbirds of Europe and regular visitors to Gibraltar. The "Rock" is one of the most popular locations for bird watchers because it provides migratory birds with invaluable staging posts between Europe and Africa. Seen on the stamps are the goldfinch, great tit, blue tit and the robin.
The stamps can be obtained by writing to the Gibraltar Philatelic Bureau, P.O. Box 5662, Gibraltar.
---
Young Group Seeking New Members
The Junior Philatelists of America is looking for new members.
JPA is the nation's largest nonprofit organization devoted to promoting stamp collecting among youth. It is open to all young people age 18 or under and costs $ 9 per year for membership. Family memberships (two or more under 18) are $ 14.
All new JPA members receive a packet containing stamps, a membership card and the "Philatelic Observer," JPA's bimonthly publication.
For more information write to: JPA, P.O. Box 850, Boalsburg, Pa. 16827-0850.
 Load-Date: February 10, 1995

 

End of Document
