

Stamps in the News: 'Blues' Series Features American Performers
The Associated Press
April 17, 1992, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 618 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body



For AP Special Features
The "History of the Blues" - the unique style of music brought to fruition by blacks in the United States - is philatelically recorded in the latest set of stamps from The Gambia, a former British colony in West Africa. There are 12 stamps and three souvenir sheets in the set.
The illustrations depict and honor famous black performers who entertained audiences all over the world with their rendering of the blues.
The 20 bututs shows Son House, the last of the great Delta Bluesmen. The 25 b features the great composer, W.C. Handy, recognized as the "Father of the Blues." The 50 b depicts Muddy Waters, country blues singer and guitarist.
The 75 b illustrates Sam "Lightnin" Hopkins, called the last of the great street singers. The 1 dalaysay pictures "Ma" Rainey, noted blues vaudevillian who was labeled "Mother of the Blues." The 1.25 d shows Mance Lipscomb, master of the slide guitar. The 1.50 d displays the lovable Mahalia Jackson, recognized as the greatest gospel singer.
The 2 d features Ella Fitzgerald, who is still entertaining audiences with her unique voice. The 3 d shows Bessie Smith, who was termed "Empress of the Blues." The 7 d pictures Huddie Ledbetter, affectionately called "Leadbelly." The 10 d depicts Joe Willie Wilkins, known for his Memphis sound guitar.
---
And the Elvis Beat Goes On
The Postal Service is undecided which of two designs will honor Elvis Presley (to be released next year). Mekeels Weekly Stamp News, the world's oldest stamp weekly, is presenting a "third design" for consideration - and is asking its readers to agree in a popularity poll.
The design selected by Mekeels is a 1991 Presley stamp issued by the Caribbean nation of St. Vincent. It shows a young Elvis in a full-length photo with his guitar in hand.
Mekeels' publisher, John F. Dunn, says "I happen to think the St. Vincent issue captures the electrifying excitement that was generated by Elvis Presley."
---
Movie Stirs Interest in Kennedy Stamps
The controversial movie about the assassination of President Kennedy reminds the International Stamp Collectors Society that it still has available a limited edition of J.F. and R.F. Kennedy memorial stamps.
These stamps are foreign tributes and include the obsolete antique 5-cent 1964 and 13-cent 1967 U.S. stamps issued for JFK and the 1970 RFK memorial 15-cent commemorative. The collections are $ 14.95 each and can be ordered from the ISCS, PO Box 854, Van Nuys, Calif., 91408, or call 818-997-6496.
---
Recycling for "Earth Day"
"Protect the Environment" says the U.S. Postal Service in celebrating "Earth Day 1992." The Postal Service is issuing a recyclable stamped envelope for the occasion.
The No. 10-size "Protect the Environment" envelope meets all Environmental Protection Agency recyclability standards for papers, inks and adhesives. Featured is a colorful photo of the Hillebrandia, a unique member of the Begonia family found only in the rain forests of the Hawaiian Islands.
The words "Protect the Environment" are printed above the window of the envelope. "Save the Rain Forests" appears in the lower left corner. At the left is "29 USA."
Here's how you can get your first day of issue postmark:
The easiest way is to purchase the new envelopes at your local post office, address the envelopes, place in a larger envelope, and send to Customer-Supplied Envelopes, Protect the Environment Envelope, Postmaster, 433 W. Van Buren St., Chicago, IL 60607-9991.
If you prefer to have the USPS do the job, send your pressure-sensitive labels and 34 cents per envelope, in check or money order, to Protect the Environment Envelope, Postmaster, 433 W. Van Buren St., Chicago, IL 60607-9992.
All orders must be postmarked by May 22.

 

End of Document
