

Stamps in the News: Uganda's New Offerings Feature Popular Breeds of Dogs
The Associated Press
August 13, 1993, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 546 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




Dogs are turning out to be among the most popular subjects featured on stamps. The latest philatelic tribute to canines comes from the East Indian nation of Uganda which has issued eight new stamps and two souvenir sheets featuring the world's most popular breeds.
The 50 shillings depicts the Afghan Hound. The 100 shillings shows the Newfoundland. The 200 shilling illustrates the Siberian Husky. The 250 has the Briard. The 300 shillings displays the Saluki. The 800 portrays the Labrador Retriever, the 1,000 pictures the Greyhound and the 1,500 shillings depicts the Pointer.
One souvenir sheet features the Norwegian Elkhound while the other bears an illustration of the Cape Hunting Dog.
Another country which recently released stamps dedicated to dogs is Grenada. There are eight stamps and two souvenir sheets in the set. Featured are the Samoyed, the Chow Chow, the Boxer, the Basenji, the Golden Labrador Retriever, the St. Bernard, the Rhodesian Ridgeback and the Afghan Hound. The souvenir sheets highlight the Alaskan Malamute and the Australian Cattle Dog.
---
The Uganda and Grenada stamps are available from the Inter-Governmental Philatelic Corp., 460 W. 34th St., New York, NY 10001.
---
Commemorating Bi-Centenary of Britain's Canal Waterway System
Britain's Royal Mail has issued four special stamps commemorating the bi-centenary of the nation's Canal Waterway system. Each stamp shows a scene from one of the crucial canal routes created to meet the transport needs of the Industrial Revolution of two centuries ago. In 1793, Parliament passed 24 acts giving permission for the canals to be constructed.
The 24 pence depicts narrow boats on the Grand Junction Canal.The 28 pence illustrates a scene from Stainforth & Keadby Canal. The 33 pence features narrow boats on the Brecknock & Abergavenny Canal and the 39 pence shows fishing boats on the Crinian Canal.
---
The set of four (mint) is available from Great Britain Collectors Society for $ 9.95, first day covers for $ 11.95, and both for $ 19.95. The address is P.O. Box 480644, Los Angeles, CA 90048.
---
'Golden Age of Sail' Theme Issued by Micronesia
The Federated States of Micronesia - a former Trust Territory of the United States in the South Pacific once known as the Caroline Islands - has issued 12 new stamps with the theme "Golden Age of Sail."
Depicted on the stamps are a dozen of the 19th century's foremost sailing vessels. Included are: Herald of the Morning, Great Republic, Young America, Stag Hound, Columbia, Lightning, New World, Benjamin F. Packard, Rainbow, Sea Witch, Flying Cloud and Courier.
The designer of the stamps is artist Charles Lundgren. He has designed stamps for the U.S. Postal Service and is a former president of the American Academy of Maritime Artists.
The Sea Witch was a China Clipper that regularly sailed from New York to China a century ago. The Lightning is the holder of the record for a single day's sail - 436 nautical miles in 24 hours.
Also issued by Micronesia was a set of four definitive stamps featuring marine life and fish found in Micronesian waters. The 19 cents shows Bennett's Butterfly Fish. The 29 cents illustrates the colorful regal Angelfish. The 50 cents portrays the orange-striped Triggerfish and the $ 1 depicts the serpentlike Zebra Moray Eel.

 

End of Document
