

Stamps in the News: Five Isle of Man Stamps Honor Queen Elizabeth
The Associated Press
April 3, 1992, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 586 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




The Isle of Man, in the Irish Sea off the northwest coast of England, has shown its loyalty to the British Crown for centuries.
This year, it joins with other Commonwealth countries to celebrate the 40th anniversary of Queen Elizabeth's ascension to the throne by issuing five new stamps. Two of the stamps show the queen's recent visits to the Isle of Man.
The 18 pence depicts the queen wearing the imperial state crown after the coronation ceremony in 1953. The purple robe trimmed with gold is the sign of a crowned and consecrated monarch.
The 23 pence features the queen's visit to the Isle of Man when she presided over Tynwald, the Manx Parliament. The 28 pence illustrates the queen in 1979 wearing formal evening attire.
The 33 pence pictures Elizabeth during her visit to the Isle of Man in 1989 with Prince Philip. The 39 pence shows the queen in 1990 when she attended a film premiere.
Also released by the Manx Post Office is a set of three sheetlets in tribute to the 50th anniversary of its famed World War II "Parachute Regiment."
The Parachute Regiment traces its origins to Winston Churchill's call for the formation of a force of at least 5,000 parachute troops. The Manx regiment became an active force on Aug. 1, 1942.
The 23 pence features a salute to three campaigns. The first, in November 1942, when it took part in the Allied landings in North Africa. The second, in July 1943, took place in southern Italy. The third, in June 1944, portrays the landings in Normandy.
The 28 pence acknowledges the 1st Airborne Division in September 1944, in the landing at Arnhem. The 39 pence depicts from 1945 to date. The Parachute Regiment is illustrated in several other campaigns including their latest involvement in the Persian Gulf War.
For further information about stamps from the Isle of Man, you may write directly to the Isle of Man Post Office, Philatelic Bureau, P.O. Box 10M, Douglas, Isle of Man.
 

 
 Stamps From Bailiwick of Jersey
Not far from the Isle of Man is the Bailiwick of Jersey, a small island in the English Channel that became a separate entity and issued its own stamps in 1969.
A recent stamp issued for "Europa 1992" is a tribute to the 500th anniversary of Columbus' arrival in the New World.
The new stamp features a portrait of Columbus in front of his sailing ships. At left is "Europa 1992," at right is "Discovery of America" and at top left is "Jersey."
Jersey has previously issued discovery stamps for Sir Walter Raleigh and Virginia, Carteret and Jersey, and a special stamp illustrating King Charles II presenting Sir George Carteret with a scroll confirming the rights of the crown to "New Jersey."
 

 
 Canada Boosts Price of Stamps, Too
Like its neighbor to the south, Canada recently raised its postal rates.
A new flag stamp features the Maple Leaf flying over rolling hills at dusk. The new denomination is 42 cents. Another new 42-cent stamp features Queen Elizabeth II. This design was reissued in both 100-stamp panes and packs of 10 stamps. The color is purple.
Other new stamps from Canada include an exploration and discovery set of four stamps also repeated on a souvenir sheet. Two of the stamps, printed in attached pairs, feature the Montreal skyline as it appears today and the area 350 years ago when the city was founded. Each has a denomination of 42 cents.
A U.S.-rate Canadian stamp of 48 cents honors the voyages of Jacques Cartier, who began exploring Canada in 1534. An international-rate stamp of 64 cents commemorates the first Atlantic crossing by Columbus.

 

End of Document
