

Stamps in the News: Ireland, Iceland and Faroe Islands Issue Joint Series
The Associated Press
October 14, 1994, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 602 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




An Irish monk named St. Brendan is the reason Ireland, the Faroe Islands and Iceland have issued a joint series of stamps celebrating the achievements of this pious, seafaring cleric.
St. Brendan was credited with the discovery of Iceland and the Faroes about A.D. 500. However, historians say a number of his fellow monks also participated in the discoveries. Many legends have been written about him - some true, others pure fantasy - including one about his reputed landing in America.
The objective of St. Brendan in setting out on these hazardous journeys was to spread the Christian faith. The Irish monks sailed across the seas without benefit of compass or charts, navigating only by the stars.
The new stamps are identical in design featuring a sketch of ancient drawings of St. Brendan and his companion monks on their difficult journeys of discovery. The names of the countries and denominations differ.
---
The two stamps from each country can be obtained for $ 10.95, first-day covers for $ 12.95, and both for $ 19.95 (per country) from the Explorers Collectors Society, P.O. Box 56562, Sherman Oaks, Calif. 91413.
---
Mandela Inauguration
South Africa hails the inauguration of Nelson Mandela as its first democratically elected president by issuing four new stamps. Commemorative envelopes also are available, says the South African Post Office in Pretoria.
The 45 cents features a portrait of a smiling Mandela. The 70 cents shows a portion of their national anthem "Die Stern" in Afrikaans. The 95 cents illustrates the new South African flag with its two broad green stripes flowing into one symbolizing reconciliation and the convergence of the past and future. The 1 rand, 15 cents pictures the Union Buildings where President Mandela was inaugurated.
---
These stamps can be obtained directly from: Philatelic Services, Private Bag x505, Pretoria, South Africa, 0001.
---
New Catalog, Old Stamps
Here's a new catalog that features only the old stamps, not the new. It's the Scott 1995 Classic Catalogue devoted exclusively to the first 100 years of stamps - from 1840 to 1940.
There are more than 32 countries listed in the Classic, beginning with the United States. The remaining countries are listed in alphabetical order. Starting with the 1840 Penny Black, stamp listings run to the start of the World War II era.
---
The cover price for the Classic Catalog is $ 33. It is available from your local stamp dealer or Scott Publishing Co., P.O. Box 828, Sidney, Ohio, 45365.
---
100th Anniversary of Movies
It's "Movie Time" in Nicaragua as that Central American nation pays philatelic tribute to the 100th anniversary of motion pictures. There are 12 different 2 cordobas stamps and a single 15 cordobas souvenir sheet depicting scenes from some of the greatest motion pictures ever produced.
The scenes illustrated include those from: "Lawrence of Arabia," directed by David Lean, "The Ten Commandments," directed by Cecil B. DeMille, "Casablanca," directed by Michael Curtiz, "The Godfather," directed by Francis Ford Coppola, "Platoon," directed by Oliver Stone and "2001: A Space Odyssey," directed by Stanley Kubrick.
---
Olympic Centenary
Another country honoring the centenary of the International Olympic Committee is the Republic of China (Taiwan). There are two stamps in the set. One shows the five-ring Olympic symbol plus the logo of the 100th anniversary. The other stamp depicts athletes high jumping, running and weightlifting.
---
The two stamps are available for $ 7.95, first-day covers for $ 9.95, and both for $ 15.95 from the Sports Collectors Society, P.O. Box 480655, Los Angeles, Calif. 90048.
 Load-Date: October 14, 1994

 

End of Document
