

State of Emergency or No, the Killing in Natal Continues
The Associated Press
April 2, 1994, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 681 words
Byline: By JOHN DANISZEWSKI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BHAMBAYI, South Africa
Body




As the sun rises above a hill overlooking the Bhambayi squatter settlement, men wrapped in blankets trudge back from a night on patrol, swinging spears and machetes as they come.
These are fighters loyal to Nelson Mandela's African National Congress - in local parlance, "the reds."
They have survived another night in a deadly struggle against fellow Zulus on the other side of the rise and just across the stream. Their enemies are "the greens" - backers of the Inkatha Freedom Party of Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi.
Here amid the crumbling ruins of Mahatma Gandhi's original settlement in South Africa, these close neighbors are caught up in a lethal dialectic of killing and revenge that has made Bhambayi and the black township of KwaMashu next door two of the most dreaded addresses in violence-ravaged Natal Province.
President F.W. de Klerk declared a state of emergency in the province on Thursday in an attempt to staunch the flow of blood in the province, where 290 people have died in political violence in the past month. But on the ground Saturday, neither side showed signs of responding to the clampdown.
"Everyone in the ANC is waiting for a fight," said one 33-year-old warrior, who would not give his name, as the morning sun glistened off the razor-sharp tip of his spear.
Thirteen people were killed in Natal between Friday and Saturday despite the arrival in armored carriers of the first of the extra army troops sent in under the emergency decree. Five of the victims were in KwaMashu and Bhambayi.
The state of emergency gives police and army special powers of arrest and bans weapons of any kind. De Klerk ordered the clampdown after a recent sharp upturn in the bloodshed.
Election officials have been warning him that violence and intimidation would make it impossible for people to campaign or vote in most of Natal.
The province is the home of Inkatha, which opposes the April 26-28 election in which South Africa's black majority will have a vote for the first time. Buthelezi charges that the culture and rights of Zulus, South Africa's largest tribe, will be trampled by a future ANC-led government.
The ANC says Buthelezi is wrapping himself in Zulu nationalism in order to retain privileges he enjoyed as a homeland government chief under apartheid. It also charges that Inkatha has been secretly funded and armed for years by the South African police.
Whatever the truth, the ANC-Inkatha feud has escalated into a war in rural Natal Province.
Bhambayi, 12 miles north of Durban, is a small dilapidated settlement of mud huts built on the steep green slopes laced by winding dirt roads. For the 5,000 or so impoverished residents, who fetch water from public taps and cook on open fires, a hard life is made more miserable by the threat of drive-by shootings and nighttime burnings.
On March 6, 11 shack dwellers in Bhambayi were killed when attackers swept through the camp at night. In KwaMashu on March 21, three people were killed and nine homes burned. Residents in the targeted ANC neighborhoods blamed Inkatha.
The opposing sides are close enough to shout obscenities at each other, and strangers are treated with deep suspicion.
"Away from here. You must get away from here. We are shooting ANC supporters," shouted one man angrily after two cars of foreign journalists ventured across a stream to the bullet-scarred Inkatha section of the settlement and tried to talk to a man living there.
On Good Friday, a few inhabitants made a cross out of the blackened timbers of one of the many burned-down shacks and carried it in a peace march in downtown Durban.
When they got back to Bhambayi, a fresh round of fighting compelled them to put aside a plan to erect the cross near the front line as a gesture of peace. It leaned abandoned against a building.
In KwaMashu, where five local ANC leaders were killed execution-style on Wednesday after being lured to an Inkatha-controlled workers hostel with the promise of a peace parley, the mood was even bleaker.
"We will die for these houses," said Sipho, 28, the leader of a group of men standing guard on the front line.
 Load-Date: April 2, 1994

 

End of Document
