

Stress: The Other Danger in Somalia
The Associated Press
January 16, 1993, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1032 words
Byline: By GEORGE ESPER, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: MOGADISHU, Somalia
Body




For Dennis Walto, an American relief worker, stress is the bullet hole in the wall behind him.
For U.S. Marines Ballinger, Bartley, Haupu and Radke, it is seeing the flashes of Somali guns and surviving.
Still, aid workers and Marines operating in Mogadishu - surrounded by human misery, often in personal danger, far from home with few comforts - show surprisingly few effects of the stress they are under.
Some say they take satisfaction from the work. Others find solace in music, exercise, the peace of dawn. Still others say they just like it in Somalia.
Many relief workers are inured to harsh conditions by years of experience. To ease the stress, they get breaks in neighboring Kenya. Most tours of duty are relatively short: a year, six months or even less.
"I don't consider it stressful at all," said Alfred Petters, 35, a sanitation engineer who has worked in Africa for 10 years and in Somali since September. "This is what I like to do."
Civilians and military alike relieve tension by listening to jazz, practicing martial arts and exercising. Some of the 10,000 Marines go jogging with rifles slung over their shoulders.
Navy Capt. Jonathan Lee, chief psychiatrist for the Marines, said he counseled fewer than a dozen in the first 30 days in Somalia, and that all the cases were routine.
"The problems coming into us in Somalia are virtually the same problems that we would see in the States," he said."We are seeing none that is peculiar to Somalia."
Lee cautioned that the longer the Marines stay in Somalia, the greater the stress and potential for breaking from fatigue and exposure.
"In order to cope, I think everybody finds their own groove," said Walto, operations manager in Mogadishu for the International Medical Corps, based in California. "Everyone seeks or finds a sanctuary where, at some point, they retreat to put it all in perspective."
Walto's sanctuary is the sunrise.
"I'm up about 5:30," he said. "That's the time when I can collect myself. I'm outside. The sun's rising. It's beautiful and it's peaceful for the most part. That's the time to focus your energies on what neeeds to get done for the day. Once the day starts, it's gone in a flash."
His organization has has 34 people caring for Somalis in ravaged areas of the country. None of them need psychiatric treatment, Walto said, despite the danger, the suffering they witness in treating casualties of war and crime, and the heat and possibility of disease.
"There's a couple of weeks when you get in-country that you find you can either work in this type situation or you can't, and we leave that open for employees," he said.
"As they come in, we know pretty quickly whether this is the kind of environment they can function in. We had a couple people who had to leave for their own personal peace and safety."
"Over my shoulder here," Walto said, "you see a hole in the wall. Somebody came in and took a shot at our director. Just knowing that, at a given point, you're in that situation, that it's not out of the realm of possibility, adds a new dimension to stress and one that you have to deal with on a day-to-day basis.
"The hardest part is getting out of here in the morning, because you know what you're going to face."
Two relief workers, a Swiss administrator for the Red Cross and an Irishman with the U.N. Children's Fund, were killed by gunmen this month.
The fatal ambush last Tuesday night of Marine Pfc. Domingo Arroyo, 21, of Elizabeth, N.J., angered and stunned his comrades, but "people have adjusted very well," said Lee, the psychiatrist.
"There is anger; they are dealing with the normal range of feelings," he said. "They are adapting to the situation in a normal way.
"They are not overwhelmed by their feelings. They are not dealing with them by randomly striking out at the Somalis. I think it will work on their level of alertness."
Marines relax by talking to friends, writing letters home, listening to jazz. Their base is like their own town transported to Somalia, with clean food and water, doctors and dentists, a post office - all contributing to what Lee calls a "reservoir of spirit."
Outside that town lies danger, as Lt. David Ballinger and the other three Marines discovered when Somalis fired at their patrol.
"This is the first time I've ever done anything like this," said Ballinger, 24, who is normally an artillery officer. "It doesn't add any more stress than was already there. It was stressful to begin with.
"It makes you realize that this is the real thing, you could possibly get killed while you're out there."
"Everybody was a little tense after it was all over," said Cpl. Jerimie Bartley, 21, of Dayton, Ohio. "You get it out of your system by talking about it. I don't think there are any long-term effects."
"It just woke me up a little," said Cpl. Hilary Haupu, of Maui, Hawaii. "I've been more aware and try to be on my toes more."
The Marines are not sure whether they killed anybody when they returned fire. An Army manual on operational stress says killing an armed enemy often causes soldiers to feel guilty.
But the fourth Marine, squad leader Alexander Radke, 26, of Globe, Ariz., doesn't buy that.
"To be honest with you," Sgt. Radke said, "I have no guilt. If someone is going to take action against myself or any of my Marines, my job is to protect them and take care of their welfare and make sure I bring them home."
The same thought occurred to Pvt. Robert Lowery 4th of Detroit, Mich., who stands guard at a gate of the former U.S. Embassy, now Marine headquarters, where scores of Somalis gather every day.
"I mentally prepared myself for coming into the country," Lowery said. "There were a lot of things being said as far as me being an African-American coming over to Africa, possibly having to shoot some Africans. I look at it from the perspective that I am in the military and it's a job I have to do. I signed a contract."
Domingo Arroyo, the first American serviceman to die in combat in Somalia, was Lowery's best friend. The young Marine was filled with so much anger that he wanted to kill the gunman himself.
"Maybe it's something that's going to pass," he said. "I try to pray every day. I believe in God and I believe he's going to protect me."

 

End of Document
