

Ten Defendants - and The FBI - Await Terror Trial Verdicts
 The Associated Press
September 24, 1995, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 789 words
Byline: By LARRY NEUMEISTER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Prosecutors in the biggest terrorism trial in U.S. history accused Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman and nine others of hatching a "monstrous" plot to kill thousands of people in a series of bombings in New York.
But by the time the jury began deliberating Saturday, the defense had put the tactics of the nation's top law enforcement agency on trial, accusing the FBI of plotting to frame the defendants to revive its reputation.
"This case is about one of the biggest and most embarrassing moments in the FBI's history," defense lawyer John Jacobs told the jury in U.S. District Court.
Abdel-Rahman, a blind, Egyptian religious leader, is charged with leading 14 Muslims in a plot to bomb the United Nations, the FBI's Manhattan offices, the Holland and Lincoln tunnels and the George Washington Bridge - all in a single day.
Three defendants pleaded guilty, a fourth testified for the government and a fifth will be tried later. The remaining 10 defendants, if convicted, face maximum prison sentences ranging from life to 20 years. Deliberations continued Sunday and are expected to last about two weeks.
The sheik, prosecutors say, is a Muslim fundamentalist who saw the United States as Islam's worst enemy. He also is accused of inspiring others to kill Rabbi Meir Kahane in 1990, bomb the World Trade Center in 1993 and plan to assassinate Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak during a U.S. visit.
Abdel-Rahman's alleged role was giving followers religious sanction to bomb, assassinate, kidnap and kill to persuade the United States to change its Middle East policies.
When the trial began nine months ago, Assistant U.S. Attorney Robert Khuzami accused the defendants of devising "a battle plan that was so horrible, so monstrous, so vicious that if it had been successful the lives of every person in this city and in this nation would be changed forever."
Prosecutors played dozens of taped conversations that were secretly recorded by FBI informant Emad Salem. They showed videotape of five defendants allegedly mixing a bomb in a garage - although a prosecution expert testified the device lacked the right mix of ingredients to explode.
Prosecutors provided the jury with transcripts of speeches in which Abdel-Rahman urged attacks on the U.S. military in the Middle East. And they spent weeks showing evidence from the Trade Center bombing, even though none of the defendants was directly charged in the attack.
But authorities may have stretched the evidence, said Vincent Cannistraro, the CIA's chief of counterterrorism operations from 1988 to 1990 and now an international security consultant.
"I think law enforcement may have provoked a greater conspiracy here," Cannistraro said, "in an effort to show they were on top of things after the World Trade Center."
The defense accused FBI agents and Salem of concocting the bomb plot so they could race in and play hero.
Such a prosecution, defense lawyers argued, would make people forget that the FBI had failed to stop the Trade Center bombing - despite trailing three of the bombers as far back as 1989 and infiltrating the militant Muslims with Salem in 1991.
"When it was all over, the newspapers could print - and they did print - headlines saying 'FBI Stops Terrorist Plot,"' Jacobs said. "That's the motivation."
During closing arguments, Assistant U.S. Attorney Andrew McCarthy defended the FBI, saying it quickly solved the Trade Center bombing and made arrests.
"To the rest of the world out there, the explosion in all its tragedy was actually a high watermark for the FBI," he said.
At least two internal FBI investigations were prompted by actions taken after the Trade Center bombing.
In August, FBI agent Frederic William Whitehurst, a chemist, testified that he was pressured to distort findings about the bombing to favor prosecutors.
Whitehurst said the Inspector General's Office of the Department of Justice is continuing to investigate.
A second investigation is under way into the FBI's handling of Salem, the informant.
Salem, an Egyptian immigrant, admitted on the witness stand that he had lied to everyone he met in America so they would think he was a "big shot." He even admitted lying to a state jury about an auto accident.
The FBI has paid him more than $ 100,000 of a promised $ 1 million, but even prosecutors called him an unsavory character.
Cannistraro believes the FBI and prosecutors went too far.
"The effort to link the sheik to a wider conspiracy is a horrible mistake … they went way overboard," he said, adding that Abdel-Rahman probably should have been charged only with conspiring to kill Mubarak.
"I think it's fair to say that some of the law enforcement people at the national level are concerned," he said. "Some of them think they overreached in New York."
 Load-Date: September 24, 1995

 

End of Document
