

Terrorism in the Middle East - Now the Movie
The Associated Press
April 15, 1994, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 734 words
Byline: By MAE AHMED, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




As "The Terrorist" opens, a bearded man in the white robes and skullcap of a devout Muslim is swinging a truncheon furiously, smashing apart a jewelry shop and video store.
That's even before the movie's credits roll. But to the Arab audience there's no need to identify the actor: He's Egyptian superstar Adel Imam.
Imam's presence made sure the film - Egypt's first with militant Islam as a serious theme - would be noticed. But it's gone beyond that: "The Terrorist" is causing an uproar, banned in some Arab countries as an affront to Muslims, drawing huge audiences in others.
The varied reception mirrors the differing degree of influence of Islamic fundamentalism across the Arab world, as well as concern in some areas that it might anger Muslim militants.
The new film is not the typical Adel Imam comedy beloved to Arabs everywhere. Imam plays Ali, a Muslim radical who through a strange series of events is taken incognito into the home of a wealthy, modern Muslim family.
The family includes loving parents, a leftist son and two daughters, one idealistic and the other who works as a model and wears risque clothes. Friends include a secular writer targeted by the film's militants and a family of Coptic Christians.
To Ali, they are infidels.
"I insist on abiding by my religion," he says as he justifies violence in the name of Islam.
But then Ali falls in love with the idealistic daughter, discovers the other daughter is not as brazen as he thought, and realizes the Coptic neighbor - whom he derided as a Christian - believes in God as strongly as he does.
Slowly, Ali begins to doubt his ideology. Back with his extremist comrades, he breaks a cardinal rule by challenging the group's leader, is pronounced an infidel and killed by his one-time allies.
Screenwriter Lenin al-Ramly describes the film's message this way: "I made a confrontation between two modes of thought: those of the terrorist who believes that only he has the truth … and the family whose thoughts vary.
"I was trying to say that not only the terrorist, but society should be more tolerant of different views, because intolerance leads to terrorism."
Unfortunately, some people missed al-Ramly's point. "The Terrorist" was banned in Tripoli, Lebanon, after a religious leader charged it insulted Muslims. It's banned throughout Jordan.
But the film is immensely popular where it is screened.
In Egypt, where a two-year campaign of extremist violence has taken 350 lives, the film is being shown in 18 theaters, all heavily guarded by police. In Kuwait, the movie is drawing crowds even though cinemas generally have lost popularity to videos.
Mubarak Al Adwani, a member of Kuwait's liberal opposition, wrote in the daily Al Qabas that the film was "a sign of a grass roots anti-terrorism movement in Egypt."
Egyptian audiences applaud the movie's criticism of violence, but some protest that its Muslim family is hardly Muslim at all. The son drinks whiskey, the daughter bares her thighs to Ali, a stranger, and the kind parents never pray.
"This was not the example of a good Muslim family," said Tarek Hanafi, 20, a civil aviation student. "We don't need to go from one extreme to the other."
Imam won't discuss the film, but al-Ramly says the 54-year-old actor asked for the role because he had long wanted to confront Islamic radicals.
In 1988, Imam was outraged when radicals attacked actors on stage as un-Islamic. He moved his popular comedy "Mister Servant" from Cairo - cast, sets and all - to the Assiut theater where the attack occurred.
Two years ago, Imam touched on extremism in "Kebab and Terrorism," a comedy about a man driven by government bureaucracy into becoming a sort of accidental terrorist.
Muslims often bridle at secular portrayals of their faith - though many are secular themselves.
Still, Egyptians are not put off by rumors that extremists will plant bombs.
"I'm not going to let them change my life," said Sahar Hosni, 31, lining up with her husband and friends to pass through a metal detector into a cinema.
Al-Ramly said the movie "broke the circle of fear" among producers.
"Movie makers thought people wouldn't attend," he said. "But the public's attendance proved … that people are not with the terrorists, nor are they afraid of them."
Maybe so. But when a bang resounded through one theater screening "The Terrorist" - it may have been a door slamming - many in the audience jumped in their seats.
 Load-Date: April 15, 1994

 

End of Document
