

The Mood Is Somber, But Peace Initiatives Many
The Associated Press
January 10, 1991, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 877 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER BURNS, Associated Press Writer
Body




U.S.-Iraqi talks in Geneva having failed, fading hopes for avoiding war in the Persian Gulf appeared to rest today with a mission to Baghdad by U.N. chief Javier Perez de Cuellar and European mediation efforts.
The U.N. secretary-general was to leave for the Middle East this evening and meet with Saddam Hussein on Saturday, just three days short of the U.N.-mandated deadline for Iraq to quit Kuwait or face possible attack.
"The window to peace surely has not become wider but it has not been shut," Germany's foreign minister, Hans-Dietrich Genscher, said Wednesday.
Nearly 6 hours of talks between Secretary of State James A. Baker III and Iraq's foreign minister, Tariq Aziz, were later characterized by their participants with discouraging words.
Baker, who was bound today for Saudi Arabia to brief allies on the outcome, said he had heard "nothing to suggest Iraqi flexibility."
"We will not yield to threats," Aziz told reporters, saying Baker's presentation was fraught with them. The United States is demanding unconditional withdrawal.
Some U.S. lawmakers said Iraqi intransigence in the Geneva talks raised the chances President Bush would get congressional authorization to wage war. Congress was to begin debating such a resolution today.
French President Francois Mitterrand said Wednesday that France would push ahead with diplomatic initiatives but convene its parliament a week from today, presumably to consider participation in a war.
The French, Germans, Italians and other Europeans favor a Middle East peace conference as a way of allowing Saddam to withdraw and partially save face.
The European Community was seeking a meeting with Aziz in Algiers over "the next few days" to discuss the crisis. Community sources said Aziz was interested in meeting in Baghdad, but that EC officials were not and that Algiers was suggested as a compromise site.
Even so, final steps for war were being taken at home and abroad.
The Britons evacuated their embassy in Baghdad today, leaving just one diplomat to settle final details, and the United States said all its diplomats would leave on Saturday.
The Pentagon said restrictions on media coverage of military operations in the Persian Gulf region have taken effect and Bush ordered civilian manufacturers to fill military orders first.
In addition, the Defense Department said it was considering keeping reservists on active duty for up to two years and veterans' hospitals were asked to prepare up to 25,000 beds.
Saddam said Wednesday that Americans will "swim in their own blood" if war breaks out.
About 360,000 U.S. soldiers are deployed in the region along with 245,000 allied troops, facing some 540,000 Iraqi troops in Kuwait and southern Iraq.
Perez de Cuellar's peace-seeking mission was one of the few apparent subjects of agreement during Wednesday's talks in Geneva.
The U.N. chief said he would fly first to Geneva, then to the Iraqi capital on Saturday morning. He said he will hold "personal, direct talks with the president of Iraq and the Iraqi authorities."
"Now I feel it is my moral duty as secretary-general of the United Nations to do everything in order to avoid the worst," Perez de Cuellar said. "I will go with my moral authority," he added.
The secretary-general would not further discuss his mission.
Hopes were high when Baker, Aziz and their delegations ended their talks, considering their length.
But the main participants in the first high-level meeting between the main adversaries in the crisis Iraq set off with its Aug. 2 seizure of Kuwait were anything but optimistic.
Aziz told reporters that in the event of a war, Iraq would "absolutely yes" attack Israel, which has promised to strike back.
The Iraqi pledged that his country would not attack first.
Bush, in Washington, would not make the same promise. He accused the Iraqis of "a total stiff-arm, a total rebuff."
Aziz did not once mention Kuwait by name, outlining instead Iraq's call for a conference to address the rights of Palestinians.
The United States has refused to link such a conference to an Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait, which Saddam has declared Iraq's 19th province.
Aziz accused the United States of a policy of double standards in the Middle East, tolerating stubbornness from its Israeli ally on the Palestinian issue while "when it comes to the Arabs, there you raise the stick."
Aziz refused to deliver a threatening letter from Bush to Saddam, saying it contained language inappropriate for an exchange between heads of state.
However, both Baker and Aziz told reporters their meetings were diplomatically polite - with no table-pounding or raising of voices.
The outcome of the Geneva talks "might change some minds" in Congress, said Rep. John Murtha, D-Pa., a member of a bipartisan congressional group that met with Bush at the White House on Wednesday.
"The fact that Saddam Hussein has completely ignored reality," he said, "is going to affect the debate" in the House and Senate scheduled to being today.
Many U.S. lawmakers have argued for delaying military action and giving the U.N.-ordered embargo on trade with Iraq more time to sap the Iraqi nation and military.
Polls have shown the American people about equally divided on whether to go to war come Tuesday's deadline or give the embargo more time.

 

End of Document
