

The Real Olympics
The Associated Press
August 9, 1992, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 834 words
Byline: By FRED BAYLES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BARCELONA, Spain
Body




The Dream Team won as scheduled. U.S. track and field was dominant. The medal count was high.
So where was the Olympic drama, the excitement, the unexpected that usually keeps us sitting on the edge of our seats?
Well, ask Lithuanian basketball star Sarunas Marciulionis, whose team celebrated a bronze medal as if it were gold.
"It's hard to explain our feelings. I'm sure it's a holiday for everybody," he said. "Our nation won."
Ask the Israeli athlete who garnered a first Olympic medal for her country and somberly dedicated it to countrymen killed by terrorists at the 1972 Games.
Ask the Spanish, ecstatic over a record 13 gold medals. Or the South Africans, whose two silver medals sweetened their return to the Games after a 32-year exile.
Ask the Namibians, the Estonians, the Bahamians, the Croats and a dozen other nationalities whose Olympic moments were filled with passion and national pride that didn't necessarily make it onto your television screen.
"These have been, without doubt, the best Games in Olympic history," Juan Antonio Samaranch, president of the International Olympic committee, said at the closing ceremonies.
For many nations new to the victory stands, the claim was not all hyperbole.
While most eyes fix at the top of the Olympic medal chart, the names at the bottom may speak more to the success and excitement of these Games.
Sixty-four nations come away from Barcelona with medals, a healthy 22 percent increase over the 52 in 1988.
Even more impressive is the 52 percent increase over the preboycott Games of 1952-1976, when an average of 42 nations took home medals.
Much of this is due to the fracturing of the Soviet Union and its satellites. It has been 50 years or more since Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania were parties to the Games. Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina, new names on the Olympic roster, come from the rending of Yugoslavia.
Namibia, once part of South Africa, celebrated its independence with a debut Olympic appearance and two silver medals.
So while the U.S. appearance at opening ceremonies was marked with a celebrity frenzy over Magic and Michael, the emotion came with the crowd salute to team members of war-ravaged Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina, many who braved shelling and snipers to make it to Spain.
These new nationalisms serve to explain why a third-place finish in basketball was so important to Lithuania's Arvidas Sabonis, a 1988 gold medalist for the Soviet Union.
"This is the best thing that's ever happened in my life," he said. "Winning the bronze medal makes me even happier than the gold I won. I shall dedicate this medal to the people of Lithuania."
Compare the ho-hum celebration of the U.S. basketball team's gold medal to the emotional outpouring over Lithuania's bronze.
Yes, Michael Jordan and Charles Barkley draped flags over their shoulders. But it was less patriotism and more a way for the Nike-sponsored athletes to cover the Reebok emblem on their team outfits.
In the Lithuanian locker room, emotions were flowing along with the champagne used to douse President Vytautis Lansbergis. People embraced. The national anthem was sung through smiles and tears.
"If they're the Dream Team, we're the Miracle Team," Donn Nelson, the assistant coach, said. "The fact that they are playing under their own flag, a year ago they wouldn't have believed this."
But joy and celebration weren't limited to newcomers.
Brazilian fans blew trumpets, beat drums and danced the samba as their team took its first gold medal in volleyball, defeating the Netherlands. Fans swarmed the court to carry Brazilian players on their shoulders.
The hometown Spanish staged deafening celebrations over 21 medals, including a gold in soccer.
"Internationally speaking, this is the greatest feat as far as a Spanish team is concerned," said coach Vicente Miera. "The emotion was the key."
Yael Arad's silver medal in judo was cause for national celebration in Israel. She dedicated her medal to the Israeli athletes killed 20 years ago in Munich and told of visiting two victims' families before coming to Barcelona.
"They were the most moving moments of my life," she said.
Gail Devers' spill in the women's 100-meter hurdles was a brief point of drama for viewers in the United States. But for the winner of the race, Paraskevi Patoulidou and her homeland Greece, the finish was a miracle.
Patoulidou, the first Greek woman to medal in track, was overcome with emotion running the edge of the track in search of a Greek flag. Later she tearfully told of looking for her husband, a former Olympic weightlifter.
"I never did find him," she said. "I think he is somewhere alone and is crying."
Folks back in the United States may have clucked their tongues over Devers' bad luck. Back in Greece, there probably wasn't a dry eye in the house.
But perhaps the most important memory of these Olympics are the things that didn't happen: no boycotts, no protests, no scandals, no trouble, for the first time since 1964.
The Olympic movement itself gets a medal for that.

 

End of Document
