

The Horror: Women and Children Singled Out for Slaughter
The Associated Press
June 7, 1993, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 794 words
Byline: By NYENATI ALLISON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HARBEL, Liberia
Body




Sarah Toen Qyn left a refugee camp here to buy provisions in the nearby Liberian capital. When the 16-year-old returned, she found only horror.
Strewn through the camp were babies with crushed skulls, mothers hacked by machetes, elderly people butchered like livestock - perhaps 300 people singled out for slaughter at the stroke of midnight Saturday.
Among the dead in this makeshift camp of mud huts were Sarah's little brother and two other relatives.
"I cannot stay here anymore, I cannot stay here anymore," said the girl, shuddering with fear. But there was no place else to go.
The massacre was a reminder that there is an ugly, brutal war going on in Liberia, where a West African coalition force has been trying to crush a rebel movement led by Charles Taylor.
The West African army, led by Nigeria, blamed Taylor's rebels for the slaughter at Harbel, about 40 miles north of the capital Monrovia. Taylor denied it and blamed his enemies.
In Washington, State Department spokesman Mike McCurry said the United States condemned "this reprehensible slaughter of displaced persons, including women and children."
"Clearly, we are shocked and saddened by the senseless killings which occurred," McCurry said, adding that the United States backs ongoing U.N. efforts to bring the warring factions together to end the war.
He was unable to say who was responsible for the massacre.
The killings took place at an abandoned Firestone operation that was once the world's biggest natural rubber plantation and a major source of revenue for this shattered nation, which was settled by freed American slaves in 1822.
The refugees who were killed were among the 33,000 who have gathered here to escape bloodshed elsewhere. More than half of Liberia's 2.3 million people have been made homeless by the fighting.
At least 90 percent of the 300 dead and 765 wounded were children and mothers, said Dr. Hans Narula, a United Nations Children's Fund official visiting Liberia.
"This act of terrorism is against all international laws of human rights and we call upon those responsible to end this type of violence," he said.
About 50 rebels entered the camp in pickup trucks after midnight Saturday, said soldiers for the army of Liberian President Amos Sawyer, who is backed by the West African army.
Only two Liberian government soldiers were stationed at the camp at the time. The soldiers said rebels looted the camp of donated rice and forced about 200 refugees to carry it for them.
Augustine Mahiga, representative of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees, said the killers then went on an orgy of mutilation and murder, traveling from hut to hut and wiping out entire families.
All the factions in the Liberian war have been accused of atrocities, lootings and rape during the 3 -year-old civil war.
Sunday's massacre was the worst to come to light since Liberian army soldiers in 1990 slaughtered about 600 civilians of rival tribes who had sought refuge in a Lutheran church in Monrovia.
Taylor telephoned the British Broadcasting Corp. on Sunday night and denied his fighters were responsible for the Harbel raid. He blamed West African intervention forces, rival rebel factions and Liberian army regulars.
"We knew that they were planning some stupid thing like this only to give us a bad name and make us appear ridiculous in the international community," said Taylor.
The massacre came two weeks after the West African army said it intercepted a radio message from Taylor in which he allegedly ordered one of his commanders to unleash a "reign of terror" on refugees.
It appeared as though most of the refugees were killed in their beds, but others were shot or attacked with machetes as they tried to run through the dark.
"I decided to hide myself in the bathroom," said 10-year-old Tanue Kessely. Government soldiers later detained him for questioning after finding a tattoo on his arm identifying him as one of Taylor's National Patriotic Front rebels.
Taylor and a rival rebel group, the Sierra Leone-based United Liberation Movement of Liberia, are notorious for pulling children into their ranks.
Taylor invaded Liberia in December 1989 to unseat President Samuel Doe. A breakaway rebel faction killed Doe, and West African troops sailed into Monrovia in September 1990 to end the fighting that killed 60,000 people.
An unsteady peace held until last October, when Taylor's fighters attacked and almost seized the capital. West African forces and their allies have pushed the guerrillas further into the interior and seized key ports and cities.
Relief workers have been unable to deliver food and medicine to the interior because the six-nation West African force has attacked relief convoys entering Liberia from the north, accusing them of delivering aid to Taylor's fighters.

 

End of Document
