

The Party's Over - What Next?
The Associated Press
September 15, 1993, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 615 words
Byline: By RUTH SINAI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Israeli negotiators have gone home to celebrate their new year. The White House stage has been dismantled. Yasser Arafat has left town. The party's over. What happens now?
In one sense, it's back to the plodding diplomacy, behind-the-scenes contacts, veiled language that characterized the first 22 months of the Arab-Israeli negotiations begun at Madrid, Spain.
It's hard to beat the stunning action of recent days: the Arafat arrival in Washington on Sunday, the White House signing of the Israel-PLO peace accord on Monday, the signing of the Israel-Jordan agenda on Tuesday and the unexpected visit by Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin to Morocco where he agreed with King Hassan to establish diplomatic relations.
In another sense, things in the peace talks will never be the same.
The Clinton administration is hopeful that the picture of Arafat and Rabin shaking hands will send shock waves through the Arab world and topple barriers to other Israeli-Arab agreements.
"We believe today's agenda, which has been finalized, will give a strong impetus, a strong momentum, to the other negotiations," Secretary of State Warren Christopher said at Tuesday's signing of the Israel-Jordan accord.
For now, no dates have been set for the next round of Israeli-Syrian talks and the administration will be in touch with both sides to fix a date, probably next month.
That date probably will include the other sets of talks too: Israel and Lebanon, Israel and Jordan and Israel and the PLO. With the PLO and Jordan, what remains to be worked out now are the admittedly difficult details of the peace. Lebanon, a satellite of Syria's, will not reconcile with Israel unless Syria does.
The question officials are pondering is how now to translate the momentum into action on the most intractable of the remaining disputes - that between Israel and Syria.
The issues are fairly straightforward. Syria wants Israel to withdraw from the Golan Heights, a strategically located plateau the Israelis captured in the 1967 Mideast War. Israel, on the other hand, wants Syria to first define just what it means by its promise to make peace. After that, Israel says it might consider a partial withdrawal from the Golan.
Christopher, who served as a go-between for Rabin and Syrian President Hafez Assad last month, is willing to continue in this capacity. Aides say he likely will return to the region next month.
Former President Carter, in town this week to attend the White House signing of the Israel-PLO accord, told President Clinton that Assad likely would not want to be left off the peace bandwagon.
Carter said in an interview Monday that he had lengthy discussions with Assad and that the next step depends on how soon Israeli political leaders and their public are ready for serious talk about the Golan Heights.
The administration also is concerned that Rabin - having traumatized Israeli public opinion by recognizing the PLO - might want to wait a while before he shocks it with a proposal to cede the Golan.
"There are political realities in Israel as well," said Christopher's top peace talks aide, Dennis Ross. "And I think what we'll do is do all we can to move ahead, but I think we have to be realistic at the same time."
The administration has so far not seen any evidence that Syria is willing to move ahead either. Syria even had planned to stay away from the Israel-PLO ceremony.
The Syrian ambassador attended on orders from Assad after Clinton spoke with the Syrian leader, White House aide Martin Indyk said. "Assad and President Clinton agreed that this was an important and significant event, and that it was appropriate, given Syria's important role in the region, that Syria be represented."
 Load-Date: September 15, 1993

 

End of Document
