

The Golan Heights: The Next Hurdle On The Road To Mideast Peace
The Associated Press
June 10, 1994, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 810 words
Byline: By NICOLAS B. TATRO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEVE ATIV, Golan Heights
Body




The row of Israeli Merkava tanks spaced along a ridge fired their huge cannons one at a time, lurching and reeling with the effort and kicking up rust-colored clouds of dust.
The thunderous clap of tank shells and window-rattling sonic booms from jet fighters streaking overhead are part of the sword-sharpening practice maneuvers that take place along the Syrian-Israeli front almost daily.
"These are the voices of peace," said Ramona Bar-Lev of the Golan Residents Council, which launched a nationwide campaign to stop any Israeli withdrawal from the Golan Heights.
Their cake-and-eat-it-too slogan is "Peace With The Golan," seen on bumper stickers, banners and T-shirts and even scratched in giant letters on the mountainside overlooking the Sea of Galilee.
Since the U.S.-brokered truce in 1974, cross-border shelling stopped and a seductive quiet has reigned in the 41-by-16 mile volcanic plateau. Israel captured it from Syria in the 1967 Mideast war.
With an Israel-PLO agreement now being implemented, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's government believes that agreement with Syria on the Golan Heights is the key to an overall Mideast peace. Jordan, Lebanon and the Gulf States will fall in line if Syria and Israel reach agreement, they argue.
But the two sides are far apart. Israel refuses to give Syria assurances that it will get all of the Golan back, and Syria has not committed itself to the open-border sort of peace that Israel wants.
For Israel, the Golan was a vital buffer that saved the nation from invasion in 1973 when Syria and Egypt launched a surprise attack. It gives the armed forces the 48 to 96 hours it needs to call up its citizen soldiers.
"The main strategic asset of the Golan Heights is that it buys time for Israel for mobilizing its reserves," said Uri Dromi, government spokesman and reserve air force colonel.
Israel's demands for trading that security is built on a phased withdrawal over 10 years; retention of mountaintop early warning stations; demilitarizing the area from the Golan to Syria's capital of Damascus; and a peacekeeping force, perhaps American.
Syria rejects a phased withdrawal and demands parity in arms reductions or in setting up demilitarized zones. Most of all, President Hafez Assad refuses Israel keeping even lookout posts on Syrian soil.
"Withdrawing from all the heights is a big security threat that Israel will not be capable of taking without a drastic reduction in the threat," said Dromi.
He argued it was not feasible to have a pullout and peace take place simultaneously as Syria envisions.
"Ten years is enough time to get used to the new situation, to establish the means of early warning, to develop enough equivalent security measures, to start trade and open embassies to reduce tension," he said.
The settlement of Neve Ativ nestles at the foot of Mt. Hermon, where Israeli lookout positions can monitor Damascus. It is also Israel's lone ski resort, where 42 A-frame chalets are nearing completion thanks in part to government loans.
"When Rabin came to power, the loans stopped for 10 months and suddenly they opened the faucet," said Aviva Maman, an immigrant from Miami whose family helps operate the ski resort.
The government is also expanding the Golan winery, one of the area's major industries, and recently added new housing in the town of Qatzrin.
All of that adds up to a mixed message for the 13,000 Jewish settlers and 17,000 Arab Druse who live in the Golan Heights at a time when Rabin is also talking of evacuating settlements.
Neve Ativ residents said they will leave if told to do so by the government but showed little enthusiasm for a land-for-peace deal with Syria. They think Assad shows no signs of wanting peace with Israel.
"He may make a deal because of pressure or because he wants a better economy, but he won't do it for the sake of peace. I don't want him to love us, but he should love the idea of peace," said Maman, petting her fierce Rottweiler dog Misty.
Many of the Golan settlers have joined the campaign to stop any withdrawal.
"I don't think Rabin has the power to order us to leave like we are soldiers. The government can't just say go in or go out," said Bar-Lev, who lives in Qatzrin, the Golan Heights only town.
In the coffee shop of the kibbutz communal farm of Ein Zivan, there was little militancy.
"We are ready for peace, but not at any price," said Rachel Abramovitch, who has two sons in the army and who was forced out of the Yamit settlement in the Sinai Desert when Israel returned the war-won land to Egypt in 1982.
Mika James-Baumitz, sitting at an adjacent table in the coffee shop, said she was ready to leave if necessary.
"It probably will be a trauma for some people if they have to leave, but it will be more of a trauma if they lose a son. You can rebuild a house, but not a son," she said, as her 5-year-old boy Uriah came bounding in.
 Load-Date: June 10, 1994

 

End of Document
