

The Artists: No Live Elephants in Seattle Opera's 'Aida'
The Associated Press
September 18, 1992, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1146 words
Byline: By TIM KLASS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SEATTLE
Body




If you want to see live elephants, go to the zoo, not to the opera.
That was the message for audiences in a $ 2 million Seattle Opera production of "Aida" that had the longest run in company history.
Not a live animal was in sight and a mere 120 performers were on stage for the Triumphal March, reconstituted by director Francois Rochaix and designer Robert Israel as a sort of dream procession.
The Egyptian army and Ethiopian prisoners were represented by 576 two-foot figurines, carried by the dozen on wooden trays. Scattered amid packing crates around the perimeter of the set were 35 life-sized sculptures of jackals, deer, cattle and other creatures covered in mock gold leaf.
Costumes were based mostly on European attire at the time of Giuseppe Verdi's masterwork, completed in 1871 to commemorate the opening of the Cairo opera House and Suez Canal two years earlier, rather than the more customary stylized impressions of ancient North African clothing.
Three lithe dancers mimed the love triangle among the much heavier singers during the prelude and at various interludes in the action.
"This production did exactly what I wanted it to do. It made people think about 'Aida,"' said Seattle Opera general director Speight Jenkins. "'Aida' has become the hottest topic of conversation in town."
Ticket sales surpassed 90 percent of capacity in the 3,000-seat Opera House even after an 11th performance was added. The old record was nine performances of Sergei Prokofiev's "War and Peace" in 1990.
Andrea Gruber sang her first Aida, Michael Sylvester was Radames, Nelly Boschkova was Amneris and Brent Ellis was Amonasro in the gold cast. Ealynn Voss, Timothy Mussard, Tichina Vaughn and Gordon Hawkins headed the silver cast. Bruce Ferden was the conductor. Performances concluded Aug. 22.
Reviews were wildly discordant.
Despite "a generally impressive cast," wrote San Francisco Chronicle critic Joshua Kosman, the staging was "a pretty second-rate affair, marked by silly, unfocused staging and an inscrutable design scheme."
The figurines reduced what traditionally is the most lavish scene in opera to "the March of the Toy Soldiers," Kosman wrote.
"The round bald heads and gold-leaf skins of the Egyptian toy soldiers did remind one irresistably of being backstage at the Oscars," concluded Judith Green, arts writer for the San Jose Mercury News.
"The Egyptian Oscars, like little R2D2s, have become local icons … but their cuteness trivializes the whole idea of a triumphal procession," University of California Professor David Littlejohn wrote in the Wall Street Journal.
Kosman, Green and Littlejohn joined local critics in praising the musical performance, especially that of the 26-year-old Gruber.
"Aida" is one of the two most frequently performed operas in the United States, but this is the first in Seattle since 1980. Logistical problems snarled an attempt to bring the International Opera Festival's monster production to the Kingdome in 1989.
That $ 4 million "Aida," originally performed in September 1987 at the foot of the pyramids at Giza, Egypt, used as many as 1,200 performers and nearly two dozen animals.
All the Opera House stage can hold is about 300 people and a few elephants.
"Then you have not enough room to act, and there are still not enough people to suggest a real Triumphal Scene," production director Francois Rochaix said.
"At best, you have a guerrilla army that might be able to attack Oregon but would certainly not be enough to do much damage to Ethiopia," designer Robert Israel said.
Verdi never specified live animals, and "there is no mention of live animals in the original production," said Jenkins, a former newspaper music critic and ex-host of the "Live From the Met" television series.
"It's a dumb thing. There's absolutely no reason to have live animals," he said. "Why would you come to the opera to see animals? If you want to see animals, go to the zoo."
Rochaix and Israel produced the company's best known work, "Der Ring Des Niebelungen," the least traditional American production of Richard Wagner's four-part operatic extravaganza to date. They removed much of the mythological feel by portraying Wotan as Wagner, a stage director who loses control of his players in the telling of a grand legend.
Their first efforts, "Die Walkure" in 1985 and the entire Ring Cycle in 1986, drew shouts of disapproval and far more boos than the few on opening night for "Aida."
The bugs were largely eliminated and the boos gone by 1987, when the company went from annual Ring productions to once every four years. Last year audiences greeted the once-radical Ring like an old friend.
"Aida" depicts the doomed love between the Egyptian warrior Radames and Aida, a slave whose father is the Ethiopian warrior-king Amonasro. Her rival for the heart of Radames is Amneris, the Egyptian Pharaoh's daughter.
As captured Ethiopians are paraded past the Pharaoh, Aida suddenly recognizes her father.
The music and drama are lost in spectacular productions such as a $ 10 million staging at a 3,400-year-old temple in Luxor, Egypt, in May 1987, and the International Opera Festival version that drew about 850,000 people to stadiums and arenas around the world in 1988 and 1989, Jenkins said.
Reviewers noted a five-second echo at Olympic Stadium in Montreal. From halfway up the stands at BC Place Stadium in Vancouver, British Columbia, a 14-foot python looked more like a worm to some viewers.
Even in a musically acclaimed Metropolitan Opera of New York production nearly four years ago, the Triumphal Scene with a few horses was "ludicrously executed," Jenkins said.
"Everyone on the stage and in the audience saw the one tall Ethiopian before Aida did, even though she was staring at the line of prisoners," he said.
Almost immediately Jenkins called Rochaix, who was asleep at his home in Switzerland.
"He said, 'I am furious, and I want you and Bob to do another one."' Rochaix said. "That was something I never forgot."
Rochaix and Israel went the opposite direction from their work on the Ring, devising an "Aida" that would be less literal and more dreamlike - in a sense, more mythical.
The result was "Verdi's fantasy, which diverges from Verdi's text from a designer's point of view," Israel said. "I don't think he was interested in the reality. Why should he be?"
The set and costumes were designed to suggest 19th-century Egyptophile Italians in a museum of Egyptian antiquities, rather than Egyptians on the Nile.
"I think this kind of set brings the story to the audience fresh," Rochaix said. "All the people on stage are Italians, but they dream they are Egyptians."
Unlike the Ring, which remains a touchstone for the Seattle Opera and is scheduled to be revived again in 1995, "Aida" was a one-shot affair, Jenkins said.
"One can always refine things," he said. "The sad thing about this 'Aida' is that you don't have a second chance."

 

End of Document
