

The Campaign's Final Battle Will Be a Long One
The Associated Press
January 5, 1993, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 869 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: BAIDOA, Somalia
Body




Moodow Nuurow trudged into town the other morning, a day ahead of George Bush.
She had walked 50 miles, day and night, carrying and leading four small children. She left two dead ones - a boy and a girl - in her village, Ooflow.
"There's no life in Ooflow," she said at the feeding center where she finally found help. "It has no water, no food. I didn't know where to go. But I had to leave."
It has been almost one month since the Marines hit the beach in Somalia on Dec. 9, opening a unique offensive to deliver food aid at the point of a gun.
Since then, the international aid agencies and the U.S. military have more than earned the "well done" they got from President Bush during his Dec. 31-Jan. 2 visit.
Marine escorts have reopened the emergency food pipeline. Relief organizations are planning food warehouses in the interior of this east African nation. People are trekking back to their villages, knowing that food awaits.
"We're a little ahead of schedule," Bush assured Marines on his visit to Baidoa, heart of the starvation belt.
But as Moodow Nuurow's desperate journey showed, the final battle of the Somalia campaign will be a long one.
Somalis are still dying over the horizon, out of reach of the food trucks. Villages are still vulnerable to armed gangs who were driven from major towns by the Marines and other international troops.
And the strategy of Operation Restore Hope still looks patched together day by day. Although aid groups are laying plans for extending their reach, they are uncertain about how those plans would mesh with the military's.
"The next phase is supposed to be securing the countryside," said James Fennell, a CARE International official in Baidoa. "But what does that mean? Will the Marines actually base themselves in villages?"
The Somali disaster - drought combined with civil war combined with wholesale looting and extortion - left an estimated 350,000 dead in 1992 and a nation in ruins.
No one knows how many are still dying. The truck that once picked up more than 150 bodies each morning in Baidoa now collects a couple of dozen. But the mortality rate in Baidoa does not necessarily reflect what's happening in countless Ooflows across southern Somalia.
"There are many people dying in villages that are not being reached because the violence continues," said Mohamed Ali Aden, acting governor of the Baidoa region.
The aid networks operating out of Mogadishu, Baidoa and six other provincial towns do not cover all the famine-stricken territory.
Food trucks moving out of Baidoa and Hoddur under Marine escort leave uncovered a 60-mile swath between the two towns, noted Mohamed Ali Ahmed, chairman of the Baidoa relief committee. Villages on the edge of the aid network are unlikely to share with those farther afield.
One hungry village recently attacked another north of Baidoa, and food deliveries are still looted sporadically, aid workers say. Some refugees who went back home returned to Baidoa because of the continuing violence, they say.
"We need help," said Aden, "but in this area the Marines are only in Baidoa."
The U.S. military will reach deeper into the countryside through such projects as upgrading the primitive road from Kismayu, on the coast, to the town of Lugh 200 miles north, said Marine Col. Fred Peck, U.S. military spokesman.
But the U.S. forces are not about to set up bases in outlying villages.
"As you widen that arc around the city (Baidoa), you can only go so far with the resources we have," said Marine Lt. Col. Ron Stokes, another military spokesman.
Peck suggested that newly arriving forces from other nations - expected eventually to be components of a U.N. peacekeeping force - may provide the opportunity to set up outposts.
Meanwhile, the military is sending helicopters on patrol from the hub towns to search for for "technicals," the weapon-mounted utility vehicles favored by renegade militiamen. Marines are also helping rehabilitate schools to turn 13-year-old armed thieves into pupils again.
But many plans and possibilities seem on hold because the United States and United Nations have not yet found a way to smoothly pass the baton. From the start, Bush has portrayed the U.S. mission as a transition to a U.N. operation.
U.N. Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali wants American troops first to disarm as much of the Somali population as possible. Bush, however, reiterated in Somalia that disarmament is not part of the U.S. mandate.
"The U.N. has to establish a peacekeeping command structure to take over," Peck said.
Somalia's warring factions also have to reach basic agreement to allow this nation to resume something approaching a normal life.
And the people of this upland farm area must hang on until what is expected to be a good harvest in July.
They must be kept strong with donated food and save the mediocre January harvest of sorghum and maize for seed, say aid workers, and more of them must get back to their villages and farms.
On the same day Moodow Nuurow straggled into the Baidoa feeding center, Mohamed Isaak, at the center for several weeks, asked a visitor for help in getting his family and 20 others back to their village.
"We need to get to Oforu, but there's no transport," he said. "How can we?"

 

End of Document
