

The Marines Are Here, Now The Real Problems Begin
The Associated Press
December 28, 1992, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 339 words
Byline: By TINA SUSMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOGADISHU, Somalia
Body




Relief agencies that complained two weeks ago about U.S. Marines not securing cities fast enough are now scrambling to keep pace with military operations.
The U.S.-led multinational force has secured all eight of the cities that are to serve as hubs for relief operations, but unforeseen problems are blocking much food from getting there.
Since Mogadishu's port was reopened after the Marines arrived Dec. 9, enough food has arrived to feed the entire country for about a week. It's sitting in warehouses as relief agencies scrounge for trucks to ship it out.
When the World Food Program tried to speed up food deliveries by arranging the import of 100 trucks and drivers from Ethiopia, it immediately faced protests from local truckers controlled by Gen. Mohamed Farrah Aidid, one of the country's most powerful warlords.
On Sunday, about 100 Somali trucks lined both sides of the road outside the U.S. Embassy in a demonstration against the plan.
"We were unemployed for two years," said Abdulahi Mohamed Rooraye, a protest leader. "Our vehicles have every right to work."
Most Somali trucks are rusted remnants from the 1950s unable to handle long hauls and the rugged conditions that are a part of food convoys.
At the same time, the locals charge twice the regional average for hauling: 18 cents per ton per mile, compared with 9 cents.
"Every day a new problem comes up that people didn't think of before," Gemmo Lodesani, deputy director of the WFP, said in an interview Saturday.
The WFP is working with U.S. officials to try to negotiate a deal with the Somalis, but in the meantime just 20 Ethiopian trucks have been imported. And the need for more is growing as Somalis become increasingly eager - and desperate - for food.
The urgency was underscored Christmas Day in Baidoa, a town in the interior that is a magnet for tens of thousands of villagers seeking food and security. At least one woman was killed and several children were injured when riots broke out among scores of people vying for the last 20 sacks of food from a convoy.

 

End of Document
