

The Farrakhan Furor: A Ministry That Inspires, Divides - And Incenses
The Associated Press
March 13, 1994, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1745 words
Byline: By SHARON COHEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CHICAGO
Body




When Brenda Bolden walks by the stone-faced men guarding her building, she doesn't ask their views on race and religion. She has one pressing priority: her safety.
She doesn't mind that these security guards, clad in suits and bow ties, are disciples of Louis Farrakhan, or that their message is controversial. If they protect her public housing project - and talk sense, too - that's just fine with her.
"I don't care if it's Farrakhan or the Ku Klux Klan," Miss Bolden says. "If they can say something to save a life, stop a shooting, clean up the drug activity or slow it down, if they can show a young person how to lead a clean and decent life, what's wrong with that?"
Nothing, of course. But there's a deeper debate here, centering on a man and a movement: Minister Louis Farrakhan and his Nation of Islam.
Should tax dollars go to members of a group that many believe preaches separatism and anti-Semitism? That's one of the numerous questions being raised about Farrakhan and his followers in a firestorm that has divided blacks, incensed Jews and stirred debate from college campuses to Congress.
The furor was sparked by a top aide's speech at a New Jersey college that excoriated Jews as "bloodsuckers" of the black community and the pope as a "no-good cracker," and urged blacks to kill whites in South Africa.
Kweisi Mfume, chairman of the Congressional Black Caucus, condemned Khallid Abdul Muhammad's remarks and disavowed a covenant his group recently had formed with a seemingly more moderate Farrakhan.
Farrakhan responded, too: Last month, he demoted his aide and denounced the speech as "repugnant," but defended its "truths" and accused the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith of trying to bring him down.
Since then, Farrakhan's tone has been defiant, and his words blistering and contradictory: He told Arsenio Hall his is a "ministry of love," then two days later, at the group's annual Saviour's Day celebration, blamed Jews for killing Christ and said "murder and lying come easy to white people."
He, and other Nation of Islam members, did not respond to several requests from The Associated Press for interviews.
To critics, the 60-year-old Farrakhan's message is drenched in pogrom-like anti-Semitism and Klan-like racism - only in reverse.
Farrakhan and his followers are a "hate-mongering fringe group," declares Major Owens, a Black Caucus member from New York.
"His racism and his anti-Semitism are odious … (but) what is just as disturbing … is he proposes a fascist dictatorship for black America," said Adolph Reed, a Northwestern University political science and history professor who has written about Farrakhan.
"It's driven by moral repressiveness," Reed said. "It's homophobic. It's sexist. And it doesn't think much of civil liberties."
But supporters see Farrakhan as a bold voice of truth who stands up to the white establishment.
"In terms of recognizing and naming the fundamental problem - racism and the continuation of slavery of black folk in this country - he does it better than anyone I know," said the Rev. Canon Frederick Williams, rector at the Episcopal Church of the Intercession in Harlem.
Many blacks live "on the very precipice of rage," he said. "He has tapped into that and it's very powerful."
Young people, such as Kelwin Harris, a 16-year-old Catholic parishioner, find parts of Farrakhan's message appealing.
"Jesse Jackson and Martin Luther King said, 'We shall overcome, but it may take some time,"' Harris said. "Farrakhan says, 'We can do this now, we can stop buying from white people. We can keep our money in our community."'
Rasheed Akbar, who runs a Chicago-based program for ex-addicts, said blacks believe "any of our leaders could be bought off other than Louis Farrakhan."
A Time-CNN poll of 504 blacks in February found that 9 percent of those surveyed ranked Farrakhan as the nation's most important black leader, compared with 34 percent for Jesse Jackson.
The poll also found that two-thirds of those familiar with Farrakhan viewed him favorably; roughly as many said he speaks the truth and is good for blacks.
There's little doubt that Farrakhan, a spellbinding orator, has star power; he has attracted tens of thousands to speeches from Los Angeles to New York, once even outdrawing a World Series game.
But Reed cautions from drawing any far-reaching conclusions.
"People invoke his name iconically … as a vague symbol of black assertiveness," he said. "That doesn't have anything to do with joining the Nation of Islam or accepting anything that Farrakhan believes."
The message may even be secondary to blacks who feel alienated and excluded by white society, said Elijah Anderson, a University of Pennsylvania sociology professor.
"They like that he applies the heat to white folks that most black leaders are not doing," he said. "He repudiates white society and says, 'We don't need them. We can do it "
Some praise the Nation's conservative themes of self-reliance, discipline, clean living - no alcohol, no drugs, and only one meal a day - as well as its success in reforming addicts and hardened criminals.
"There is no group in America that has done more for African-American males than the Nation," contends the Rev. Michael Pfleger, a white Catholic priest with a black parish - and a Farrakhan friend for 10 years. "They reach out to try to give them knowledge, respect and to develop their full selves, rather than to be wasted or written off."
But positive deeds don't obliterate poisonous messages, says civil rights activist Roger Wilkins, a history professor at George Mason University.
"When the Nation does good work … it's as if you do charity in the daytime and run a house of prostitution at night," Wilkins said. "The good is clearly overshadowed."
For all the uproar, Farrakhan's Nation is relatively small. The group doesn't release membership numbers, but it numbers more than 20,000, according to Larry Mamiya, a religion and Africana studies professor at Vassar College.
For more than five decades, the Nation of Islam was run by Elijah Muhammad as a black nationalist empire that regarded whites as devils.
Farrakhan, born Louis Eugene Walcott, a former Episcopal altar boy and calypso singer who still plays the violin, joined after hearing Muhammad speak in 1955. He became a protege of Malcolm X.
After Muhammad's death in 1975, the Nation split; his son, Wallace, rejected separatism and moved toward orthodox Islam. Mamiya says that faction has 100,000 to 200,000 followers.
But Farrakhan took the more militant road.
He vaulted to prominence as a supporter of Jesse Jackson's 1984 presidential campaign and, soon after, was courting controversy.
He made veiled threats against Jews accused of harassing the civil rights leader, scorned Judaism as a "gutter religion," and consorted with Libya's Moammar Gadhafi, accepting a $ 5 million business loan for his organization.
Now, the Nation of Islam has expanded its business empire from hair-care and skin products to plans for a printing operation for its newspaper "Final Call."
Among the most high-profile ventures are affiliated companies that have won lucrative government contacts to provide security guards at subsidized housing developments in several big cities.
The companies' efforts have been successful in Baltimore and Washington, D.C., but in Los Angeles, a contract was lost because the guards were unable to stop rampant drug dealing and gang activity.
In many places, including Chicago, Jewish groups have objected to these arrangements.
"You can't excuse or wash away the Nation of Islam's bigotry simply because it's a situation of desperation," said Richard Hirschhaut, director of the Anti-Defamation League's greater Chicago region.
But Chicago Housing Authority Chairman Vincent Lane says he can't refuse to do business with legitimate companies.
"This is not about religion," he said. "It's about trying to stop the violence in public housing. … I'm open to anything that works."
Lane says the neatly dressed, polite guards are good role models and perform well even though they are unarmed.
"The impression," he said, "is if you mess with one of these guys, you're not messing with an individual, you're messing with an organization."
That's the opinion, too, of Miss Bolden, head of the tenants' council at Ogden Courts on the West Side.
"The way they carry themselves with respect," she said, "people tend to give them respect."
While the issue there was the group's presence, it was the Nation of Islam's philosophy that created a stir last year in a far different setting - Wellesley College.
There, a professor taught an Africana studies course using the organization's book "The Secret Relationship Between the Blacks and the Jews," which singles out Jews as being responsible for the slave trade.
A university spokeswoman said there was almost universal objection to teaching the book as historical fact.
In a 1992 New York Times op-ed piece, Henry Louis Gates, chairman of Harvard's Afro-American studies department, called the book "one of the most sophisticated instances of hate literature yet compiled." He said it "depends on an unscrupulous distortion of the historical record."
Other attacks on Jews have been downright bizarre. Gates noted that a New York leader of the Nation of Islam once blamed Jews for destroying the ozone layer.
Anderson, the Pennsylvania professor, says targeting Jews is ironic, considering their presence in the civil rights movement and their support of black political candidates.
Still, Farrakhan admirers and opponents can find common ground in at least one area: They say it's unfair that blacks are asked to denounce the Nation of Islam leader when whites aren't held to similar standards.
There's a "disturbing sense that … black people don't participate so much as individuals as a group, (and) every one member of a group is responsible for what other people do," Reed said.
Others say it's part of a media game - to highlight the sensational and ignore the rest of the message.
"White America wants a bogeyman, and the minister becomes that through the manipulation of the media," said Williams, the Harlem rector.
The criticism makes Farrakhan even stronger among blacks, contends Akbar, who runs the anti-drug program in Chicago.
"Every time they hear something negative about Farrakhan, it boosts their respect for him," he said. "If the media were wise, they'd just stop criticizing him."
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Sharon Cohen is the AP's Midwest regional reporter, based in Chicago.
 Load-Date: March 13, 1994

 

End of Document
