

The White House Takes Issue With Coverage, in Washington and Iraq
The Associated Press
January 24, 1991, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 876 words
Byline: Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The White House is asking the press a question that government asks at times like these: Whose side are you on?
After several days of skirmishing with reporters looking for more details about the effectiveness of allied bombing in Iraq, the administration opened a counterattack Wednesday.
It accused reporters of unnecessarily negative coverage and suggested that one of the country's most respected war correspondents had become a conveyor of propaganda.
"I don't know why you're so intent on proving massive failures of some kind," President Bush's spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, told reporters Wednesday while complaining about a report broadcast by Peter Arnett of Cable News Network.
Today, Fitzwater continued expressing unhappiness over press coverage of the war.
"We all have a great fear because of the way the media is covering this thing that if they shoot down one of our planes, they're going to say the tide has turned," he said.
"We need to get on kind of an even keel in terms of our public psyche that allows us to accept the fact that this is going to last for some period of time, that there are going to be ups and downs," he added.
In his assessment of Arnett's reporting Wednesday, Fitzwater suggested it was aiding Iraq. "We must point out once again that any reports coming out of Baghdad are in effect coming from the Iraqi government,"
"I think it's fair to the American people to know that when they hear these reports, exactly what it is they're seeing," he added.
In his report, Arnett, the only Western reporter permitted by Iraq to remain in Baghdad, said that in August CNN toured an Iraqi facility that manufactured baby formula. He said the Iraqis took him to the facility after the allied bombing started; he found it in ruins.
"The machinery inside was a molten pile. The intact signboard at the entrance to the factory read 'Baby Milk Plant' in English and Arabic," Arnett said.
The American military responded vigorously to the suggestion it had targeted a civilian facility - the only place in Iraq, Arnett said he had been told, capable of producing infant formula in a country that has been subjected to a five-month embargo.
"I can assure you our targeting is strictly limited to military targets," Lt. Col. Mike Scott told reporters in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Air Force Lt. Col. Mike Gallagher said the facility was heavily fortified with "military guards around it, a barbed wire fence."
"Numerous sources have indicated that the facility is associated with biological warfare production," Gallagher said.
Later, in Washington, Gen. Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said, "It is not an infant formula factory no more than the Rabta chemical plant in Libya made aspirin." (The Rabta plant, scene of a mysterious fire in March 1990, was alleged by U.S. officials as a poison gas plant and by Libya as a pharmaceutical factory.)
Added Powell: "It was a biological weapons facility, of that we are sure, and we have taken it out."
The incident illustrated the tensions that arise in wartime when the government bends every effort to achieve its purposes and feels that anything working counter to its goals amounts to comfort for the other side.
But usually such tensions come later in a war. And the situation here is exacerbated by Arnett's rare solo status.
When Harrison Salisbury of The New York Times was admitted to North Vietnam and reported that the Christmas 1966 bombing of Hanoi "has been inflicting considerable civilian casualties in Hanoi and its environs for some time past," an uproar ensued.
Government officials and other newspapers attacked Salisbury's dispatches for failing to specify his sources of information for casualties and bombing damage.
On another occasion during the Vietnam war, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, miffed by the way a newspaper was challenging government accounts of the war's progress, demanded of the paper's correspondent: "Whose side are you on?"
But television's ability to dramatically convey what seems indisputable - because it is told in pictures - complicates the argument.
Another factor is the tension that's already arisen between a press corps seeking information on the effects of the allied bombardment in Iraq and Kuwait and a Pentagon that says releasing that information would aid Iraq.
"Arnett is going to be used" by Iraq, said Jay Rosen at the Gannett Foundation Media Center at Columbia University. "The judgment that has been made is that even that is better than nothing. That's an arguable point and I think people in the news business will argue about t when this (war) is over. What the White House wants to do is argue about it now."
Peter Braestrup, author of several books about military-media relations in wartime, said, "We have to make up our minds - is having a Western reporter over there, however constrained and censored, worth it to the American government and the public rather than having no window at all on what's happening in Baghdad? I think it is."
Michael Schiffler of the Center for War, Peace and the News Media at New York University, said Arnett was functioning "as a vessel" for the government of Saddam Hussein, "but the same thing is true of the Western journalists in Dhahran (Saudi Arabia). They're serving as a vessel too."

 

End of Document
