

The Stage Is Set for Culture Capital
The Associated Press
March 23, 1993, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 773 words
Byline: By RAF CASERT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ANTWERP, Belgium
Body




Eager to shake its image as a haven of xenophobia and intolerance, Antwerp is this year's Cultural Capital of Europe and welcoming the world.
The city is looking well beyond Rubens and its Gothic cathedral during the nine-month festival, which begins at the end of the month. An American rapper, African tribal masks and a Bosnian play on Sarajevo's plight will share the limelight.
"We won't just imprison ourselves within Flemish and European culture," said Eric Antonis, director of the Antwerp 93 extravaganza. "We won't follow the spirit of provincialism."
That may seem logical for a world port with Jewish, Chinese and North African communities; yet it can also seem like an act of courage, given Antwerp's political atmosphere.
In its November 1991 elections, one in four Antwerp citizens voted for the anti-immigrant Flemish Bloc - a stunning rise for the extreme right. The vote cast a cloud over the city - and the festival.
"This city is ravaged by this phenomenon," Mayor Bob Cools told Knack Magazine, making a comparison with the pre-Nazi 1930s.
Artists were stunned as well, seeing the closing off of a city that earned its wealth from being open to the world.
"Suddenly, the whole project faced a question mark. Could we continue when so many said, 'We want foreigners out,"' asked Michel Uytterhoeven, the festival's performing arts coordinator.
But organizers decided to use the circumstances to positive effect - and invited the whole world.
"We can work on the mentality and society through Antwerp 93," Cools said. "By choosing art, we hope to teach people things like beauty, color, sound, living together with other people."
The Flemish Bloc sees it differently.
"It is just exaggerated how the multicultural elements of the city will be played up during the events," said Sen. Roeland Raes, a Flemish Bloc leader.
For the multicultural, there's the inaugural "brass band invasion" during the opening weekend of March 26-28. More than 1,000 musicians will walk through Antwerp's city center, a colorful line more than four kilometers long. Antonis said local bands will be joined by bands from as far away as Cameroon and Madagascar. A fireworks display will add to the festive mood.
But some of Europe is not in a party mood these days, with war tearing apart the former Yugoslavia. So Antonis chose to add a somber note with the world premiere of the play "Sarajevo" on the same weekend.
The play tells how a city containing different cultures can turn into a battle zone where neighbor kills neighbor. Theater director Haris Pasovic, who conceived the play, won't make it for the premiere because he cannot get out of besieged Sarajevo.
With a budget of $ 28.5 million, Antonis said, "The idea of Cultural Capital is only secondary to the idea to be able to do a lot of things with a large amount of money."
The European Community has awarded the title since 1985, when Athens was the first. Madrid had the honor last year.
While drawing from other cities and cultures, Antwerp will also focus on its own heritage, which includes baroque painters Peter Paul Rubens and Jacob Jordaens. Rubens is usually the biggest draw. His house here is always packed with tourists. This month, the Rubens Cantoor exhibit will show work from his studio from the crude, initial sketches to the finished product.
In the recently renovated Gothic cathedral, Rubens' epic painting, "The Raising of the Cross," has regained its old place following a 14-year restoration.
Renovation and restoration are visible throughout the city, from the massive, century-old Centraal Station to the riverfront.
With the festival, Antwerp hopes to restore some of the pride that made it one of the world's foremost cities during the 16th century.
Goods from around the globe swamped the docks, and trade in gems started building Antwerp's reputation as the world's diamond capital. But religious intolerance between Catholics and Protestants soon turned Antwerp into a backwater.
The port regained most of its former glory between 1880 and 1930 when three world fairs and the Olympics were staged here. Nazism and German occupation during World War II put an end to that glory.
"We need to go back to this great tradition and show how beautiful it was when we embraced the world and how wrong it was when intolerance reigned," Antonis said.
Nowadays, 134 nationalities live in Antwerp. Moroccans and Turks are the biggest ethnic groups but still number fewer than 25,000 in a total city population of 465,000.
For the Flemish Bloc, that's still way too many. The party seeks to send North African and Turkish immigrants home, seeing them as a source of crime and unemployment.

 

End of Document
