

The Job: Rebuilding a Nation Filled With Fear and Hatred
The Associated Press
September 18, 1994, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 816 words
Byline: BY PAULINE JELINEK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KIGALI, Rwanda
Body




There is little hope of Rwanda rising from the ashes by itself, and pulling it out will be difficult because the pieces are still smoldering.
Some things can be fixed with money, which the world surely will provide. Money will rebuild the schools, banks and other businesses that were ransacked, looted or mined, and restore the electricity, running water and telephone service returning refugees will need.
Other damage is far more enduring: mothers who wander from orphanage to orphanage in search of surviving children, the one in four Rwandans who are in foreign refugee camps, the other one in four who are homeless within the country, the hundreds of thousands who grieve - many with vengeance in their hearts - for massacred loved ones.
Five months after ethnic Hutu extremists began the slaughter of an estimated 500,000 Tutsi civilians, burning hatred and fear remain. The embers may cool only with time and soul-rending effort.
It will take "years and years and years," said Arturo Hein, representative of the U.N. Development Program in Rwanda. "This country is on the floor."
Rwanda's humanitarian emergencies are not over, but they have been largely brought under control by the work of 85 relief organizations and the expenditure of hundreds of millions of dollars.
Now the new government, the United Nations and the army of aid workers also are taking up the long-term job of rehabilitation.
The U.N. Rwanda Emergency Office, which coordinates relief work, says it has not recommended that refugees and the displaced return home because there are still reprisal killings, bandits and death squads. But the agency is setting up aid and rehabilitation programs in preparation.
The staggering breadth of the wreckage - physical, social and psychic - make the job enormous.
Things that are easy to fix, like damage to structures, are being fixed already. Some gasoline stations, restaurants and a few other small businesses have reopened, but most factories remain closed because of a lack of workers and electrical power.
Austrian and American engineers expect to get the water back on soon, Germans are restarting the power system and Britons are fixing roads and bridges.
Relatively little property damage accompanied the slaughter and the subsequent 14-week military campaign by predominantly Tutsi rebels, who control the new government.
Massacres that wiped out entire villages were accomplished with machetes, clubs, small arms, and occasionally grenades. The ensuing military campaign involved some mortar fire, but not enough to do wide-scale serious damage.
"The physical destruction in this country is not very important," Hein said. "More important than that is the destruction of the human capacity."
Sabena, the Belgian airline, has become the first commercial carrier to resume service to Kigali, but Canadian U.N. troops coordinating relief flights have yet to hand over the control tower to civilians. They said some Rwandans sent to replace them appeared to have no training as air traffic controllers.
During the slaughter, assassins targeted educated and professional Tutsis. That extermination and the later flight of Hutu professionals, managers and skilled workers, will slow the recovery.
Officials trying to revive schools, health programs and other institutions do not know how many teachers, doctors and other professionals were slain or fled. The Justice Ministry says only 40 of 700 judges remain.
What does Rwanda's disaster say of the former elite's leadership?
"A lot of professional people were involved in this one way or another," said Alex deWaal of Africa Rights, based in London.
In a country that is 85 percent rural, many peasants also took part in the massacres. Some believed ethnic hate broadcasts saying they must kill or be killed. Others were told they could have the land or other possessions of their victims.
If the cycle of killing and revenge is to stop, Rwandans must be convinced that justice will be done.
"Those who are really guilty need to be made examples, to show the people that those who do bad things will be punished, to show others that it is bad to kill," said Lazare Ndazaro, assistant to the rehabilitation minister.
Last Tuesday, the government complained that the United Nations had been slow in helping establish a judicial system to try alleged killers.
Few investigators have been provided to gather evidence for cases. Although one arm of the Emergency Office concluded that the killings were genocide, thus requiring an international tribunal, other U.N. officials are still considering whether international trials are warranted.
"The intimidation and other problems can't be stopped until the homework is done, and it's not getting done," said Michelle Kelly, director in Rwanda for International Medical Corps aid organization.
"You have to document what happened and nail those guys - accuse them and then develop a prosecution system."
 Load-Date: September 18, 1994

 

End of Document
