

The Battle For The Mosque: Government vs. Extremists
The Associated Press
December 24, 1993, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 711 words
Byline: By KHALED DAWOUD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




From a mosque in 7th century Arabia, Prophet Mohammed began spreading the faith of Islam. Today, Egypt's government is fighting to keep Muslim extremists from spreading revolution from the mosque.
In Cairo's sprawling Imbaba district, once a militant stronghold, authorities have closed at least a dozen makeshift prayer centers crammed into hallways and alleys that were run by the radical al-Gamaa al-Islamiya.
Throughout the country, the Ministry of Religious Endowments plans to take over more than 7,000 mosques that were controlled by extremist groups, many of whose members have fled or been jailed.
In essence, it's a battle for the soul of Egypt. Islam pervades Egyptian life. In Cairo, the call to Friday noon prayers sounds from loudspeakers in every direction, drowning even the ubiquitous horn-honking. Prayer mats are spread across busy downtown streets to accommodate the faithful. More than 90 percent of Egypt's 58 million people are Muslim.
In downtrodden areas like Imbaba, the fundamentalists seized on the people's traditional faith to implant a more adamant Islam. For the past two years, militants have waged a violent campaign to supplant the secular government with Islamic rule. More than 240 people killed in radical attacks or clashes with police.
But Abdel Ghaffar Mohammed, a resident of Imbaba for 10 years, said he believes the government is loosening the radicals' grip.
"The fall of the Islamic Republic of Imbaba started the day the government took over the Gamaa's mosques," he said.
Mohammed Abdel-Monem Saeed, a political analyst at Al-Ahram Center for Political and Strategic Studies, said the government's approach was astute but faced a major barrier.
"The government is … controlling the message it conveys to the people," he said. "But the problem is that there will always be more mosques than the Ministry of Endowments can control."
In fact, no one knows how many mosques there are in Egypt.
Cairo is known as the city of 1,000 minarets, but there are thousands of small, private mosques in addition to historic and official ones. The same is true throughout Egypt, where those who heed Mohammed's call to build mosques also get tax breaks.
Since mosques are exempted from the law requiring government permits for public gatherings, radicals had ample chance to spread their message in sermons and in talks with young men after the five daily prayers.
Saeed said that since the rise of the Islamic movement in the 1970s, militants gathered recruits and made plans in mosques, and the Interior Ministry accuses "terrorists" of storing weapons there, too.
Al-Gamaa al-Islamiya, or the Islamic Group, saw the mosque as a way to build an alternative to the government. In Imbaba and other poor areas, it opened schools and clinics alongside mosques to serve people largely ignored by the state.
Imbaba, with a population of about 1.2 million, is inhabited mostly by poor southern Egyptians who came to Cairo for jobs and a better life. It grew as a squatter area not officially recognized as part of the city and receiving almost no services.
A year ago, with the radicals tightening their hold on Imbaba, the government sent in armored personnel carriers and about 14,000 troops. They arrested more than 700 suspected leaders of al-Gamaa.
Now, the government is taking over the mosques, putting graduates of state-funded Al-Azhar Islamic University in place of the fiery preachers who railed against government callousness. The mosque doors are closed after each prayer so radicals cannot gather.
But Sherif Wagdy, an 18-year-old student from Imbaba, said the government-paid preachers will not tame the anger of the young.
He went to the radicals' mosque, Wagdy said, as a place "where I can learn the truth" instead of hearing platitudes from preachers at official mosques.
In Imbaba, the government seems to be responding to the public's disenchantment. It is paving streets, building a sewage system and providing electricity.
But Saeed, the political analyst, said this will not end the threat from radical groups unless the government broadens democracy.
"What we need," he said, "is political reform to convince the people of the government's own ideology and understanding of Islam, as opposed to what the Muslim extremists are offering."
 Load-Date: December 24, 1993

 

End of Document
