

The World Watches While America Learns Limits, Seeks Role - An AP Essay
The Associated Press
October 13, 1993, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 732 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




In Somalia, it takes a military blunder, the killing of a dozen U.S. servicemen, the raw television image of a corpse dragged through the streets, to cause Washington to rethink its purpose. The next week, in Haiti, it takes less: A few dozen armed thugs cause an American warship to turn tail.
With the world watching, this arsenal of democracy is learning the humbling lessons of the post-Cold War era. The king of the hill, with the best of intentions and the authority of arms, can still be tripped up by a handful of people if avoiding bloodshed is an overriding American consideration.
It can't be overriding, says an icon of the old school, Helmut Sonnenfeldt, longtime associate of Henry Kissinger. "There's a lot of turbulence around the world now," he said. "If we're going to slow it down and contain it and avoid it we have to make it clear that we're prepared to involve ourselves, not in every case, but in some, and that we don't flinch as soon as we start suffering casualties."
But Americans don't want casualties. The country seemed to give its unconcerned consent to the humanitarian mission of feeding starving Somalis - until American soldiers died. Congress caught the message and President Clinton had to ask the country for six months before he would pull out of Somalia, even if its nation-building mission was still unfinished. In exchange, he could offer only a "reasonable chance" that chaos would not follow.
Compare that to the Cold War's hottest battle, Vietnam, where presidents withstood civil disruption and congressional attempts to set a deadline for U.S. withdrawal. Henry Kissinger's "decent interval" withdrawal agreement with the communists finally came after 68,000 American deaths.
Or even the Persian Gulf, where the mission was simple - oust Saddam Hussein's troops from Kuwait - and Americans gritted their teeth in fear of casualties but understood the goal.
Television becomes a powerful partner in policymaking: That's another lesson in Clinton's effort to frame a post-Cold War response to turmoil that disgusts the world but doesn't threaten it.
Clinton said his stomach turned when he saw television from Mogadishu of the desecration of a GI's body. The country's reaction to pictures of starvation in Somalia was what sent U.S. forces there in the first place. "Our consciences said, 'Enough,"' said Clinton.
TV is two-way, Sonnenfeldt reflects. People in Port-au-Prince and Mogadishu can watch the American debate while it is going on.
But TV is also two-dimensional. The audience doesn't know what it doesn't see. Sen. Bob Graham, D-Fla., just back from Haiti, was asked Wednesday (on television) what he would tell Americans "who see these pictures of Haitians dancing in the street, having turned away our ship, and say, "Hey, if they don't want us, why bother?"'
"Well, what you don't see are the vast majority of Haitians who are cowering in the shadows out of fear," Graham replied.
A country cowering in the shadows doesn't show up on television. A restoration of hope in the Somali countryside - an end of starvation, a million lives saved, the planting of crops, reopening of schools and hospitals - are the proud accomplishments of the U.N. mission, Clinton told the country last week, but those events don't go on television.
Between the Somalia dilemma and the Haiti puzzle last week occurred the underground detonation of a Chinese nuclear bomb, an event that could have fearful consequences. But television wasn't there. The story had a short life span. It did not ring the phones on Capitol Hill.
Clinton won office on domestic issues against a president he accused of indifference to events at home. The Democrats had been out of executive power for 12 years. Clinton's foreign policy apparatus is largely staffed by Carter administration veterans. The president addresses foreign policy when he must, in a crisis, as he did last week on Somalia, but without the passion he brings to such issues as health care.
The demise of the Cold War took away containing communism as the driving purpose of U.S. foreign policy. Clinton & Co. have been struggling to articulate a policy. They still need to decide where to get involved, where to stay out and when to get out when the nation's security isn't threatened but its pride is tweaked by a mob in the streets.
 
 ---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Mike Feinsilber has covered events in Washington since 1968.
 Load-Date: October 13, 1993

 

End of Document
