

The Beirut Marine Bombing, 10 Years Later: Lessons and Questions
The Associated Press
October 21, 1993, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 920 words
Byline: By EARLEEN FISHER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BEIRUT, Lebanon
Body




Saplings now push through the rubble where 241 U.S. servicemen died. From half a mile away, an Islamic sermon wavers faintly from loudspeakers at the Great Mosque.
Behind the ruins, past the sun-scorched weeds, an unintended epitaph survives on a bullet-pocked retaining wall where U.S. Marines had gathered to drink beer and soda pop in a sort of open-air clubhouse.
"Lt. Nairn … Lance Cpl. Iocovino … Lcpl. Kreischer … Lcpl. Wentworth ..." Dozens of names, names of the dead.
The clubhouse wall was never meant as a memorial. This was a place where the living painted their names to declare "I was here" or to mark days until the next troop rotation in a mission "to support democracy" in Lebanon's tangled civil war.
But at 6:22 a.m. on Sunday, Oct. 23, 1983, scores of troops died when a suicide bomber drove an explosives-packed truck through a barbed wire fence and into the lobby of a four-story makeshift barracks.
The building, between runways of Beirut International Airport, collapsed in a cascade of broken concrete. Each floor pancaked explosively onto the one below, trapping sleeping men at every level and spitting parts of bodies into the air.
Less than three weeks ago, echoes of the Beirut barracks disaster were sounded when 18 U.S. servicemen were killed in Somalia, another foreign place where American troops were sent to bring peace and stability. Hundreds of Somalis also died in the Mogadishu fight.
Robert Jordan, a 55-year-old Cincinnati publishing executive, was a Marine Corps major at the Beirut base in 1983. That October Sunday, he had lazed in bed, past the time when he would normally have been eating his weekend omelette in the barracks building 200 yards away. He'd been invited for a later brunch with French forces.
"Suddenly, I heard the biggest explosion of my life, including the rockets we were subjected to in Vietnam," Jordan, now president of the Beirut Veterans of America, recalled this week in a telephone interview. "Everything was covered in fine, gray dust. I saw what I thought was a tree with the branches blown off, but it was the upended body of a Marine whose legs had been very crudely blown away."
This month, Jordan watched television news reports of the Oct. 3 street battle in Mogadishu and said he wept at footage of U.S. soldiers' bodies being dragged through the streets.
"Those men shouldn't have had to die," Jordan said. "It appears that we are doomed to keep repeating our errors over and over again.
"You can see it time and time again when we sent men out on a mission that was ill-defined with inadequate resources and it has resulted in unneeded deaths. We've got to learn the lesson that the military is a viable tool for international diplomacy, but you only play it if you're willing to use it."
This week, President Clinton ordered home the elite U.S. Army Rangers who had been sent to Mogadishu two months earlier to hunt down a fugitive clan leader. Remaining U.S. troops serving with the U.N. force are to be pulled back by next spring.
A decade ago, the Marines pulled out of Beirut four months after the catastrophic bombing. So did the rest of the Multinational Force in Lebanon, which included troops from Italy, Britain and France. The French lost 58 paratroopers to a second suicide bomber the same day the Americans were attacked.
Lebanon's civil war, which started in 1975, would not be declared over until 1990, six years after the last Marine left Beirut. Since then, peace has come to parts of Lebanon, but the political shakeout goes on, as an array of political and sectarian groups jockeys for influence.
At the airport, passenger jets take off, but not to the United States. The U.S. government banned direct travel to and from Lebanon in 1985 after Shiite militants hijacked a TWA jet and murdered a passenger, a U.S. Navy diver, on the runway at Beirut.
Across the road leading to the terminal, a power saw whines in the omnipresent anthem of Lebanon's reconstruction boom.
Standing there at the airport, on the broken ground floor of the bombed-out Marine barracks, on an October Friday, the weekly Islamic holy day, a visitor hears another sound full of portent for Lebanon.
It is the amplified sermon of Sheik Mohammed Hussein Fadlallah. Although he has always denied it, Fadlallah was considered the mentor of Hezbollah, the umbrella for the Iranian-backed Shiite bombers and hostage-takers of the 1980s. His cassettes are sold in Shiite neighborhoods under street murals of Iran's deceased revolutionary patriarch, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.
The last of almost 100 foreign hostages seized in Lebanon were freed in 1992. Hezbollah, committed to disrupting the U.S.-sponsored Arab-Israeli peace process and erasing Israel from the map, now concentrates its guns on Israeli soldiers and their Lebanese militia allies in southern Lebanon.
Last year, it emerged from the shadows to enter politics, winning eight of Parliament's 128 seats. It remains stridently anti-American.
"I believe those who are controlling the decision-making in the United States are crazy," said Hussein Khalil, head of Hezbollah's political arm. "They repeat their mistakes, like the mistakes they made when they came to Lebanon in 1982.
'Now the whole world believes the Americans are beasts who enjoy killing, destruction, bloodletting," Khalil said. "Give us one example of American intervention to enforce a government that has survived."
 
 Eds: Earleen Fisher, AP Chief of Middle East Services, was based in Beirut in 1980-83 and returned to the city for this report.
 Load-Date: October 22, 1993

 

End of Document
