

The War Is Over, but the Hardships Continue
The Associated Press
April 19, 1992, Sunday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 515 words
Byline: By GREG MYRE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LUENA, Angola
Body




In the muddy market square, a one-legged man on metal crutches sells cigarettes one at a time because few people can afford a full pack.
Imported whiskey and beer are plentiful, but there is no fruit for sale. Precious water is stored in the salvaged fuel tank of a MiG fighter plane.
Angola's 16-year civil war ended last May, but in Luena, a once-thriving railroad town, the battle for survival continues.
"There used to be a lot of life in the town," said Victor Borges, a small, white-haired Portuguese who has lived in Luena since the 1950s. "Now there is very little here."
Hundreds of thousands of lives were lost in the Angolan war. The area around Luena, in the remote eastern bush, was among those that suffered most.
The leftist government of President Jose Eduardo dos Santos, supported by the Soviet Union and Cuban troops, fought to a stalemate with the rebels of the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA), backed by the United States and South Africa.
Angola, a potentially wealthy nation in southwest Africa, is to hold its first democratic elections in September. Carrying the vote off successfully could bring a measure of stability the country has not known since independence from Portugal in 1975.
The devastation in Luena, a town of 50,000, illustrates how difficult it will be to turn peace into prosperity. No new buildings have gone up since independence, pastel paint has given way to exposed plaster and walls are scarred by bullets.
Luena's lifeline to the world, the Benguela railway, will take years to repair. Many of the dirt roads outside the town are mined.
Electricity and running water were among the war's casualties. Much of the economy runs on barter, with beer considered the strongest currency.
There is but one doctor, and the hospital lacks many medical supplies and is unsanitary. "The hospital is not a place you'd want to go if you were sick," said Liam Weston, an American who runs a medical aid program.
Among the few people considered prosperous are officers of the former Soviet military, who have remained despite the war's end.
Soviet-built Ilyushin transports still make deliveries to Luena and residents say some of the goods are sold on the black market. All of the several men selling beer and whisky in the public market said their supplies came from the former Soviet officers.
Military goods also are for sale. A slightly used Soviet military truck can be bought for $ 500, but spare parts or gasoline are hard to find.
Political reconciliation appears to be going far better than economic reconstruction. Since the government and UNITA signed a peace accord in May 1991, only sporadic incidents have been reported.
Jonas Savimbi, the rebel leader, recently addressed a rally of more than 5,000 supporters in Luena. In a symbol of the reconciliation, UNITA soldiers and government policemen shared security duties.
A government rally a day earlier also was free of trouble.
Residents say the only serious incidents in recent months involved unpaid government soldiers who demanded money from officers and ransacked their homes.

 

End of Document
