

The Artist-Activist Makes a New Movie
 The Associated Press
November 26, 1995, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1306 words
Byline: By DOUGLAS J. ROWE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




As a kid, Harry Belafonte felt inspired by the Charlie Chaplin films that lampooned the industrial revolution and the Nazis, works not to be confused with the Little Tramp's early, fun movies.
His appreciation for such films as "The Great Dictator" begat the inspiration he got from Sean O'Casey, Arthur Miller, Shakespeare, John Steinbeck and Clifford Odets.
"All of these men are artists who had social and political conscience in everything they did," the 68-year-old entertainer said in his familiar rasp over lunch one recent day.
They knew their plays, books and movies had power and could "lead people to a vision and a truth," said Belafonte, who was taking a break in rehearsing a play at a Harlem theater.
That's why he's always felt you can't separate social reality from art. It also helps explain why he's worked so hard for certain political-social causes over the years: marching with the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. to advance civil rights, working with Nelson Mandela to overturn apartheid in South Africa, helping to organize the "We Are the World" effort for starving Africans and "Hands Across America" for the hungry here. In 1960, President Kennedy named him a cultural adviser to the Peace Corps, and he's served as a U.N. goodwill ambassador since 1987.
As an actor, he's quite the activist these days.
For the first time since "Uptown Saturday Night" two decades ago, Belafonte has starring roles in major movies.
In "White Man's Burden," which opens nationwide Dec. 1, he plays a wealthy industrialist living in a world in which blacks are dominant and whites make up the underclass. He'll also be seen as a 1930s gangster in Robert Altman's upcoming "Kansas City."
"I guess if I really had to make my living exclusively off films, I would perhaps have done much more," Belafonte said, taking small bites of chicken and salad. "But I really didn't like so much of the material that was around and the way the industry was headed and how the industry sought to probe into the inner recesses of the black experience."
He disdained films that focused on inner-city drugs and juvenile violence. Gangsta movies weren't for him.
"I was really quite prepared to accept the fact that the best years of my film life already visited me," he said.
Then two years ago, his friendships with directors Jonathan Demme and Altman led to discussions about subject matter that excited him. Also, the way they wanted to portray blacks "I thought was very healthy," he said.
Altman asked him if he wanted to star in his new movie and Belafonte demurred, telling him: "Well, I haven't been in the batter's box for a long time, and this role is rather demanding and very dimensional and I'm not too sure I can pull it off."
Altman told him to think about it, so Belafonte gave it considerable thought and got to a point, he said, "where I thought if Bob's willing to take the risk and heavily sit on me and prod me, I can pull it off. And I agreed to do it.
"Then my worst fears were realized: He wouldn't prod me and he wouldn't sit on me; Bob doesn't work that way - 'Get out there and swim, kid. Show time!"' Belafonte recalled, laughing ruefully.
His fears about flailing in the deep end of the pool were allayed by his daughter, Gina, who worked as his drama coach for that film as well as "White Man's Burden," which he initially didn't want to do.
"When I first read the script, I thought: 'Very naive, and people can get into a lot of trouble trying to do what this picture is trying to do.' And I backed away from it."
His agent called months later and asked him to reconsider because John Travolta wanted to do it if Belafonte would. Belafonte loved "Pulp Fiction" and figured Travolta "could only make me look good."
Belafonte's film career blossomed in the 1950s with such movies as "Carmen Jones," "The World, the Flesh, and the Devil" and "Island in the Sun." And after honing his acting skills, he found success producing, writing and directing.
He produced the recent HBO film "The Affair," about a black World War II soldier wrongly charged with rape. He'll produce Demme's adaptation of "Parting the Waters," the Pulitzer Prize-winning Taylor Branch book about the civil rights movement. He also is signed on to direct a Turner Network movie, "The Port Chicago Mutiny," about sailors who rebel at being forced to work in a dangerous munitions dump in San Francisco during World War II. And he has at least two other writing-directing projects in the works.
"I'll tell ya: It's not an ego trip - write, produce, write, star. What pushes me a lot is my belief in the subject matter," Belafonte said.
"I feel like I've been resurrected and I'm in second youth and life. But perhaps more importantly than all of that I'm doing pictures that are by and and large on my terms."
It's as if things have come full circle for Belafonte. Sure, most people know him as the handsome balladeer whose signature song gets everyone yelling "DAY-O!" But Belafonte's first love was acting.
Born in Harlem, he spent five years in his mother's native Jamaica starting at age 8. He returned to New York and, after serving in the Navy during World War II, he worked in the garment district and as a janitor's assistant. A night at an American Negro Theater play got him interested in theater and he eventually joined a drama workshop with classmates including Marlon Brando, Walter Matthau, Bea Arthur, Rod Steiger and Tony Curtis.
He made his Broadway debut in "John Murray Anderson's Almanac," getting rave reviews and a Tony award for supporting actor. Soon afterward, he signed a record deal with RCA Victor.
Since then a lot of people have thought he's sacrificed economically and otherwise because of his activism, he said. "I let them linger with that concept sometimes. Most of the time I hasten to tell people I've lost nothing."
But when that comment is met with skepticism, he conceded a downside: "Frustration."
The upside? Befriending and gaining the respect of someone like Mandela, he said, sounding awestruck and delighted by the fact.
"Nelson calls me friend. He'll always take my phone call. And when he's in America, 'Let's have lunch; let's have dinner."'
Belafonte even sounded tickled, too, by how Mandela affectionately calls him "boy."
Calling himself a "cultural worker," Belafonte feels the mandate to make a difference, and thinks all creative people should feel it. "Artists, artists, artists, artists, artists. We are the most powerful force on the Earth. Bigger than the church. ..."
Their importance is illustrated by how "the first thing any corrupt force wants to do in a society is to kill off its intellectuals and its artists. We're the first. Why are we so dangerous? We must be doing something."
Paul Robeson, one of Belafonte's mentors along with Dr. W.E.B. DuBois, once told him: "The function of the art is not only to show life as it is, but to show life as it should be."
Belafonte said that was "glorious" advice, adding: "That's how I get up everyday."
No wonder Sidney Poiter, his best friend since age 19, has said he's "a cauldron of intellectual and social energy. He pours a lot into life and he demands a lot from it."
But Belafonte easily segues into endearing personal asides, like when he refers to Poiter.
"We're a little older now. I've had to go out to California every now and then and wheel him around the garden," he joked, "show him the tulips and the daisies. Help him say: 'Chrysanthemums."'
So for the man whose 1956 "Calypso" album was the first LP ever to sell a million copies, it doesn't much matter that his last hit record came even longer ago than his last big movie role.
"At this time of my life, I'm overendowed with blessings," he said, while acknowledging that the business of political-social activism remains unfinished.
"But there'll always be unfinished business. There's always going to be mischief."
 Load-Date: November 26, 1995

 

End of Document
