

The Contribution of African-American Quiltmakers
The Associated Press
February 8, 1993, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1134 words
Byline: By J.L. HAZELTON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ST. LOUIS
Body




Like the negative space circling the wedding rings that dot one old-fashioned American quilt pattern, the 200-year role of black quilters is emerging as an integral part of the design.
Fueled by the focus on ethnic identity that grew from the civil rights movement, and encouraged by the new feminist tradition of examining "women's work" as art, black quiltmakers are beginning to take their proper place in American folk art.
"Quilting is a fundamental part of the African-American cultural tradition," said Joe Ketner, director of the Washington University Gallery of Art in St. Louis and an expert on 19th-century black art. "Quilting evolved from a strong tradition of weaving in Africa and is still a vital part of African-American culture today."
In the United States, quiltmakers once meant white women. But says Cuesta Ray Benberry, who has spent 15 years researching black quilters, African-Americans have created quilts almost as long as whites.
In fact, the colorful American patchwork quilt traditionally associated with white, Appalachian craftswomen is actually a fusion of black and white techniques, Benberry says.
Eli Leon, an independent scholar and quilt collector in Oakland, Calif., says the study of black quilting sheds light on the history of the craft as a whole. "The African-American tradition has fueled, has inspired the patchwork quilt," he said.
However, the black and white traditions are not identical, he said.
In contrast to a European-American emphasis on the precise reproduction of a traditional pattern, the African-American quilter was more likely to improvise, using scraps to create "decorative patterns that in Africa would have been imbued with symbolic meaning as well as aesthetic value."
Doris Bowman, a needlework expert at the Smithsonian Institution, said the recent focus on blacks, women and other groups often marginalized by historians, led inevitably to studies of the black quiltmaking tradition.
"African-American quiltmaking is diversified as everybody else's quiltmaking," she said.
For Bowman, the study of black quilters is part of a bigger picture. "It influences and is influenced by other studies, like women's work and women's history, black women's history, black history."
Like so many other cultural manifestations - from music to food - a melding of European and West African traditions led to something totally new and wholly American.
Constructed of small blocks of sewn-together fabric scraps, the patchwork quilt typifies the American emphasis on ingenuity and convenience, Benberry said.
"When people say this kind of quilt came over on the Mayflower, it's simply not true," she said. "Quilting in America did come from Europe, but the quilt we know as the traditional American patchwork quilt is not wholly European."
Seventeenth-century Europeans used a three-layered bed covering, often of silk, with a design stitched into it, but it was a luxury item.
It was another group of immigrants, slaves from West Africa, who applied the now-familiar patchwork and quilting techniques to that bedcover.
The West Africans had no need for three-layered bedcovers in their warm homeland. But they, like medieval Asians, quilted their heavy cloth armor, and they wove long narrow strips of cloth and stitched them together to create larger textiles, Benberry says.
The patchwork quilt evolved in America by the mid-18th century.
Benberry, who retired in 1985 after 40 years of teaching in St. Louis public schools, is a historian and lecturer. A member of the Quilter's Hall of Fame, she appears in Who's Who in America and the Smithsonian Institution's Directory of African-American Folklorists.
Delving for information on early African-American quilts, Benberry found that, as with other aspects of black life in America, the historical record is thin.
Most documents, ships' ladings and plantation records, for the most part, identify blacks as only "John," "Mary" or even "Big Mary," Benberry says.
And most black-made quilts don't exist any more; they wore out with use.
What remains primarily are slave quilts made for a white master or mistress and preserved by the white family, she says.
Made and preserved after Emancipation, Benberry is quick to add.
Pre-Emancipation, "I don't think there was all that much recognition of slaves' work," she said.
But after Lincoln's 1863 Emancipation Proclamation, former slaves who stayed with their former owners often became a part of the extended family, and their handiwork was treasured.
One quilt preserved by a white family, circa 1830, has a pattern unlike anything Benberry has ever seen. Its squares each contain a large, fringed flower, something like the stylized ancient Egyptian lotus, and several rose-like buds.
The quilt is part of a show at the St. Louis Art Museum, "Hear My Quilt: 150 Years of African-American Quilt Making." Benberry is curator. Another Benberry show is touring the United States.
Most quilts replicate a traditional pattern - Whig Rose, Wedding Ring, Black Crownes, Crazy - and don't vary from white to black quiltmakers.
Only oral tradition really can distinguish quilts made by blacks from those made by whites. "That's the one true way that you can know, when it's actually handed down in the family," Benberry said.
There are, however, some techniques more common to black quilters. Black quiltmakers, for example, often incorporated a text into their designs.
Faith Ringgold, a painter and the author of the award-winning children's book "Tar Beach," has extended that tradition into her own contemporary work. One of her text works is called "The Dinner Quilt." The pieced, quilted, appliqued work shows a painted family seated around a painted table set for feasting, with painted food and painted place mats bearing the names of great black American women, including Zora Neale Hurston, Sojourner Truth, Harriet Tubman and Bessie Smith.
Four corner panels carry a handwritten narrative about family memory and tradition.
Like Ringgold, young women from the United States, London's Brixton, Canada, the Caribbean and Soweto, South Africa, are redefining the quilting tradition as members of the Women of Color Quilters Network, which Benberry helped found. Often, these artists focus on African designs and techniques.
Meanwhile, more traditional black American artists, including many elderly Southern women, carry on their family's quiltmaking habit.
A quilt by one such artist, Sarah Mary Taylor of Yazoo City, Miss., is called "Timmy, Lassie and Deer."
The jolly appliqued pattern is, of course, all about Lassie, the TV collie, her young master, Timmy, and their romping pursuit of a heavy-antlered deer.
Another Taylor quilt is patterned with the image of cooks, armed with hatchets, wildly chasing panicked chickens across the fabric.
"She sews what she knows," Benberry said.

 

End of Document
