

The Poor and Powerless Are Dying Again in Somalia
The Associated Press
March 30, 1994, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 828 words
Byline: By TERRY LEONARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOGADISHU, Somalia
Body




Cholera victims sprawl across filthy hospital floors or on the ground in a courtyard, shaded from a searing Somalia sun by pieces of brightly colored cloth strung on branches and sticks.
Somalis are dying again, this time of a highly preventable disease. Those who could be helping them are instead making demands for money or political gain.
More than 3,600 Somalis have caught cholera, and their numbers have overwhelmed the feeble health care system. In some areas, the infection rate has increased ninefold in a single week. Most victims are children and their mothers, already razor thin and weakened by the recent famine.
Famine was virtually wiped out with the help of U.N. forces that arrived in 1992. The last American troops participating in the mission withdrew last week.
Now cholera has become Somali's new killer.
"We are at the beginning of an epidemic spreading all over the country. We believe the numbers will continue to rise," said Dr. Muhein Mathias of the World Health Organization.
At least 116 have died and the WHO predicts the epidemic will last another two months. Doctors fear the coming rains, which usually arrive in April, could prolong the season of death.
Cholera is spread through contaminated water. It causes severe diarrhea that leads to dehydration and death. Prevention is the key to ending the epidemic before spring rains help it bloom in the squalid cities.
The United Nations has launched a major campaign to chlorinate wells and to teach Somalis simple hygienic steps that avoid infection.
In a largely illiterate society, U.N. officials sought to enlist the aid of the popular radio stations operated by rival warlords Gen. Mohamed Farrah Aidid and Ali Mahdi Mohamed. But the stations want $ 60 for every public service announcement, said David McLachlan-Karr, the head of the U.N. anti-cholera task force.
Imams ask for money to make such announcements at mosques, said another U.N. official speaking on condition of anonymity. Clan elders and the editors of the city's newsletter-style newspapers demand similar payments, he said.
"There is a misconception about the role of UNOSOM. They think UNOSOM is sitting on billions of dollars and we are keeping it for ourselves," said McLachlan-Karr, using the acronym for the United Nations Operation in Somalia.
When the United Nations tried to arrange for trucks with military escorts to take badly needed medical supplies to the remote village of Dusa Mareb near the Ethiopian border, the drivers demanded $ 5,000 apiece.
"We can't pay that. It is extortion," said McLachlan-Karr.
Clan hatred and mistrust is so deeply rooted, not even a killer disease is a common enemy.
In one hard-hit Mogadishu neighborhood that straddles a sub-clan boundary, French aid workers cannot set up a cholera clinic because neither sub-clan will agree to locate it in the territory of its rival.
The United Nation tries to send its prevention message through a U.N. radio station, loudspeaker campaigns and the distribution of some hundreds of thousands of leaflets and posters.
U.N. Children's Fund spokesman Chris Clark said well-known Somali poets and songwriters have been commissioned to write songs about cholera prevention for the radio.
But some Somalis blame the Western agencies for the growing epidemic.
"We believe UNOSOM and UNICEF are causative agents of cholera," said Abdulkach Ahmed, an official of the Joint Health Authority, a loose organization put together by Aidid's and Ali Mahdi's factions to deal with health issues.
JHA officials said UNICEF's well-chlorination program was a failure and that UNOSOM had not provided enough medical supplies, water and equipment. The authority wants the United Nations to give it money, medicine and equipment to run the anti-cholera campaign.
"Quite frankly I think it is outrageous," McLachlan-Karr said, bristling at suggestions UNICEF had made the epidemic worse. "UNICEF has done a first-class job in chlorination. The problem is the job is too enormous."
"I cannot speak to you without their permission," said a Spanish doctor gesturing to JHA officials at Mogadishu's Karan Hospital, where the 450 cholera patients spill out of the wards and tents and onto the ground in the courtyard. "I don't need any more political problems."
The hospital was crowded, but patients were being cared for. Bottled water seemed in abundant supply. Bottles of intravenous solution hung from the sticks and branches that supported the colorful cloth shades, but patients were not going without.
McLachlan-Karr agreed there were plenty of medical supplies for the asking. The United Nations, he said, anticipated the epidemic and placed medicine and equipment around the country.
Clark says UNICEF, eager to enlist Somali help, will loan the authority some cars and provide other things on the list.
But McLachlan-Karr notes that cars provided earlier to transport the sick to Mogadishu hospitals ended up becoming the personal vehicles of Somali doctors and hospital staff.
 Load-Date: March 30, 1994

 

End of Document
