

THE U.N.'S MOMENT: One-Day Snapshot of a New Empire at Work
The Associated Press
September 11, 1993, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1736 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Body




EDITOR'S NOTE - It once was known for Cold War desk-thumping and Christmas cards. But now the United Nations has the world's center stage. This article, a unique one-day look at U.N. operations, is based on reporting by 15 Associated Press bureaus worldwide.
---
On the remote mid-Pacific atoll of Abeieng, out where the day begins, the United Nations arrives soon after dawn.
Htun Win, U.N. engineer, has landed. More important, so has his trench-digging machine. The islanders, tossing aside their shovels, get down to laying water pipe the easy way. "Finally they'll have clean water," the U.N. development manager says.
The new day moves on, racing around the globe, and in country after country the U.N. legions go about their business:
A pediatrician in China, an agronomist in Zimbabwe, U.N. refugee workers in Liberia's war-bloodied countryside. Nuclear scientists conferring in Vienna. U.N. human rights "watchdogs" keeping an eye on El Salvador's police. Airborne U.N. troops swooping in to hunt for a militia leader in Somalia.
Suddenly - almost overnight, it seems - the world has a new empire on which the sun never sets.
Solvent or not, efficient or wasteful, beloved or berated, the United Nations seems finally to have "arrived." And just how far, just how deep, the international organization is rooting itself in the planet's daily doings can be seen in a snapshot of its activities on just one day, Tuesday, Sept. 7 - a day in the life of the United Nations as reported by Associated Press bureaus worldwide.
Some would say it's gone too far, grown too bureaucratic.
On this day, for example, human rights official Michael Williams is waiting patiently in Cambodia's steamy capital for word from "upstairs" on a new U.N. human rights office in Phnom Penh.
It's scheduled to open in just three weeks. But can it hire five employees, or eight? A query to U.N. officials in Geneva, Switzerland, has now been bounced up to New York headquarters.
"The U.N. is a curious beast," the exasperated Briton says. "In some ways it is sort of an unimaginable bureaucratic machine."
The machine is at full throttle this day at the U.N. centers in Geneva and New York, where the General Assembly convenes in two weeks.
Battalions of bureaucrats reach for their "in" boxes. Diplomats do lunch by the dozens. Organizers put finishing touches on seminars and symposia. Commissions and councils sign off on reports. At the 14-story U.N. University in Tokyo, academics prepare for Wednesday's public forum on "Rethinking Development."
And everywhere the paper spews out.
The vast printing plant, its hum buried beneath the U.N. sculpture garden, produces at least 2 million pages of documents each day. This day's big job: "National Account Statistics," a 430-page report, in 3,325 copies.
Upstairs, in the wood-paneled hush of a U.N. conference room, the General Assembly's budget committee is meeting to consider how to pay for it all.
The U.N. "family" embraces more than two dozen major organs and more than 50,000 employees. The budget for the core organization - not counting such agencies as the World Health Organization and the Food and Agriculture Organization - stands at $ 4.7 billion, most of it for peacekeeping missions. But governments are $ 2 billion in arrears, and some threaten to withhold payments further if they don't see more waste-fighting from headquarters.
"The organization is being stretched, and mistakes are being made," Melissa Wells, U.N. undersecretary-general for administration and management, concedes to the AP. "But we're learning."
The stretch is evident at the daily 10 a.m. meeting of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
Ranged in two circles around their oak conference table, 37 floors above the East River, three dozen people from "DPKO" take a half-hour tour of a world in turmoil, reviewing the day's reports from the growing number of U.N. military operations.
At its end, Dennis Beissel, an American operations chief, observes, "Well, now, we're starting four missions, closing a major one, and expanding another." Then he adds, with the half-smile of a weary administrator, "Any more?"
Could they bear any more?
The perils and pitfalls of peacekeeping, growth sector of the new U.N. empire, are clear in the day's AP reports:
In Somalia, even before the sun reaches Mogadishu, helicopters carry 50 U.S. Army Rangers into the hunt for anti-U.N. warlord Mohamed Farrah Aidid. The Rangers, part of a U.N. strike force, drop in on a suspected command center, exchange fire with militiamen, suffer two wounded - but don't find Aidid.
In Cambodia, a peacekeeper from Cameroon is killed when his vehicle runs over a land mine left over from the civil war. He is the 20th U.N. fatality in the 18-month-old mission.
Other U.N. troops, these from Britain, hunker down this Tuesday in their barracks in Vitez, Bosnia-Herzegovina, as Croat and Muslim forces battle nearby. A mortar round wounds one peacekeeper.
Back in New York, at 3:10 p.m., U.N. peacekeeping chief Kofi Annan brings together his top deputies for a 50-minute meeting on the former Yugoslavia: How can the operation be expanded if necessary?
The undersecretary-general, a soft-spoken career U.N. man from Ghana, later tells the AP that demands for peacekeeping are growing too rapidly. "We're finding it difficult to get the troops we need," he says.
Not all peace missions are under siege or undermanned.
On this morning atop the sun-lit Golan Heights, between Israel and Syria, commanders of the Austrian-Canadian-Finnish-Polish U.N. force are putting new troops through a day of training. For 19 years, this multinational unit has kept combatants apart.
"I think there wouldn't be peace if this mission weren't here," says Canadian Col. Douglas Lynch.
Peacekeeping takes more than troops, however. It also takes diplomacy.
The U.N. secretary-general, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, lands at New York's Kennedy airport this morning after a week in Europe, where he has met with Israeli, Haitian, French and Iraqi officials in his role as the world's chief peace promoter.
After a few final meetings at the U.N. Secretariat, Boutros-Ghali puts a stop to the nonstop whirl and retires to the secretary-general's Sutton Place mansion to rest.
Even for its chief executive, the United Nations may have gotten too big. Its far-flung operations cannot all be controlled from Boutros-Ghali's 38th-floor office. Many agencies, in fact, obtain government financing independently, and simply file annual reports to U.N. oversight bodies.
For the 184-nation organization, the challenges are growing more complex as the world moves deeper into the post-Cold War age.
In Liberia, for example, the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees office is pushing hard this day for air drops of food to people who otherwise might starve in isolated Lofa County.
More than 250,000 Liberians are endangered, pinned down between factions in a civil war. But rebel bands are raiding aid convoys.
"See, we humanitarian workers have to expect hurdles created by the very people we serve," says frustrated U.N. refugee official Moses Okello.
Private aid groups complain, however, that the United Nations is moving too slowly in the West African nation's refugee emergency, that it is too sensitive to the politics of the warring parties. It's a complaint heard in other war zones, too.
Where peace prevails, U.N. specialists can more easily go about fulfilling the U.N. Charter's commandment to "promote social progress and better standards of life."
Out in the Pacific island nation of Kiribati, the U.N. Development Program's Htun Win is cajoling tradition-bound villagers to abandon their contaminated household wells, a source of cholera, and help his team build new water systems.
"They were reluctant to work as volunteer laborers," the Burmese engineer tells the AP by satellite telephone relay. "But with the new trench excavator, they're excited."
In China's Hebei province, Dr. Pang Ruyan, a UNICEF pediatrician, treks to Xiabeitou village this morning to take blood samples from 100 children, part of a study to learn whether Vitamin A doses can help fight children's diseases.
The peasants seem to welcome the U.N. interest. "When we got there, the village people were waiting for us," she says.
On the other side of the globe, other peasants, hundreds of them, line up outside an eye clinic in Lima, Peru, awaiting free treatment for glaucoma or cataracts, paid for by the WHO's regional health organization.
Other specialists elsewhere are taking the United Nations into still new areas.
At the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna, Austria, part of the U.N. "family," experts sit down this morning to a second day of meetings to review findings - and assess dangers - from inspections of Russia's Chernobyl-type nuclear plants.
Deep in Venezuela's Amazon jungle, meanwhile, environmental researchers sponsored by the U.N. Development Program take an inventory of plants, animals and 19 Indian tribes - to learn what must be saved from overdevelopment.
To the northwest, in El Salvador, human rights protection tops the day's U.N. agenda.
A Chilean lawyer and Italian policeman, members of a U.N. mission monitoring the peace in that Central American nation's civil war, don their baby-blue U.N. jackets and go off to investigate reports that police are threatening strikers who occupy a San Salvador hospital.
"We want to see whether the police are using force," says lawyer Mariana Allendes. They aren't.
But while the United Nations stretches its helping hands farther, its pockets grow emptier.
Brian Scoullar, a Food and Agriculture Organization scientist in Zimbabwe, up at dawn this day, spends part of it checking peasants' newly irrigated bean fields. But money is on his mind - his three-year budget was just cut by 25 percent.
"We may have to redefine the objectives of the whole thing," says the unhappy Australian. "It's very demoralizing."
Back in Cambodia, Williams, chain-smoking his way through his day, could be demoralized, too. His mission's vehicles are being stolen. Headquarters hasn't funded the new human rights office. In fact, the New York accountants are dunning him for personal phone calls made by long-departed colleagues.
But Williams, 44, insists his U.N. work is the most satisfying of his career. And he foresees many more days in the life of the United Nations, because for all its sprawl and shortcomings, he says, "it's the only game in town."
 Load-Date: September 11, 1993

 

End of Document
