

This Is Not the Anti-Iraq Coalition of 1991
The Associated Press
January 18, 1993, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 715 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Western-Arab coalition that mustered the political will and military muscle to smash Iraq's army two years ago could be passing into history even as the United States maintains unrelenting military pressure on Iraq.
The Arabs, many of whom joined in the Persian Gulf War to liberate Kuwait, did not participate in the attacks President Bush ordered on anti-aircraft installations in southern Iraq on Wednesday and on a dormant nuclear fabricating plant eight miles south of Baghdad on Sunday.
Some Muslim governments in the Middle East were even mildly critical of Wednesday's raids. By contrast, the foreign minister of Israel, Shimon Peres, applauded the bombings as "a demonstration of international strength against the aggression of a dictator."
"The reaction of Jordan and Egypt was not as supportive as we would like it to be," Rep. Lee H. Hamilton, chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, said Sunday before U.S. cruise missiles struck near Baghdad.
Hamilton, D-Ind., said on CBS-TV that the Clinton administration faced "a tremendous political challenge … to keep the unity of the coalition together, to keep the United Nations together, with all the signs of fraying around the edges."
Donald McHenry, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations during the Carter administration, said the constant hammering of Iraq "in the long term can undermine the unity of the United Nations and the coalition forces."
McHenry, in a CNN interview, said Iraqi President Saddam Hussein was being built up among his own people, partly because of civilian casualties in the U.S. raids, while other Arab countries' support for the United States grew weaker.
"Slowly, but surely, we may have to re-evaluate the whole situation," he said.
More than two dozen nations joined the United States two years ago in the war to force Iraq out of Kuwait and deter any threat to Saudi Arabia's oil fields. Egypt and Syria contributed tens of thousands of troops. Bases in Saudi Arabia and in Turkey, a non-Arab but predominantly Muslim NATO ally, contributed to the military victory.
But the United States now is operating with strong and direct support only from Britain and France, and the legal basis for bombing Iraq is not as clear as it was after Saddam's forces invaded Kuwait.
The attack Sunday was defended by Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, as a response to Iraq's refusal to cooperate with U.N. weapons inspectors and also as "derivative" of the resolutions approved by the U.N. Security Council at the end of the Gulf War.
The attack Wednesday followed a Jan. 6 ultimatum to Saddam to remove surface-to-air missiles from a so-called no-fly zone established by the United States, Britain and France - not by the Security Council - to protect Shiite dissidents in southern Iraq.
However, the White House had reported on Jan. 9, four days before allied warplanes struck, that Iraq had "backed down" by dispersing the missiles.
Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz on Saturday called the no-fly zone in the south and another in the north designed to protect Kurds "the main issue in the current confrontation."
He said Iraq had no intention of challenging the United Nations or violating Security Council resolutions but would fight to regain control of its airspace. "The imposition of no-fly zones is not a United Nations decision," Aziz said.
If President-elect Clinton keeps up the bombing raids - and his statement supporting Sunday's missile attack suggests he will - U.S. ties to the Arab world could be strained even as Clinton tries to promote a peace settlement in the Middle East.
Clinton said the missile strike was "appropriate and forceful." His press secretary, Dee Dee Myers, said the incoming administration was "prepared to continue taking appropriate action until Iraq complies."
He may score some points with the Arabs and Turkey by providing more support to Bosnia's Muslims in their war with Serbs. Clinton, for instance, has proposed providing weapons to the Muslims.
There is no sign yet the Arabs would quit U.S.-sponsored peace talks with Israel in some demonstration of brotherhood with Iraq. But their participation is based on confidence in and strong ties with the United States.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Barry Schweid has covered diplomacy for The Associated Press since 1973.

 

End of Document
