

Thumbnails of the Some of the TV Reporters Covering the War
The Associated Press
January 27, 1991, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1205 words
Byline: By SCOTT WILLIAMS, AP Television Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The war with Iraq has put Americans in daily contact with a range of television faces, many of them new. Here are some capsule biographies:
 
 In Baghdad:
 
 PETER ARNETT - The stocky, balding Arnett was widely respected among reporters long before he and CNN colleagues John Holliman and Bernard Shaw became famous by covering the war's outbreak from their Baghdad hotel.
His colleagues were not surprised when he elected to stay in Baghdad, under Iraqi censorship, to continue his reports. He has been with CNN since 1981.
A native of New Zealand, he covered the Vietnam War for The Associated Press from 1962 to 1975, winning a Pulitzer Prize in 1966. He also covered the Jonestown massacre in Guyana and fighting in Afghanistan, El Salvador and Nicaragua.
 
 At the Pentagon:.
 
 WOLF BLITZER - A CNN iron man who on some days has seemed to work around the clock, the bearded Blitzer has been covering the Pentagon throughout the gulf crisis and, like many CNN correspondents, also has been on duty for the network's call-in shows.
Blitzer, a native of Buffalo, N.Y., was kidded in a "Saturday Night Live" sketch for the "worst media name" of the crisis. ("Obviously the guy made it up for the war.").
The author of two books, he has worked as a reporter in Washington for nearly 20 years. Before joining CNN in March 1990, he was Washington bureau chief for The Jerusalem Post.
His Mideast assignments included the first Israeli-Egyptian peace conference in 1977 and the final negotiations in 1979. In 1982, he covered the withdrawal of PLO and Syrian forces from Beirut.
 
 FRED FRANCIS - NBC's defense expert, he was assigned to the Pentagon in 1984 after two years covering the State Department. He covers national security issues and was the pool reporter for U.S. TV in the Panama invasion,
He has broken major stories on the Iran-Contra affair, Libya's poison gas plant and the explosion aboard the USS Iowa.
He joined NBC in 1975, and has covered civil war in Lebanon, the Nicaraguan overthrow of Somoza, the Iranian revolution and U.S. Embassy takeover, and many other news events overseas.
 
 DAVID MARTIN - CBS' calm, authoritative ace at the Pentagon since 1983, Martin began his news career as a CBS researcher in 1969. He rejoined the network in 1983 from the Washington bureau of Newsweek magazine, where he had covered defense and intelligence issues.
Previously, he had worked for the Washington bureau of The Associated Press and was a member of the news cooperative's special assignment team.
He's also the author of two books, including "Wilderness of Mirrors," about the secret battles of the CIA and KGB.
 
 In Saudi Arabia:
 
 RICHARD BLYSTONE - CNN's London correspondent, the droll, unflappable 'Bly' has covered such diverse events as the Iran-Iraq war, the crash of Pan Am's Flight 103 in Lockerbie, Scotland, and the wedding of Britain's Prince Charles and Princess Diana.
In 1985, he covered the TWA hostage crisis from Beirut and Paris. Before joining CNN in 1980, he worked for The Associated Press, covering New York City, Saigon, Bangkok and London.
 
 ARTHUR KENT - A full-time NBC correspondent in Rome since August 1989, Kent had been a free-lance reporter, writer and camerman for NBC in Afghanistan, Pakistan, the Soviet Union and China since the summer of 1986.
He traveled with the last Soviet combat unit to leave Afghanistan and covered the December 1988 Armenian earthquake and China's crackdown at Tiananmen Square in May 1989.
Kent was 21 in 1976, when he became the Canadian Broadcasting Corp.'s youngest-ever correspondent.
 
 CHARLES D. JACO - A CNN correspondent in Miami, the balding, mustachioed Jaco covered the Panama invasion and capture of Manuel Noriega before his Saudi Arabia posting and his high-anxiety, rooftop reports of Scud missile attacks.
He joined CNN in 1988, after nine years as a correspondent with the NBC radio network. He was news director of WXRT radio in Chicago from 1976 to 1979, and has written for many national publications.
His more than 40 journalism awards include the Peabody Award.
 
 In Israel:
 
 LINDA SCHERZER - A Jerusalem-based CNN correspondent since April 1988, she has covered the intifada, Israeli politics and the aftermath of the Temple Mount shootings.
Before that, Scherzer covered Vermont for WPTZ, an NBC radio affiliate in Plattsburgh, N.Y., for three years.
A native of Montreal, Canada, she earned her undergraduate degree from Brandeis University and her master's in journalism from Northwestern University.
 
 DEAN REYNOLDS - ABC's chief correspondent in Tel Aviv since 1986, Reynolds has covered London, the Pentagon and Washington since joining the network in July 1984 from CNN, where he was White House correspondent.
Son of the late ABC newsman Frank Reynolds, he worked his way up through the ranks of United Press International, starting in the news service's Baltimore bureau in 1972 and leaving UPI as its White House correspondent in June 1982.
 
 The Analysts:
 
 Adm. WILLIAM J. CROWE, USN (ret.) - ABC's folksy consultant on national security and international affairs since January 1990, Crowe was Gen. Colin Powell's predecessor as chairman of the Joint Chief of Staff from 1985 to 1989.
Before the U.S.-led attack on Iraq, he was among several senior retired military officers who appeared at congressional hearings to urge U.S. restraint during what then was a crisis, not a war.
Both scholar and sea dog, he is a tenured professor of geopolitics at the University of Oklahoma. His Ph.D. in politics is from Princeton University, his master's from Stanford University, his B.S. from the U.S. Naval Academy.
He was commissioned in 1946 and commanded the submarine USS Trout from 1960 to 1962. He became deputy chief of naval operations in 1977, following two years as commander of Middle East forces in Bahrein.
 
 Gen. GEORGE B. CRIST, USMC (ret.) - CBS' military analyst, Crist was a four-star general when he planned and directed the 1987-88 Persian Gulf escort and retaliatory operations during the Iran-Iraq war.
In the 1950s, he served in all three active Marine divisions and was a White House aide under President Eisenhower; in the 1960s, he fought in Vietnam and was aide to the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Earle Wheeler.
In the '70s, he commanded infantry battalions in the Atlantic and Pacific and began his involvement in NATO planning with the Fleet Marine Forces, Atlantic, where he rose to become deputy commander.
In 1980, he joined the Joint Chiefs as vice director, later participating in the Grenada invasion. Crist in 1985 became the first Marine to be a unified commander, in charge of military affairs in the Near East and Southwest Asia.
 
 GARY G. SICK - NBC's consultant served on the National Security Council staff under presidents Ford, Carter and Reagan, and was principal White House aide for Iran during the Iranian revolution and hostage crisis.
Sick holds a doctorate in political science from Columbia University, where he is an adjunct professor of political science and a fellow of the Research Institute on International Change.
The author of "All Fall Down: America's Tragic Encounter with Iran," Sick retired from the U.S. Navy as a captain, with service in the Persian Gulf, North Africa and the Mediterranean.
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto NY4

 

End of Document
