

U.N. Conference Approves Plans But Bickers to the End over Sex
The Associated Press
September 13, 1994, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 692 words
Byline: By EILEEN ALT POWELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




The U.N. population conference today approved a 20-year plan aimed at controlling the world's growth and stimulating economic development. Quibbling over language on sex went on to the last minute.
The Program of Action broadens the approach to population control by putting it for the first time in the context of economic development, environmental protection and - especially - empowerment of women.
The non-binding program was adopted by consensus, but more than 20 delegations said in the final day's speeches that they had objections over abortion and reproductive health provisions.
The Vatican, which led the fight to water down abortion and reproductive health provisions, said it would go along with parts of the document, a softening of its rejection of U.N. population documents in 1974 and 1984.
But the Vatican delegate, Archbishop Renato Martino, said the Holy See could not support any sections "recognizing abortion as a dimension of population policy and primary health care." He also rejected wording the Vatican reads as approving extra-marital sex.
The plan isn't required to be followed by the nations that agree to it. But delegates say it carries a "moral weight" and gives new ammunition to politicians and private groups to lobby for change.
Disputes over the report's references to abortion and other reproductive issues have dominated the nine-day conference. Delegates have struggled to draft a document that satisfies all delegations.
Still, not all the 182 nations, territories and religions represented at the conference that began Sept. 5 were happy with the final product. At least 16 delegations said in plenary speeches that they had objections.
It was not immediately clear how many of the objections would be attached as formal footnotes of reservation to the document.
In announcing the Vatican's stand, Martino said the Holy See "wishes in some way to join, even if in an incomplete or partial way," the consensus on the report.
He said the Vatican would support sections on the family, economic development, empowerment of women and migration.
Muslim countries, including the host nation Egypt, criticized inclusion of the word "individuals" in a section on sexual activity. Muslims have argued this suggests approval for extra-marital relations, which is against Islamic law.
The leader of the Iranian delegation, Mohammed Ali Taskhiri, argued that "this document, with all the positive aspects it contains, does not take into consideration the role of religious beliefs and systems."
He and other speakers said they would by guided by religious law, and not the conference document, on the issue.
El Salvador, Malta and Colombia expressed reservations about a long-debated chapter on abortion, aimed at ensure that the procedure was carried out safely. They were joined by several Muslim countries, including Iran, Libya and Yemen.
The plan broadens the approach to population control by including, for the first time, economic development, empowerment of women and environmental protection.
Changing language to accommodate the Vatican and Muslim nations brought complaints from some Western delegations that wanted stronger stands on sexual rights. And Third World countries complained not enough time was given to their concerns, especially development.
When delegates finally finished work on chapter eight of the report, which contained the contentious abortion section, the audience broke into applause.
Fred Sai, a Ghanan official who chaired the drafting committee, emphasized that the Program of Action makes clear that it is up to each nation to decide how to carry it out.
The U.N. International Conference on Population and Development had a mandate to find ways of curbing world population, which is growing at a record rate of more than 90 million people a year.
The focus was on women - educating them, giving them health and family planning services, ensuring their economic security - and finding the funds to do it.
The action plan sets an agenda for the next two decades and calls for annual spending of $ 17 billion by the year 2000 for population control and development, or about triple the current expenditure.
 Load-Date: September 13, 1994

 

End of Document
