

U.S. Warplanes in Skies; Marines Prepare To Hit the Beach
The Associated Press
December 7, 1992, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 896 words
Byline: By G.G. LABELLE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOGADISHU, Somalia
Body




Somalis got their first look at U.S. power Monday when Navy warplanes roared over Mogadishu, and Pentagon sources said Marines would land at dawn Wednesday to begin helping the starving people.
The 1,800 Marines standing offshore on three Navy ships are the vanguard of a multinational rescue mission in the war and famine-wracked nation. But Pentagon sources said most of the 28,000 U.S. soldiers and Marines committed to the operation might not begin arriving for several days.
Robert Oakley, a special U.S. envoy and former U.S. ambassador to Somalia, arrived Monday to meet with leaders of Somalia's warring clan leaders and with international aid workers to outline plans for the U.S.-led operation. He stressed that Washington envisioned a humanitarian effort and not a military one.
Oakley told reporters the U.N.-authorized operation would be the opposite of Desert Storm, the mammoth military campaign that dislodged the Iraqi army from Kuwait nearly two years ago.
"We hope it will remain a humanitarian operation all the way through, because the purpose is to protect deliveries of relief supplies, relief workers and relief recipients," Oakley said.
Aid groups say half the food donated for starving Somalis has been stolen by the gangs of gunmen who have held sway during a nearly 2-year-old civil war. An estimated 300,000 Somalis have died from starvation, disease and fighting this year, and 250,000 more are feared to be in imminent danger.
Underscoring the chaos, rival militiamen battled for a second day in Baidoa, one of the inland towns hit hardest by famine. A spokesman for the international relief agency CARE, Rick Grant, said at least 48 people were killed and 50 wounded Monday.
Grant said at least 28 and possibly 34 died in fighting Sunday between feuding clansmen.
Michael McDonagh, an official of the Irish relief agency Concern, said relief workers feared Somali militiamen would go on a last-minute spree of shooting and stealing.
"They know that come tomorrow the gravy train is over. The next 24 hours are going to be very crucial," McDonagh said.
U.S. troops and smaller contingents from France, Canada, Italy, Egypt, Turkey, Kuwait and other nations hope to impose calm so relief supplies can move into the countryside in safety.
American officials have said U.S. troops will fight if necessary. But Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, said Monday that the initial response from Somali warlords had been better than expected.
"Many of the problems we had feared most have not materialized," Fitzwater said.
Fewer young gunmen have been on the streets of Mogadishu in recent days, and there have been reports that many have moved inland to avoid foreign troops.
Kenya announced Monday that it closed its border with Somalia to prevent armed Somalis from seeking refuge. Ethiopia took the same step over the weekend. The two nations abut nearly all of Somalia's land frontier, which runs across thinly populated semi-desert.
U.S. officers in the Navy's amphibious task force said the first mission of the Marines off Somalia's coast would be to take control of the seaport and airport at Mogadishu. The Marines - who arrived in the area last week - will come ashore in helicopters and amphibious vehicles.
They will first secure the airport in Baidoa, 200 miles to the west, to pave the way for the Army's 10th Mountain Division.
Two Navy F-14s flew over Mogadishu, dropping orange flares to defend against any possible attack by militiamen armed with shoulder-mounted missiles. Pentagon sources said F-14s from the aircraft carrier USS Ranger flew reconnaissance missions over Somalia scouting for the Marine landing.
Cable News Network said a team of U.S. air traffic controllers landed about 30 miles west of Mogadishu on Monday to help guide in planes that will bring more troops and supplies once the Marines secure airfields.
Oakley, a former ambassador to Somalia, met with U.N. Special Envoy Ismat Kittani and with officials of international aid agencies. He said he would meet Tuesday with the two strongest warlords, Mohamed Farrah Aidid and his clan rival, Ali Mahdi Mohamed, who control halves of the city.
A source who spoke on condition of anonymity said Oakley told aid workers that the military would bring in engineering equipment to rebuild roads, bridges and port facilities.
U.N. and relief workers do not think the first 1,800 Marines will face widespread opposition simply because that is a huge force by Somali standards. A supply ship also was bringing M1-A1 tanks, armored assault vehicles and artillery for the Marines.
But aid agencies prepared evacuation plans just in case fighting erupted. If there is trouble, the approximately 200 relief workers in Mogadishu would gather in two locations to be evacuated by a small force of Pakistani soldiers who have been in the city since September as U.N. peacekeepers.
The initial Marine force is to be followed by 16,000 Marines from California and 10,000 light infantrymen from the 10th Mountain Division based at Fort Drum, N.Y.
Diplomatic sources in neighboring Djibouti said a paratroop company of 150 French Foreign Legionnaires would arrive soon after the first Marine contingent and be followed by 850 more French soldiers and Legionnaires a day later. France plans to send more than 2,000 soldiers to Somalia, and other nations also have pledged units of several hundred each.

 

End of Document
