

U.S. 'Plucking the Bird' of Violence to Reduce Warlords' Power
The Associated Press
February 19, 1993, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 705 words
Byline: By TOM COHEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOGADISHU, Somalia
Body




U.S. special envoy Robert Oakley said Friday that freezing the military might of Somalia's warlords has reduced their political support, part of what he calls his "plucking the bird" strategy for calming the devastated nation.
Oakley defines his approach as building up the authority of clan leaders and village elders while using force to quash any military challenges from the nation's once all-powerful warlords.
The strategy has begun to transform the political terrain in Somalia without instigating a major clash, the 61-year-old career diplomat said in an interview with The Associated Press.
"You take one feather at a time and the bird doesn't think there's anything terrible going on. Then one day he finds he can't fly," Oakley said. "We did that from the beginning."
"It's not perfect, but it's not bad in a little over two months in making clear that political power no longer comes from the barrel of a gun," he said.
Operation Restore Hope, the U.S.-led military mission to secure Somalia so relief aid can reach starving millions, has halted the clan warfare that raged for almost two years after the 1991 ouster of dictator Mohammed Siad Barre.
With U.S. forces planning to turn control of the mission over to U.N. peacekeeping troops, attention has focused on how to keep the peace so relief agencies and the United Nations can start rebuilding.
Relief officials have praised the U.S. accomplishments, but some fear a return to chaos, clan feuds and looting once the American soldiers leave. Coalition forces have seized only a few thousand weapons in a nation teeming with arms from the Cold War support of both Soviets and Americans.
Oakley, who will leave Somalia at the end of March, said Operation Restore Hope has accomplished its chief goal of enabling humanitarian aid to be distributed to the starving, saving lives.
In addition, he said, the coalition forces wanted to create stability so the United Nations could oversee Somalia's transition from civil war to a structured society.
Since the start of the mission in December, Oakley has explained to faction leaders that the U.S.-led troops wanted to avoid a fight but would use their superior weapons and training if necessary.
The point was emphasized when U.S. helicopters destroyed several vehicles belonging to one warlord who ignored a warning to halt his advance on rival forces.
At the same time, the coalition forces assisted relief efforts and worked with clan elders and other local leaders, involving them in the first steps toward rebuilding their communities.
"We've worked very hard to avoid any immediate, direct, angry confronations with the military leaders here because we didn't want to generate any popular hostility," said Oakley, a former ambassador to Lebanon, Somalia, Zaire and Pakistan.
"On the other hand, we felt it was essential for the future of Somalia that these people be brought down in size and influence, politically as well as militarily, so that war could not resume," he said.
The strategy appears to be working. Military alliances no longer have power, causing allegiances to shift.
For example, some members of the United Somali Congress - divided between factions loyal to rival warlords Ali Mahdi Mohamed and Mohamed Farrah Aidid - are seeking to reconcile the party even though Ali Mahdi and Aidid show no interest.
"Your big coalitions are in trouble," Oakley said. "The leaders are looking for new bases of support. Everybody's looking around for new partners."
Now, he said, the U.N. forces taking over from American troops must be tough enough to prevent any bids by warlords to gain land and power.
He defended turning over the mission to the United Nations as a sound political decision in line with the original plans laid out last year.
"The longer the United States takes the lead, the more it costs U.S. taxpayers," Oakley said, noting America now pays 85 percent of the mission's expenses, compared with 30 percent once it is under U.N. control. He estimated the total U.S. bill at up to $ 2 billion.
"If it's seen as trying to stick the United States with more than we think is our fair share, and our fair share is a huge amount compared to what anybody else has put in here, at that point you get a backlash," he said.

 

End of Document
