

U.S. Transport Planes are the Tractor-Trailers of the Military
The Associated Press
December 11, 1992, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 517 words
Byline: By RUTH SINAI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




They lumber rather than swoop. They're bulky rather than sleek. They're your fuddy-duddy uncle, rather than your jet-setting aunt.
The C-5, C-141 and C-130 cargo planes have fancy names like Galaxy, Starlifter and Hercules, but they don't have the star quality of the F-16, F-117 and F-15 fighters made famous by the Persian Gulf War.
Yet they're the lifeline of the relief operation in Somalia, no-frills flying tractor-trailers that ferry U.S. troops, equipment, supplies and food in an "air bridge" linking the United States and Somalia.
The other links of the bridge are the KC-10 and KC-135 tankers, in-flight refueling stations that gas up the cargo planes on their journey.
The Air Mobility Command that operates the transporters is gearing up for 20 missions a day into Mogadishu, to deliver between 25,000 and 30,000 troops, said a spokeswoman, Maj. Ann Simpson.
The cargo-only C-5 Galaxy can carry bridges, tanks, helicopters and hospitals in a cargo bay the size of an eight-lane bowling alley.
It's expensive - costing about $ 141 million - and it stands as high as a six-story building. The C-5 is almost as long as a football field, but it handles beautifully, said Col. James M. Murphy, who has piloted Galaxies and Starlifters.
On the ground, it feels like driving a motor home, said Murphy. In the air, it's almost as smooth as flying a fighter jet.
But the missions of these two types of planes are very different. And Murphy spoke of a "friendly rivalry" between fighter and transport pilots.
"A fighter pilot will say he delivers the punch. But we say, you don't deliver anything until we deliver it first," said Murphy, director of operations management at the Air Mobility Command at Scott Air Force Base, Ill.
As a rule, the more skilled, more aggressive pilots end up on fighters, he said. The more patient ones, willing to endure long flights and landings in unfamiliar lands, become transport pilots.
Fighter pilots are perceived as more glamorous, Murphy said, but they couldn't do their job without the equipment flown to wherever they operate by transport planes.
The C-141 Starlifter, like the Galaxy, is a jet-powered, long-range transporter, but it's used to ferry both equipment and people. The turboprop Hercules is designed for shorter flights and for lighter cargo or troop loads and can land on short runways or even dirt roads. All three planes are manufactured by Lockheed-Georgia Co.
The C-130 is being used to deliver food for starving Somalis. The food, which can also be parachuted down if the plane cannot land, is picked up in Europe or Africa.
A typical journey to Somalia for a C-141 transporter starts out at Camp Pendleton in southern California, where it takes on as many as 200 Marines and their equipment. Flying east, the Starlifter refuels in the air off the coast of Maine, crosses the Atlantic and refuels again off Spain.
It then proceeds to a Middle Eastern country to change crew and make the last, short hop to Mogadishu. The Air Force declines to identify the Middle Eastern stop, but it's believed to be Egypt.
In all, it's a 21-hour trek over 8,500 miles.

 

End of Document
