

UN Envoy Hopes for the Best, Wary of the Worst
The Associated Press
October 20, 1993, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 667 words
Byline: By PAUL ALEXANDER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOGADISHU, Somalia
Body




The U.N.'s special envoy looks at Somalia a year from now and sees a country conducting a census, putting the final touches on a new police and court system and preparing for national elections.
But Jonathan Howe also sees the very real possibility that chaos, civil war and starvation could return to plague the countryside.
The retired U.S. admiral has been buffeted by accusations that the United Nations has bungled the multinational intervention in Somalia since it assumed control from the United States in May.
Still, he remains upbeat, accenting U.N. accomplishments in other parts of the country even as southern Mogadishu remains tense, warlord Mohamed Farrah Aidid continues to churn out anti-U.N. rhetoric, and the United Nations searches for a way out of a quagmire.
"The vast majority of the country does support the United Nations and does want to recover from all of the heartache and pain they've gone through," Howe said in an interview Tuesday.
"Compared with a year ago, there has been amazing progress," he said. "But it's fragile and it could easily go back to where it was."
When foreign troops came to Somalia in December, their mission was to get food past warring clans to the starving. But when 24 Pakistani peacekeepers were killed in ambushes in June, the focus of the mission changed to capturing Aidid and disarming his militia.
The shift in priorities and resulting civilian and troop casualties created an international uproar, leading some countries to question their participation in the operation and, like the United States, distance themselves from the new U.N. policy.
Still, Howe was adamant that one key to the future is making sure those responsible for the deaths of U.N. forces face justice. Since June 5, 76 peacekeepers have died, and the United Nations blames Aidid.
"If there's not a responsible accounting for these attacks against the United Nations, then there is increased potential that his whole country will degenerate back into major clan warfare," Howe said. "And there are implications for the world and how the U.N. conducts its business."
Howe said he hopes Aidid's faction takes advantage of "a window of opportunity" for peace.
"It takes two to have a dialogue and it takes two to have an interest in peace," he said. "Peace does not necessarily serve the interests of those who have attacked us, apparently. I hope it does now."
Howe refused to admit the United Nations made mistakes. "It's too soon" to make that assessment, he said.
Aid workers and military officials privately say Howe's biggest mistake was putting out "Wanted" posters for Aidid and offering a $ 25,000 reward for his capture.
Aidid used that to subvert the U.N. operation, gathering support by portraying it as a personal battle between himself and Howe.
Nigerian soldier Umar Shantali, released Thursday by Aidid's men along with U.S. helicopter pilot Michael Durant, told reporters that his captors hated Howe.
"They said they would like to dig out Howe's eye, then take out another eye and make a dinner," Shantali said.
Last week, a spokesman for the U.N. mission said peacekeepers were no longer actively searching for Aidid. But despite efforts to tone down the emphasis on hunting Aidid, Howe said he remains a wanted man with the bounty still in effect.
Like the coach of a struggling sports team, Howe could find himself out of a job.
Even that option is complicated, however. If Howe resigns, Aidid could paint it as the departure of a defeated foe.
There has been speculation that Aidid released the prisoners and called a unilateral truce to buy time until U.S. forces pull out by March 31, at which point he will push to become president of Somalia.
"I think it's doubtful that he would be elected in this country in a fair and equitable process," Howe said.
"But that is a choice the Somali people will make, ultimately, so it is not for us to cast judgment on people they choose to elect," he said. "Our focus should be on the process and ensuring it is fair and equitable."
 Load-Date: October 20, 1993

 

End of Document
