

Vets Return to Riviera to Remember the 'Other D-Day'
The Associated Press
August 7, 1994, Sunday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 885 words
Byline: By PATRICK McDOWELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




If they glance up from their novels and navels, the French hordes vacationing on the Riviera may spot a few elderly men who liberated the sun-drenched beaches 50 years ago in one of World War II's least-remembered battles.
They're veterans of what's called the Other D-Day, or Champagne Campaign - the near-flawless landings of 350,000 Allied soldiers in southern France 10 weeks after their comrades waded into Normandy.
The French take great pride in the southern assault, in which they played a major role. So do some Americans, including five elderly paratroopers who want to jump to reenact their role.
But compared to the D-Day anniversary hoopla in June, the commemorations of the Provence landings will be distinctly low key. Veteran Doug Dillard jokes of being "the Rodney Dangerfields - we don't get no respect."
"You can't spend $ 60 million on every anniversary," mused Dillard, 68, of Bowie, Maryland. "I think our vets feel the ceremonies in Normandy epitomized the celebration for all the World War II soldiers."
As an 18-year-old sergeant in the 551st Parachute Infantry Battalion, Dillard stepped out of a C-47 into a clear Mediterranean sky Aug. 15, 1944, in the early hours of Operation Dragoon. He landed in a tree in the rugged Provence hills near Draguingan.
Dillard is leading about 20 of the unit's veterans back. They will be among perhaps 400 U.S. veterans attending ceremonies Aug. 14-16 at little-known battlefields like Draguignan, La Motte or Saint-Raphael.
Five U.S. veterans are trying to reenact their jumps, bailing out near Draguignan. But a jump school that was to provide a plane backed out, and they haven't found another way to get airborne. Dillard doesn't plan to jump.
Navy Secretary John Dalton is the top U.S. official coming for the ceremonies, which will be televised in France. Traffic jams, horrendous during the D-Day extravaganza, are expected only because of the vacationers.
But even if relatively neglected, "le debarquement de Provence" retains a place in Gallic hearts nearly equal to the Normandy landings.
The southern forces secured France's finest beaches and wine country. And unlike the token 177 commandos who took part in D-Day's Operation Overlord, most of the troops in the Provence landings fought under the French flag.
"I hope that the liberation of Provence is remembered with feeling, because three-quarters of the troops were French," said Defense Minister Francois Leotard.
Actually, most of the 230,000 men in French uniform were from African colonies, Gen. Charles de Gaulle's main source of manpower until enough of occupied France was freed to recruit a mainland army.
Several African heads of state will join President Francois Mitterrand during a 22-ship naval review Aug. 14 that will include seven U.S. and two British warships. U.S., British and French special forces will make a symbolic parachute jump.
Operation Dragoon was rated the war's best-executed airborne-amphibious assault - and it nearly didn't happen.
Britain's leader, Winston Churchill, was strongly opposed. He felt diverting men from Italy to France, instead of sending them further east, dashed any chance of challenging post-war Soviet control over Eastern Europe.
Gen. Dwight Eisenhower, the Allied military commander, wanted a southern landing to protect the flank of the troops coming off the Norman beaches. Ike prevailed - only six days before the landings.
At 10 p.m. Aug. 14, 1944, U.S. Army Rangers and French commandos scaled sheer cliffs and seized German gun emplacements at Cap Negre that threatened the invasion fleet. Naval and aerial bombardement along the 45-mile front erupted at dawn.
The division-size airborne task force parachuted into the hills to stop German reinforcements reaching the beaches. Landing craft brought ashore the U.S. 3rd, 36th and 45th Divisions, veterans of landings in Italy and North Africa.
They landed with minimal fighting. In the first 24 hours, 198 Americans were killed - a fraction of those mowed down at Omaha Beach.
One of the first ashore was probably Richard Jahn, then 19. Using radio-controlled boats stuffed with explosives, his Navy demolitions unit blasted lanes through submerged, hull-ripping obstacles so troop carriers could get through.
Jahn landed at Saint-Raphael in front of a German bunker with a cannon pointing straight at him. It didn't fire.
"I guess the reason I'm alive today is they didn't have any stomach to fight any more," said Jahn. "Most of the Germans were either really old men, or Hungarians and Romanians."
From an abandoned villa, Jahn "liberated" what he thought an appropriate souvenier - a painting of Saint Raphael's cathedral with a German bunker in the foreground. It hangs today at his home in Chattanooga, Tennessee.
Five French divisions started coming ashore Aug. 16. Hitler ordered most of his troops to retreat north. The French captured the key ports of Toulon and Marseille, then pushed north along the Rhone Valley, taking care not to trample prized vineyards.
Dragoon's initial ease led to it being dubbed the Champagne Campaign. But any good times ended as the Riviera summer turned to winter in the Ardennes forest.
The 551st Parachute Infantry Battalion took 14 casualties the first day of Dragoon, Dillard recalls. At the Battle of the Bulge, less than 100 of its 700 men survived.
 Load-Date: August 8, 1994

 

End of Document
