

WALTER MEARS: The Lasting U.S. Role in the Middle East
The Associated Press
September 14, 1993, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 719 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




When the wagers were made in "this brave gamble" for Middle East peace, President Clinton wasn't a player. But now he is and the United States is committed to trying to make it a winning bet.
Amid all the wondrous changes symbolized by a hesitant handshake at the White House on Monday, there was one constant: the lasting U.S. role. That was dramatized by the setting.
Israel and the PLO worked out the terms of their preliminary peace accord in secret talks mediated by neutral Norwegian diplomats. While U.S. diplomats weren't involved, they were said to have been kept informed. Then, once the deal was set and peace letters had been exchanged, both sides looked to Washington as the site for a formal, ceremonial signing.
So Clinton was host and, in a way, matchmaker, as Israel's Yitzhak Rabin shook the outstretched hand of the PLO's Yasser Arafat, to applause that sounded across the sunny South Lawn, from an audience of some 3,000, including two former presidents, eight former secretaries of state, dozens of diplomats and most of Congress.
"A peace of the brave is within our reach," Clinton said at a ceremony that put him in the role all presidents covet, presiding over a diplomatic success story. He declared that "this brave gamble that the future can be better than the past must endure."
It is only the first chapter; there are major obstacles to be confronted, and costs to be covered. But it was a breakthrough between old enemies, and a break for Clinton, since it is happening on his watch.
In the days since agreement was set, away from Washington, he has been stressing the long U.S. quest for a secure peace between Israel and the Arab states. Clinton said the Middle East peace process has been a foreign policy priority since his first day in office. Secretary of State Warren Christopher said the agreement is the important thing, and not who gets credit for it.
He and Clinton said the PLO accord, providing for Palestinian rule in Gaza and Jericho, is a start that gains momentum for the Washington-sponsored peace process, and should be a catalyst for later agreements between Israel and other governments.
Israel and Jordan sign a treaty framework today and Christopher hopes that within a year, they will have an agreement comparable to the Israel-PLO accord.
"I am convinced that the United States must assume a very heavy role and responsibility to make this work," the president said. That will cost money, although probably not vast sums. The administration said this accord would not involve the use of U.S. troops in a peacekeeping role, but that could come as part of subsequent peace agreements with Arab states.
There is precedent. Clinton noted that U.S. troops were sent to the Sinai peninsula to monitor the 1979 Camp David peace agreement between Israel and Egypt.
One possibility: a peacekeeping role on the Golan Heights should there be a later accord between Israel and Syria. That area now is occupied by Israel.
In addition to providing U.S. aid, the administration will try to line up allied financial support for the Palestinians. American foreign aid to Israel won't be affected.
"I look to see the United States being more deeply involved in the Middle East even than we have been in the past," said Rep. Lee Hamilton, chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee.
And those involvements have been deep. "Looking back on the four years of my presidency, I realize that I spent more of my time working for possible solutions to the riddle of Middle East peace than on any other international problem," Jimmy Carter wrote in his memoirs.
That paid off in the Camp David accords negotiated in 1978 between Egypt and Israel, the first peace accord between an Arab government and the Jewish state. Carter said those accords set a framework for peace that still is being followed.
President George Bush pressed for the direct negotiations that revived the peace process beginning in 1991.
Clinton applauded them both at the signing ceremony, and said every president, Democrat or Republican, since Harry Truman has worked for peace in the Middle East. "We've all built on the efforts of each other," Christopher added.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.
 Load-Date: September 14, 1993

 

End of Document
