

WALTER MEARS: Why Doesn't the New World Order Feel Safer?
The Associated Press
June 14, 1992, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 761 words
Byline: By DONALD M. ROTHBERG, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Disorder forms a troubling backdrop for the upcoming summit between President Bush and Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin.
The two presidents call each other George and Boris and want the world to know they are friends and allies. The Cold War is over.
"We can see a new world coming into view," Bush told the nation one week after the fighting stopped in the Persian Gulf. "A world in which there is the very real prospect of a new world order."
Then why doesn't the world feel safer?
The new post-Soviet world is anything but the orderly place envisioned only a year ago by Bush. Constant and unpredictable change have made old measures of power obsolete and new ones questionable.
"It's not going to be orderly in the wake of the Cold War," said James Schlesinger, a former Defense secretary and CIA director. "It's going to be more disorderly. It's going to be more unstable."
A few current reasons to agree with Schlesinger:
- A savage civil war rages in Yugoslavia. Border disputes and ethnic warfare break out across the former Soviet Union.
- Unrest persists in countries from Peru to Thailand, from Afghanistan to Haiti.
- Saddam Hussein still rules Iraq and yearns for nuclear weapons.
- In Algeria, democracy was tested and found wanting when Islamic fundamentalists were the big winners in that country's first national election.
- Even as Bush and Yeltsin talk about substantial cuts in their vast stocks of multi-megaton missiles, the world worries more than ever about nuclear weapons falling into the hands of regimes that might not hesitate to use them.
The picture is not unrelievedly dismal.
Gone is the grim East-West confrontation, replaced by the promise of unprecedented cooperation between Washington and Moscow.
Already, the two former adversaries have joined to sponsor the first face-to-face negotiations between Israel and its Arab neighbors.
They also worked together to broker a peace agreement in Afghanistan.
The trouble spots serve as reminders that the collapse of the Soviet Union and the swift defeat of Iraq did not leave the world trouble free.
In place of the Soviet Union is a chaotic grouping of new nations, some with nuclear arms, struggling to throw off the stultifying economic legacy of communism and make the shift to free market economies and democracy. So far, capitalism has brought little more than rising prices and unemployment.
The former Soviet republics are seeking Western aid and investment.
But American voters are looking inward this election year and politicians are worried about making any major commitments of aid to the former Soviet Union. U.S. businesses also are cautious about commitments in a region whose uncertainty is as great as its potential.
Through the Cold War, military might mattered most. The United States and Soviet Union targeted their nuclear missiles on each other. Their armies never clashed but the two superpowers fought proxy wars throughout the world: Korea, Vietnam, Afghanistan.
But with the death of communism, economic power replaced tanks and missiles as the measure of global influence. Money talks in the post-Soviet world. By that standard, Japan and a unified Germany were the new superpowers. At least for a while.
Wait long enough in this topsy-turvy world and nothing is quite the way it once seemed. Japan is discovering the business cycle and retrenching. Germany is over its head in debt and rising interest rates trouble its economic partners.
The global trend is to trading blocs that could end up as giant economic rivals. A unified Europe competing against an Asian bloc and a U.S.-dominated Western Hemisphere.
The dream of a united Europe was jolted by Danish voters who rejected the idea of political and economic union in its first electoral test, suggesting that European unity could be a case of leaders getting too far ahead of the people.
The world is discovering that the stodgy old men who ruled from the Kremlin were not risk-takers. They possessed terrifying military power but avoided placing it into direct confrontation with the West.
They imposed stability over a region the world now knows teemed with ancient hatreds. The heavy hand of Moscow is gone and Azeris and Armenians are free to resume their blood feuds, as are the Serbs, Croats, Bosnians and Muslims of Yugoslavia.
Ironically, the lifting of the Iron Curtain may allow U.S. troops to enter Eastern Europe for the first time since World War II, this time on a dangerous NATO mission to end the fighting in Yugoslavia.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Donald M. Rothberg covers diplomatic affairs for The Associated Press.

 

End of Document
