

Warlords Call For Cease-Fire But Fear Stalks The Interior
The Associated Press
December 11, 1992, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1207 words
Byline: By NICOLAS TATRO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOGADISHU, Somalia
Body




Somalia's two main warlords agreed with a handshake and a hug today to stop fighting and have their gunmen out of town within 48 hours.
The announcement by Gen. Mohamed Farrah Aidid and Ali Mahdi Mohamed, after a groundbreaking meeting sponsored by the U.S. military, did not, however, call on clan gunmen to surrender their weapons.
It came just hours after their fighters slugged it out in Mogadishu with cannon and automatic weapons.
U.S. forces, meanwhile, apparently were finding it more complicated than expected to get started with the delivery of food to victims of Somalia's famine and civil war.
Plans were canceled to escort a relief convoy across the green line separating the two warlords' turf. A convoy to Baidoa, the epicenter of the famine, had been scheduled to go Saturday but was postponed by at least a week.
An Associated Press reporter saw more than a dozen U.S. Marines working on an airstrip at Uanle Wein, about 60 miles northwest of the capital - the only known U.S. Marine presence outside Mogadishu.
Somalia remained a dangerous place two days after U.S. and French troops came ashore to pacify the country so its starving might be fed.
The first bloodshed of the U.S.-led mission occurred Thursday night when French and American soldiers opened fire on a truckload of Somalis that rammed a French barricade. Two Somalis were killed and seven injured.
In the famine-stricken interior, armed looters were attacking relief operations and relief workers pleaded for the Marines to come swiftly to their aid.
The flow of relief supplies by air into Mogadishu, however, appeared to be picking up, with planes landing frequently. An additional 350 Marines, from Camp Pendleton, Calif., also arrived, boosting the U.S.-led force to more than 2,000.
It was not clear whether the warlords' call for peace would be heeded. Somalia is rife with gunmen, many of them free-lancers, who have looted relief convoys and terrorized Somalis and relief workers.
Aidid and Ali Mahdi shook hands and hugged warmly under heavy security. An Aidid aide called the meeting "very cordial, very amiable. … Everybody was hugging and enjoying the camaraderie of one another."
The two issued a communique that said they had agreed on an "immediate and total cessation of hostilities" and restoration of the political party they once shared, the United Somali Congress.
They also called for breaking "the artificial lines in the city," which has been divided between the Ali Mahdi-controlled north and the Aidid-run south.
The communique asked clan gunmen to "report within 48 hours to their respective locations outside the city." It welcomed the foreign intervention to "join with us in the restoration of peace in Somalia."
It was the warlords' first meeting since they began battling nearly two years ago after President Mohamed Siad Barre's ouster. The warfare plunged Somalia into chaos that, compounded by famine and disease, has claimed more than 300,000 lives.
Ali Mahdi, the interim president, drew a crowd of hundreds of cheering people as his convoy passed through the southern sector of the city, home to Aidid's loyalists. At one point, a Marine helicopter swooped to within feet of the convoy, driving off hundreds of onlookers.
The warlords met privately with special U.S. envoy Robert Oakley at the U.S. liaison office. Also at the meeting were U.N. special envoy Ismat Kittani and Marine Gen. Robert Johnston, commander of U.S. forces in Somalia.
The meeting followed an attempt by Ali Mahdi's forces to seize Aidid's radio station in southern Mogadishu. Aidid fighters were said to have driven off the attackers Thursday night, but fighting continued well past dawn near the line that divides the capital into Ali Mahdi and Aidid's fiefdoms.
U.N. spokesman Ian MacLeod said the United Nations hoped to hold another meeting Jan. 4, in Ethiopia, to set the stage for an overall conference of Somali clan leaders.
U.N. Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali appears to have high hopes for the U.S.-led mission in Somalia. The New York Times quoted Boutros-Ghali today as telling U.S. officials in New York on Wednesday that U.S. troops should stay in Somalia until they disarm its warlords, restore order and train a military police force.
U.S. officials have described their goal as more modest, saying they hope U.N. peacekeepers could replace the Americans early next year.
Initial U.S. plans called for heading to the famine belt this weekend, but the Marines and French Legionnaires have their hands full trying to secure the capital.
In a briefing to relief agencies today, Johnston said Marines expect to move into Baidoa within seven to 10 days.
The U.N.'s MacLeod said Johnston advised that the Marines' priority in Mogadishu is to remove large arms from the streets, specifically so-called "technicals" - trucks equipped with everything from small cannons to 50-caliber machine guns.
A 10-truck food convoy sponsored by the relief agency CARE was to have been escorted into Ali Mahdi's territory today by the American and French troops with Pakistani U.N. peacekeepers doing the driving.
But it was canceled, and Marines at the port said there was a dispute over who would drive the trucks.
The Americans and French were not in control of much beyond the airport, seaport and several key intersections of the capital. The fighting between rival clansman raged less than a mile from U.S. and French posts.
In the interior, relief workers in Baidoa, 125 miles northwest of the capital, barricaded themselves in their compounds after a failed attack by heavily armed looters Wednesday night.
Workers from the World Vision agency said in an anxious message Thursday that they could not "overstress the urgency that we all feel and how let down we feel by the delay of the troop arrival."
They asked that U.S. aircraft at least buzz the city again as they did Tuesday and Wednesday.
Relief agencies reported between four and seven jeeps stolen or looted by gunmen today. They flew 13 foreign workers out of Kismayo after a night of gunfire and looting, U.N. officials said. It was the second such evacuation this week from the port 300 miles south of Mogadishu.
In Mogadishu, however, International Red Cross workers said their planes brought in 50 tons of rice and beans.
World Food Program spokesman Paul Mitchell said a Danish-registered ship carrying 30,000 metric tons of wheat was due to arrive Sunday. It would be the first relief ship to dock since Oct. 24.
"We think this is a very significant achievement, and it's mostly due to the fact that the military forces that have come here have secured the port and provided us the kind of security that we did not have before," Mitchell said.
At the French checkpoint Thursday night, French and American soldiers fired at the Somalis' truck after it sped through the barricade, its driver ignoring orders to stop, a Marine warrant officer said. The officer, Mike Hedlund, said the vehicle then crashed.
At the Pentagon, Lt. Gen. Martin Brandtner said the truck had been mounted with a gun. But news photographers who arrived on the scene minutes after the incident did not see any weapons.
The dead and injured were flown to the USS Tripoli off the coast, where the injured were reported in stable condition.

 

End of Document
