

Washington Seeks to Keep Saddam's Missiles from Shattering the Coalition
The Associated Press
January 18, 1991, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 873 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Official Washington's early optimism in the Persian Gulf war was checked today by additional U.S. casualties and an Iraqi missile attack that forced the Bush administration into a tense scramble to keep its international coalition intact.
The Pentagon announced that two more U.S. planes and their crews were missing in the air war, bringing U.S. aircraft losses to three during two days of massive strikes against Iraqi targets.
An "outraged" President Bush condemned the attack while Secretary of State James A. Baker III telephoned Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir telephoned to assure him that the United States is "continuing its efforts" to eliminate the Iraqi threat. Baker also conferred with the ambassadors from Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Syria.
The administration was clearly worried that a retaliatory strike by Israel would trigger a walkout of Arab countries from the military coalition against Saddam.
"The president is outraged at and condemns this further aggression by Iraq," said White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater after the pre-dawn missile raids on Tel Aviv and Haifa.
"It's what we've been worried about all along," said Pentagon spokesman Pete Williams.
Bush ordered a new wave of air attacks on Iraq, but there was no assurance the U.S. raids would head off Israeli retaliation.
The president planned to visit the Pentagon this afternoon before spending the weekend at Camp David, Md.
The Pentagon identified the latest aircraft losses as a Navy A-6 Intruder and an Air Force F-15E Strike Eagle. No information was available on the crewmen.
Previously, an F-18 Hornet was lost in the opening sorties and its pilot killed.
An Iraqi Scud missile targeted on Saudi Arabia was intercepted and destroyed by a U.S. Patriot missile. Up to 10 Scud missiles were reported to have hit their targets in Israel.
A senior administration official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the allies understood that Israel would retaliate for the missile attack.
The Israeli ambassador to Washington, Zalman Shoval, said only that "Israel reserves the right to respond in any way it deems fit."
The Bush administration was concerned that Israeli retaliation could cause Muslim and Arab allies to pull out of the 28-nation U.N. coalition and enhance Saddam's claim as a leader of the Arab masses.
Thoroughly outgunned, Saddam has attempted from the start to reshape the conflict over his occupation of Kuwait into an Arab-Israel confrontation in which ever Arab state would be under pressure to back him.
Iraq's attack - though less damaging than first thought - "could seriously change the equation," said Senate Republican leader Bob Dole of Kansas. "And it could certainly, depending on the seriousness if the Israelis respond, put considerable strain on the coalition."
But Rep. Stephen Solarz, D-N.Y., who fought in Congress last week to give Bush authority to go to war, said he didn't expect the coalition to dissolve.
"Both Egypt and Saudi Arabia fully understand that Iraq is much more of a threat to them than Israel," Solarz said.
Meantime, the Pentagon awaited word on the results of Thursday night's ferocious attacks against Iraqi targets, intended in part to destroy Saddam's ability to communicate with his army - and thus to isolate and demoralize the troops.
So pleased were U.S. military planners with the results of Thursday's 1,300 aerial missions that both Bush and Defense Secretary Dick Cheney felt constrained to warn that dark days could lie ahead.
Spokesman Marlin Fitzwater reported that Bush cautioned his Cabinet that "things might not go so well" in the days ahead.
Said Cheney: "There have been casualties and there are likely to be more casualties."
Still, members of Congress rose to cheer when Cheney and Gen. Colin Powell, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, went to the Capitol to report on the first results of the war. The Senate congratulated the armed forces by a vote of 98-0.
"People continue to be awed and thrilled by the skill of our military and the effectiveness of our weapons," said Sen. Phil Gramm, R-Texas.
And from a leader of last week's Senate doves, Tom Harkin, D-Iowa: "I have to hand it to them."
Rep. Dave McCurdy, D-Okla., offered this assessment of Saddam's failure to respond vigorously to the air raids on his forces: "I think it's paralysis. They aren't communicating anymore."
Senators were told 80 percent of targets were actually hit - a high success ratio.
Rep. William Dickinson, R-Ala., marveled at how forces from at least four countries could fly so many missions in such a constricted space without even a common language, yet emerge with "no mishaps, no accidents."
"There's never been this assimilation, this combining of massive air and other power since D-Day in Normandy," said Dickinson, the ranking Republican on the House Armed Services Committee.
Even Bush, his face no longer etched in the grimness of the last few days, reflected pleasure in the success of allied bombers.
Before word came of Iraq's strike, the president playfully joshed with Fitzwater. He taunted his press secretary with mock ire for having suggested that Saddam's "surrender" was the ultimate goal of Operation Desert Storm.
Actually, its stated purpose remains Iraq's withdrawal from Kuwait.

 

End of Document
