

What The Winners Won in Gulf War
The Associated Press
March 23, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 917 words
Byline: By ROBERT BARR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




For each member of the coalition that drove Iraq out of Kuwait, the victory meant something different.
Syria was invited in from the diplomatic cold. Egypt was forgiven one-fourth of its debt. Turkey gained billions in aid and greater access to the U.S. market for its textiles.
Britain reasserted its role as America's best friend in Europe and the French government became more popular with its own people.
As President Turgut Ozal of Turkey put it: "Siding with the winners is always advantageous."
Any gains may quickly be reversed in the volatile Middle East, but it appears for the moment that few nations did as well as Syria.
President Hafez Assad committed 15,000 soldiers to the coalition and "managed to transform Syria's fortunes" in exchange, said Anoush Ehteshami, professor of Middle East politics and international relations at Exeter University in Britain.
Before the war, the Unites States and Britain shunned Syria's repressive government and its main backer, the Soviet Union, was losing influence throughout the region.
Britain restored relations in November, three months after Saddam Hussein seized Kuwait, and Secretary of State James A. Baker III met with Assad this month.
Ehteshami said Syria is seen as an important element in any future Arab security force.
It and Egypt, the other Arab pillar of the multinational force, signed an agreement with the six-member Gulf Cooperation Council in Damascus this month to provide security for the region. Persian Gulf states promised Syria $$3 billion in aid.
"No one would have expected the Syrians to be in that position two years ago," said Michael Clarke, executive director of the Center for Defense Studies at King's College, London.
"In the long term, Syria has to be very careful. The Syrians didn't do that much in the war. They are getting quite a lot of kudos from the minimum commitment. They have to be careful not to strain Western credibility."
Syria, Egypt and Morocco, another Arab member of the coalition, encountered domestic opposition during the war from Islamic fundamentlists and factions that supported Iraq. It is not yet clear whether the domestic difficulties ended with the war.
Egypt's financial gains were substantial. It received grants and pledges of aid exceeding $$3 billion, about half from Saudi Arabia. The United States wrote off $$6.7 billion in military debts and the Gulf states forgave debts of nearly $$7 billion.
In January, the Group of Seven industrialized nations said they were writing off one-third of Egypt's debt to them. The amount was not disclosed.
The aid helps compensate Egypt for losses caused by the gulf crisis. Premier Atef Sedki told Parliament in January the country had lost $$7-8 billion in revenue from the Suez Canal, tourism, non-oil exports and remittances from 670,000 Egyptian workers who fled Iraq and Kuwait.
In diplomatic terms, Egypt took a leading part in an Arab endeavor without damaging its relations with Israel, Ehteshami said, adding: "It appears they have managed to assimilate their relations with Israel into their Arab relations."
Turkey made an important contribution to the U.N. embargo by denying Iraq use of its oil export facilities. While making friends in the West, President Turgut Ozal may have made enemies at home by defying public opinion and allowing U.S. planes to operate from the Incirlik air base.
"There are political gains, prestige gains," said Seyfi Tashan, director of the independent Foreign Policy Institute in Ankara. "Whether these can be transformed into material gains, I have my doubts."
Immediate results for Turkey included $$1 billion in military aid from Germany, a proposed 25 percent increase in U.S. military aid in 1992 to $$625 million, a 50 percent increase in the U.S. textile import quota and at least $$3.5 billion in special aid commitments from various countries.
The continuing economic embargo on Iraq will cost Turkey at least $$7 billion in lost trade over a year, according to the World Bank. The loss of trade and tourism have caused tens of thousands of Turks to lose their jobs.
For the French government of President Francois Mitterrand, the war countered a decline in popularity and voter confidence.
Although Communists and the far right accused the government of subservience to Washington, about 75 percent of the public supported French war policy. Opinion polls showed a sharp rise in the fortunes of Mitterrand and Premier Michel Rocard.
In one February poll, Mitterrand's approval rating was 65 per cent, up 10 points from a month earlier.
The war gave John Major, Britain's new prime minister, a chance to establish himself as a leader in his own right, not just a shadow of his predecessor, Margaret Thatcher.
Eighty percent of the public supported British policy and Major's personal approval rating rose to 59 percent, six points more than Mrs. Thatcher ever achieved.
Major was soon reminded , however, that voters care more about pocketbook issues than distant wars. In a parliamentary by-election March 7, because of an unpopular tax, his Conservative Party lost a seat it had won by a huge margin in 1987.
Italy contributed only one squadron of Tornado fighters to the war effort and any credit it gained among coalition partners may have been lost when it endorsed Soviet peace efforts just before the ground war began.
It was not on the first list of those invited to Washington for postwar talks. Foreign Minister Giovanni de Michelis was added later, but was not granted a meeting with President Bush.

 

End of Document
