

When The Lights Dim, The Work Begins
The Associated Press
May 10, 1994, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 630 words
Byline: By TINA SUSMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PRETORIA, South Africa
Body




President Nelson Mandela had the world at his feet Tuesday, standing on stage before princes, presidents and prime ministers.
But behind him, isolated by chain-link fences and bulletproof glass, stood the people Mandela must face when the inaugural lights dim and the celebrities leave - people expecting jobs, houses, education, health care and peace.
The problems facing Mandela and his African National Congress are staggering: 40 percent unemployment, 50 percent illiteracy, massive crime and political violence, ethnic polarization, and the impatience of tens of millions of blacks demanding a better life now that apartheid is over.
If the country's first black president manages to satisfy blacks and maintain sufficient economic prosperity to please whites, his five-year term will be seen as a near miracle on a continent littered with black-ruled nations still struggling to overcome the effects of colonialism.
If Mandela fails, South Africa could be dismissed as another African basket case of civil strife, corruption and mismanagement.
The pressure is on to become a shining example to the rest of the world.
"The nation that was pariah will now become a beacon of hope," said U.S. Vice President Al Gore. "It will allow us the opportunity to hope in a world which often crushes hope."
Mandela's ANC swept last month's national election with a campaign promising 2.5 million new jobs, 2 million new houses, free education, and a nationalized health plan aimed at ensuring all South Africans the top-notch health care now accessible mainly to the white minority.
Throughout the campaign Mandela appealed for patience, warning that riches would not come overnight and could take as long as a decade.
"There is no easy road to freedom. We know it well that none of us acting alone can achieve success," he said in his inauguration speech. "We must therefore act together as a united people, for national reconciliation, for nation building, for the birth of a new world."
That reconciliation may prove one of Mandela's biggest challenges. While the April 26-29 vote was the result of negotiations among diverse political factions, animosities remain.
Former President F.W. de Klerk says Mandela will not be able to keep his promises to blacks without raising taxes for whites, and he accuses Mandela of not being able to control his followers in the ANC.
The proof, says de Klerk, is the political violence raging in many black townships.
Mangosuthu Buthelezi's Zulu nationalist Inkatha Freedom Party boycotted the vote until the last week of the campaign, a move blamed for campaign bloodshed involving pro- and anti-election forces. Inkatha placed a distant third in the vote, but with more than 40 seats in the 400-seat parliament, it is likely to continue pressuring Mandela to give in on Buthelezi's demand for a sovereign Zulu homeland.
The pro-apartheid Freedom Front wants a white homeland. Together with Inkatha, it could bog down the new parliament over the issue at a time when Mandela would rather focus on keeping his campaign promises.
If political violence linked to opposition parties' demands returns, Mandela will have a tougher time than ever gaining the investment needed to revive the economy. And if he doesn't bring in new investment, wealthy whites - many of them already fearful of black rule - will be inclined to leave the country and take their riches with them.
On a smaller scale, Mandela must deal with the threat from white militants who have vowed to wage war rather than live under black rule. Bomb blasts on the eve of voting killed 19 people.
Although police arrested more than 30 right-wing whites, the bloodshed - along with Tuesday's bulletproof shield - was a reminder that while Mandela is immensely popular, he still has some people to win over.
 Load-Date: May 10, 1994

 

End of Document
