

Who Is Winning The War In Rwanda?
The Associated Press
June 13, 1994, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 594 words
Byline: By JEFFREY ULBRICH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KIGALI, Rwanda
Body




The rebel Rwandan Patriotic Front has rolled up more than half the country in two months of savage fighting against government forces, but that doesn't really answer the question: Who is winning the war?
The advances made since President Juvenal Habyarimana died in mysterious plane crash April 6 have won the rebels parts of Kigali, the capital, though the government forces remain in control of the city center.
The rebels today claimed they had taken Gitarama, an important city to the southwest where the interim government had fled at the outset of the fighting. The government army was reported on the run with the rebels in pursuit.
But battlefield successes don't make a rebel victory certain.
"How do you measure who is winning the war?" a senior independent military source asked rhetorically. "In this case, the RPF is winning the terrain, but (government forces) are killing more people."
Hundreds of thousands of Rwandans have died since the civil war erupted anew - nobody really knows how many. Most of the victims have been civilians. And most of those civilians have been from the minority Tutsi tribe, murdered by government-trained militias of the majority Hutu ethnic group.
"The (government forces) are now in a desperate mood," the senior officer said, speaking on condition that he not be identified.
Even if the Tutsi-led rebel forces win the war on the ground, they may have little left to rule because most of the Tutsis in the country will be dead. At the same time, the rebels will be too spread out and too thin on the ground militarily to control their gains effectively, the source said.
Recent withdrawals of government forces have left gruesome results.
A frequent tactic, military sources say, is to exterminate Tutsis and other opponents systematically in an area, then conduct and orderly withdrawal. When the rebel forces come in, they find a human wasteland.
"It looks like when intense fighting is going on, the militia is also in there killing (civilians)," the military source noted. "So the withdrawal is not necessarily a defeat. It is always tactical and planned."
Rebels and representatives of the Rwandan army have conducted five rounds of cease-fire talks in Kigali, the capital, over the past 10 days with little result. One of the conditions set by the Patriotic Front is that the massacres must stop before there can be a cease-fire.
But before the massacres can stop, the militias must be brought under control, and it is far from clear that anyone will be able to do that.
The militiamen, armed with guns, knives, machetes and spears, enter villages and neighborhoods methodically murdering Tutsis and others they don't like. They throw up roadblocks everywhere and menace all who pass.
Some observers believe the more the Patriotic Front rebels tighten the noose around the army in the southwestern corner of the country, the more frenzied the murder and massacres will become.
The rebels are steadily pounding army troops who hold the center of Kigali.
In Gitarama, the fighting was so intense last week that President Theodore Sindikubwabo fled, taking a few of his ministers with him to the western town of Gisenyi near Lake Kivu, across from Zaire.
One of the great fears on the horizon is that when the military conflict ends, either through total victory or a cease-fire, a great wave of banditry will arise in Rwanda.
"There are going to be bandits created by hunger," said the independent military source. "And these people are going to be very dangerous. They will make life very difficult if their basic needs are not met."
 Load-Date: June 13, 1994

 

End of Document
