

World Leaders Cut Political, Business Deals and Enjoy the Snow
The Associated Press
January 31, 1994, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 568 words
Byline: By CLARE NULLIS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DAVOS, Switzerland
Body




Maybe the spirit of the "magic mountain" really worked after all.
When PLO chairman Yasser Arafat took the hand of Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres and guided him onto a platform for a debate on the Middle East Sunday, the brotherly gesture seemed to reflect the playful mood infecting others as they rubbed elbows on the ski slopes.
Klaus Schwab, head of the annual World Economic Forum, boasted the five-day gathering that ends Tuesday lured in 200 top government representatives, 200 leading academic thinkers and eight chief executives representing a staggering $ 3 trillion in annual business.
So what attracted all those heavy hitters, including the former bitter enemies of the Middle East?
Schwab claimed it was the spirit of the "Magic Mountain," a reference to the philosophical masterpiece based in Davos by German novelist Thomas Mann, which makes a plea for order and humanity.
Peres and Arafat were center-stage Sunday, having cleared nearly all the remaining obstacles to withdrawal of Israel from the Gaza Strip and Jericho.
"When one opens one's eyes early in the morning and one can see the magic mountain, he knows it is one thing to look at the mountain and another thing to negotiate slippery heights," Peres told the conference.
As Arafat and Peres labored toward a breakthrough in the peace process, political and business leaders from around the world played in the snow and cut multimillion dollar deals in Alpine chalets.
The hotels, streets and ski slopes contained more political, economic and academic superstars per square mile than anywhere else in the world.
Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin sauntered in the morning sun, passing Peres and his Egyptian counterpart enjoying the mountain scenery.
Swedish Prime Minister Carl Bildt, the legendary French marine environmentalist Jacques-Yves Cousteau, and business heavyweights such as Swissair boss Otto Loepfe mingled ingognito.
American composer Quincy Jones and actress girlfriend Nastassja Kinski, fretting at the nonappearance of their chauffeur-driven car, tried to climb in one of the Arafat limousines.
Dallas Mayor Steve Bartlett hosted a 4 a.m. victory celebration - with popcorn and Ben and Jerry's ice cream - for the Dallas Cowboys' Super Bowl victory over the Buffalo Bills.
This year's conference, grandly titled "Redefining the Basic Assumptions of the Global Economy," was packed with lofty economic and political debates and closed-door brainstorming sessions.
The event by no stretch of the imagination set the world straight. But at least it offered a chance to make contacts, strike contracts and settle some corporate and political rows.
The value of deals cemented during Sunday's ice festival and skiing competitions will remain a mystery. The only visible impact was the sight of a dozen executives sporting bandages on Monday.
On the political front, the Peres-Arafat appearance was the latest in the string of diplomatic triumphs to come out of the annual forum.
In 1988 the Prime Ministers of Greece and Turkey met, leading to the normalization of relations after the row over Cyprus. A 1990 meeting between West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl and East German leader Hans Modrow helped pave the way for reunification of the country. And in 1992, South African President F.W. de Klerk shared a platform with African National Congress leader Nelson Mandela and his Inkatha rival Chief Mangosothu Buthelezi.
 Load-Date: January 31, 1994

 

End of Document
