

Zaire Expels Thousands of Rwandan Refugees; Others Take To The Hills
 The Associated Press
August 22, 1995, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 816 words
Byline: By CHEGE MBITIRU, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GOMA, Zaire
Body




Setting fire to huts and looting aid camps, Zairian soldiers forced thousands of refugees back home to Rwanda on Tuesday. Another 60,000 refugees fled into the hills to escape the expulsions, apparently fearing slaughter in their homeland.
The United Nations and the U.S. State Department said the removal of refugees from camps in eastern Zaire could turn into a disaster if not stopped. Despite protests from Rwanda and the United Nations, Zaire gave no indication it was going to slow the exodus that sent 10,000 Rwandans across the border Tuesday.
Zaire began expelling refugees Saturday, but Tuesday's operation was by far the largest. Officials gave no explanation, but Zaire appeared to be pressuring the United Nations to find another country to take the refugees.
The central African nation borders nine neighbors and has 1.8 million refugees, more than any other country in the world.
At Goma, on the northern end of Lake Kivu, about 750,000 Rwandan refugees had been living in sprawling camps before the expulsions.
Almost all the refugees, both those from Rwanda and Burundi, are ethnic Hutus. Nearly 2 million Rwandan Hutus fled their homeland when Tutsi-led rebels seized power from the Hutu-dominated government in July 1994. The rebels took over after an estimated 500,000 people, mostly Tutsis, were killed by Hutu-led militias.
Among the refugees are soldiers, militiamen and officials of the former government who are blamed for planning and carrying out the massacre. Rwanda's government has charged that the Hutu militants were rearming in the refugee camps and preparing to attack Rwanda.
Many of the refugees feared retaliation for the genocide if they return. The Rwandan government was screening those who returned, searching for the perpetrators of last year's killings.
Gunfire sounded Tuesday morning at the Goma camps, U.N. refugee spokesman Peter Kessler reported. It was not immediately clear who was shooting or if there were any casualties.
Zairian troops used trucks, buses and even private vehicles to ferry refugees from the Mugunga camp near Goma to the Rwandan border, said U.N. refugee spokesman Chris Bowers.
Refugees complained about being beaten by soldiers and having their belongings stolen, and smoke billowed from Mugunga after soldiers set fire to some huts to encourage refugees to leave.
Aid workers at Mugunga said Zairian soldiers looted the camp Monday night, U.N. spokesman Ron Redmond said. There were unconfirmed reports of refugee women being raped. Many aid workers, fearing violence, left the camps around Goma on Tuesday.
Bowers said more than 10,000 refugees from three areas in Zaire - Goma, Bukavu and Uvira - were sent across the border Tuesday, but he did not have figures for each border region.
"Let them go," said one Zairian immigration official who refused to give his name. "They have been killing us. They have been stealing from us. They are more than we are."
In Washington, State Department spokesman David Johnson said Zaire was violating international law and could precipitate a "human disaster" if it continues to expel refugees.
Most of the refugees at Goma were women, elderly men and children who seemed resigned to being forced back to Rwanda. They carried plastic buckets of water, straw sleeping mats and bundles of food.
"If they say we must go, we go," said Ngeremenyera Bititwayechi, 50, as he waited at the border for his eight children, who were separated from him during the roundup.
After refugees crossed the border, they were being bused to a U.N. transit camp some 15 miles south of the Rwandan town of Gisenyi.
On the southern edge of Lake Kivu, more than 3,000 Rwandan refugees at Bukavu were forced back into Rwanda on Tuesday and at least 8,000 more were being pushed toward the border, said Kessler.
The United Nations was sending food and aid workers to the Rwandan town of Cyangugu to help those refugees.
Even further to the south, some 60,000 refugees fled into the hills at Uvira with little food or water after four camps there were "looted flat" by Zairians, Bowers said. Those refugees included 25,000 people from Burundi.
"This could bring about a repeat of the deaths we saw last summer," Kessler warned.
An estimated 50,000 Rwandan refugees died of cholera and other diseases in Goma shortly after the panicked exodus of 1.2 million refugees from Rwanda in July 1994.
At the United Nations on Tuesday, the Security Council called for a halt to the expulsions and sent Sadako Ogata, the U.N. commissioner for refugees, to Zaire to discuss the matter with authorities.
"The operation is not being conducted in a humane manner," said Carrol Faubert, the U.N. refugee agency's envoy for the region. "(This is) asylum fatigue, not just in Zaire, but in Tanzania and Burundi, all of which have indicated they would like Rwandan refugees to go home."
Zaire also holds refugees from conflicts in Angola, Sudan and Uganda.
 Load-Date: August 22, 1995

 

End of Document
