

'Country of the Future' Still Seeking Its Way
The Associated Press
April 28, 1991, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 1066 words
Byline: By KEN SILVERSTEIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




In the early 1970s, when this huge nation's economy was growing as fast as any in the world, the government declared: "Brazil is the country of the future."
Nearly a generation later, ordinary Brazilians who struggle with recession and four-digit inflation say it still is and always will be.
Critics have referred to it as Belindia, a combination of Belgium and India, for the stark contrasts of progress and backwardness, wealth and poverty.
Brazil is larger than the contiguous United States and has 150 million people.
It is blessed with abundant natural resources. It produces everything from coffee and orange juice to jet planes, computers and optic fibers. The gross national product, $$350 billion, is the world's 10th largest and only Japan and Germany have larger trade surpluses.
For all of this century, Brazil has seemed poised to become a leading economic power.
Instead, the economy underlying the rosy statistics has nearly always been out of control.
Inflation compounded to more than 50 million percent in the past decade, per capita income was stagnant and real wages plummeted. The inequity of Brazil's distribution of wealth is surpassed only by Honduras and Sierra Leone, according to the World Bank.
In Rio, the 250,000 residents of Rocinha, Latin America's largest slum, literally look down at gleaming luxury condos that line sparkling beaches.
Rich Brazilians in $$150,000 imported cars drive past growing numbers of poor people who live under bridges and highway ramps.
While half the work force earns $$30 a week or less, an estimated $$1 billion finds its way to foreign banks each month.
"The country is like an old machine that's blowing apart, leaving its parts scattered," said Francisco Weffort, a sociologist now teaching at Notre Dame University in the United States.
Alexandre Barros, a leading business consultant, said: "Brazil is never going to enter the First World when we have 15 million kids who have never been to school."
Analysts trace the problem to a "trickle down" model of development in which hardly anything trickles down.
As political scientist Walder de Goes expressed it: "The rich have tremendous power to prevent change and the poor are too unorganized and uneducated to demand it."
Governments have railed against inflation for years. Leaders have tried price freezes, arrested shopkeepers who raised prices and changed the currency four times in the past five years.
Inflation hurts everyone, the argument goes. In Brazil, not necessarily.
Bankers made huge profits from "overnight" accounts, short-term money market funds that paid up to 3 percent a day. Industrialists jacked up prices at will and held down wages, creating huge profit margins.
President Fernando Collor de Mello accuses a "pro-inflation" lobby of sabotaging efforts to keep prices down, but like past leaders, has been either unable or unwilling to break the resistance to reform.
A small elite has controlled much of rural Brazil since the 16th century, when the Portuguese crown divided its colony into huge land holdings, or "captainships," for favored noblemen.
In the northeast, one of the poorest regions in the Western Hemisphere, landowners called "colonels" exercise near-feudal control with hired gunmen.
Miserable conditions ensure a steady flow of economic refugees to the more developed south. Many end up in wretched shantytowns that ring the big cities.
"Induced migration simply transfers poverty to the cities, which have become impossible to administer," said Jose Marcio Camargo, a Rio economist.
For generations, a strong central government promoted rapid growth and protected domestic industry.
President Juscelino Kubitschek, the symbol of "Big Brazil" thinking, tried to open the heartland in the 1950s by building the modernistic capital of Brasilia on the barren central plains. His motto was "Fifty Years in Five."
The army overthrew left-leaning President Joao Goulart in 1964, smashed unions and outlawed the political opposition. With borrowed money, the generals built the world's largest hydroelectric dam at Itaipu, the trans-Amazon highway, steel mills and other state-owned companies.
Disaster struck in 1982. Mexico defaulted on its foreign debt and new loans dried up. Brazil couldn't meet its debt payments. The economy plunged into recession and inflation soared.
After the military relinquished power in 1985, the crisis grew under Jose Sarney, the civilian transition president. At one point, inflation reached an annual rate of more than 5,000 percent.
Collor took office last year as the first freely elected president since 1961. He froze $$115 billion in private and corporate bank accounts in a radical anti-inflation plan, but has beem imable to brighten the dismal economic picture.
The gross national product fell to 4.6 percent in 1990, the worst performance since 1947. Inflation was 450 percent in the past 12 months.
Most experts agree the "big government" development model is obsolete.
"I don't agree with the neo-liberals who think all our problems can be solved by slashing away at the state, but Brazil's economy is certainly too closed, which creates fantastic inefficiencies," said Camargo, the economist.
One obstacle to reform is a system of "clientelism" - politicians trading money and favors for supporters in a society where only 10 percent of voters people earn enough to pay taxes.
Problems are compounded by a general mistrust of government.
In the past five years, two administrations have launched four economic "shock plans" that changed all the rules of the game overnight.
"The constant decree of economic packages has shattered people's confidence," Camargo said. "Instead of saving money locally, where it can be invested productively, they put it in overseas banks."
Some Brazilians claim development is stifled by the $$122 billion foreign debt, the largest in the developing world.
Brazil stopped making interest payments in June 1989 and is about $$8.5 billion in arrears, but recently reached an agreement with creditors to start paying again.
"In the past decade we doled out more for interest payments than we received in new loans," de Goes said. "That flow must be reversed."
Middle-class Brazilians are emigrating in growing numbers.
The poor despair, but can't afford to leave. When asked about the country's prospects, Jose Raimundo da Silva, a Rio street vendor, expressed a common view: "This country can't be fixed."

 

End of Document
