

'Death and the Maiden' With Close, Hackman and Dreyfuss Opens on Broadway
The Associated Press
March 17, 1992, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 609 words
Byline: By MICHAEL KUCHWARA, AP Drama Critic
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




At least there's a bit of fun in all the star-watching. Seeing Glenn Close, Gene Hackman and Richard Dreyfuss in the flesh, on stage, on Broadway.
Outside of that pleasure, there is little to recommend in "Death and the Maiden," a turgid political thriller that arrived Tuesday night at the Brooks Atkinson Theatre in a glossy, wrong-headed production directed by Mike Nichols.
The premise, devised by Chilean playwright Ariel Dorfman, sounds implausible enough to be promising. The time is now; the place, an unnamed country. It's most likely Chile, according to a note in the theater program, although you'd never know it from the performers who look and act more all-American than South American.
A lawyer (Richard Dreyfuss) is brought home one night by a good Samaritan (Gene Hackman) after his car gets a flat tire. The lawyer's wife (Glenn Close) recognizes her husband's benefactor as a man who participated in her torture and rape 15 years ago when the country was ruled by a different, more authoritarian government.
But is it really the right man?
The woman thinks he is and plots to get even - rather quickly, as it turns out. Before the first act curtain falls, she has the surprised do-gooder tied to a chair in the living room. She is brandishing a gun and deciding to put the man on trial for his past crimes.
To complicate things, the woman's husband has been named by the new government to a commission investigating deaths caused by the old regime. How would it look if his wife takes justice into her own hands?
That's one of the more practical matters raised by Dorfman who has put some serious moral questions on stage - questions about guilt and innocence, justice and revenge. But they are never answered dramatically.
At times, "Death and the Maiden" seems more of an argument than a play. The three characters are types rather than people. We never learn much more about the three than their various viewpoints. Consequently, it's hard to feel one way or another toward them - even the woman with her horrific past experiences.
Dorfman has given the woman's supposed tormentor some superficial, pretentious characteristics. He's a doctor, a cultivated man who liked to listen to Schubert, particularly the composer's famous quartet, "Death and the Maiden," while torturing his victims.
"I would put on Schubert because it was a way of gaining the prisoners' trust," he says. The doctor developed a perverse rationale for going along with the torture of prisoners, saying he would make sure it never became too much to bear.
The cast works hard, especially Close who has a marathon role. Her eyes constantly ablaze with anger and fear, she is an assured, inventive actress, but here she is forced into a variation on the crazed, revengeful woman she played to perfection in the movie "Fatal Attraction."
Hackman has the right amount of ambiguity as the man who could be a monster. Dreyfuss gives an edgy, hyperactive performance as the understandably upset husband.
Nichols can't settle on a proper tone for the production. The director plays some moments for laughs, dissipating the tension that should keep building throughout the evening. But then the arguments between husband and wife go slack, too, turning into little more than two-person panel discussions.
Designer Tony Walton has created an ominous beach house setting, built mostly from massive stone columns and beams. It's Stonehenge with sand.
"Death and the Maiden" begins and ends with a mirror of glass facing the audience, a device used to better effect in "Cabaret" 25 years ago. We are all guilty, the reflection seems to say. Too bad Dorfman's message isn't told as theatrically.

 

End of Document
