

36 Skulls is the Aftermath of Fiery Highway Explosion in Venezuela
The Associated Press
September 29, 1993, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 332 words
Byline: By KATHERINE HUTT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LAS TEJERIAS, Venezuela
Body




Rescue workers had a grisly job, picking through incinerated vehicles to determine the number of victims of a fiery explosion that almost obliterated the bodies of the dead.
"We have 36 skulls," Capt. Egui Martinez, fire department commander for the region, said late Tuesday.
Based on the number of skulls found - about the only trace left of the victims who perished during rush hour Tuesday when a natural gas pipeline exploded under a highway - Martinez put the death toll at 36.
The state news agency Venpres initially reported 50 dead, but lowered the toll to 37 Tuesday night. The was no way to immediately reconcile the figures given by Venpress and Martinez.
Another 40 people were injured when the pipeline exploded shortly before 8 a.m. under the Central Regional Highway in this town 30 miles southwest of the capital.
The state gas company Corpoven said a telephone company contractor laying fiber optic cable, working without Corpoven's permission, ruptured its pipeline.
The president of the state-controlled telephone company, Bruce Haddad, didn't acknowledge the company's responsibility for the explosion. But Haddad, in an interview with Radio Caracas Television, offered to pay compensation to victims and their families and to foot the bill for damage to cars.
The telephone company said it was investigating the cause of the blast.
Most of the dead were on a bus that was passing by the excavation crew.
"It was like a stream of fire that leapt to the sky," Alberto Jose Galeno, a passenger in a truck on the other side of the highway, said from his hospital bed.
Witnesses said the flames rose 130 feet into the sky.
The heat was so intense that truck driver Jesus Hernandez, 42, suffered first-degree burns on his face and hands even though he was 200 yards away.
"There was a big flash. The windshield broke. I ran," Hernandez said.
Hours after the explosion, firefighters hosed down the asphalt to cool it, scattering rings, shoes, handkerchiefs and other belongings of the victims.
 Load-Date: September 29, 1993

 

End of Document
