

A 'Title Wave' of New Books Recall the Attack on Pearl Harbor
The Associated Press
November 15, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 871 words
Byline: By NORMAN N. BROWN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




In anticipation of this year's 50th anniversary of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, publishers have unleashed a tidal wave of books dealing with that "Day of Infamy."
Among the prominent titles in the Pearl Harbor book deluge are three remarkable volumes published this fall by the Naval Institute Press in Annapolis, Md.
As author Paul Stillwell points out in his prologue to "Battleship Arizona: An Illustrated History" ($ 48.95), Americans today know very little about the Arizona beyond the fact that it was sunk during the attack. They have perhaps seen a grainy film clip of it being bombed, or at least one well-publicized photo of its charred, toppled foremast. Beyond that, Arizona is just the name of a memorial in Hawaii where tourists can view the sunken wreckage.
Stillwell sets out to fill this void. Assisted by official documents and pictures, memorabilia supplied by former crew members of what was the U.S. Navy's "Battleship 39," oral history records of events, and many other contemporary sources, he weaves the interesting story of the Arizona, from its keel-laying in New York in 1909 to its death on the first day of a titanic struggle for supremacy in the Pacific.
As it turned out, the Arizona would never fire its guns in anger. When the United States entered World War I, the ship served exclusively off American shores as a training vessel for gunners who would be assigned to other ships. Because it burned oil, the ship was not sent to Europe, where oil was scarce. Instead, less modern, coal-fired warships made up the U.S. naval presence overseas, where coal was more readily available.
In the years of peace that followed, the Arizona made trips of protocol to Europe and the Mediterranean; it went south in North American winters to exercise with other fleet units in the Caribbean, transited the Panama Canal, and twice visited Peru. Its home port was switched from New York to San Pedro, Calif. The ship visited the Hawaiian Islands, and almost every year was dry-docked at Bremerton, Wash., for maintenance and repairs.
The Arizona was regularly modernized and altered. A magnificent frontispiece photograph - one of 370 - of the ship in its final configuration launches the reader into Stillwell's book. It was a truly handsome ship even before its first modifications, definitely more so after them.
Stillwell recalls the soul of theman-of-war whose death signaled the beginning of a war in which it would not fight, and from which the U.S. Navy would emerge as the biggest and best in the world.
The Arizona saw many happy days, and because of them it is still remembered with affection by the men who served aboard it. Stillwell has captured this affection in the many anecdotes he relates, none of them sugary nor sentimental.
An excellent companion volume to "Battleship Arizona" is "Pearl Harbor Recalled: New Images of the Day of Infamy" ($ 42.95). In it, painter Tom Freeman recreates quite vividly the events of Dec. 7, 1941, of which there indeed exist relatively few action photographs and films.
Freeman's viewpoints are unconventional, and his choice of passages of the battle unusual and original. His use of strong colors and accurate detailing contribute largely to the appeal and freshness of this work, and he brings the spectator up close to what is happening.
The illustrations are suitably complemented by brief explanatory texts by James P. Delgado, a specialist in underwater archaeology.
A gripping footnote to the Pearl Harbor disaster is provided by Stephen Bower Young in "Trapped at Pearl Harbor: Escape From the Battleship Oklahoma" ($ 24.95). Young was one of a handful of sailors who were trapped inside one of the stern gun turrets of the battle-wagon, which was torpedoed and capsized at its mooring site.
Young recreates the early Sunday morning atmosphere aboard the Oklahoma, when men were beginning to stir, looking forward to breakfast, light duties or shore leave. The surprise and confusion of the first moments of the attack, he recalls, gave way to training asserting itself and men running to their battle stations to await orders.
They never came.
As the battleship turned over, the crew of No. 4 Turret was deluged with oil and bombarded by sundry equipment that broke loose from the bulkheads, especially heavy artillery shells that fatally crushed a number of men. Some managed to get out onto the sloping decks and swim away before the open hatches were submerged, but 11 were unable to do so.
One of the men who got out reported the existence of survivors, and rescue efforts to save them were initiated. The rescuers cut their way through bulkheads and decks and finally got to the compartment where Young and his companions were isolated.
Cutting through the last steel plates was difficult because it could not be done by blowtorch - the trapped men would have suffocated. Cold chisel and jackhammer did the job with excruciating slowness while air escaped through the hole they wrought and water started rising in the compartment, threatening to drown the men who had managed to stay alive for 25 hours after the attack. But they all got out, relieved, incredulous at their luck, and thankful.
Fifty photographs accompany this cliffhanger of a story.

 

End of Document
