

A Tale In Which The Cautious President Takes A Trip That Does Him No Harm
The Associated Press
July 11, 1992, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 709 words
Byline: By TERENCE HUNT, AP White House Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




After an aggressive trade trip to Asia and a go-it-alone stand at the Earth Summit in Brazil, President Bush almost became an invisible man when world leaders gathered first in Munich and then in Helsinki last week.
Bush suffered personal embarrassment and political beatings in Asia and Brazil. This time, facing an increasingly tough battle for re-election, the president appeared determined to avoid any more damage in Germany and Finland.
Bush went along with broadly worded communiques at the Munich economic summit of industrialized nations and the Helsinki gathering of 51 leaders for the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Yet, nothing from either meeting carried an imprint of leadership from George Bush.
Though he was the most powerful leader at both meetings, he seemingly made no demands of his partners and did not attempt to bend them to compromise. Instead, he kept his head down and played it safe.
At home, Ross Perot and Bill Clinton played along, acting as if they didn't know that Bush were overseas.
Of course, the president knew in advance that the Munich summit would fail to produce a long-sought agreement to revamp the world's trading system and that it would offer only vague promises for world growth even though global economies are struggling.
Investing little energy in its outcome, Bush hardly could be blamed for its failure.
In Helsinki, the results also were sparse.
The leaders failed to take a strong stand on the Balkan crisis, merely expressing "dismay" at the bloodshed that has claimed many thousands of lives. Russia blocked stronger language.
In a largely symbolic gesture, the United States and Western Europe agreed to send ships off Yugoslavia to monitor observance with U.N. sanctions. It was a far cry from the naval blockade that had been contemplated.
Secretary of State James A. Baker III said the United States did not want to get trapped in a "quagmire" - a buzzword from the Vietnam era.
And Bush stressed that the United States was not trying to settle the bitter ethnic dispute.
"I think people are reluctant to get bogged down in … guerrilla warfare," Bush explained Friday. He said the U.S.'s chief responsibility was providing humanitarian relief.
He said there was "reluctance on the part of people to go storming into a situation that is very complicated from a military standpoint. And also we think diplomatic pressure, sanctions, and humanitarian relief is the answer right now."
Like Bush, all of the leaders in Munich were politically weak and their economies were feeble. Bush was strapped by a staggering budget deficit that limits his hand. And with the collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of its military threat, European leaders are looking for ways to assert their own independence.
It was almost preordained that not much would result last week.
French President Francois Mitterrand, always prickly toward the United States, refused to go along with British efforts for a compromise on farm subsidies that are at the heart of the trade impasse.
U.S. officials said Mitterrand was fearful of offending the politically powerful farm bloc as he approaches a crucial vote in France on European political and monetary union.
"We are the sole remaining superpower," President Bush said after the Munich meeting. And yet, "That doesn't mean that the way you lead is to dictate."
White House officials expressed confidence Bush would get a boost from his diplomacy. But it's not likely to last long. Besides, Americans already give him credit for skill in foreign policy. In this area, voters overwhelmingly believe Bush is better than Clinton or Perot.
It is on the bread-and-butter issue of the economy where Bush gets low ratings. And that's sure to work against him if the economy remains weak and Americans vote their pocketbooks.
"The state of the economy has a lot to do with the questioning of my presidency, and economic recovery clearly will be a benefit," Bush said in an interview with the MacNeil-Lehrer NewsHour. "And the opponents are going to be hoping the economy is bad, because that's the only thing they can do to kid us on the economy."
----
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE: Terence Hunt has covered the presidency since 1981 and is The Associated Press' chief White House correspondent.

 

End of Document
