

After the Massacre, The Soldiers Are Gone and The People Are Glad
The Associated Press
December 4, 1991, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 610 words
Byline: By SHELLEY EMLING, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SANTIAGO ATITLAN, Guatemala
Body




The roadblock on the rocky road into this highland village, site of a massacre by the army a year ago, is manned not by soldiers but by local Indian men in embroidered pants and straw hats.
Each night, a makeshift barrier seals off the 20,000 or so residents, mostly Tzutuhil natives, from the rest of the world.
Men armed only with sticks and the ability to summon an angry mob with the blow of a whistle prevent army and police patrols from passing through town.
This village 50 miles west of Guatemala City took control of its own security a year ago, on Dec. 2, hours after soldiers at the town's military post opened fire on residents who were protesting the attempted kidnapping of a local merchant by the army.
The barrage, in the town square, left 13 Indians dead, including a 10-year-old boy, and at least 20 wounded.
Following local and international outrage against such violence, the government ordered military and police forces out of the town at the residents' request.
Before last December, Santiago Atitlan, with narrow rutted streets and crumbling adobe houses, was a menacing place. Its reputation as a guerrilla stronghold prompted military repression that continued even after a civilian government came to power in 1986.
Guerrilla activity was common and the sounds of armed clashes crackled in the surrounding hills. Masked men attacked church and social workers thought to be sympathetic to the rebels.
"Before, there was no law," said Manuel Sisay, president of the town's self-protection committee. The soldiers "killed, kidnapped and robbed because there was no authority."
But the shootings a year ago changed all that. More than 10,000 villagers signed a petition, many with a thumbprint because of their illiteracy, asking for the military's removal.
By presidential decree, the base was shut down on Dec. 20. Coffee grows there now.
On occasion, the townspeople have allowed government police to enter their village - but only in groups of six to eight at a time.
A security committee oversees Santiago's "rondas," small groups of unarmed volunteers who take turns patrolling the town and making certain no uniformed military men come in.
On May 23, about 40 soldiers arrived in a small boat shortly after dawn. The residents surrounded the men and contacted the human rights ombudsman as well as the presidential palace. The soldiers were ordered out.
Even now, residents watch closely when army planes or helicopters fly overhead, afraid that the military is trying to come back.
"Since the army left, we've had a peace that's felt totally secure," said Pedro Sojuel, a weaver and one of nine members of Santiago's security committee. "This year has been at peace … God has listened to our prayers."
In a move unusual in Guatemala, a military court sentenced two men to long prison terms for the Santiago Massacre, as it has become known.
Reports after the incident said the two men - plus the commander of the base and two other soldiers - had harassed and fired on the townspeople during a drunken binge.
The case is one of six human rights cases cited by the U.S. Congress in July when drafting a bill that would continue a suspension of military aid to Guatemala and condition future economic aid on progress in the human rights situation. Congress has not yet voted on that bill.
"The security forces are virtually never held accountable for human rights violations," said the U.S. State Department's 1990 Human Rights Report on Guatemala. "With few exceptions, the government has failed to investigate, detain, and prosecute those perpetrators of extrajudicial and politically motivated killings who were connected with the security forces."
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto NY6

 

End of Document
