

Alien Smuggling: The Dangerous New China Trade
The Associated Press
June 7, 1993, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 693 words
Byline: By RICK HAMPSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Millions of Chinese peasants, captivated by images of American luxury on TV and with little to lose at home, are turning to human smugglers known as "snakeheads" to steal passage across the sea.
But escape can be deadly, as it was for at least seven of those aboard the freighter that ran aground off a New York City beach early Sunday.
With a rising tide of ships jammed with illegal Chinese immigrants steaming toward America, officials worried about such a disaster. The wreck was merely the latest and worst in a series of incidents involving a booming criminal trade in human desperation.
-Four members of Fuk Ching, a Chinatown gang notorious for immigrant smuggling, were killed in a shootout last month at a "safe house" in suburban Teaneck, N.J.
-Thirty-seven women aboard one smuggling ship said they were raped by crew members last year en route to the United States.
-A fishing boat nearly sank last fall while attempting to ferry 160 Chinese to Long Beach, Calif.
-At least three illegal immigrants have been shot to death during the past year in New York's Chinatown, apparently because they failed to pay off their passage. Others have reported being kidnapped and tortured.
Unlike illicit migrations from Latin America and the Caribbean, the one from China is highly organized and vastly profitable to those who control it. Immigrants typically agree to pay $ 30,000 for their long, often agonizing passage, with a down payment and the balance to be paid after arrival in the United States.
The most common destination for Chinese is New York. Police estimate that more than two dozen smuggling rings operate in the city.
Investigators mention a few familiar names in an otherwise shadowy business. One of those is Paul Wong, alias "Fuchou Paul," a leader of the Green Dragons, a Chinatown gang. Wanted by the FBI for murder and extortion, he's thought to have fled to China.
Much of the smuggling is planned and organized outside the jurisdiction of U.S. law enforcers. Operating from a base in Hong Kong or Taiwan, the mastermind of a smuggling ring hires recruiters, sailors, corrupt officials, drivers, document forgers, employment agents and thugs. Some experts say it all adds up to a $ 3-billion-a-year industry.
"The American authorities really don't know what's hit them," Peter Kwong, director of the Asian-American studies program at Hunter College, said Sunday.
Some experts estimate that as many as 100,000 Chinese are being smuggled into the United States each year, compared with about 30,000 legal Chinese entries.
In the past six months more than a dozen ships carrying an average of 150 people have been seized by U.S. authorities, who concede that they may interdict only 5 percent of such vessels. Other ships never come near U.S. waters, instead dropping immigrants off in Mexico or Canada for transport across land and into the United States.
But even the limited number of Chinese who are apprehended gives some idea of how fast the new China trade is growing. Before Sunday, more than 1,800 undocumented Chinese had been caught at sea or on land this year, compared with 1,390 in all of 1992.
Only 89 of the latter were sent home, because Chinese aliens can avoid immediate deportation by seeking political asylum; since the immigration service has limited jail space, a detainee is often released on his own recognizance pending a hearing.
Many Chinese who seek asylum say they are trying to escape forced sterilization and their country's one-child policy, and INS officials said U.S. courts have granted asylum on these grounds.
So the Chinese keep coming, even though the economic success enjoyed by earlier arrivals is ever harder to duplicate. The average wage for unskilled labor in Chinatown has dropped to between $ 1 and $ 1.50 an hour; an advertisement for a $ 2.50-an-hour job - still far below the legal minimum wage - starts a stampede.
Many illegal Chinese are forced into indentured servitude to pay off their debt to the smuggler. Some live in barracks and are taken to and from work by guards.
"This traffic is inhuman, and yet Americans are not really reacting," complained Kwong. "They assume it's a Chinese problem."

 

End of Document
