

Almost 50 Years Later, Some Japanese Still Fighting the War
The Associated Press
October 11, 1992, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 857 words
Byline: By ERIC TALMADGE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TOKYO
Body




Nearly 50 years have passed since Allied forces humiliated the Japanese war machine, but in Japan's courts, its diplomatic relations and the minds of many of its people, World War II has yet to end.
A crewcut neo-nationalist in military-style clothing stands atop a black bus bellowing through a megaphone at commuters: "We must never apologize for the war! If we do, all of Asia will have their hands out demanding reparations! We don't owe them anything!"
So common is the scene that most of the mildly annoyed passersby ignore the anti-communist, anti-government banners and the shouted message: that Japan's armies were on a holy mission to liberate Asia from Western colonialism.
Immersed in rebuilding their own country, the Japanese have long avoided many of the harsher realities of the past, and making amends.
But, like the pesky rightists, the war refuses to go away. That is particularly true now that Japan is trying to exert more international influence.
For the first time since World War II, Japanese ground forces are being deployed overseas. Although they are serving with U.N. peacekeeping forces in Cambodia, the move has stirred anxiety among Japan's former enemies.
On Oct. 23, Emperor Akihito is to embark on an extremely sensitive journey to China. Already, the main issue has become the war: Should Akihito apologize for Japanese atrocities?
Masahiko Ishizuka, a columnist for the Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Japan's leading economic daily, believes most Japanese think not.
"Has Britain ever apologized to the people of China or India for having preyed on them during the 19th century?" he wrote recently. "Has Spain ever expressed regret for having slaughtered the indigenous peoples of South America? Will America ever apologize for having killed or maimed millions of Vietnamese?"
Apologies for the war by Japanese leaders have been rare, in contrast to Germany, whose chancellor, Willy Brandt, fell to his knees in 1970 before a memorial to Jewish victims of the Warsaw ghetto uprising.
Parliament has never approved a resolution denouncing the war. Education Ministry officials have censored history textbooks that deal too explicitly with the Imperial Army's exploits.
On past trips abroad, Akihito and his father, the late Emperor Hirohito, called the war "regrettable" and "unfortunate," but never expressly apologized.
The imperial remarks have been so guarded that a toast offered by Hirohito in 1984 to Chun Doo-hwan, then president of South Korea, could have been interpreted as a call for Korea, not Japan, to repent.
"It is indeed regrettable that there was an unfortunate past between us for a period in this century, and I believe that it should not be repeated again," the emperor said.
Kenichi Takagi, a lawyer, said the Japanese "have always thought of themselves as victims, thanks largely to Hiroshima and Nagasaki. We've never really been forced to look at ourselves as the culprits."
For two years, Takagi has been at center stage in the most sensational war-related trial in recent memory, trying to win compensation for Asian women sexually enslaved by the Imperial Army.
The charge is crimes against humanity. Among the complainants are several South Korean women who say they were forced to serve as prostitutes for Japanese soldiers.
Other former sex slaves - historians believe there might have been up to 200,000 - have come forward in the Philippines, Indonesia, North Korea and China.
Japan ended decades of denial this year by acknowledging it was involved in running front-line brothels, but officials have stuck to their position that negotiations over reparations will not be reopened.
Japan never paid reparations to China or Korea, although it offered $ 300 million in grants and $ 200 million in loans to South Korea when formal relations were established in 1965.
It paid a total of $ 1.15 billion to Burma, the Philippines, Indonesia and South Vietnam. Most was in the form of capital goods, with the receiving country supplying the needed raw materials, leading to criticism that it was designed to reopen Asian markets to Japan.
Germany, on the other hand, has paid more than $ 43 billion to Holocaust survivors and their families.
"The United States let Japan off the hook for its own strategic reasons after the war," Takagi said. "Japan wasn't forced to pay reparations, and the countries around it were too weak to do anything about it. That has dulled our sense of responsibility."
In recent years, an increasing number of grassroots movements have begun seeking payment.
In September, a committee was formed in Beijing to coordinate the activities of more than 300,000 Chinese seeking damages. Groups in Taiwan are asking redress for wages paid them in worthless wartime currency. North Korea has said Japan should pay damages to its former sex slaves.
Takagi is betting that, with Japan trying to bolster its international position, and ultimately get a seat on the U.N. Security Council, it will find such movements too embarrassing to ignore.
"I think the government is beginning to realize that, if it doesn't act before these people die, it may never be able to win the trust of Asia," he said.

 

End of Document
