

Ambivalent Panamanian: Insults Bush But Wants to Study in the U.S.
The Associated Press
June 12, 1992, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 591 words
Byline: By JOSEPH B. FRAZIER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PANAMA CITY, Panama
Body




On a street littered with debris from anti-Bush demonstrations, Sergio Montenegro Ruiz relit a half-smoked cigarette and considered America.
He would like to go to school in the United States one day - electronics, maybe - even though he had just spent three hours Thursday shouting insults against its president.
Montenegro Ruiz, who works as a clerk and attends night school, said he sees no discrepancy. "America isn't bad. But it won't let Panama be Panama and I am a Panamanian, and with pride," he said.
The demonstrations during President Bush's visit Thursday have roots that go back decades. Many here believe America's close ties with Panama and military presence in the isthmus-nation have created a dependency that undermines their own sovereignty.
The feeling peaks from time to time.
On Thursday it was triggered by memories of the 1989 U.S. military invasion, which Bush ordered to capture dictator Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega. At least 325 Panamanians died in the fighting. Some put the figure much higher.
"The killer always returns to the scene of the crime," said a flyer from the Association of University of Panama Professors.
Yet like Montenegro Ruiz, Panamanians reveal ambiguous feelings about the United States.
Polls still show most favor keeping the 10,000 American troops in their country past the end of the century, when by treaty they are to be withdrawn.
The U.S. presence has raised the standard of living. Withdrawal of the troops will cost about 12,000 jobs in a country where unemployment is endemic.
President Guillermo Endara's office thanked Panamanians for their good behavior during the Bush visit, saying it was "lamentable" that small groups tied to Noriega "impeded the happy culmination of the ceremonies through which the Panamanian community wanted to show its togetherness with the North American leader."
During Bush's visit, officially invited crowds cheered in the square where Bush sat. Small groups of well-wishers formed along motorcade route.
Panamanians danced in the streets when the United States carted Noriega off to Miami to face drug-trafficking charges. He was later convicted.
Today, many of the same people who quietly yearned for an American invasion in 1989 feel they have been treated shabbily.
Some shopkeepers still are filing lawsuits, claiming the United States is liable for the tens of millions of dollars they lost to civilian looters. U.S. appeals courts have ruled there is no liability.
Family members of political prisoners arrested after the fighting blame their plight on Bush.
Many of the 2,700 families who lost homes in Panama City's El Chorillo slum, where the fighting was heaviest, say the indemnity of about $ 6,800 per family for new housing and lost belongings was not enough. They want another $ 3,500.
The ambiguous feelings go back a long way.
The United States helped Panama break away from Colombia in 1903 so it could negotiate a deal to build the Panama Canal.
American troops have been in Panama since 1911, along with a Canal Zone in which American law ruled until it was dissolved in 1979. This has riled many Panamanians over the years.
In 1964, at least 18 Panamanians and four U.S. soldiers were killed in clashes that erupted after a Panamanian flag was torn as students tried to raise it outside Balboa High School in the Canal Zone. National outrage sparked by the incident has slept but never died.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Joseph B. Frazier, Associated Press news editor in the Mexico City bureau, has covered Panama, Mexico and Central America for the AP since 1979.

 

End of Document
