

American Investors Who Dabbled in Mexico Feel the Pain
The Associated Press
December 29, 1994, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 676 words
Byline: By LISA GENASCI, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The Mexican peso's tumultuous drop has been felt primarily in Mexico. But if you're an American owner of Mexico stocks or mutual funds that invest there, you could be smarting from the sting.
Many investors who jumped into Mexico and other so-called "emerging markets," reaping double-digit returns in 1993, now are experiencing the risks and pain of foreign stock ownership.
The value of Mexican holdings owned by American investors has fallen by billions of dollars in a matter of days.
There were signs Wednesday that the Mexican turmoil might be abating somewhat. The peso and Mexican stocks recovered some lost ground amid possible signs of peace from insurgents in southern Mexico and word that an International Monetary Fund delegation was visiting Mexico City.
Nonetheless, the Mexican stock market has lost in dollar terms 44 percent this year. In 1993 it rose 47 percent, prompting enthusiasm among American investors at a time when interest rates at home were at 25-year lows.
In late October, there was $ 55 billion in foreign investments in the Mexican stock market and 75 percent of that was U.S. money, said Lars Schonander, Latin America economist at Baring Securities Ltd.
With the peso drop, people lost about one-third of their holdings, adding up to significant losses.
"That can't fail to have an impact on the idea of investing in Latin America," Schonander said.
Investors in mutual funds that specialize in the fledgling markets of Latin America also have been hurt by the Mexico debacle. Many have lost between 6 percent and nearly 20 percent since early last week.
Still, there has been little evidence so far that investors in this species of mutual funds are bailing out. At Fidelity Investments Inc., the nation's leading mutual fund company, redemptions in international funds have been "very modest," said Connie Hubbell, a spokeswoman.
Fidelity's New Markets Income fund, however, had seen redemptions on the order of 23 percent of assets as of Wednesday, Hubbell said.
The losses in Mexican stocks followed the government's decision on Dec. 20 to scrap its policy of defending the peso's value vs. the dollar, a move that came despite assurances to foreign investors that no such action was imminent.
The Mexican stock market plunged, as did American depositary receipts in Mexican stocks, which are the equivalent of Mexican stocks traded in this country.
The peso's devaluation instantly reduced the value of Mexican shares by making them much cheaper when purchased with dollars. In addition, the peso's devaluation generated concern that the debt burdens of some big Mexican companies had suddenly ballooned in dollar terms, which would devour their profits and hurt their stock prices.
"Those heavy debt burdens will be harder to dispatch," said Joyce Chang, a director in the emerging markets group at Salomon Brothers Inc.
Furthermore, the peso's declining value makes imports to Mexico more expensive. That can bring inflation, higher interest rates, lower economic growth and lower corporate earnings, Schonander said.
Still, there is some feeling that American investors have overreacted, pushing solid stocks such as the telecommunications monopoly Telefonos de Mexico down more than 14 percent in a week.
"People are not trading on fundamentals, they are trading on panic and the possibility of making short-term gains," said Marla Marron, Latin American equity analyst for Salomon Brothers.
Indeed, while consumer product companies, banks and those with large import bills may fare poorly with a shriveled peso, others could benefit or feel little effect, Marron said
Telmex has dollar revenue from international calls, yet it also pays its suppliers in dollars, providing somewhat of a balance.
Companies with strong exports such as the glassmaker Vitro could also benefit because the cheaper peso means they can sell their products more competitively abroad.
Mexican hotel and resort operators also are expected to gain as more foreigners visit Mexico, exploiting bargains created by the expanded purchasing power of their dollars.
 Load-Date: December 29, 1994

 

End of Document
