

An Admiral's-Eye-View of the Falklands War
The Associated Press
April 10, 1992, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 438 words
Body




ONE HUNDRED DAYS: The Memoirs of the Falklands Battle Group Commander.  By Admiral Sandy Woodward, with Patrick Robinson. Naval Institute Press. 360 Pages. $ 24.95.
 
 "One Hundred Days," one of more than 100 books written about the air, sea and land hostilities in the Falklands, is not the best. But it is written by the person closest to the events transpiring on the military level, as opposed to those in the political and diplomatic sphere.
The brief war in the remote South Atlantic archipelago began April 2, 1982, when Argentina invaded the islands - which it and other Latin American lands call the Malvinas and which it has long claimed were usurped by Great Britain in 1833.
Fighting ended in mid-June when the Argentines were finally evicted by British forces.
Woodward briefly recounts his naval career prior to assuming command of a Royal Navy task force and the circumstances leading to his being ordered to recapture the islands. He then takes the reader at length through the successive stages of the conflict, going with particular care into the orders he gave to the naval contingent as the situation evolved.
He seems moved by the desire to lay out in full, for the benefit of historians, the motivation behind each order, with a view to its justification. After all, Woodward's task force lost in action enough ships and aircraft to make his competence at times suspect and to dull the sheen of his overall accomplishment of eventually recapturing the islands.
By now, it is known that the recapture of the Falklands was not a pushover. It was the result of, among other factors, good personnel-training on the British side and incredibly stupid political and military bungling by the Argentines.
Woodward recognizes these facts while at the same time complaining that British naval electronic weaponry was found wanting in the face of deadly attacks by the Argentine Air Force. (This one branch of the nation's military emerged from the war with an untarnished record of determination and some success in the face of appalling attrition.)
Woodward's book is not an outstanding opus by a long shot, nor is it a whining excuse for the author's professional shortcomings - those observed and those that may yet come to light. Woodward states he did his duty as best he could to help win the war. He is honest to the point that he exposes some of his own less appealing personal traits of impatience, intolerance and anger.
The narrative matter of this book, coming as it does "straight from the horse's mouth," is therefore valuable in that capacity, and as such it must be judged.
 
 By Norman N. Brown
 
 ociated Press Writer

 

End of Document
