

An AP New Dimensions Feature - The Nature Conservancy's Record in Preserving Land is Excellent
The Associated Press
August 14, 1992, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 537 words
Byline: By COUNTRY LIVING
Body




The Nature Conservancy saves land the old-fashioned way - it buys it.
The private, non-profit organization has been called "conservation's best-kept secret," according to an article by Monica Michael Willis in the current issue of Country Living, and its purpose is to save all species, no matter how obscure or seemingly insignificant.
The organization's mission is three-fold: to identify land that shelters the best examples of natural communities and species; to protect natural systems and habitats through acquisition made possible through individual and corporation contributions, foundation grants and membership dues; and to manage the preserves via staff and volunteer land stewards.
To keep management and overhead costs low whenever possible, property is turned over to responsible federal and state agencies for protection.
Founded in 1951, the Conservancy's entrepreneurial spirit enables it to bridge the often enormous environmental gap between the public and private sectors.
The Conservancy appeals to many corporations as well as individual members because of its track record for efficiency and level-headedness.
As Noel Grove wrote in his new book, "Preserving Eden: The Nature Conservancy": "Central to Conservancy's success are the business minds that can close a land deal, entice a gift from a potentially generous donor, or devise a tax shelter to save a rare plant."
Unlike most conservation groups, which devote their sizable resources to educating the public, the Conservancy focuses on purchasing tracts of land in North America and working with partners in the Caribbean and Latin America to preserve habitats they believe help maintain the biotic diversity of the planet.
If land the Conservancy wishes to obtain is not on the market, the group often tries to persuade the owner to grant a conservation easement, which would restrict the use of the land to protect a certain species. Landowners generally receive a federal tax break in exchange for their generosity.
At present, the Conservancy owns and manages more than 1,300 preserves throughout the country, ranging in size from less than an acre to more than 324,000 acres.
Since 1953, 6.2 million acres of vital habitat have been protected in the United States; acres protected outside the United States, with Conservancy assistance, total 22 million. In America, new acquisitions average 1,000 acres a day.
Among the notable projects the organization has undertaken is the Louisiana Nature Conservancy's 609-acre White Kitchen preserve. Purchased in 1989, this wetland in southeastern Louisiana functions as a refuge to hundreds of plant and animal species, including the bald eagle.
The group has helped raise funding to establish the World Center for Birds of Prey in Idaho and worked in tandem with the state of Florida to purchase the 3,000-acre Wakulla corridor, home to a number of rare freshwater species.
In 1990 the Conservancy launched "Parks in Peril," an international campaign to protect 200 key tropical ecosystems covering more than 100 million acres, including rain forests, throughout Latin America and the Caribbean.
For more information about the Nature Conservancy, write P.O. Box PSA, 1815 N. Lynn Street, Arlington, Va. 22209.

 

End of Document
