

An Immigrant's Path to the Labor Movement
 The Associated Press
October 22, 1995, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 715 words
Byline: By KEVIN GALVIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Maria Herrera's path to the labor movement began one terrifying night in Honduras, when gunmen burst into her home and executed her husband while she hid under a box with their infant son.
She fled to the United States, where every job seemed to come with an exploitive boss. Some wanted kickbacks. Some wanted much more. Tired of running, she finally found refuge in the labor movement.
"I have undergone a great change because of all the things that have happened to me," said Herrera, 39, now an office building janitor and part-time organizer for a Service Employees International Union local. "We deserve justice in this country. We must be respected because we are fighting for our rights."
Seeking to regain labor's political and social clout, union leaders gather at the AFL-CIO convention in New York on Monday with an eye toward intensifying recruitment efforts among low-wage part-time workers, many of whom are new residents struggling to gain a foothold in the United States.
That requires extra effort. Unions must hire bilingual organizers and publish recruiting material in several languages. Organizers must overcome the skeptical views of labor unions some workers bring from home, as did Herrera.
The focus on immigrants from Latin America and Asia remind some organizers of the labor movement's work at the turn of the century, when union ranks swelled with mill and factory workers from Europe.
"They come here with a hot fire burning in their belly to not just make ends meet or just get along," said David Sickler, the AFL-CIO director for California, Nevada and Hawaii, destinations of many immigrants. "They want a better life and they're willing to fight.
"Once those people become convinced that you can deliver, they'll go to hell and back for you."
Once the language barrier is broken and the cultural barrier crossed, union organizers recruiting immigrant workers still have hurdles to overcome.
"They have two or three jobs. It's hard to get to them. And when we get to them, they're sleeping or they're tired," said Maria Naranjo, a Washington organizer for "Justice for Janitors," a high-profile campaign that employs civil disobedience and work stoppages to press the cause of cleaning workers nationwide.
Low-wage workers frequently jump to new jobs a month or two after organizers have begun to recruit them. "In terms of building a core group of leaders, it's been very difficult," Naranjo said.
Like the service employees union, the United Food and Commercial Workers hires organizers who speak Spanish and Asian languages. Spokesman Greg Denier said the UFCW publishes informational material in 14 languages.
The UFCW produces radio ads with workers from local immigrant communities extolling the benefits of unions in their own languages. Denier said it's proven an effective way to address workers who "believed in the American dream, yet find themselves exploited."
Herrera once shuddered at the thought of signing a union card. Co-workers here told her unions collected dues, then scoffed at worker complaints. In Central America, she said, union membership could mark you for political violence.
She was afraid she would be fired from her minimum-wage job for attending a meeting. After her husband was slain for supporting guerrillas in neighboring El Salvador, she had left her son with her mother. She sends home much of her earnings to support the boy she hasn't seen since 1981.
But the treatment she suffered in the workplace overshadowed those concerns.
"They pushed us, insulted us, and they even tried to abuse me," she said during an interview in Spanish at a union office. "I said, 'No more! I'm going to the union, and I won't be … mistreated anymore."'
Once she ran from the first sign of authority; now she's a vocal protester in the "Justice for Janitors" campaign, chanting in the street, blocking traffic, papering the city with posters that denounce powerful developers.
Sickler said his AFL-CIO regional office is coordinating a new push to organize among the Los Angeles area's 700,000 manufacturing workers, 70 percent of whom are Latinos.
National Association of Manufacturers spokeswoman Laura Brown said it would be wrong to assume most immigrants are exploited by businesses "and we certainly wouldn't condone that kind of treatment of workers."
 Load-Date: October 22, 1995

 

End of Document
