

Anti-Inflation Policies Bring Desperation to the Poor
The Associated Press
June 2, 1992, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 765 words
Byline: By TODD LEWAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




In a glittering high-rise, economists told a development symposium the cure for Brazil's economic ills was more austerity.
If the government cut social spending, fired more of its employees and raised taxes, they said, triple-digit inflation would subside and the economy would bounce back from its worst recession.
Five blocks away, beneath a highway overpass, Amelia Matos washed stockings in a salad bowl with water from a fire hydrant outside her home, a jumble of scrap plywood held together by tacks and wire.
Her husband, a construction worker laid off nearly a year ago, was selling fruit on the streets and their three sons had skipped school to peddle chewing gum to motorists at a nearby traffic light.
"A lot of people around here don't believe in anything any more," said Mrs. Matos, 42. "No matter what you do, no matter how much you do without, the economy keeps pushing you down into the ground."
Fernando Collor de Mello won the presidency with promises to defend the "shirtless and shoeless" by increasing the minimum wage, restoring buying power and creating jobs.
Instead, after taking office in March 1990, Collor froze bank accounts for 18 months, scrapped monthly wage increases indexed to inflation, raised taxes and utility rates, abolished rent control and capped the minimum wage.
His reforms averted hyperinflation, but businesses cut production, laid workers off and continued raising prices, sending the nation of 150 million into its worst recession.
"The issue of social equity was forgotten," said Jose Marcio Camargo, an economist at Pontifical Catholic University in Rio. "The state got smaller, but who took care of the poor?"
Brazil's debt-laden government says it has no money for social programs that would cushion the impact. Even plans to build 5,000 centers where children could study and receive food, counseling and medical care were suspended after a government minister was fired for diverting health-care funds to the project.
Little headway has been made in overhauling the pension system, which pays the equivalent of about $ 50 a month, or the educational system, whose professors earn half as much as maids.
"This recession has sent the poor into a free fall and there's no safety net to catch them," said Helio Jaguaribe, a Rio sociologist.
In Sao Paulo, the industrial hub, officials and labor unions say 154,000 workers were laid off in January alone, bringing the number of unemployed in Brazil's largest city to nearly 1 million.
Those with jobs face monthly inflation of more than 20 percent that cut the value of the minimum wage by more than half in six months, to the equivalent of $ 40 a month. In April, union spokesman Sergio Mendonca said the minimum wage had reached its lowest real value since 1922.
A reporter who visited a supermarket in the middle-class district of Flamengo in April found the monthly minimum would buy two gallons of milk, three dozen frankfurters and two bags of rice.
The minimum was increased to the equivalent of $ 80 in May, but frozen for four months. Half the workers in Brazil are paid the minimum wage.
"It's the same dinner every day - bananas, rice and beans," Amelia Matos said in her shelter beneath the overpass. "We've already cut back on clothes, watching TV and extras like curtains. We have no more to cut."
Even Rio's "favelas," or shantytowns, have become expensive. The minimum wage no longer covers the rent for a one-room shack with a mud floor and no electricity or running water in the hillside slum of Jacarezinho.
Buying such a hovel is out of the question for most shantytown residents. A 10-by-12-foot shack costs up to $ 800 in Jacarezinho.
Some Brazilians barter household goods with neighbors, share apartments or rent sleeping space to keep up with inflation. Others pay bills late or bounce checks.
A study by the Rio state power company found 27 percent of its customers paid their bills late in December, up from 6 percent a year earlier. The National Federation of Apartment Administrators said 270,000 Brazilians did not pay their rent on time in January, four times the highest previous rate.
Luizete Campos, 46, who has four children and works as a maid and janitor, described how the hard times have affected her family:
"I never see my husband and my two girls live with my mother in Salvador half the year. My boys give me 15,000 cruzeiros ($ 7) a day from washing cars, but who knows what things they are learning on the streets?"
Sometimes, desperation leads to violence.
Mobs looted six supermarkets in poor Rio neighborhoods during two weeks in April, one of them on Easter Monday.

 

End of Document
