

Are the Honduran Colonels Listening In?
The Associated Press
June 21, 1993, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 590 words
Byline: By FREDDY CUEVAS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TEGUCIGALPA, Honduras
Body




The military still either runs or influences nearly everything in Honduras, including the telephone system, so a lot of Hondurans don't call each other anymore.
Businessmen suspect the colonels are listening in to obtain information for their own business dealings. Labor leaders and human rights workers fear darker motives. The armed forces, which have controlled Honduras Telecommunications for 20 years, deny everything.
Honduras has had an elected government since 1981, but the military still has great power. It has a secret police force accused of many human rights violations, and controls customs services, border crossings, airports, seaports, transit police, immigration and aeronautical services, vehicle licensing, the merchant marine, national police and private security companies.
For years, the military received lavish U.S. aid in return for help with the Contra rebellion against the former Sandinista government in neighboring Nicaragua.
A recent Voice of America commentary described Honduras as "an army with a country instead of a country with an army."
In explaining the reluctance to use the telephones, Carlos Avila, manager of the Banco del Pais, told The Associated Press:
"Our clients prefer to do their business in person simply because the telephone lines are not secure in this country. There is a tremendous distrust of the telephone system … and the clients are now coming to our offices." Honduras Telecommunications, known by the acronym Hondutel, controls the telephone, fax, satellite, microwave and telegraph services. The military opposes selling it to private investors, as has been done with dozens of other state companies.
Under Honduran law, tapping telephone conversations is punishable by up to two years in jail.
"Telephone espionage constitutes an extremely grave crime," said Leo Valladares, coordinator of the government Commission for the Protection of Human Rights.
Carlos Kellner, former president of the telecommunications workers' union, accused the military of tapping the lines of public officials, business people, labor leaders and journalists since 1980.
"Even President Rafael Leonardo Callejas hasn't escaped the telephone monitoring ordered by the military," he said in a radio interview.
Kellner has lived in the United States since 1990. He left Honduras after accusing the armed forces of persecuting him for opposing the alleged tapping.
Olivin Rodriguez, the union's lawyer, said Honduran telephone lines "are monitored by military officials not only for national security reasons, but also to gain advantages in business dealings." said Olivin Rodriguez, legal counsel for the union.
"The current administration of Hondutel has reached the extreme that it will deny telephone service to people it doesn't like," he said.
"For a long time, my telephone has been monitored by Hondutel. That way, military officials gain advantages in their favor. They obtain information for their businesses … and that's why the armed forces now enjoy a privileged economic situation in Honduras."
Gen. Luis Alonso Discua, the military commander, described the allegations as "part of a systematic campaign against men in uniform."
Numerous accusations of corruption and abuse have arisen against the armed forces. According to news reports, the military's businesses include insurance companies, a flourishing commercial bank, radio stations, hotels, farms, the only stores where weapons can be bought and the most modern funeral parlor in Honduras.
Individual officers also have large business holdings.

 

End of Document
