

Argentina Shaken to the Core by Army Admission of Guilt
The Associated Press
April 26, 1995, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 952 words
Byline: By IAN PHILLIPS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Argentina
Body




For years Argentines were told not to dwell on the horrors of the "Dirty War." Now, the official silence has been broken with the admission that the army tortured and killed leftists and political dissidents two decades ago.
The truth has shaken the country to the core. While it may help Argentines confront their past, it may not help President Carlos Menem, who pardoned many of the people responsible and is up for re-election.
"It's time to assume the responsibility and no longer deny the horrors of the past," army Commander Gen. Martin Balza said Tuesday in acknowledging the army's role in the former military government's brutal campaign.
"The army did not know how to take on terrorists by legal means" Balza said on a televised talk show. "(It) employed illegitimate methods, including the suppression of life, to obtain information."
His surprise statement was applauded Wednesday by human rights groups, which have pushed for a new investigation into the disappearance of thousands of people during the Dirty War.
It came on the heels of two chilling confessions by retired armed forces officers who said political prisoners were thrown alive into the Atlantic from navy and army aircraft in the 1970s.
Wednesday night, Menem told reporters he might try to revoke a 1987 law that protects lower-ranking officers from prosecution. It wasn't clear whether he intended the move to discourage additional confessions, or was responding to complaints that too many officers escaped punishment.
"It is interesting to note that these confessions are made 20 years after the events and 20 days before the elections," Menem said at the presidential palace, the Noticias Argentinas news agency reported.
The military junta that seized power in 1976 went after left-wing guerrillas who sought to destabilize the country. More than 9,000 people, many of them intellectuals and dissidents unconnected with terrorism, were arrested and disappeared, an official report says.
Human rights advocates claim more than 30,000 Argentines disappeared under military rule.
Anybody remotely suspected of links with leftist groups or ideology - including journalists, intellectuals, scientists, trade unionists and political activists - lived in fear of being rounded up by secret police forces.
Human rights groups have demanded the publication of hit lists drawn up by the military juntas in the Dirty War.
But Menem has said the juntas destroyed almost all information pertaining to their Dirty War. Likewise, Balza said he had no knowledge of any lists.
Menem, who repeatedly urged former repressors "not to rub salt in old wounds" by publicly confessing to atrocities, praised Balza's "courage" and said he expected statements soon from the air force and the navy.
He said he hoped Balza's revelation would pacify the country and put an end to further tales of torture by repentant officers.
"This is a relief because on the one hand it will stop public confessions from repentant military men and also society will be able speak more openly," Menem said.
In a newspaper interview published Monday, former Sgt. Victor Ibanez claimed prisoners were put on "death flights" between 1976 and 1978. He was the first member of the Argentine army to speak out on alleged military murder methods.
The account echoed a confession in March by a former navy officer, Lt. Cmdr. Adolfo Scilingo. He, too, described how prisoners were drugged and thrown to their deaths from navy planes.
Human rights groups disagreed with Menem, saying they hoped debate on the Dirty War, formerly stifled, would lead to a shake up in the country's discredited armed forces.
"The significance of Balza's words cannot be underestimated," said Simon Lazara, a director of the Permanent Assembly on Human Rights and spokesman for former President Raul Alfonsin.
"Especially when you consider that he (Balza) leads an army which in its heart has people linked to that past."
Two former army generals, Fernando Santiago and Luciano Menendez, responded angrily Wednesday to Balza's statement, arguing that they had no regrets for the army's actions in the 1970s.
And they said Balza wasn't in a position to judge them, because he spent most of the Dirty War out of the country, working as a military attache in Peru.
"I helped prevent my country from falling into the hands of international subversives and communists," Santiago said. "And so I'm not going to apologize to anybody."
Menem's government has been criticized for not doing enough to investigate military crimes committed in the Dirty War. He granted an amnesty in December 1990 to most military officers and former terrorists accused or convicted of crimes
The admission, just three weeks away from national elections in which Menem is seeking a second term, could not have come at a more sensitive time for the government.
On Tuesday, Menem's running mate claimed the confessions were designed to undermine the president's bid for re-election.
"The assassins are only ready to confess 20 or 30 days before the elections," said Carlos Ruckauf, a former interior minister.
A veteran of the 1982 war with Britain over the Falkland Islands, Balza was not accused of abuses during the trials of military leaders held after democracy was restored in 1983. He is regarded as a supporter of Argentina's constitution and democratic system.
Balza, who consulted Menem and spoke twice with Defense Minister Oscar Camilion before delivering his speech Tuesday, said he had originally planned it for Army Day on May 29 - after the elections.
Contrary to the hopes of rights activists, he said the army had no knowledge of lists of Dirty War victims.
Menem has said the military government destroyed information pertaining to its Dirty War.
 Load-Date: April 27, 1995

 

End of Document
