

Argentine Campaigns Move from the Street to the Airwaves
The Associated Press
October 2, 1993, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 389 words
Byline: By IAN KATZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Argentina
Body




The ruling party's radio jingles, repeated at every commercial break, urge Argentines to "vote for progress."
The leading opposition group counters with a television ad mocking President Carlos Menem for accepting a Ferrari as a gift.
Meanwhile, street rallies called by parties competing in Sunday's election for half the seats in the Chamber of Deputies attract only a handful of activists and curious passers-by.
After embracing the return of democracy 10 years ago with enormous rallies, Argentina's enthusiasm for street politicking has waned. This year's campaign has been more American in style - dominated by radio and TV talk shows and attack ads.
The conservative newspaper La Nacion, in a front-page story Friday, called the campaign "monotonous" and noted that it lacked "the massive demonstrations of other years." Analysts say style is replacing substance.
This campaign has focused on Menem's efforts to reform the 140-year-old constitution to allow him to run for re-election in 1995. The constitution limits presidents to one six-year term, but can be amended by a two-thirds vote in both houses of congress.
While Menem's Peronist Party emphasizes the country's economic stability, opposition candidates accuse the government of corruption and of ignoring social issues such as health care and education.
The lack of street campaigning reflects Argentines' increasing distrust of politicians.
"No one is interested in debate," said Atilio Boron, a candidate with the Front for Advanced Democracy, a small left-leaning party.
At the same time, candidates are becoming more sophisticated in the use of the media, analysts say.
Before this election, a candidate criticized on a TV program might let weeks pass before responding.
"Now there is instant response," said Roberto de Michele, program director for Citizens Power, a political watchdog group. "They call the TV station on their cellular phone to respond live, and then go to the studios to debate in person."
Candidates from small parties complain that the Peronists and the Civic Radical Union, the nation's two dominant political groups, hold an unfair advantage because of the high cost of advertising. A minute on the most popular prime-time TV shows costs as much as $ 57,000.
"That means we have to try marches in the streets," Boron said. "And that's not very effective."
 Load-Date: October 2, 1993

 

End of Document
