

Argentina, Banks Back to the Table; Phiippines and Banks Strike Accord
The Associated Press
February 20, 1992, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 562 words
Byline: By ED McCULLOUGH, Associated Press Writer
Body




Argentina and its creditor banks resumed talks in New York Thursday on renegotiating the country's foreign commercial debt.
Meanwhile, the Philippines government and its commercial bankers reached agreement in New York to restructure $ 5 billion in medium- and long-term debt.
Jose Cuisia, governor of the Central Bank of the Philippines, said in an interview the agreement could lead his country back to a normal relationship with the world's financial markets. Similar debt restructuring agreements with Latin American countries served as a catalyst for new private investment, he said.
"More importantly," Cuisia said of the agreement, "it enables us to embark on a path of more sustainable growth."
The government of Argentina since April 1988 has made either no payments or only partial payments on its debt to commercial banks, which exceeds $ 30 billion.
The government has asked bankers to forgive 40 percent of outstanding principal. In return, Argentina's negotiators offered to exchange existing debt for new debt, such as zero coupon bonds from the U.S. Treasury. Those are bonds which pay no interest during their lifetime but a lump-sum payment when the bonds expire.
Argentina also offered to make a substantial payment on overdue interest that totals about $ 8 billion.
The committee representing some 600 foreign banks didn't publicly issue a response, but an Argentine negotiator said the banks offered to reduce the principal by 30 percent.
"Clearly, that's the first thing they put on the table," the negotiator said, speaking on condition of anonimity. "Mexico got 35 percent. … I think we'll agree on 35 percent very rapidly."
However, the banks are reluctant to lock in today's low interest rate.
"In terms of interest rates, there is a substantial difference," the negotiator said. "That's where the main discussion is."
It's unclear exactly how much Argentina owes the banks. Economy Minister Domingo Cavallo put the total commercial debt at $ 31 billion, including $ 8 billion in overdue interest.
Economic analysts and spokesmen for the banks put Argentina's total commercial debt at about $ 36 billion, including about $ 9 billion in overdue interest.
One partial explanation for the difference could be the government has debts to official Argentine banks, like the Bank of the Nation. Those debts total $ 3 billion to $ 4 billion, the negotiator said.
Foreign banks want a much bigger lump sum payment on overdue interest than Argentina initially offered. A spokesman for the Argentina Treasury said Wednesday that banks want at least $ 1.1 billion. The government offered $ 500 million.
The negotiator said the government may agree to pay more, if it can do so in installments.
On the Philippines agreement, the government agreed to offer a cash buyback of certain debt by the Phlippines. Specific terms are being finalized but details should be available to international bankers by next month, said Chemical Banking Corp., which chairs a bankers committee in the debt talks.
The agreement includes offers of three separate bond offerings with maturities ranging from 15 years to 25 years, all designed to reduce the interest payments on the original debt.
The Philippines is saddled with a total $ 29.8 billion in foreign debt, but only $ 11 billion of that is owed to foreign banks. The balance are loans from foreign countries or international organizations.

 

End of Document
