

Around the World in '95
The Associated Press
November 18, 1994, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 931 words
Byline: By JENNIFER MERIN
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




1995 is a do-or-dream year for those who wish to retrace the footsteps of our history's great explorers.
There are at least two excursions that will set you in the right direction and provide far more comfort and predictability than our adventuresome forebearers ever had.
To celebrate its 125th anniversary, the American Museum of Natural History is offering a month-long voyage retracing some of the research expeditions it has sponsored in the past. Since its founding in 1869, the museum has supported more than 1,000 expeditions, including several led by anthropologist Margaret Mead, fossil-hunter Barnum Brown and naturalist Theodore Roosevelt.
The journey will take you through unspoiled, exotic places in the company of scholars and curators who, along with scientists and naturalists, are striving to understand global climate change, the loss of species and habitats, the roots of diverse human civilizations and other phenomena.
The itinerary includes sites in biologically diverse Cuba (pending permission from the Department of the Treasury) and Amazonia, where you'll visit Manaus, Brazil, and go upriver to watch wildlife, explore the rain forests and meet native families.
After going to Easter Island, where you will see the monumental Moai stone figures, you'll get a close-up look at Polynesian culture in Rarotonga, New Zealand.
In Papua New Guinea, you'll penetrate dense jungles and meet the Huli, a tribe whose body decorations, costumes, crafts and customs are particularly colorful. In Borneo, you'll see turtles, rare monkeys and orangutans.
Traveling in China will afford you a look at where Peking Man was discovered at Zhoukoudian, and visits to the Great Wall, Yonghegong Temple and the Forbidden City. You'll also go to Outer Mongolia, where you'll see dinosaur eggs, prehistoric tools and a contemporary lifestyle with yurts, folk dancing and horsemanship. In Myanmar, you'll see the dazzling gold stupa of the Shwedagon Pagoda and other remarkable Buddhist monuments.
Wildlife enthusiasts will see lemurs in Madagascar and wildebeest and zebra roaming the Serengeti Plains in Tanzania. A visit to Dordogne and nearby areas will fascinate those who attempt to decipher the prehistoric cave drawings.
The journey is round-trip from Newark, N.J., Jan. 19, 1995 to Feb. 21. You'll fly first-class aboard a chartered Balair jet re-configured to accommodate 88 passengers. Accommodations are the finest available in each destination, ranging from five-star hotels to simple lodges. Meals reflect local cuisine and culture. The cost is $ 34,950 per person, double occupancy.
Another extraordinary around-the-world tour is themed after the Far Eastern adventures of one of the world's most famous travelers. The Spirit of Marco Polo is a 24-day trip that starts in Los Angeles or Seattle on April 28, 1995, and concludes in New York on May 21.
Organized by Abercrombie & Kent, the journey's itinerary includes a visit to the Great Wall and Forbidden City and a banquet at the famed Diayoutai State Guest House in Beijing. After touring museums, the cathedral and Cu Chi battlefield in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, you'll make a stop at the culturally rich Singapore.
A two-day ride through Malaysia aboard the restored Eastern & Oriental Express Train will take you to Bangkok, Thailand, where you'll visit the Grand Palace and Emerald Buddha Temple. After a quick change in modes of transporation, you'll boat along the city's klongs to its famous floating markets.
Other points of interest on the trip include Myanmar, Nepal, Turkey and Italy.
Transportation is aboard a privately chartered MGM Grand Air DC-8 re-configured to accommodate 60 passengers in first class. Lodging ranges from modern deluxe hotels to former palaces, and meals are the finest.
The price of $ 29,500 per person, double occupancy, includes limousine pickup and first-class airfare from your home to Los Angeles or Seattle and from New York.
If you'd prefer to see the world by ship, two luxury cruise lines are offering around-the-world excursions in 1995.
Cunard's newly refurbished 1,864-passenger Queen Elizabeth II has a cruise leaving New York on Jan. 6, 1995. The 102-day trip returns on April 18 after stopping at 38 ports, including St. Thomas, Virgin Islands; Acapulco, Mexico; Los Angeles; Honolulu; Auckland, New Zealand; Sydney, Australia; Kobe, Japan; Hong Kong; Manila, Philippines; Bangkok, Thailand; Singapore; Mombasa, Kenya; Haifa, Israel; Istanbul, Turkey; Naples, Italy; Cannes, France; Barcelona, Spain; Lisbon, Portugal; and Southampton, England.
Fares range from $ 29,900 to $ 547,289 per person, double occupancy. Price includes round-trip airfare to New York. Land excursions are extra.
An 85-day cruise aboard Holland America's 1,115-passenger MS Rotterdam departs Los Angeles on Jan. 23, 1995, arriving in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., on April 18 via 35 ports. You'll visit Manila; Xiamen, China; Hong Kong; Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam; Bangkok, Thailand; Singapore; Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia; Sri Lanka; Goa and Bombay, India; Cairo, Egypt; Jerusalem; Athens, Greece; Rome; Monte Carlo; Marseilles, France; Barcelona,Spain; and Lisbon, Portugal.
Fares range from $ 21,975 to $ 53,465 per person, double occupancy. Airfare from home to Los Angeles and from Fort Lauderdale, Fla., is included. Shore excursions cost extra.
---
IF YOU GO: For brochures and-or bookings contact the following: American Museum of Natural History Discovery Tours at (800) 462-8687 or in New York (212) 769-5700; Abercrombie & Kent at (800) 323-7308; Cunard at (800) 528-6273; and Holland America at (800) 522-3399.
 Load-Date: November 18, 1994

 

End of Document
