

At 50, Curious George Gets The Keys To The City
The Associated Press
June 7, 1991, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 453 words
Byline: By JON MARCUS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.
Body




One day, Curious George turned 50.
And so, he got the keys to the city.
"George, I want you to remember," said the mayor: "Don't get into trouble with the keys to Cambridge."
Six million copies after Curious George's misadventures first were published in 1941, the grandchildren of his first admirers paid homage Friday to the hyperactive chimpanzee befriended by the man in the yellow hat.
"He's silly and he gets into a lot of trouble," gushed 7-year-old Thaddeus Stefanov-Wagner, one of 300 cheering youngsters who shared Curious George's birthday cake, balloons and punch outside the Cambridge Public Library. "I like him."
The 85-year-old co-creator of the books, Margret Rey, said she and her husband had the most basic of reasons for inventing George.
"We did it because we needed money," she said as children swarmed around her, asked for hugs and offered handmade birthday cards.
"It's a good book," said Rey, who lives in Cambridge and manages the rights to Curious George-inspired merchandise. "We never thought of children, we did it only to please ourselves. By happy coincidence, the children had the same kind of imagination."
A German native, Rey joined forces with her future husband, H.A. Rey, to found an advertising agency in Rio de Janeiro. They married in 1935, moved to Paris in 1936 and fled the Nazi invasion of 1940, riding bicycles and carrying the manuscript for Curious George.
The book was published in the United States a year later.
"You don't feel the time really," Rey said Friday. "We only did one every six or seven years, when we had forgotten what a pain it was."
She wrote the books. He illustrated them.
"It was also a joy, but it was a lot of work. For some reason, it paid off."
H.A. Rey died in Cambridge in 1977.
The couple collaborated on the original edition and six other titles in which Curious George took a job, rode a bike, got a medal, learned the alphabet, went to the hospital and flew a kite. Twenty-eight other Curious George books have been adapted from an animated film series.
Mayor Alice Wolf handed a brass key to the city to a costumed Curious George stand-in. She said the stories "have something universal about them, and they draw on things that are common to all kids and at all times."
Children take to Curious George because "he always gets forgiven on the last page," said Siobhan McHugh, a babysitter who attended the birthday celebration.
"They wish they could be that bad and get away with it," said Kathy O'Riordan, who brought the 3-year-old she babysits. Newer books "are too commercial. They're all selling a product."
O'Riordan, who read Curious George as a child, said adults remember George with nostalgia, "and then they want to read it to their own kids."
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto upcoming

 

End of Document
