

At the Movies: 'The Cowboy Way'
The Associated Press
June 1, 1994, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 462 words
Byline: By BOB THOMAS, Associated Press Writer
Body




Two rodeo cowboys invade New York to find a missing buddy and end up in a shooting war with mobsters. Sound like a tired premise for a movie?
It could have been. But lusty performances, outrageous humor and superior action turn "The Cowboy Way" into a rip-snorting, bronco-buster of a movie.
Woody Harrelson and Keifer Sutherland are a championship roping team currently at odds because Harrelson got drunk and pulled a no-show at the national finals. They shoulder their differences after their friend, Joaquin Martinez, disappears in New York. He had gone there to find his immigrant daughter, Cara Buono.
Harrelson and Sutherland race through escapades in upper society and the underworld. They discover that Martinez and his daughter have fallen victim to a vicious gang that smuggles Latin-American women into the country and forces them to work in squalid sweatshops.
The gang's chief enforcer, Dylan McDermott, realizes the danger from the cowboys and sets out to destroy them. Of course, he has met his match.
"The Cowboy Way" exudes energy (as opposed to hyperactivity). Gregg Champion in his first important film as director appears destined for a sturdy career. He allows each actor to register strongly, and he handles action like a master. He even puts a Wild West twist on the classic "French Connection" chase that climaxes the movie.
Harrelson delivers an uproarious performance as the outwardly dim-bulb Westerner who can beat the New Yorkers at their own games. He mugs, he smirks, he waggles his eyebrows in a perfectly endearing way. It's a role that should place him among the big-bucks stars.
Sutherland, in the less showy role, gives his most mature performance to date. He supplies needed counterbalance to his partner's insanities. Both find a helpful ally in a mounted police officer, the reliable Ernie Hudson. McDermott offers a convincing portrait of pure evil.
Bill Wittcliff wrote the script from his and Rob Thompson's original story. The situations are fresh and audacious, the dialogue breezy.
Some of the scenes are certain to be talked about - especially the cowboys' unique way of forcing a gang member to talk, and the finale in Times Square, which is a howler.
The Universal Pictures release was produced by Brian Grazer for Imagine Entertainment. The rating is PG-13 for language, violence and innuendo. Running time: 102 minutes.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Load-Date: June 1, 1994

 

End of Document
