

At the Movies: 'Clear and Present Danger'
The Associated Press
August 1, 1994, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 711 words
Byline: By DOLORES BARCLAY
Body




Let's see now. When last we saw Jack Ryan, his daughter was recovering from an almost fatal car crash, his wife was pregnant and he was tangling with some pretty harsh Irish terrorists.
Well, his daughter is alive and well and has a baby brother, and Jack's back in the saddle again, riding roughshod over those nasty drug cartels in Colombia.
Paramount Pictures' "Clear and Present Danger," based on the Tom Clancy best seller, brings back Harrison Ford as Ryan. This time around, he's promoted from analyst to deputy director when Adm. James Greer (James Earl Jones) is diagnosed with pancreatic cancer.
While investigating the death of a friend of the president, Ryan discovers the dead man was a money launderer for drug lord Ernesto Escobedo (Miguel Sandoval), and soon is thrust into the "war on drugs."
Only problem: Who are the enemies?
In true Clancy style, enemies are both within and without. In this case, the bad guys go all the way up to the White House and back, and pepper the Colombian jungles. Straddling the middle is a former intelligence officer for Fidel Castro, Felix Cortez (Joaquim de Almeida), who has his own agenda regarding the balance of drug power.
As Ryan delves into his own investigation, the CIA's deputy director of operations, Robert Ritter (Henry Czerny), and National Security Adviser James Cutter (Harris Yulin) launch the president's secret, covert action in Colombia to eradicate drug labs, warehouses and the drug lords themselves.
Heading the attack is a dedicated CIA operative named Mr. Clark (Willem Dafoe), who commands the high-tech raids from his hotel room equipped with computer, transmitters and cellular phones.
Ryan is set up as the fall guy for the smarmy Ritter and the self-righteous president (Donald Moffat), who's given to intone such twaddle as: "These drug cartels represent a clear and present danger to the government of the United States." Does anyone remember Iran-Contra?
Meanwhile, Escobedo's empire is crumbling around him from the CIA assault, and Cortez is working with the other drug barons to help dispose of Escobedo.
On the action scale, "Clear and Present Danger" rates an eight. There's no high-tech silliness, but some nicely choreographed destruction. A sniper attack in Bogota on a car caravan carrying Ryan and other government officials is superb and will have you on the edge of your seat.
There's also plenty of computer technology set loose, including the obligatory computer hack who salivates over busting personal codes, and a technician who can match voice prints of just about anyone.
Ford keeps a pained grimace embedded on his face throughout. And when he's not projecting agony, the grimace turns to anger. A little levity might be good.
Anne Archer reprises her role as Cathy Ryan, but has little to do this time around. Thora Birch, who as daughter Sally was an intricate part of the "Patriot Games" script, has even less to do - perhaps two lines.
And Dafoe is wonderful as Mr. Clark, an agent who cares more about his men in the field than the mission itself.
Jones, unfortunately, is given the role of dying mentor. I guess this means no more work for the formidable actor in future Clancy adaptations. His Adm. Greer will be missed.
There's other good support from Joaquim de Almeida, Czerny, Yulin, Moffat and Sandoval. Ann Magnuson puts in a good turn as the FBI secretary Cortez woos for information.
"Clear and Present Danger" is a must-see thriller for adults and high-tech groupies who prefer good acting to pretty faces and grown-up action to multimillion-dollar silliness.
Phillip Noyce, who also did "Patriot Games," directs from a screenplay by Donald Stewart, Steven Zaillian and John Milius. The second unit direction was handled extremely well by David R. Ellis.
"Clear and Present Danger" was produced by Mace Neufeld and Robert Rehme and is rated PG-13.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Load-Date: August 1, 1994

 

End of Document
