

At the Movies: 'Death and the Maiden'
The Associated Press
January 12, 1995, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 533 words
Byline: By DOLORES BARCLAY
Body




It's a dark and stormy night. Other than that, few cliches abound in "Death and the Maiden," a taut, three-character drama directed by Roman Polanski.
Based on Ariel Dorfman's play, the movie unspools during a storm at a beach house in an imaginary South American country. A woman who was tortured for her political beliefs 15 years ago meets a man she thinks was responsible for her horror. She holds him captive and executes her revenge. Caught in the middle is her pragmatic husband, who has risen up the poltical ladder after helping overthrow the previous regime.
The material works much better on stage, because "Death and the Maiden" largely is a psychological outing, a mind trip of sorts that seeks to strip away lies and disguises.
Polanski does well enough, given the confines of a beach house and its surrounding terrain, and he gets outstanding performances from Ben Kingsley as the presumed villain, Dr. Miranda, and Stuart Wilson as the husband, Gerardo.
Where he fails, and where the movie suffers irreparably, is in the unbridled histrionics of Sigourney Weaver, who is dreadfully miscast as the deeply scarred Paulina Escobar.
As an actress, Weaver lacks the depth to reach deep enough inside to pull out a credible performance. What we're stuck with is something that best resembles a high school drama exercise.
Weaver screws up her face and snarls each line like she's Lady Macbeth on steroids. It's frustrating to watch, and you long for Glenn Close or Meryl Streep or Judy Davis or any other actress of substance.
Paulina is home alone, preparing dinner for herself and Gerardo, who is late. He's had a flat and gets a lift with a thoughtful motorist, Miranda. Gerardo invites Miranda in for a drink. The men get drunk while Paulina stews and plots. When Gerardo falls asleep, she strikes, subduing the unsuspecting Miranda and tying him up.
She accuses Miranda of being the man who tortured her daily, both physically and mentally. Paulina was blindfolded throughout and knows her tormentor only by his voice.
How can she be certain that Miranda is the one? She isn't.
Oddly, Gerardo does nothing to thwart Paulina's actions outside of rational argument. He's as paralyzed with inactivity and indecision as she is fiercely intent on revenge.
The characters lob philosophical remarks back and forth and draw out the mind games before the violence becomes a reality.
Polanski does manage an incipient feeling of terror, directing from a screenplay by Dorfman and Rafael Yglesias, and the moody photography of Tonino Delli Colli greatly enhances the edginess.
"Death and the Maiden" was produced by Thom Mount and Josh Kramer, with Bonnie Timmermann and Dorfman as co-producers and Sharon Harel and Jane Barclay as executive producers.
The Fine Line Features release is rated R.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Load-Date: January 12, 1995

 

End of Document
