

Attack on Esteli the Latest Twist on Nicaraguan Fratricide
The Associated Press
July 27, 1993, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 607 words
Byline: By ANITA SNOW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MANAGUA, Nicaragua
Body




Leonardo Gutierrez, his son and his son-in-law were leaving their home in Esteli when all three were struck by army bullets.
"The soldiers shot me, old woman," Gutierrez told his wife as he collapsed in the dirt road outside the house. Now his wife, Melina Arce, sits by her 63-year-old husband's hospital bed waiting for the day he can come home.
"We can't live any longer like this in Nicaragua," Arce said in an interview at the hospital. "We can no longer live with this war between brothers."
Wars between brothers have been waged for nearly a century in this Central American nation of 4 million. Last week's battle between a new rebel group and government forces is just the latest twist on the fratricide.
With the emergence of the new rebels - the Revolutionary Front of Workers and Peasants - many Nicaraguans fear civil war will return.
About 50 people died in the clash between the rebels and soldiers of the Sandinista-controlled army in Esteli, 60 miles north of Managua. It was some of the fiercest fighting since the 10-year civil war ended in 1990.
Although the leftist Sandinistas lost the 1990 elections, ending a decade in power, they remain in charge of the police and the military by agreement with President Violeta Chamorro's government. They also remain Nicaragua's largest political party.
The current government is nearly bankrupt and cannot meet the demands of the people, including former fighters from both sides of the civil war. It has not fulfilled promises to provide the ex-combatants with land and aid.
By government estimates about 1,500 soldiers among tens of thousands awaiting resettlement assistance have rearmed. Other estimates are higher.
The 150 heavily armed rebels that descended Wednesday on Esteli, an economically depressed city of 140,000, said they were battling to force the government to provide them with the land, tools and other promised help.
Prisoners captured in the fighting said the objective was to rob banks. Rebels made off with some $ 4 million.
"We are already battling a war against hunger. We don't need another war against each other," said Mercedes Talavera, in her 40s, who lost her husband and eldest son in the 1980s war between the Sandinista government and U.S.-backed Contra rebels.
Her 18-year-old son, a Sandinista army soldier, was missing after the attack on Esteli.
Nicaragua has little tradition of peacefully resolving its problems.
Liberation fighter Augusto Cesar Sandino - from whom the Sandinistas take their name - launched a five-year war on the National Guard and U.S. Marines, who had helped restore order after a 1909 rebellion.
The Marines left in 1933, and the Guard became increasingly politicized under the leadership of Anastasio Somoza Garcia. The following year Somoza Garcia orchestrated Sandino's assassination and was elected president.
For nearly 40 years, Somoza and his two sons, Luis and Anastasio Jr., ruled Nicaragua with an iron fist.
Nicaraguans - fed up with corruption, the Guard's brutality and the deterioring economy - launched a guerrilla war against the government in the 1970s. Some 50,000 people were killed before the Sandinistas' victory in 1979.
Another 30,000 people were killed in the civil war over the next decade between the Sandinistas and the U.S.-backed Contras.
By 1990, Nicaraguans were fed up with war and chose Chamorro, wife of slain newspaper Pedro Joaquin Chamorro, to replace Sandinista President Daniel Ortega.
Peace returned to Nicaragua, but Chamorro inherited an economic disaster. Her administration has controlled inflation, but hasn't been able to create jobs or make good on promises to former fighters from both sides.

 

End of Document
