

Back into the Lending Game with Mexico
The Associated Press
January 8, 1995, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 899 words
Byline: By KAREN GULLO, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




When a group of U.S. banks agreed this past week to loan Mexico billions to make it through a financial crisis, it generated an uncomfortable sense of deadbeat deju vu.
Banks rushed to loan money to Latin American countries during the 1970s oil crisis, and some barely survived the losses that multiplied when Mexico, Brazil, Argentina and other sovereignties defaulted on the loans.
Now a group of at least 10 U.S. commercial banks, led by Citicorp and J.P. Morgan & Co. Inc., are contributing $ 3 billion to an $ 18 billion emergency credit line to Mexico.
The loans are portrayed by the lenders as a vote of confidence that Mexico will emerge from its financial woes. But some banking industry analysts are giving the banks a thumbs down, saying the painful lesson of 20 years ago apparently didn't sink in.
"It was like deju vu all over again, seeing banks providing liquidity to Mexico," said Raphael Soifer, who follows banks at Brown Brothers Harriman & Co., a Wall Street investment firm.
To be sure, there are some differences between 1995 and the banks' previous foray into loans to developing Latin American nations.
For one thing, the banks are not the sole source of credit to Mexico. The $ 18 billion package consists of loans from Canada, from the U.S. Treasury, the Federal Reserve System, and a group of European central banks.
U.S. banks' share of the credit line is relatively small.
"The banks are not the only ones being asked to pull the oars," said Diane Glossman, a banking analyst with Salomon Brothers Inc. "In the 1980s, they had all the debt."
What's more, bank lending accounts for a small share of capital inflows to Latin America. Most of the investment comes from public and private institutions which have been pouring money into developing country funds.
But what makes analysts like Soifer uncomfortable is that banks, flush with capital and searching for sources of income, have been stepping up their lending to Latin America and other development economies around the world.
Soifer said he worries that the lending comes at a time when banks total exposure to Latin America is approaching 1980s levels. That's not a big problem if the country's economy is growing and there's plenty of investor interest in developing-country securities.
But with interest in Mexican securities drying up, at least for now, the lending looks riskier.
Soifer said that the most recent figures a lending survey taken by the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, a group of U.S. financial regulatory agencies, show cross-border exposure of U.S. bank to Mexico reached $ 17.24 billion at June 30. Some of the total represents debt securities, not just loans.
Citicorp's exposure was $ 2.9 billion as of Sept. 30, according to the bank's Securities and Exchange Commission filings.
Not everyone is alarmed about the Mexican credit package. Bankers and other analysts say banks are much more careful about extending credit and investing in Latin America than they once were.
For example, one of the big areas of concern among Mexican investors are exposure to short-term Mexican bonds known as tesobonos, denominated in pesos but indexed to the value of the dollar.
U.S. banks don't own tesobonos, which became much more expensive for the Mexican government to repay because the peso has plunged in value.
"Most of the bonds are owned by foreigners, but they're not owned by banks," said an executive at one bank that has loaned money to Mexico, who spoke on condition of anonymity. "They're held by institutional investors."
Other analysts say that loaning money to Mexico makes good business sense because if the Mexican economy recovers - and most people think it will - banks will be well positioned to prosper on a number of fronts.
Part of the government's rescue plan calls for increased foreign ownership of Mexican financial companies, which opens the door for U.S. banks to acquire Mexican banks or brokersage.
This will give the banks a bigger role in the local economy, said James McDermott, an analyst at Keefe Bruyette & Woods Inc., an investment banking and equity research company specializing in banks.
"Mexico's a country with 90 million consumers," said McDermott. "The long term view remains positive."
 
 Coming Up
On Monday , the Federal Reserve releases consumer credit figures for November. … December wholesale prices are to be released by the Labor Department Tuesday , followed on Wednesday by consumer prices. … December retail sales figures are due
 
 Friday from the Commerce Department.
 
 Ticker
The Commerce Department said this past week that orders to factories rose 2.6 percent in November. … December retail sales figures show electronics, home items and jewelry did well, but apparel had a harder time this past Christmas. Toys R Us said Christmas sales were disappointing. … The United States and Japan said they will restart negotiations over a $ 36.1 billion deficit in autos and auto parts. … Philip Morris Cos.  is consolidating its
 
 Kraft and General Foods businesses beneath the Kraft Foods banner...The Big Three U.S. automakers sold 7.4 percent more cars and light trucks last year. Asian automakers also shared in the increase. … Jerre Stead has left the top job at AT&T 's computer business to run software maker Legent Corp.  … Tandy Corp.says it will close 233 Video Concepts and McDuff stores.
 
 End advance for release weekend editions Jan. 7-8
 Load-Date: January 8, 1995

 

End of Document
