

Beth Carvalho: Samba Queen Still Unknown in the United States
The Associated Press
March 9, 1993, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 712 words
Byline: By JOHN WRIGHT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




In Brazil, Beth Carvalho has the kind of following Michael Jackson might envy. She's had dozens of hit songs. She fills soccer stadiums with thousands of screaming fans. Leading politicians crave her endorsement.
But in Manhattan, she's no more popular than a foreign film, playing to audiences in small nightclubs. Herlisteners - Americans as well as Brazilians -make plenty of noise, but it's the Brazilians who know all the words. They're the ones who have grown up listening to the sequined, red-headed samba queen.
"Samba has a contageous rhythm, it's exuberant," Carvalho, 47, said of the music that is synonomous with the wild abandon of Brazilian carnival.
Bouncy samba relies on upbeat percussion, with numerous kinds and sizes of drums and tamborines; a grunting, groaning and squeaking cuica; guitars; and a cavaquinho, a ukelele lookalike. Mixing these unique instruments with Brazilian enthusiasm and sensuality inevitably creates a music made for riotous dancing and parading: Nobody sits still.
Carvalho, interviewed during a two-week engagement in New York, also noted the melancholy side to samba, which was brought to the slums of Rio in the 1920s by the descendents of African slaves. "Longing is what the blacks who came from Africa for Brazil felt," she said.
Samba can signify love, sensuality, social satire or longing. More than a dozen types of music crowd Brazilian airwaves and dancehalls, but Carvalho says that it all comes back to samba.
American jazz discovered Brazil in the 1960s, when cool jazz mated with hot samba. The miscreant offspring: bossa nova, notably Antonio Carlos Jobim's mellow ballad "The Girl From Ipanema."
"Bossa nova drank from samba, sophisticated the harmony and simplified the rhythm," said Carvalho, describing samba as "the fountain from which all Brazilian music drinks." She has sung bossa nova and other Brazilian styles, but she always returns to her samba roots.
Samba's biggest stars have been Alcione, Clara Nunes and Martinho DaVila. But its most visible player has been Carmen Miranda, best known for the wild bowls of fruit she would wear on her head in 1940s musicals. She helped make samba heard around the world, even if Hollywood diluted her music and dance.
During her New York run, Carvalho paid tribute to Miranda by wailing out her mournful tale of unrequited love, "Ta-I."
In this song and others, Carvalho doesn't write her own music. Rather, she discovers and recovers.
"I have the attributes of a discoverer. I discover talents of composers and musicians," she said. "I discover and rescue. That's my objective."
What she means by rescuing is finding sambas from a generation earlier and recording them. This has brought some older, forgotten talents back from obscurity.
For instance, when she found the songs of Angenor de Oliveira (known as Cartola), he was earning a modest living running a cafe. "Many people thought he had died," she said. "Nowadays he is popular."
Cartola, who has died since fame was bestowed upon him late in life, composed "Nao Quero Mais Amar a Ninguem" ("I Don't Want to Love Anyone Again") on Carvalho's newest album "Perolas" ("Pearls").
Others are fortunate to be discovered younger. For instance, Carlinhos, a guitarist in her band, was playing at an out-of-the-way Rio bar when she saw him.
Carvalho, born and raised in Rio, grew up in a middle-class family and took up guitar as a teen-ager, playing in coffee houses with a variety of bands. She appeared on her first television show in 1966 and began recording soon after, her hits including "As Rosas Nao Falam" ("The Roses Don't Speak") and "Cinelandia," a tribute to movies of the 1940s.
The singer said discovering new talent gives her "the joy of knowing that I gave a chance to someone who made it." Furthermore, she says she's laying the groundwork for the music's future.
"The composers and musicians I've discovered are the new generation of samba," she said.
Politicians also have discovered her appeal. When Rio de Janeiro Gov. Leonel Brizola ran for president in 1989, the veteran political leader lined up support from political luminaries, fat-wallet contributors and the left-wing Carvalho.
Although he lost, Carvalho's cheery campaign song, "La la la la la Brizo-la," was a high point in an otherwise humdrum race.

 

End of Document
