

Biography Gives the Devil (Soldier) His Due
The Associated Press
May 22, 1992, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 420 words
Body




THE DEVIL SOLDIER: The Story of Frederick Townsend Ward, the Most Honored and Controversial American in Chinese History.  By Caleb Carr. Random House. $ 25.
At long last, Frederick Townsend Ward has been at least partially rescued from oblivion, thanks to Caleb Carr's well-written biography "The Devil Soldier."
Ward was born in Salem, Mass., in 1831 and died of a bullet wound in the gut in Ningpo, China, in 1862. In his brief life of 31 years, he sailed ships to the Far East, fought with American freebooter William Walker in Central America, joined the French army to fight the Russians in the Crimea, and raised an army with which he defended the emperor of China against a huge internal uprising.
"When he arrived in Shanghai," says Carr, "Ward was 28 years old and penniless. When he died in battle three years later, he was the most honored American in Chinese history, a naturalized Chinese subject and a mandarin entitled to wear the prestigious peacock feather in his cap."
Not bad for a ship's broker's son from Salem, where "the Ward family, like Salem itself, had passed the crest of its fortunes."
A persuasive young man with a gift for leadership and audacious action, Ward got himself the financial backing of some prominent Chinese and organized a military corps to defend the Manchu dynasty against the Taipings, a semi-Christian religious sect that exploited peasant dissatisfaction to mount a powerful insurgency against the effete and backward forces of the empire.
At the head of a motley crew of European and Filipino mercenaries and Western-trained Chinese rank-and-filers, Ward used the latest Western military hardware and a native talent for tactics to defeat the rebels with his "Ever Victorious Army."
The empire honored Ward in life and built him an ornate tomb in death. But life and history have both treated this New England boy unkindly. When the Manchu empire finally fell in 1911, Ward was remembered as its defender, and the new revolutionary government allowed his memorial to crumble. When the Japanese invaded in the 1930s, they ransacked the tomb. When the Chinese Communists took power in 1949, they dug up Ward's bones, razed the memorial and paved it over with asphalt.
Meanwhile, back in Salem, Ward's family, "in a moment of astoundingly narrowminded destructiveness, destroyed his personal letters and papers."
All this did not leave author Carr much material with which to work, but he has done a creditable job with what material there is.
 
 By David Smyth
 
 ociated Press Writer

 

End of Document
