

Birth Control A Luxury Item In Much Of The World
The Associated Press
July 1, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 569 words
Byline: By DAVID BRISCOE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




An average woman in Chad would have to pay nearly three-fourths of a year's income for an intrauterine device, and even condoms are priced out of reach for couples in 59 countries, says new study.
High-priced condoms, birth-control pills, intrauterine devices and sterilization make contraception a luxury item in much of the world, according to the report prepared for release Monday by the Population Crisis Committee.
Even in the United States, the high cost of birth control is contributing to unwanted pregnancies and abortions, according to the committee's director.
Meanwhile, the study, "Access to Affordable Contraception," says in the next ten years nearly 800 million couples will need access to birth control to help stem population growth and protect against AIDS.
Estimating that the average couple needs about 100 condoms a year, or one every three to four days, the report recommends the cost of birth control not be more than one percent of average per capita income. In six countries, it exceeds 25 percent.
Millions of couples in Africa, Asia and Latin America now want to keep their families small but cannot afford it, the report said.
"This study debunks the idea, now current in U.S. foreign aid circles, that the private for-profit sector alone can provide contraception at affordable prices to the hundreds of millions of low-income families who seek it," said Sharon L. Camp, the group's senior vice president. The committee is a non-profit group advocating steps that make family planning more widely available.
Most of the need for inexpensive contraceptives is in developing countries, she said, but the study also shows that the United States has some of the highest contraceptive costs among industrialized countries.
"Clearly, the high cost of contraception and the lower availability of subsidized family planning supplies and services in the United States compared to Europe, contribute to the high U.S. rates for unintended pregnancy and abortion," said Dr. Camp.
Less than half the population in many countries has access to affordable contraceptives, the report says, while more than 90 percent of couples in most developed countries can afford birth control.
The study says that an intrauterine device (IUD), including medical charges for inserting it, costs $$114 in Chad where annual per capita income is about $$165.
Female sterilization could cost 89 percent of average annual income in Kenya, it estimates.
The report sites birth control successes in some countries, including Bangladesh and Thailand. It says low-cost family planning services are widely available in about two-thirds of Latin American and Caribbean countries.
Most Bangladesh couples can now buy a year's worth of condoms for less than the equivalent of one U.S. dollar, or less than 0.7 percent of average annual income, the report says. The government subsidizes commercial sales of condoms and birth control pills.
In Thailand, average family size has declined to about two children per couple, thanks to a government program which has distributed free pills since 1976, it says.
The study notes evidence that in some areas as many people will use birth control they pay for as will those who receive free supplies and services.
But it adds that the strong push to privatize family planning services could make modern contraception too expensive for large numbers of very poor couples in Africa, Asia and Latin America.

 

End of Document
