

Books and Authors: Carlos Fuentes Travels Across the Centuries
The Associated Press
July 3, 1992, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 925 words
Byline: By ANITA SNOW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Carlos Fuentes has spent his life traveling across continents and cultures. Now, he's sojourning across centuries.
In "The Buried Mirror: Reflections on Spain and the New World," the celebrated Mexican writer explores the history of the Spanish-speaking people since Christopher Columbus' first voyage to the Americas in 1492.
The book travels from the caves prehistoric people once inhabited in Altamira, Spain, to the graffiti-covered walls of East Los Angeles.
Fuentes makes the history of Spanish America come alive with the stories of kings and peasants, soldiers and priests, martyrs and dictators, acknowledging both the positive and negative that evolved from Columbus' voyage.
"There was good and bad in the encounter between Europe and the New World," the Mexico City resident said during a telephone interview in New York. "But it was out of this clash that we were born."
Throughout the book, Fuentes emphasizes the multicultural heritage of Spanish-Americans: European, African, Amerindian. And he underscores his belief that individual cultures constantly evolve, thriving only when exposed to other cultures.
"Isolation means death," Fuentes writes in a chapter about the influence of Hispanic culture on the United States. "Encounter means birth, even rebirth."
"The Buried Mirror" evolved from a five-part bilingual series of the same name that Fuentes narrated for the Discovery cable television channel and the BBC.
He said he agreed to do the series, which made its premiere on cable in April, in part because he was angered by Lord Kenneth Clark's exclusion of Spain and Spanish America in his "Civilization" series, produced by the BBC years ago.
"I think that the culture of Spain and Spanish America is still ignored," Fuentes said. "In a lot of ways the mirror is still buried."
"The Buried Mirror," a metaphor for the survival of Hispanic culture, was inspired by the mirrors that the Totonacs of Mexico buried with their dead to help guide them to other worlds.
In the same way, Fuentes said he hopes the series and the book will help guide Latin Americans and their neighbors to the North as they "rediscover America" amid the quincentenary commemorations.
Fuentes said of Latin Americans that 1992 "is a good time for us to reflect on our history and culture and to look forward."
Latin American nations, struggling to find their place in a changing world after four decades of East-West conflict, need to examine the past while putting their economic houses in order for the future, he said.
The United States, too, should engage in self-discovery in the post-Cold War world, said Fuentes. North Americans must learn to be less arrogant toward other nations and cultures, learn to tolerate the "he or she who isn't like you or me," he said.
"North America is monolingual and North Americans are the linguistic morons of the world. They ignore the world's geography," Fuentes said. "That has to change or the United States is going to become a backwater."
The future holds many opportunites for cooperation between the Americas, he said. Those opportunities include a proposed free-trade agreement between the United States and Mexico, a concept he says is inevitable.
"Integration is going to happen with or without a trade agreement," Fuentes said. "It's just a question of whether we're going to regulate it."
Fuentes said that now that "The Buried Mirror" is on the bookshelves, he has returned to an earlier project: a trilogy of novels dealing with 100 years of Latin American history.
The first novel, "The Campaign," gained critical acclaim when it was released late last year. It covers the Wars of Independence, which erupted across the continent in 1810.
Now, he's working on the second novel, "The Dead Bride," about upper-class Latin Americans who lived in Paris in the 1800s.
The third installment in Fuentes' trilogy will deal with the Mexican Revolution of 1910.
Fuentes, 62, is author of more than a dozen novels, most of which have been translated into English. They include "The Death of Artemio Cruz," "The Hydra Head," "Terra Nostra," "The Old Gringo," and "Christopher Unborn." He also has written numerous short stories, plays and essays.
His literary awards have included Mexico's National Prize for Literature in 1984 and the 1987 Miguel de Cervantes Prize for Literature from Spain.
The son of a Mexican diplomat, Fuentes spent his early years much as he has his later years, traveling. Fuentes was born in Panama City, and the family lived in Washington, Chile and Argentina before settling in Mexico City when he was in his teens.
He did his undergraduate university work in Mexico, his graduate work in Geneva.
Later he combined careers in writing, teaching and politics. His government career began with posts in Switzerland and he later was assistant chief of press for the Mexican Foreign Ministry. From 1974 to 1977, he was Mexico's ambassador to France.
In the world of academia, he has been Robert F. Kennedy Professor of Latin American Studies at Harvard University.
That constant traveling, that repeated contact with so many different kinds of people, shaped Fuentes' views about how cultures evolve. Now, on the 500th anniversary of the clash between the New and the Old worlds, the lifelong traveler wants to share what he has learned along the way.
"If we do not recognize our humanity in others," he writes in his latest book, "we shall not recognize it in ourselves."
---
"The Buried Mirror: Reflections on Spain and the New World," is published by Houghton Mifflin Co. and has a suggested retail price of $ 35.

 

End of Document
