

Books and Authors: Author Tells About 'Trading With the Enemy'
The Associated Press
June 25, 1993, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 839 words
Byline: By ANITA SNOW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MEXICO CITY
Body




Tom Miller arrived here on his way back from Cuba with two day's growth of beard and mixed feelings about the country he described with great affection in his latest book.
It was the first time the writer from Tucson, Ariz., had returned to the communist isle since publishing "Trading With the Enemy: A Yankee's Travels Through Castro's Cuba."
Although delighted to see old friends, he was saddened to see how much Cuba's economy had deteriorated since his last visit in October.
The economic crisis began in late 1989 as communism collapsed in East Europe and Cuba lost its former political allies and trading partners. The situation has gradually worsened as many of the imported goods - including many kinds of processed foods - that Cubans once depended upon have become harder to get.
"Cuba these days is about halfway between nostalgia and calamity," Miller said during a recent interview over breakfast at Mexico City International Airport's Baron Rojo restaurant.
"It's trying to encourage the former and stave off the latter."
Miller said he ran into a number of friends whose relatives suffer from a mysterious affliction that has blinded thousands of Cubans. Specialists are studying theories to find the cause - food shortages, pesticides, even a virus.
He found food shortages, electricity cutbacks and gasoline rationing more severe than ever.
Miller wrote about many of those problems in "Trading With the Enemy," which was published in December and already is in its second printing.
Based on the nearly eight months Miller roamed throughout Cuba's cities and countryside, the book is a British-style literary travelogue that mixes vivid description with personal impressions.
"Trading With the Enemy" is the latest in a series of new accounts being published in English about Cuba following a decadeslong dearth of such books about the Caribbean nation.
Miller said the spurt of new books is apparently tied to Cuba's current problems and the belief that the communism state implanted by the 1959 revolution will not survive.
Miller said in another interview earlier this year: "Cuba is changing like never before."
Latin America had been the focus of much of Miller's previous writings, including contributions to The New York Times, Esquire and Rolling Stone. His previous five books included "The Panama Hat Trail," based on his travels in South America, and "On the Border," about life along the U.S.-Mexico frontier.
But he had never visited or written about the communist country that remained an enigma to its neighbors in the United States because of the Trading With the Enemy Act, U.S. legislation that forbids normal relations between the United States and Cuba.
As a journalist, Miller was given permission by both countries to live in Cuba and began his adventure.
Miller mixed with the black marketeers along the Havana seawall known as the Malecon, sipped rum with Hemingway's old drinking buddies, sat in the kitchen of Cuba's "Julia Child," studied the oboe with a National Symphony Orchestra member.
He listened to the Cubans' favorite jokes about Fidel Castro, their love of Meryl Streep, dominoes and baseball, their frustrations about the food and gasoline shortages.
He fanned out across the country, visiting Hemingway's house, the gate outside the U.S. Navy base at Guantanamo Bay, and a memorial dedicated to Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, the American couple convicted in 1951 and subsequently executed for conspiring to pass nuclear secrets to the Soviet Union.
But unlike some of other recent books about Cuba, Miller's remains surprising objective and unpolitical. In fact, Miller said he has been satisfied - and surprised - about the lack of negative reaction.
During a publisher-sponsored book tour to Miami and New York earlier this year he said that only two people attacked his book and what they perceived to be his politics.
A liberal attacked him for not being sufficiently opposed to the U.S.-sponsored trade embargo against Cuba. A conservative criticized him for not being sufficiently anti-Castro.
"Where are the Red baiters?" he said, grinning. "I miss them!"
Upon his return to Cuba in May, virtually everyone he ran into who had read the book - including those he had quoted - were pleased with the final product.
Now that his book has been published, Miller's trading with the enemy isn't likely to end anytime soon. He has too many good friends in Cuba now. And despite all its political and economic troubles, Miller has grown fond of the nation and its people.
He likes the way the Cubans can still find a way to play dominoes on their porches despite electricity shortages, how they can trade and buy on the black market to put together a feast when the shelves in the government-run stores are bare, how they can joke about their economic problems when no relief is in sight.
"The country is going to hell in a handbasket," he sighed. "But I love it anyhow."
---
"Trading With the Enemy: A Yankee's Travels Through Castro's Cuba," published by Atheneum, sells for a suggested retail price of $ 24.

 

End of Document
