

Brazilians Take to the Streets to Demand Impeachment of President
The Associated Press
August 26, 1992, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 574 words
Byline: AP Photos SAO101,2 of Aug. 25, By STAN LEHMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAO PAULO, Brazil
Body




Thousands of protesters gathered outside Congress today as legislators prepared to vote on a corruption report that could lead to the impeachment of President Fernando Collor de Mello.
The report, released Monday by a congressional committee, accuses the president of taking $ 6.5 million in "undue benefits" from his 1989 campaign treasurer, Paulo Cesar Farias.
The 22-member committee was to vote later in the day on its recommendation that impeachment proceedings be initiated by the full House and Senate. If it is passed, the report will be sent to the full House, where a two-thirds majority is needed before impeachment proceedings are opened by the Senate.
Collor, Brazil's first freely elected president after 21 years of military rule, has pledged to fight impeachment, but he has been seriously weakened by the report.
A crowd gathered early today on the lawn outside the Congress building in Brazil's capital, Brasilia. Some people waved Brazilian flags and banners reading "Collor Get Out!"
State police ringed the building, and policemen on horseback patrolled the streets. Areas within a 1,000-yard radius of Collor's Brasilia mansion were declared a national security zone to keep out protesters.
On Tuesday, more than a million demonstrators took to the streets nationwide to demand Collor's impeachment, and more politicians abandoned his administration.
In Sao Paulo, Brazil's biggest city and its industrial and financial center, more than 350,000 protestors packed a downtown square.
Street vendor Carlos Ferrer sold T-shirts reading: "I believe in the president, and in elves, Santa Claus and virginity." He said business was brisk.
"Street demonstrations are fundamental to persuade Congress to impeach Collor," said Gov. Luiz Antonio Fleury Filho of Sao Paulo, Brazil's richest and most populous state.
He said Collor "has lost the moral conditions to govern the country."
Walter Sacca, a director of Sao Paulo's powerful Federation of Industries, said "protests must continue to force the country's politicians to punish all those guilty of corruption, including the president. If there is no punishment, there will be chaos."
The last time Brazilians took to the streets in such large numbers was during 1984 protests that helped force the armed forces to step down and accept a return to civilian rule the following year.
Investigators said Farias, the campaign treasurer accused of running an extortion ring that took millions of dollars from businessmen in return for government contracts or favors, has been paying Collor's expenses since he took office in early 1990.
According to news accounts, 209 legislators in the 503-seat lower House support Collor - down from 252 last week. The government needs 168 votes to block impeachment. A vote is expected by Sept. 8.
Collor has tried to shore up support by opening the public coffers to "friendly" legislators. He recently raised military salaries and released $ 400 million for low-cost housing and sanitation projects.
But the government was seriously weakened when the leaders of two pro-government parties announced they would support impeachment.
Vice President Itamar Franco also has turned against the president. Franco, who would take office if Collor is impeached, called the corruption charges "an ethical road map." relations with Collor.
The military, which still wields significant political influence, has largely remained neutral. Prospects of a coup are seen as remote.

 

End of Document
