

Brazil's President: Burnout in the Fast Lane?
The Associated Press
July 15, 1992, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 811 words
Byline: By PETER MUELLO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




A recent cartoon in a Rio newspaper showed a man watching TV as the announcer says: "And now, the news." The screen bursts and a wave of mud covers the hapless viewer.
The mud of scandal has engulfed the government of President Fernando Collor de Mello, his family and inner circle, and left Collor a shadow of the conquering hero who swept into office in 1990.
Today, isolated in the presidential palace, Collor scribbles notes to his press secretary about a mysterious "coup syndicate" he says is behind the scandal.
A poll in early July of Brazilians in 11 major cities indicated that 53 percent want him to step down because of charges involving a close Collor associate accused of graft, extortion and influence-peddling.
Collor has denied any wrongdoing, but not many people seem to believe him. Even if he stays in office, he is linked in the public mind to a crude attempt to raid the henhouse.
"The government is over," said Alexandre Barros, head of political consultants Early Warning of Brasilia. "The number of 'smoking guns' is incredible."
How did things go so wrong, so fast?
Collor came into office promising to reform the economy and end corruption.
But his anti-inflation plan flopped. Today, the country is mired in recession and record unemployment, but prices still rise 20 percent each month.
Graft and corruption ran rampant during the 1964-1985 military dictatorship, and persisted under civilian rule before Collor took office. But it's never been so noticeable as in the past two years.
One reason is that newspapers are freer to expose wrongdoing. Sniffed political columnist Gilberto Dimenstein in the Folha de Sao Paulo newspaper: "They're amateurs … They left trail after trail."
In addition, the distribution of income is as skewed now as it was in colonial times, when a tiny elite ruled Brazil and plundered its wealth.
According to a U.N. report released in April, Brazil's richest 20 percent has 26 times the income of the bottom 20 percent - in a time of recession, record unemployment, and 20 percent monthly inflation.
Collor was born to privilege, heir of a wealthy and politically powerful provincial clan with close ties to the military rulers.
Rich, handsome and athletic, he attended the best schools here and in Paris, returning to take over his family's news media empire.
Early on, Collor learned the uses of power and connections.
He was 14 when his father, Sen. Arnon de Mello, shot a colleague on the senate floor. The death was ruled accidental - he was aiming at someone else.
Collor rose quickly in Alagoas, a notoriously violent and corrupt state in Brazil's poor northeastern sugar cane belt. He would beat on his chest and defy hired assassins to shoot him, winning points with voters as a macho man.
In 1979, the military regime named him mayor of Maceio, the state capital. Three years later he was elected to Congress. In 1986 he became governor.
A year later, he set his sights on the presidency and with his inner circle began planning a campaign based on promises to fight corruption. With his aquiline profile, deep baritone and elegant suits, he looked great on television. He beat socialist Luis Inacio Lula da Silva by 4 million votes in the 1989 election.
It soon became evident the new masters in Brasilia wanted too much.
Collor's brother Pedro in May accused Paulo Cesar Farias, Collor's campaign treasurer, of extorting millions of dollars from businessmen and government companies in the president's name.
Congress has evidence Farias paid Collor's family expenses. Farias is being investigated for graft, tax evasion and influence-peddling, and some legislators believe they have enough information to indict him.
On Tuesday, lawmakers questioned a personal secretary of Collor, Ana Maria Acioli, on one of her bank accounts showing more than $ 500,000 in deposits between Sept. 1, 1991, and last May 30.
She told them she knew of no illicit funding of the account, used to pay Collor's personal and household expenses. But according to news reports and other witnesses' testimony, the money came from Farias.
Reporters found credit card bills in the garbage of press spokesman Claudio Humberto Rosa e Silva showing charges higher than his salary. Rosa e Silva was transferred to Brazil's embassy in Portugal.
First lady Rosane Malta Collor resigned under fire as head of a government charity when it was revealed she doled out money and gifts to her family in Alagoas, including grants to nonexistent companies.
Collor's Cabinet has caused more headaches.
Labor Minister Antonio Magri was taped by a hidden microphone exulting over a $ 30,000 bribe and urging a subordinate to take some, while Health Minister Alceni Guerra ordered huge stocks of bicycles and umbrellas from a friend's store at inflated prices.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Peter Muello, based in Rio, has covered Brazilian news for The Associated Press for 12 years.

 

End of Document
