

Brazil To Shelve Gigantic Development Projects in the Amazon
The Associated Press
December 3, 1993, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 457 words
Byline: By JORGE MEDEROS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BRASILIA, Brazil
Body




Brazil will stop pursuing huge development projects in the Amazon and turn instead to smaller-scale efforts that are less harmful to the environment, President Itamar Franco announced Friday.
But Franco's policy met with immediate opposition from leaders in Amazon states, who called for more mining and forestry.
Franco's new policy - a consequence of economic recession - is his first regarding long-term Amazon development that takes environmental protection into account. The Amazon basin comprises 57 percent of Brazil.
The "era of mega-development projects is a thing of the past," Franco declared at the first meeting of the National Amazon Council.
The council, which will monitor development in the region, includes Rubens Ricupero, minister of the environment and the Amazon, and the governors of seven jungle states.
Brazil has long portrayed efforts by foreigners to help protect the rain forest as meddling with its internal affairs.
Environmentalists have attacked the government for spending huge sums on hydroelectric dams, bridges and roads that destroyed the rain forest, then fell into disrepair when federal funding dried up in the 1980s.
Franco said all development projects in the 2-million-square-mile Amazon basin would have to follow new ecological and economic zoning guidelines and be approved by the Environment Ministry.
The government recently mapped out "ecological zones" where uncontrolled slash-and-burn clearing of rain forest and industrial projects would be banned. Agricultural and light industrial projects would be allowed.
The governors had very different ideas on how to tap the Amazon's riches.
Amazonas state Gov. Gilberto Mestrinho, considered the most powerful politician in the Amazon, demanded that the government legalize gold mining throughout the region.
About 400,000 prospectors are illegally mining for gold, diamonds and other minerals in the Amazon. They often ravage the forests and poison rivers with mercury, used to separate gold dust.
Mestrinho railed against laws that prohibit mining on Indian reservations and called for education to teach miners how to use mercury safely.
He said the governors wanted to exploit Amazon lumber, and that $ 20 billion in hardwoods could be cut each year "without destroying the jungle."
He also demanded that federal legislators review the boundaries of all indigenous reservations, in particular the mineral-rich lands of the Tikuna tribe and the Yanomami.
The 37,000-square-mile Yanomami reservation on Brazil's northwest border with Venezuela has been invaded repeatedly by gold prospectors since 1987. The miners have wrought environmental havoc and, through violence and disease, have helped cause the deaths of more than 2,000 of the estimated 9,000 Yanomami.
 Load-Date: December 3, 1993

 

End of Document
