

Briefs Save the Rain Forest Run
The Associated Press
April 16, 1993, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 857 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




In 1992, the Rudolf Steiner School, a Waldorf school, raised more than $ 1,700 to adopt 50 acres of rain forest in Mbaracayu Reserve in Paraguay. The donation was made to the Latin American division of The Nature Conservancy, based in Arlington, Va.
The project involved painting T-shirts depicting rain forest themes that were sold at a school fair. At the same time, the school said it was incorporating study of the rain forest into the curriculum.
Waldorf Schools are a group of 500 independent schools internationally that share the philosophy of Austrian scientist and philosopher Rudolf Steiner.
This year, over 30 Waldorf schools, including those in California, New York, Oregon, Vermont, Hawaii and Canada, will sponsor "fun runs" to raise money to adopt additional acres of rain forest. These events will be held during the first week of May, with children signing up sponsors to pledge a certain amount of money for the distance they run.
Kathy Schnell, a spokesperson for the Rudolph Steiner School, said over 3,000 students are expected to participate nationwide. The goal is to rain enough money to adopt 1,000 acres of rain forest, which cost $ 35 an acre to adopt.
The Rudolph Steiner School in New York City will hold its event on May 5. The school said it expects over 200 students to participate in the run, which will be held in Central Park.
---
Books Change Lives
MIDDLETOWN, Conn. (AP) - Have you ever felt so strongly about a book that you wrote to the author to tell him or her how it changed your life?
That's what 9th-grader Noelle M. Arton did, and now she is the grand-prize winner in the Books Change Lives Contest, co-sponsored by The Center for the Book at the Library of Congress and READ, Weekly Reader's literary magazine for teens.
Noelle is a student at Monte Vista High School in Danville, Calif. She wrote to Dr. Richard D'Ambrosio, author of "No Language But a Cry," a book about child abuse.
As the grand-prize winner, she receives a five-day, expense-paid trip for two to Washington, D.C., where her letter will be placed on file at the Library of Congress.
Noelle's letter to D'Ambrosio said, in part, "before reading your book, I didn't believe there was hope for severely abused children … Laura was seriously injured, and then, with the help of you and your colleagues, she was almost completely healed. This proved to me that anything is possible if you have determination."
---
Binary Zoo Software
CHAMPLAIN, N.Y. (AP) - Binary Zoo has three computer software programs for kids ages 7 to 14 designed to introduce music, math and museums.
Smithsonian Mystery At the Museums invites players to join forces with computer companion Edison to investigate and explore true replications of Smithsonian museums, solving more than 16 challenging games and puzzles. Wild Science Arcade is a science discovery program. And Rock and Bach Studio is all about music and multimedia. In this program, children find out about different instruments in an orchestra and practice different types of rhythm.
The software is designed for an IBM-PC or compatible. System requirements include a mouse, Sound Blaster or compatible sound card, a VGA or better monitor and a hard disk running MS-DOS 3.3 or later.
---
Binary Zoo is at Box 3210, Champlain, N.Y., 12919. The software is distributed by Broderbund. Suggested retail price: $ 59.95.
---
All Stars in the Kitchen
HOUSTON (AP) - The USA Rice Council has designed All Stars in the Kitchen, a recipe card collection for children that emphasizes good nutrition and a healthful lifestyle.
Seven athletes' cards feature photos on the front and recipes on the back. One card contains nutrition tips; another explains the new USDA Food Guide Pyramid. Featured athletes and recipes: Troy Aikman of the Dallas Cowboys (Quarterback Crunch Bars), Roger Clemens of the Boston Red Sox (Pitcher Perfect Rice Pudding) and Olympic gold medalist Summer Sanders (Black Bean and Rice Medley).
The USA Rice Council says all profits from the sale of the recipe cards will be divided among the athletes' favorite charities including Kid Care, devoted to helping homeless and underprivileged children; D.A.R.E., Drug Awareness and Resistance Education; and the Troy Aikman Foundation, benefitting children's charities in the Dallas-Fort Worth, Texas, area.
---
All-Stars in the Kitchen cards are available from the USA Rice Council, Box 740121, Houston, Texas 77274. Retail price is $ 1.95 per set; $ 2.11 for residents of Texas.
---
Haircutting Instructional Video
WOODLAND HILLS, Calif. (AP) - Haircutting By Numbers is an instructional video developed by a team of hairdressers. It's designed to teach adults how to cut their children's hair.
In the 20-minute video, host Bernard Gough, a former salon owner in London, demonstrates a basic cut using simple techniques on three children with different hair lengths and textures. The video is not recommended for children under 5 years of age (StellaGoff Productions, suggested retail price: $ 14.95).
---
Haircutting By Numbers is distributed by Shan Marie, 20929-47 Ventura Blvd., Suite 353, Woodland Hills, Calif. 91364. $ 14.95 plus $ 2.50 for shipping and handling.

 

End of Document
