

Bugs That Die at the Peak of Passion Swarm Through the South Again
 The Associated Press
September 30, 1995, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 285 words
Byline: By ELLIOTT MINOR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CLIMAX, Ga.
Body




Those love bugs are at it again - splattering windshields and bumpers along the highways of the Deep South.
"It's a rough way to go," said H.A. Denmark, a retired University of Florida entomologist who has studied the insects.
"I don't recommend it, but they die happy, I guess."
The quarter-inch black flies, so named because they mate in flight, are attracted to the heat and exhaust fumes of highways and swarm every May and early fall.
"I think they're worse this year than they've ever been," said Dixie Hutto, a restaurant owner in Climax, a farming community of 200 in southwestern Georgia.
Love bugs can clog radiators, causing engines to overheat. They can smear windshields, cutting visibility. And the acids in their decomposing bodies can ruin auto paint.
Everyone agrees they're a nuisance. Some curse them. Others make jokes: "What is one love bug? An unloved bug."
But nobody really knows what to do about them. Some people hang bug screens on the front of their cars and trucks. Others just wash their vehicles more often.
"You learn to live with them," Police Chief Tom Jones said recently, looking at the remains of the black bugs on his white police car. "They're not going away, just like gnats. It's just a fact of life here."
Love bugs came from Central and South America in the early 1900s and spread through Texas to Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, Florida, Georgia and South Carolina. They got to Climax in the 1980s.
Climax got its name in 1883 because it was the highest point on the railroad line between Montgomery, Ala., and Savannah. The town puts on a Swine Time festival in November, when the love bugs are gone.
"That'll be the climax of this year," said 75-year-old resident Clifford Wells.
 Load-Date: September 30, 1995

 

End of Document
