

Bush Says Gates Shouldn't Be Left 'Twisting in the Wind'
The Associated Press
July 13, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 835 words
Byline: By RITA BEAMISH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KENNEBUNKPORT, Maine
Body




President Bush on Friday heatedly defended Robert Gates, his nominee to head the CIA, and called on the Iran-Contra prosecutor to give the Senate any information he has on Gates.
In a 15-minute soliloquy, an agitated Bush said Gates should not be left "twisting in the wind" while the Senate mulls new questions and disclosures in the Iran-Contra case that might bear on Gates.
Bush told reporters at his vacation home that it is his understanding independent prosecutor Lawrence Walsh does not have data implicating Gates in the biggest scandal of the Reagan administration. But he said it would be "extraordinarily helpful" if Walsh would release any such information so the Senate can get on with the Gates confirmation hearings.
On another topic, Bush said he had "some differences" with Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev's letter to him outlining Gorbachev's bid for Western aid. Bush answered questions after saying goodbye to visiting Japanese Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu.
The president did not elaborate, but his national security advisor, Brent Scowcroft, dismissed the letter as "the same kinds of things we've seen before."
The letter laid out Gorbachev's economic plans in a bid to answer administration requests for more specifics on planned progress before committing large-scale U.S. aid.
The letter appeared not to measure up in terms of specificity.
"It's broad," Scowcroft said, adding that it discussed currency exchange rates, consumer prices and plans for privatizing areas of the economy.
He said Gorbachev said military spending, a key concern in the West, had been cut already by 29 percent.
But, Scowcroft said, "That's one of the most difficult questions to answer. It's not at all clear that they have a precise understanding" of total defense expenditures.
The topic of Gates elicited a rare display of intensity from the president.
He called Gates, the former deputy director of the CIA and now deputy national security adviser, "a man of honor and integrity." Bush said he relied on his aide's word that he had no knowledge in his previous CIA post of the Reagan administration's diversion of funds from arms sales to Iran to assist the Contra rebels in Nicaragua.
Bush said the Senate "should demand" any information the investigators have on Gates, but should not hold up the confirmation hearings "based on some inquiry over here that's been going on four years."
"It just distresses me to hear hypotheses raised that throw questions on his integrity," Bush said.
The ABC News program "Nightline" on Friday night quoted an unnamed source as saying Gates had met in Miami with Chilean arms dealer Carlos Cardoen as part of an operation to transfer weapons including deadly cluster bombs to Iraq during the Iran-Iraq War.
"Nightline" said sources contacted as part of a joint investigation with the Financial Times of London identified Gates as playing an integral part in the shipment of arms to Iraq through Chile. It also read a statement from the White House denying that Gates had met with Cardoen or that illegal shipments to Iraq had been made.
The program said, however, it learned only Friday that President Ronald Reagan signed an authorization in 1983 directing the CIA to help provide military and technological assistance to Iraq during its war with Iran.
The Senate Intelligence Committee this week postponed the Gates confirmation hearings scheduled for Monday after a former CIA official, Alan Fiers, agreed to cooperate in Walsh's investigation and to implicate other officials involved in the Iran-Contra deal. The senators said they wanted to question some individuals about Gates' possible involvement as deputy to CIA Director William Casey.
In Washington, Sen. Frank Murkowski, R-Alaska and a member of the Intelligence Committee, said Fiers' plea "just sent a caution flag up. Prudence simply dictates that we talk to" those who may have answers to the committee's questions, he said.
For his part, Bush said:
"Let's get to the bottom of it, but let's bring forward these people that are supposedly fingering him. Let's bring forward and let them stand there under oath before the Senate."
He said he did not want Gates brought down by "rumor and insinuation," nor have the confirmation hearings held up until after the congressional summer recess that begins Aug. 5.
Asked if Walsh should get on with his investigation, Bush said, "He's been on with it for four years. He ought to get on with it and off with it, in my view."
Gates' nomination, he said, should not be "obscured by an investigation that has been going on for four years. They ought not to panic and run like a covey of quail and say let's hang it out all over next summer."
He said "it just seems a little weird" that the Iran-Contra case continues to percolate.
"You shoot down one thing and somebody raises another," Bush said.
He rebuffed a question about Casey's involvement, saying tersely, "I have no knowledge of what Casey can do or didn't do. The man's dead. Let's have some more interviews with a dead man."
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto XKNE103

 

End of Document
