

Bush In Danger Of Becoming 'The National Scapegoat'
The Associated Press
June 11, 1992, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 832 words
Byline: By TERENCE HUNT, AP White House Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Cold War and the Gulf War were won on George Bush's watch. Dictatorships fell in Panama and Nicaragua with a lot of help from Washington. At home, the economy struggled out of recession.
This was supposed to have been the year the president was invincible, coasting to a second term. Instead, he is in deep political danger.
Associates say Bush is frustrated and puzzled by his slump in the polls. He seemed gloomy on a vacation to Kennebunkport, Maine, this month, and when asked how he felt, replied, "About a seven."
Clearly, voters are angry.
"There's a very strong anti-incumbent fervor," said Clayton Yeutter, White House counselor of domestic affairs and former chairman of the Republican National Committee. "I believe it's much broader than the United States. The whole world is in a funk."
"This is a weird year," Bush said last week. "This is what they call one of the weird ones out there."
At the heart of the president's malaise is a witches' brew of problems and unflattering perceptions of him, analysts say.
Many of the difficulties spring from the economy, which under Bush has been at its weakest since World War II.
"The recession has finally crystallized in many peoples' mind the sense that they have been going downhill, that they're running faster to stand still, that median incomes are really not increasing above inflation," said Stuart Eizenstat, who was White House domestic adviser to Jimmy Carter.
"People are looking for that elusive thing called leadership, and George Bush does not project leadership," said Lyn Nofziger, White House political director under Ronald Reagan.
"It's sort of a creeping sense that you've seen build over the years that something really is seriously wrong," said political consultant Jody Powell, who was Carter's press secretary. "The people have sort of come to the conclusion that he's not the guy to fix it."
"We have built the presidency up so much in this country," Nofziger said. "He's responsible for all that's good and all that's bad. When things go wrong we always blame the president.
"He is the national scapegoat."
Yeutter said leadership is a problem that Bush recognizes he must address. He said the president's leadership "is more fully understood outside the borders of the United States than it is inside."
A Republican poll by the Wirthlin Group found that 83 percent of the people believe the nation is on the wrong track, the worst showing in at least 12 years.
Despite signs of economic recovery, Bush said a national poll found that 70 percent of Americans believe the economy is getting worse.
Underscoring those fears, unemployment jumped to 7.5 percent in May, the highest level in nearly eight years.
Bush lost credibility with many Americans when he reneged on his read-my-lips-no-new-taxes pledge, observers said. It damaged him with conservatives "and that began to have a more corrosive effect generally," said Norman Ornstein, a presidential analyst at the American Enterprise Institute.
Some analysts believe Bush's successes in foreign policy backfired by showing he had a strong hand overseas but then was unable to solve problems at home.
"The victory in the (Gulf) war has made no appreciable difference in the everyday life of the average American," said Mark Mellman, a Democratic strategist and pollster. "People believe that George Bush does not understand the kind of problems that they face. He is distant and removed and unconcerned and unmoved by their plight,"
The collapse of communism focused attention on problems at home.
Presidential aide Yeutter said Americans "are basically saying to their leaders: 'Now that you've conquered the Soviet threat, and now that the Iraqi challenge is behind us and the geopolitical issues are of less danger, it's time to pay attention to these domestic issues and we're not pleased with what we see."
John Sears, an attorney who helped run Ronald Reagan's 1981 campaign, said Bush was the lesser of two evils in his contest with Michael Dukakis and came to office without broad support.
"His unwillingness or inability to flesh himself out once in office caught up with him in the end," Sears said. "People expect the president to make strong decisions and to lead. He looked at it more as a managerial position. It isn't."
Haley Barbour, a White House political director under Reagan and now a consultant, said Bush has been too conciliatory toward Congress.
"He has compromised and met them halfway, sometimes more than half, and the product of that is that a lot of people have forgotten what George Bush is for," Barbour said. "They don't know what he wants. More than any other thing, that has caused people to question what he believes in or whether he believes in anything."
Bush's campaign insists the president has the right policies and the best people, that his problems are chiefly the result of bad communications.
"We can't get the message to the people," Bush campaign press secretary Torie Clarke said. "We do a lousy job of merchandising what he's doing."

 

End of Document
