

Caldera, '60s Populist, Tries to Run Venezuela that Way in the '90s
The Associated Press
July 23, 1994, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 707 words
Byline: By ED McCULLOUGH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARACAS, Venezuela
Body




President Rafael Caldera, who won election seven months ago by a slim margin over three rivals, is laying to rest any doubts that he'd run Venezuela his way.
His suspension of constitutionally-guaranteed liberties two days ago, by overruling a Congress where his supporters are in a minority, is only a notable example of many that show he is determined to impose his will.
His imposition this month of price and currency controls flouts the hemisphere-wide trend toward free-market approaches to economic development, though they're in line with the thinking that underlaid his 1969-74 presidency.
"Everything has changed, except Caldera," said Oswaldo Alvarez Paz, a former congressman and state governor who was defeated in December's presidential election.
The suspension of Venezuelans' right to own property "hasn't been done since 1812," when the emerging republic was fighting for its independence, Alvarez Paz added in an interview.
Caldera decreed that on June 27 and again on Friday, after Congress overturned the earlier decree. Also suspended were Venezuelans' rights to travel, hold meetings, and be protected against arbitrary arrest.
Caldera insists most Venezuelans support him, and he said Friday he's willing to hold a referendum on the constitutional suspensions.
His opponents don't like to admit it, but Caldera may be right. He consistently wins higher public approval ratings than the 30 percent he garnered in the election, when only about 60 percent of the electorate voted.
He claims Venezuela, which has the largest petroleum reserves in the Western hemisphere, should not be poverty-stricken, and that fundamental change may turn things around.
Caldera, 78, is the grand old man of Venezuelan politics. He co-founded and helped build the Christian Democratic party, known by its Spanish acronym COPEI, into one of the country's two main parties.
He is a noted lawyer, pro-union activist, university professor and author. Since 1974, he has been a senator-for-life, as are all Venezuela's former presidents.
He is considered brilliant, competent, honest and dedicated to the have-nots in a society whose public officials aren't known for those qualities.
He's also stubborn and autocratic. Spurned by COPEI, he campaigned and won last year as an independent.
Caldera's reasoning for the constitutional suspensions, which Congress is preparing to overturn again, is that economic crisis threatens to overwhelm Venezuela's laws and institutions.
The oil-based economy contracted last year and will do so again this year. Inflation may reach triple digits; unemployment, double digits. Hundreds of thousands are hungry, suffering and angry.
"We feel no satisfaction in taking this measure," an emotional Caldera sadi in a 10-minute speech broadcast live nationwide Friday night. But "I promised the country a government that would govern. The country elected me to confront the crisis."
Justice Minister Ruben Creixems said the government should be judged not for thwarting Congress, but by how prudently it uses the powers it has seized.
Some Venezuelans fear the worst. For weeks, police have swept through poor neighborhoods at night, rounding up "suspects" and holding them several days without charges.
Prominent bankers have been detained and their property seized, allegedly in relation to bank failures that prompted a $ 7 billion bailout by Caldera's government - equivalent to more than half the 1994 national budget. The massive printing of the local currency, the bolivar, stoked inflation.
Foreigners and Venezuelans alike are stopped at highway checkpoints by the National Guard who claim to be searching for illegal weapons, but who allow passage only after a bribe is paid.
The way to combat inflation, Alvarez Paz and other opponents argue, is to reduce the fiscal deficit and inflation and sell off state companies, which Caldera shows no interest in doing.
Caldera says the extra powers allow the government to curtail price-gouging and the hoarding of food and medicine, and to prop up the bolivar.
The government also wants to prevent those allegedly involved in the banking scandal from fleeing the country or keeping hold of illicit gains, including property which the government wants to sell to pay for the bailout.
 Load-Date: July 23, 1994

 

End of Document
