

Campaigns Wage Angry Duel on the 'Stealth Medium'
The Associated Press
October 27, 1992, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 778 words
Byline: By MIKE ROBINSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A new front in the campaign war between President Bush and Democrat Bill Clinton has opened on the nation's radio airwaves, with each side claiming the other is making use of the "stealth medium" to twist the facts.
New taxes on farmers, wholesale job layoffs, the closing of Fort Benning, Ga. - all this and more would transpire under a Clinton presidency, the Bush campaign's radio ads claim.
Meanwhile, the Clinton campaign charges the Bush administration uses taxpayer dollars to close American plants and to send jobs to Central America.
"Deceitful and distorted," says the Bush camp. "Bald faced lies," says Clinton aide Brooks Yeager.
Advertising scholars say something about radio tempts campaigns to massage the facts.
"Radio has always been dirtier than television because it doesn't tie the message to the source," says University of Pennsylvania political scientist Kathleen Jamieson. "The academic research is very clear that audiences don't remember who sponsors a radio ad. … Radio is a stealth medium."
Brown University political scientist Darrell West says radio "is a medium where you can deliver a message without suffering the same backlash."
Bush ads often evoke a nightmarish scenario under a Clinton administration.
A ringing telephone opens one ad in North Carolina as a farmer calls the "Clinton-Gore Land Management, Species Protection, AFCS office, Tax Filing and Government Oversight Office."
Farmer: "Yes, ma'am, I'd like to plant a crop of corn, please."
"I'm sorry, sir, the Clinton-Gore Land Management Directorate has classified your farm as wetland."
Then farmer learns he owes new taxes and won't get his farm payments.
"What!"
"Oh, yes, sir. President Clinton did just what he promised. He was for change, remember?"
"We have never proposed any of these taxes," says Clinton spokeswoman Max Parker. "What they are trying to do is scare farmers."
Most of Clinton's ads take aim at the dismal economy under Bush. A typical ad, airing in New Mexico, recalls the president's 1988 promise to produce 30 million jobs.
"Remember? George Bush gave us the worst economy in 50 years. In America, there are almost 3 million more people unemployed today than when George Bush took office."
True - if growth is the only basis for judging the economy. But the ad omits that 1 million more Americans are working than when Bush took office.
A Bush ad that aired until Monday in Georgia said Clinton would cut defense so sharply it could close Fort Benning and cost 5,000 civilian jobs.
Military experts scoff at the notion that any president would close the huge "Home of the Infantry" in the home state of Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman Sam Nunn.
Clinton's ads claiming the administration subsidizes moving plants to Central America draw credibility from reports on CBS' "60 Minutes" and ABC's "Nightline." An ad that aired in North Carolina:
"Kellwood Textile Company, Fletcher, North Carolina. - 175 people once worked here. Now the jobs are gone, chasing cheap labor in Central America. George Bush is using your tax dollars to make it happen. Last week, 60 Minutes and Nightline uncovered the ripoff. ..."
Actually, the program in question is more complex and hard to explain in a 30-second ad.
The Agency for International Development does provide grants to business groups in Central America that try to lure U.S. companies there - but only if the U.S. companies have already decided to move abroad.
The State Department says the program promotes stability in impoverished countries while keeping the plants that would move overseas anyway in this hemisphere - where they still may buy from U.S.-based suppliers.
"There is not a single federal program that 'pays' American companies to shut down their U.S. operations, lay off American workers and move to Latin America - not a single one," says Bush campaign spokeswoman Alixe Glen.
But Clinton's campaign points to low-interest loans, tariff waivers and other benefits provided to the companies.
Bush ads airing in a dozen states say a Clinton energy tax would boost utility bills and cost jobs.
"An independent analysis says that Clinton-Gore radical environmental taxes will drive up our annual utility bills $ 343," says a typical commercial. "A CONSAD research study says those same taxes would force cutbacks in energy and related industries."
"That would threaten 200,000 jobs in Illinois - it could cost you your job," the ad says.
But Clinton has never advocated such a tax.
Wilbur Steger, who heads CONSAD Research of Pittsburgh, says the $ 100,000 study was financed mainly by the Washington-based Global Climate Coalition, a lobby of energy companies that would be hit by such a tax if it were enacted.

 

End of Document
