

Central America Faces Task of Winning The Peace
The Associated Press
June 27, 1992, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 943 words
Byline: By JOSEPH B. FRAZIER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TEGUCIGALPA, Honduras
Body




The fires of revolt have been banked in Central America after a dozen years and more than 100,000 lost lives, but the poverty and lopsided societies that ignited them remain virtually untouched.
Unless changes are made, say economic and political specialists, the region and its 30 million people could slide into a new cycle of violence.
"We worry a lot about the capacity the countries … have to confront poverty and debt, and for the reactivation of their economies," said Efrain Anibal Diaz Arrivillaga, a Honduran economist.
"Foreign factories are opening in Honduras and they provide a lot of jobs, especially in the clothing industry. But these are just pockets of prosperity and they don't really affect the national economy.
"The population is growing at 3 percent a year. Jobs aren't growing nearly that fast."
Crowded El Salvador, short of land and jobs, faces the probable return of hundreds of thousands of refugees, mostly from the United States. Peasants scratch out subsistance livings growing corn on small mountain patches.
Mud and thatch peasant huts, unchanged in generations, contrast starkly with the mansions of the rich minority. Factories on the edges of San Salvador, closed during the violent decade, remain empty, their walls splashed with rebel grafitti.
Illiteracy and ignorance are a plague throughout the Central America, except in enlightened, democratic Costa Rica.
World prices are low for the traditional crops, especially coffee and sugar, and the level of U.S. aid is dropping with the end of East-West confrontation in the region.
For most of their histories, Central American countries have relied on the military to keep order. Now, as the nations become democratic, their governments must stand on their own.
High expectations of a better life are far from being met.
"The region is walking blind; some objectives are needed," said Manuel Acosta Bonilla, a former Honduran foreign minister who advises President Rafael Callejas.
"Countries in Central America should be making 10-year plans, but there is no idea of the future. They're leaving it to surprises.
"They need to figure how to feed their people, to raise the standard of living. If there is no answer to the larger problems, the violence will come back, and it will be worse."
Over the past decade, fratricidal war gripped El Salvador, Nicaragua and Guatamala, countries with oppressive elites and enormous gaps in wealth. Costa Rica and Honduras, where those conditions either did not exist or were less acute, generally escaped the violence.
Central America's last civil war ended Feb. 1 with a cease-fire in the 12-year-old El Salvador conflict. Eight years of war came to a close in Nicaragua in 1990 after the leftist Sandinistas lost democratic elections and the U.S.-backed Contra guerrillas agreed to disband.
A 30-year-old insurgency sputters on in Guatemala, but is more a nuisance to the government than a threat.
Although the wars are over, discontent simmers on.
Dissidents in Nicaragua are rearming as promises and the expectations of fighters on both sides go unfulfilled.
Some Contras and leftist Sandinista soldiers have joined forces, belying claims that the country's problems continue to be ideological. Many of the "revueltos," as the new combined group is known, have taken over land by force.
"Nobody is going to want to invest in Nicaragua if even its own government cannot protect private property," said Ramiro Gurdiam, head of the independent Private Enterprise Council.
Salvadoran guerrillas, who began fighting because their social movements were brutally supressed, were to have disarmed 40 percent of their forces by June 1. They have not, citing government delays in implementing other aspects of the peace agreement.
Rebel leader Chano Guevara said recently that the left is ready "for any situation" that might arise from a failure to fulfill cease-fire terms.
In both El Salvador and Nicaragua, tens of thousands of weapons remain in private hands.
Most Central Americans who were landless before the fighting began remain so.
In San Salvador, cardboard and scrap-lumber huts line the walls of urban gulches within shouting distance of mansions protected by walls.
Barefoot, diseased mothers with gaunt children beg for centavos in filthy market corners of the region's capitals, often in the shadows of modern office buildings.
Scrap-lumber villages are springing up on the edges of Managua, capital of Nicaragua, and on vacant lots within the city.
"We have the obligation to heal the country … in the economic realm and in the social and moral realms, because they are vital components of the founding of peace and national reconciliation," said Armando Calderon Sol, mayor of San Salvador and president of the governing Arena Party.
"There needs to be some way of equitable distribution" of wealth, said Hugo Noe Pino, head of the economics department at the University of Honduras.
All of that is a tall order in a region divided for centuries by social and racial differences and forced to economic standstill or decline by insurrection and war.
Noe Pino said the the left "has been largely discredited."
"Governments now are from the new right," he said. "The left was a needed mechanism in Central America, but it was swallowed. Now, who will channel frustrations?
"Justice in the region is not of the quality we would like. There is still a fear of going to court. There is no guarantee of an honest trial."
Mayor Mayin Correa if Panama City tells of a prisoner who was held for seven years awaiting trial, then freed recently after a court took 30 minutes to decide he was innocent.
"Can you imagine trusting a justice system like that?" she asked.

 

End of Document
