

Chile's Ex-Dictator Healthy, Controversial, On the Job
 The Associated Press
November 23, 1995, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 815 words
Byline: By EDUARDO GALLARDO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SANTIAGO, Chile
Body




To his enemies, he is a ruthless ex-dictator with blood on his hands. To the government, he is an immovable object. To some of his staunchest supporters, he is the man who should be the next president.
Gen. Augusto Pinochet turns 80 on Saturday, as healthy and controversial as ever. There is no talk of retiring from the army he has commanded for more than 22 years, the first 17 of them when he also was Chile's ruler.
Pinochet, who ousted a leftist government in 1973 and then governed with an iron hand before leaving the presidential palace in 1990, says he likes being referred to as "the world's oldest soldier."
The constitution written by Pinochet before he stepped down and allowed the return of democratic elections prevents the civilian president from firing him as army commander. It says the post is his until March 1998.
A group of right-wing politicians and businessmen is celebrating Pinochet's birthday with a mammoth banquet in Santiago and at least 20 other dinners around the country Saturday night.
Earlier in the day, delegations from the army, navy, air force and national police will visit Pinochet's house to wish him well. A military band will play some of his favorite tunes, mainly German military marches.
Hernan Briones, an organizer of the evening tribute, says more than 2,500 people are expected at the main banquet in the capital and about 18,000 should attend the other dinners. Each will pay the equivalent of $ 38 for the dinner plus $ 100 to go into a planned Gen. Augusto Pinochet Foundation.
At the end of the evening, all the banquet sites are to see a televised talk by Pinochet, who has made clear "it won't be a farewell speech."
There has been speculation the celebration will be a launching pad for a Pinochet candidacy in the 1999 presidential election.
Pinochet and the organizers dismiss that talk. But retired Gen. Jorge Ballerino, one of Pinochet's closest associates, said that after leaving the army, "my general, as any other Chilean, will have the right to seek the presidency if he wants to."
The Communist Party and other leftists vow "to spoil the party" with demonstrations and other unspecified protests.
Pinochet cracked down especially on leftists after he overthrew President Salvador Allende, a Marxist, in a bloody 1973 coup. A presidential commission reported in 1991 that 2,115 people were slain for political reasons during Pinochet's regime and about 700 disappeared after being arrested.
Pinochet, who had been appointed army chief by Allende 19 days before the coup, says he acted to prevent Chile from being turned into another Cuba and to end growing social and economic chaos.
Although he gave up presidential power, Pinochet remains at the center stage of Chilean politics.
His comments often trigger controversy, with strong criticism from the left, open praise from the right and an uncomfortable silence from the government.
Although he repeatedly stresses that as a military officer he is obedient to the government and remains out of politics, many of his remarks are political and critical of the government.
He recently criticized the government's effort to seek "truth and justice" about human rights abuses during his regime.
He has attacked the restoration of diplomatic relations with Cuba, and suggests President Eduardo Frei "is not strong-willed enough."
Pinochet also publicly disagreed with the government's strong opposition to nuclear warhead tests by France in the South Pacific. "We are, as always, meddling in the business of a sovereign country," he said.
Frei's government appears uncomfortable with the situation, but there is little it can do.
Defense Minister Edmundo Perez, the man in the government who deals most with Pinochet, says part of the problem is that Pinochet is "an unusual army commander."
"He was president for 17 years and maintains a strong leadership over the political right," Perez notes.
Congressman Jose Viera-Gallo, a socialist who was exiled during Pinochet's regime, criticizes the former dictator for his dual roles as army commander and defender of his authoritarian rule.
"They are contradictory roles," Viera-Gallo argues.
The president sometimes reprimands Pinochet for his remarks, but Viera-Gallo says that does little good because of the constitutional clause that prevents the firing of Pinochet.
The right firmly supports Pinochet. "You can't muzzle him. He has all the rights to respond to the attacks on his government," says Congressman Alberto Espina.
Under the constitution, Frei will be able to pick a new army commander in March 1998, but he will have to choose from five generals proposed by Pinochet.
Pinochet is not giving any hints. "It could be anyone," he told reporters recently.
What he makes clear is that retirement is not in his plans. In a recent interview with the newspaper El Mercurio, he even joked that a Chinese magician had predicted he would live 100 years.
 Load-Date: November 23, 1995

 

End of Document
