

Cholera, Aided by Poverty, Creeps Toward the Rio Grande
The Associated Press
March 24, 1992, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 538 words
Byline: By SUSANA HAYWARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MONTERREY, Mexico
Body




Not far from the power lunches and billion-dollar companies in this bustling northern industrial center, children play in rotting garbage and old men scrounge for food scraps.
The other side of Monterrey's tracks was ripe for cholera when it arrived this month on a northern march that could soon take it across the Rio Grande into the United States.
Cholera, which has killed some 4,000 people in Latin America in the past year, could be carried toward the border by rivers that feed the Rio Grande or by illegal aliens who cross the river in search of jobs.
Texas Department of Health spokewoman Beverly Ray said no cases of cholera have been confirmed this year in Texas. The only significant outbreak in the United States was among about 75 passengers on an Argentine jetliner that landed in Los Angeles last month. One person died.
"The only way this is going to to go into the United States is through illegal aliens," said Carlos Rojas, a cholera specialist at Monterrey's Technological Institute of Higher Education.
Around Monterrey - a city of 2.5 million people about 100 miles from the border - about 12 cases have been confirmed. News reports, quoting unnamed health authorities, say as many as 200 cases have developed.
Although easily treated if caught in time, cholera can kill quickly through severe diarrhea and dehydration. The disease is spread through food and water contaminated by fecal matter.
Since breaking out in Peru in January 1991, it has spread to nearly every nation in Latin America.
Along the two-lane highway to Reynosa from Guadalupe in northern Mexico, cardboard shacks line the Santa Catarina River.
Water filters through the trash that dots the hills and drains into the tub Amparo Ortiz Munoz uses to bathe herself and her five children.
She has heard about cholera, but isn't sure what it is.
"I'm turning to the radio for information. I know I have to boil water," said Ortiz, washing a pile of clothes outside her one-room shack.
In Guadalupe, a working-class community of 500,000 people, at least a fifth of the population live without adequate drainage or potable water. Ten of the 12 confirmed cholera cases in northern Mexico were in Guadelupe.
Scores of suburbs around this city of 2.5 million share Guadelupe's sanitation problem.
"Our government wants to copy America but in America people have water and drainage," said Ignacio Staines, a physician and activist in a neighborhood called Land and Liberty, where streams of sewage run down the hills.
Cholera bacteria showed up in at least two samples from the San Juan River north of Monterrey, which receives tons of raw sewage daily and flows into the Rio Grande.
"At this moment the San Juan River is our great mortification," said Jose Cavazos, health director for the state of Nuevo Leon. "It's a cauldron for any type of germ."
The government said the victims brought back the cholera from southern Mexico, where most of Mexico's 3,500 cases and 35 deaths have been reported.
The government has declared an alert in several municipalities and has dispached health officials to inform people on precautions. But it dismisses fears of an epidemic.
"Nuevo Leon is not at risk," said Cavazos. "There's drainage and 92 percent has potable water."

 

End of Document
