

Clinton Approves Resumption of Radar Operations in the Andes
The Associated Press
December 2, 1994, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 538 words
Byline: By DAVID BRISCOE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Clinton has approved resumption of anti-drug operations with Colombia that had been suspended out of concern that innocent aircraft might be shot down.
The operations are to include U.S. radar assistance in the interdiction of aircraft "reasonably suspected to be primarily engaged in illicit drug trafficking in that country's airspace," Clinton said in a memorandum dated Thursday and made public on Friday.
An administration official said a similar agreement with Peru is imminent.
A congressional study carried out during the summer said suspension of the U.S. efforts had benefited narcotraffickers.
Ground-based U.S. radar had been keeping tabs on drug flights out of the two Andean countries. Very few flights were intercepted but authorities in Bogota and Lima used the data to stage raids on cocaine laboratories and storage facilities, officials said.
The program was discontinued by the Clinton administration on grounds U.S. officials could be held liable under international law if Colombia or Peru used the U.S.-supplied data to shoot down suspect civilian aircraft.
Clinton, in his memo to the secretaries of state and defense, said U.S. help is needed because of the "extraordinary threat posed by illicit drug trafficking to the national security" of Colombia.
He said the Colombian government has worked out appropriate procedures for protecting against the loss of innocent lives in the air and on the ground in connection with the interdiction.
Any aircraft to be intercepted would be carefully identified and warned before any action is taken, he said.
Congress passed a law last summer that requires the administration to certify that the country receiving the intelligence data has taken measures to protect against innocent loss of life.
Details of the resumed U.S. activities were worked out with Colombia and arrangements were continuing with Peru, official said.
U.S. anti-drug officials have said that civilian aircraft often are used to send cocaine from Peru to Colombia for final processing and eventual distribution in U.S. cities.
The study by Congress' General Accounting Office said the May decision made life easier for the drug traffickers in several ways.
It said they were able to use multiple flights with smaller drug loads than before. They also began flying during daylight hours instead of the early evening. In addition, they were able to spend more time on the ground and used more direct air routes instead of the more circuitous ones used previously.
The May decision prompted expressions of outrage from officials in Colombia and Peru, who felt it demonstrated a lack of U.S. resolve. It also produced a deep rift between the counter-narcotics offices in the Pentagon and the State Department, which vigorously opposed the suspension.
Colombian President Ernesto Samper's spokesman said Friday he hoped the United States would immediately resume helping Colombia track drug flights by radar.
In a phone interview, spokesman Juan Fernando Cristo said the information from the U.S. radars was needed to curtail flights carrying coca leaves and paste, the prime ingredient of cocaine, to refining laboratories inside Colombia.
"Cooperation in the anti-drug fight is fundamental," Cristo said.
 Load-Date: December 2, 1994

 

End of Document
