

CNN's Peter Arnett: A Man in the Bullseye
The Associated Press
January 20, 1991, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 562 words
Byline: By JAY SHARBUTT, AP Television Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Peter Arnett, a short, balding guy with a broken nose and a Pulitzer Prize, achieved a dangerous dream Sunday - being the only American network TV corrrespondent in Baghdad right in the middle of a war.
Not only that, the phone worked, at least when the Iraqis let him use it.
At 56, an age many globe-trotting journalists think of writing a novel or even becoming an editor, Arnett again is in the thick of things, covering the war between Iraq and U.S.-led forces.
Born in Riverton, New Zealand, Arnett is by no means the flaky, reckless war-junkie journalist so loved by Hollywood. He calculates the odds of getting out the story, not his obituary.
But as his daughter, Elsa, a Boston Globe reporter, wrote on Friday, he repeatedly has said, "I'm a war correspondent. I don't want to wither away in a desk job. I want to be out there reporting in the field as long as I can."
An incurably cheerful, outgoing man, quick with a joke and quick to help a newcomer, even a competitor, he has been with CNN since 1981, and before that was with The Associated Press going back to 1962.
He has had peaceful stretches, including two years as CNN's Moscow bureau chief in 1986-88, and then in Washington, where he reported on the government and national security matters. He hated Washington, he privately told friends.
Things were still fairly peaceful until, offered the chance to become CNN's man in Jerusalem early last year, he jumped at it.
He does seem to visit the neighborhoods of doom more often than most - the war in Afghanistan, the fighting in El Salvador and Nicaragua, and, of course, Vietnam, where he won his Pulitzer in 1966.
But again, as his daughter quotes him, "War reporting is my life. I'm completely absorbed by what is happening around me and the effort it takes to file a story. I don't have time to worry about the danger."
He joined The AP when both he and the U.S. effort in Vietnam were young. He was in for the long haul. You name the place, the battle, he was there - Ap Bac, the Ia Drang, Dak To, Khe Sanh, the Tet Offensive of 1968.
Able to report combat brilliantly, then turn right around and write one of those What-It-All-Means news analyses, he was in Vietnam at the bitter end.
With AP bureau chief George Esper, he covered the fall of Saigon to the North Vietnamese on April 30, 1975.
Arnett's pals likely weren't all that surprised that he was in Baghdad with CNN colleagues John Holliman and Bernard Shaw, reporting live by phone as the first wave of U.S.-led air attacks began in the pre-dawn hours last Wednesday.
In a way, he's lucky he's still there. His colleagues, now safely back in the United States, and CNN executives are flooded by appeals for interviews from people covering the people covering the story.
In addition to newspaper types, "Entertainment Tonight" and "Inside Edition" have been among the callers, and People magazine plans a big piece. Why, even a delegate from Vanity Fair magazine has joined in.
It isn't known who will play Arnett when the inevitable movie is made about him. But its probable Hollywood producers already are thinking about such a story. They love "reality-based" movies, if not reality.
But that's the way things go. Reality for Arnett is Baghdad, getting the story out and continuing to inhale and exhale on a regular basis.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE: Jay Sharbutt first met Arnett in 1969 on assignment in Vietnam.

 

End of Document
