

Cocaine Wealth Bypasses Farmers Who Harvest the Leaves
The Associated Press
December 24, 1991, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 612 words
Byline: By PETER McFARREN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CHAPARE, Bolivia
Body




The huge profits piled up in the cocaine trade do not filter down to the peasants who grow coca leaf, most of whom are mired in poverty and hopelessness.
Pedro Sotelo is one such grower. He lives in a wooden shack with his wife and two children in the heart of this lush tropical region. Five of his seven children have died from diarrhea and respiratory ailments.
The 35-year-old Sotelo migrated to Bolivia's lowland country in search of work after a drought devastated his farm in the Andean highlands.
Today, he is one of the estimated 300,000 farmers who are the first link in the chain that supplies cocaine to users in Europe and North America.
The closing of tin mines in the highlands six years ago also fueled the flight of the Indians to the region. "Financial troubles, hunger and poverty have driven the farmers to cultivate the coca leaf," he said.
But they have found that the business is lucrative only to those further along the chain.
As much as $ 400 million in cocaine earnings filter back into the Bolivian economy each year, but millions more - no one knows how much for sure - go to traffickers and dealers who smuggle and sell the illicit finished drug abroad.
"Contrary to what the industrialized world thinks, the Bolivian coca leaf farmer has received very little return on the raw material that is converted to cocaine," said Bolivia's agricultural minister, Mauro Bertero.
Growers in the area agree.
"The farmers, because of their humble origins, have been used by the huge cocaine trafficking mafias," complained Nestor Bravo, a leader of the Chapare coca growers federation.
Nonetheless, farmers find they would make even less by growing other crops, so coca cultivation remains the chief source of income for Chapare's peasants, amounting to 92 percent of all agricultural output in this region alone and a quarter of Bolivian farm production.
Farmers receive between $ 30 to $ 50 per 110-pound load of coca leaves, which are then processed by primitive labs into cocaine paste. The paste is next flown to the northern Beni region of Bolivia or to Colombia, Brazil or Argentina for further processing into pure cocaine.
"It is apparent to us that the peasant coca growers are not profiting from the coca-cocaine industry in Bolivia," said Bruce Wharton, press attache at the U.S. Embassy in La Paz, the capital.
"They are victimized and exploited by the drug traffickers. They produce the raw material and get nothing for it, while the traffickers profit enormously from this nefarious trade," he said.
Malnutrition, infant mortality and high illiteracy rates remain problems in Chapare - a region that produces a third of the world's coca supply.
The life expectancy in Chapare is 40 years and the infant mortality rate stands at 17 percent, according to statistics. But with many infant deaths often going unreported, health experts say the rate is far higher.
Sotelo said his children work the fields, harvesting the coca leaf - unable to attend school because of financial difficulties. In Chapare, most children rarely advance beyond elementary school.
"I'm willing to plant other crops if I can sell them, but if I can't, what's the point?" said Sotelo.
For instance, tangerines by the hundred would fetch about 30 cents - a low price that usually leaves them to rot.
Thus, when coca prices drop below the cost of production because of crackdowns against cocaine-processing labs, farmers turn in desperation to voluntary eradication in return for $ 800 per acre destroyed.
The U.S. Agency for International Development and the United Nations are financing development projects to encourage farmers to plant alternative crops such as pineapple and bananas.

 

End of Document
