

Commerce is Scarce, But Cubans Squeeze by on The Black Market
The Associated Press
August 3, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 585 words
Byline: By JOSEPH B. FRAZIER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MARIEL, Cuba
Body




On the hot coastal road to Havana, two men on bicycles, legs of pork on their shoulders, pass three policemen. Nobody blinks. Down the highway, another man carries a huge slab of meat, only partly wrapped in paper.
In a country where such meat would be often hard to obtain in any store, it seems that somebody's butchered pig is taking a speedy trip to Cuba's illegal but essential black market.
Much of the food produced in Cuba - most, say some - goes the same route, as do clothes, cigarettes, shoes and many other consumer goods.
Despite the gains this island nation 90 miles off the Florida coast has made in 32 years of communism, especially in literacy and public health, the black market is a reminder that basic consumer needs still go begging.
Many shops are boarded shut and appear to have been for years, and the shelves in those stores still open are nearly bare of all but basic staples. The roadside fruit stands and street vendors common to most Latin American capitals are absent.
Yet somehow the most basic of needs get met, and while many others do not, Havana functions better than some Latin American cities.
The healthy-looking kids and the way people dress is a sign that what is available in the state stores has little bearing on what people eat or can get if they ask the right questions in the right places.
A young woman in this town 25 miles west of Havana described her work on a poultry farm, saying some of the chickens got "lost" and wind up on the black market, where that money buys tobacco that also could be sold on the side.
The woman, in her late 20s, spoke in her home on condition of anonymity because she feared arrest.
She said she considers herself a good Cuban and supports the Communist Party, but must sell to the black market for her and her four children to get by. "Listen, food is not political," she shrugged.
These days she is trying to get soap, baby clothes, and other scarce goods from those with access to state dollar stores generally reserved for foreigners. She pays for the goods in Cuban pesos at an inflated rate, then sells the items, keeping a few things for her children.
Are customers waiting?
"Loads of them," she says.
"Cigarettes. Razor blades … I can sell those. If I want meat, well, listen, somebody has beef. Maybe not in the stores, but somebody has meat," she says. "We know these things. We have to know these things. I know who has meat. They know who has razor blades.
"Among survivors, there is an understanding," she said.
Legally, producers are required to sell to the state, which distributes the goods. The black market short-circuits this government middleman.
Havana residents say it works in various ways. Goods fall off trucks or leave factories unofficially. Some government plumbers or electricians work evenings, using purloined parts.
Farmers sell to taxi drivers who run the produce into town to shopkeepers or private customers who may or may not sell to others.
"Limes?" said a corner shopkeeper in eastern Havana. "Here they are. I got limes through the proper way. But if I get some more and dump them in the same bin, well, listen, who has to know about that?"
Havana has virtually no advertising for consumer goods. There is little to advertise and the scramble for scarce available goods negates the need for the hucksters.
Thus what President Fidel Castro called the "craziness" of the market economy last week keeps Cuba's underground economy alive. It breaks down to supply and demand.
The demand is tremendous. The supply is not.

 

End of Document
