

Corporate Cowboys At The End Of Their Ropes
The Associated Press
June 30, 1991, Sunday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 907 words
Byline: By PAUL ALEXANDER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SYDNEY, Australia
Body




Australia gave birth to its share of corporate cowboys who flourished in the heady days of easy credit and little supervision. But many of the flamboyant high flyers have gone under Down Under.
At least 15 of Australia's major businesses have fallen on tough times in the last two years, with losses totaling around $$12.8 billion.
The corporate heads who paid themselves multimillion-dollar salaries while acquiring art collections, antiques, plush yachts and executive jets now are selling off such accouterments to make ends meet.
Government officials worry that as a result potential investors will grow wary of the Australian market.
"It is not going too far to say that this country is now regarded with contempt in many important centers around the world," former Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser said recently. "If you are an Australian businessman who wants to do something overseas and you want to get a partner overseas … they don't want to talk about it."
The list of flops is long and features some of Australia's most distinguished names from the 1980s:
-Alan Bond, best known for financing Australia's stunning triumph over the United States in the 1983 America's Cup yacht race, now carries the reputation of the country's biggest corporate loser.
At its peak, Bond Corp. Holdings Ltd. held interests in brewing, media, resources and property. It had a gold mine and telephone company holdings in Chile, brewing and other mining interests in the United States.
In September, Bond was ousted as head of the company he founded. Several months before he was forced to sell Vincent Van Gogh's "Irises" at a reported loss after buying the painting for a once-record $$53.9 million.
-Romanian refugee George Herscu ranked among Australia's 10 richest men until his Hooker Corp. - which included U.S. shopping malls and upscale retailers like Bonwit Teller and B. Altman - fell on hard times.
Now bankrupt, he has been convicted of corruption charges for paying off a former state official.
-Christopher Skase once headed the multibillion-dollar media conglomerate Qintex Australia Ltd. and paid himself $$9.5 million in salary one year.
His undoing followed a failed $$1.5 billion bid for the U.S. movie company MGM-UA Communications Co. He told a court recently that his personal assets have fallen to a little over $$100 in pocket money.
-John Spalvins was credited with steering the Adsteam Group, which includes some of Australia's best-known retailers, through the aftermath of the 1987 stock-market crash only to see it start to fall apart last year following a misconceived takeover effort.
-Laurie Connell's failed Rothwells Merchant Bank is being examined by a special Royal Commission as part of an investigation of alleged business-government improprieties.
He already faces criminal charges over Rothwells' failure, which followed the 1987 stock market crash.
Many of the fallen, such as Bond and Connell, began their empires in Western Australia state, home of the country's fastest-growing city, Perth.
They cleaned up on real estate and natural resources, each success breeding a feeding frenzy of ever-faster expansion.
Banks, faced with uncertainty after deregulation and concerns over losing their market shares, began making unsecured loans. Bond opened the door when he bought a Perth brewery using unsecured financing from a Hong Kong bank.
"It was seen as a borrower's market," said Ray Block, an analyst with the Midland Montague group. "The entrepreneurs were courting overseas banks."
Australian businessmen used the easy financing to go nose-to-nose in boardrooms worldwide, developing reputations as savvy corporate raiders. They made forays into heavyweight multinationals like American steelmaker USX Corp., oil producer Texaco Inc. and entertainment giant MGM-UA.
By all appearances, things were going great. The sky was the limit.
Then the stock market crashed worldwide in October 1987. Loan interest rates of up to 25 percent had looked like mere inconveniences until cash flows dried up and payments came due. Liquidators were called in.
Questionable conduct and huge fees for the men at the top, once considered standard business practices, came under increasing scrutiny and criticism. The government recently established an industry watchdog, the Australian Securities Commission.
"While we may be trying to do something legally about some parts of it now, for a long while it appeared as though if you were an Australian corporation leader, you could do anything, no holds barred," said Fraser, the former prime minister.
"There were virtually no laws, no restraints, and that got Australia a very, very bad name."
But Midland Montague's Block said the entrepreneurs don't bear all the blame.
"They were very persuasive people, but they essentially had a very uncritical audience," he said. "In many cases, these people believed in what they were doing."
Some notable exceptions to the list of corporate failures were thriving media magnate Kerry Packer and Robert Holmes a Court, once Australia's richest man who was making a quiet comeback from the market crash until he suffered a fatal heart attack last year. Holmes a Court's wife, Janet, has taken over the reins of the family company.
Packer, who survived a heart attack last year, currently is Australia's most ostentatious high-roller. A fanatical polo player and sponsor, he recently leased a DC-8 jet for $$1.5 million a year to ferry his sportsmen to overseas events.

 

End of Document
