

Council Consider New World Order But Itself Mirrors the Old World Order
The Associated Press
February 1, 1992, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 542 words
Byline: By VICTORIA GRAHAM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Despite calls for the Security Council to reflect new political realities like the power of Germany and Japan and the importance of Third World nations, the council's composition is unlikely to change soon.
The council's veto-wielding five permanent powers - the United States, Britain, France, China and Russia - are in no hurry to usher in change and to expand their club. They could veto any challenge to their own power.
Leaders of the 15 council nations met Friday in an extraordinary session. They pledged to develop preventive diplomacy, explore new avenues of peacekeeping and to dedicate themselves to arms control, but not a word was written about changing the council's configuration.
British Prime Minister John Major called the summit and presided. In answer to a question about restructuring, he told ABC-TV on Friday: "The U.N. is more successful today than it's been for many years past … Is it really sensible to go down the byway of institutional change? I doubt it."
But officials of Zimbabwe, India and Venezuela made speeches arguing for restructuring of the council, especially increasing its size. Zimbabwe and Venezuela said the veto power of the permanent five was undemocratic and should be scrapped.
"The council cannot afford to shield itself from change at a time when all the other major organs of the United Nations are going through a process of reform," said Zimbabwe's Foreign Minister, Nathan Shamuyarira, who expressed the resentment felt by many Third World nations that the "Big Five" run the show.
Japanese Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa made the case politely and indirectly for a permanent seat, noting Japan's huge financial contributions to the world body and its peacekeeping operations.
Germany has not yet pushed for its seat on the council, but any eventual restructuring is considered unthinkable without a permanent German seat.
There have been suggestions that the European Community be given a single permanent seat without a veto, either replacing Britain and France, or in addition to them.
Earlier in the week, U.S. Ambassador Thomas R. Pickering told a forum in Washington said any change to the council could open a "Pandora's box" of bargaining and problems.
Any expansion of the council or changes in veto powers would require an amendment of the U.N. Charter, and approval for that is needed from both the Security Council and General Assembly.
Zimbabwe also argued that the increase in U.N. membership alone warrants expansion of the council, the most powerful U.N. body which makes crucial decisions on behalf of everyone.
In 1945, the council of 11 original members represented 20 percent of the U.N. membership, but now it represents less than 10 percent of the 166-nation General Assembly. Africa and Latin America have no permanent members.
Zimbabwe's Shamuyarira urged abolition of the veto.
"While in the aftermath of World War II, the victorious powers gave themselves special privileges," he said, "now in the post-Cold War era, we believe we are all victors and there are no losers.
"Consequently no one deserves any special privileges."
The 10 non-permanent members currently serving two-year terms are Austria, Belgium, Cape Verde, Ecuador, Hungary, India, Japan, Morocco, Venezuela and Zimbabwe.

 

End of Document
