

Coup Leaders Cited Perez's Failure to Help the Poor, Wipe Out Corruption
The Associated Press
November 27, 1992, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 502 words
Byline: By HAROLD OLMOS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARACAS, Venezuela
Body




President Carlos Andres Perez faced the guns of rebellious soldiers again Friday because of his failure to share Venezuela's wealth with the poor, the mutineers said.
Lt. Col. Hugo Chavez, in jail for helping lead a failed coup attempt in February, said in a videotape broadcast during the early hours of the revolt that Perez's economic policies had triggered it. Other rebels cited corruption.
Despite the nation's known oil reserves - the largest in the Western Hemisphere - and the economy's 8.5 percent growth rate in the first half of 1992, 23 percent of Venezuelans live in extreme poverty.
"Most of this growth is concentrated in the less than 3 percent richest segment of the population," Jose Miguel Senior, an economics professor at Caracas Central University, told the financial newspaper Reporte.
The poor have also been hit hard by an economic austerity program Perez ordered after his 1989 inauguration. The program, which eliminated government subsidies, triggered riots in which at least 300 people died.
The coup attempt came less than two weeks before municipal and state elections that Perez's opponents tried to turn into a referendum calling for a shortening of his five-year term, which ends on Feb. 2, 1994.
The 70-year-old president called such a referendum unconstitutional and rejected it.
Perez has done little to relax the belt-tightening program or stop corruption, despite the February coup attempt that was mounted for the same reasons as Friday's.
The February revolt did prompt him to freeze gasoline prices, but little else.
Now, having faced two coup attempts in less than a year, Perez may be compelled to compromise and change his rigid economic policies to prevent a third attempt.
Perez has said the austerity program is needed because the country's free-spending during the oil boom days in the 1970s can't continue and because of the poor oil market.
Inflation, one of the targets of Perez's plan, is running at 35 percent this year.
The increasing number of poor has caused the crime rate to soar, adding to complaints about Perez's administration. Accusations of corruption have dogged Perez since his first term as president, which ended in 1978.
The president's popularity was recently rated at 9 percent. During Friday's coup attempt, some people gathered near the palace shouted anti-government slogans. Others leaned out of windows banging pots, a symbol of protest.
Despite Perez's unpopularity, Venezuelans do not favor a return to the military dictatorships that ruled this country until 1958. Since then, democratically elected leaders have governed, marking the longest stretch of continuous democratic rule in Venezuela's history.
An independent poll in November showed that although 75 percent of Venezuelans rejected the country's political leadership, 90 percent wanted a continuation of democratic rule. Only 10 percent leaned toward dictatorship.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Harold Olmos, the Venezuela chief of bureau, has reported from Caracas for The Associated Press since 1982.

 

End of Document
