

Cristiani Proposes Amnesty to 'Close the Door' on Revenge
The Associated Press
March 15, 1993, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 724 words
Byline: By JOSEPH B. FRAZIER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN SALVADOR, El Salvador
Body




President Alfredo Cristiani proposed a general amnesty for those blamed for massacres and human rights abuses by an international panel that made its findings public today.
A leader of the former rebel movement opposed an amnesty, as did the secretary-general of the United Nations, Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
An amnesty would require legislative approval, but Cristiani's conservative ARENA party controls the 84-member National Assembly.
The report, released at U.N. headquarters in New York after a seven-month investigation, blamed the Salvadoran military for the vast majority of the atrocities committed during the 12-year war.
The independent commission, established in the 1992 peace accords that ended the fighting, named rebel and government military leaders and recommended they be barred from public office.
The United States considered the war a democratic struggle to prevent a Communist takeover of Latin America and gave hundreds of millions of dollars in military aid to a series of rightist governments. It also trained Salvadoran soldiers, including a battalion cited for the war's worst civilian massacre.
Although the bulk of the killings was tied to the rightist military and government forces, leftist rebels shared blame for assassinations and abuses.
About 75,000 people died during the war, most of them peasants, labor leaders, students and intellectuals suspected of leftist leanings.
In the early 1980s bodies in the streets were so common they sometimes went almost unnoticed. Children would find them and argue over the weapon used.
Funeral homes sent vans at dawn to gather bodies, hoping for the business when families located the victims.
Fading white crosses still dot the highways where thousands of unidentified murdered Salvadorans were buried.
The U.S. Embassy monitored it all and reported monthly to Washington in a document known in house as the "grim-gram." At times the deaths passed 1,000 a month.
A fifth of this Massachusetts-sized country of 5 million was displaced.
The equivalent toll in the United States would be 50 million displaced and nearly 4 million dead.
The conflict arose from decades of oppression by a tiny elite class of landowners. Student and labor groups, inspired by the recent victory of the Sandinistas in nearby Nicaragua, took up the fight and by 1980 the war was on.
Cristiani called for a general forgiveness and for a new unity for his country. "We are going to turn our back on a sad page of our history," he said in a televised address Sunday night.
He said a general amnesty will "close the door to all temptations of revenge or reprisals."
Cristiani portrayed his rightist administration as neutral. One of the founders of his party, Roberto D'Aubuisson, was cited in the report for having engineered the 1980 murder of the outspoken Archbishop Oscar Romero.
"In our heart and in our mind we don't consider ourselves the enemy of anyone," he said. "We want to tell the country that the time to pardon each other for any harm caused has arrived."
Ferman Cienfuegos, a member of the former rebel's political commission, rejected the idea of an immediate amnesty.
"First we must apply the recommendations and later discuss the possibility of an amnesty," he said.
The report highlighted the better-known cases, and many conclusions confirmed what Salvadorans knew or suspected for years:
-That D'Aubuisson, who died of cancer last year, arranged the murder of Romero, who was killed during a Mass.
-That the charismatic Col. Domingo Monterrosa, whose helicopter was blown out of the sky in 1984, was behind the El Mozote massacre in which hundreds of civilians were slaughtered in the remote village in 1981. The feared Atlacatl Battalion, cited in the report for the massacre, was U.S.-trained.
-That rebel leaders Joaquin Villalobos and Ana Guadalupe Martinez directed the murders of 10 mayors in areas they tried to control in eastern El Salvador.
Gen. Rene Emilio Ponce, defense minister since August 1990, was named as the author of murders of six Jesuits priests, their housekeeper and her daughter. He offered his resignation on Friday.
The report said Ponce and others ordered Col. Guillermo Benavides to have the priests, considered by them to be leftist, killed and to leave no witnesses.
Benavides, the only Salvadoran officer ever convicted of a human rights violations, is serving 30 years.

 

End of Document
