

D.C. Suburbs the Battleground for Virginia Senate Race
The Associated Press
October 10, 1994, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 913 words
Byline: By ANNE GEARAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ARLINGTON, Va.
Body




Along a road named for Gen. Robert E. Lee and not far from one named for George Washington, the three candidates for Virginia's Senate seat are staking claim to some key real estate.
There springs from this roadside in suburban Washington a thicket of red, white and blue campaign placards: Four tout the Republican, Oliver North; five promote the Democrat, Sen. Charles S. Robb; two are for independent Marshall Coleman.
They are the signs of a political battle to capture the richest, most populous region of Virginia, of a showdown over shifting political balances in the American South.
One vote in four in Virginia is found in the Washington suburbs. Twenty years ago, it was more like one in six.
Northern Virginia lies well below the Mason-Dixon Line but has little in common with the downstate farming and coal regions that defined Virginia politics a generation ago.
The region has become the most conspicuous battlefield in Virginia's closely watched Senate race - an increasingly nasty match between Iran-Contra figure North and scandal-tarred Robb. Coleman is the sideshow.
North was convicted of three felonies for his role in the scheme to sell arms to Iran and divert the profits to rebels battling Nicaragua's government, but the verdicts were later overturned on appeal.
Robb has acknowledged unspecified marital indiscretions and was investigated by a grand jury in connection with the secret taping of a telephone call by then-Lt. Gov. L. Douglas Wilder, his longtime Democratic rival. He was not indicted, but three of his aides pleaded guilty to minor charges in connection with the incident.
The suburban voters of northern Virginia are generally more liberal, better educated and more politically savvy than voters in other parts of the state, political analysts say, in part because they are near Washington.
To court its 1.4 million people without alienating voters elsewhere, candidates for statewide office must step delicately over such social fault lines as abortion and gun control.
Analysts believe North cannot win without a good showing in northern Virginia, but the region is absolutely crucial for Robb.
"Chuck Robb must do well in northern Virginia. He must win northern Virginia, given that Ollie North appears to have much stronger support in rural areas," said Mark Rozell, a political scientist at Mary Washington College.
An independent poll two weeks ago showed Robb with 38 percent of the vote in northern Virginia, an 18-point lead over North. Robb trails North by a few points statewide.
The same Mason-Dixon Political Media Research poll showed Coleman with 15 percent in northern Virginia. If Coleman lasts through the Nov. 8 election, it will be because of continuing support from the region, analysts say.
All three candidates spend large amounts of time campaigning in northern Virginia and are concentrating much of their fund-raising efforts there. Robb's largest fund-raiser, a $ 500,000 evening of campaigning with President Clinton last week, took place there.
North raised about $ 50,000 in a few hours last week at a Fairfax fund-raiser attended by well-connected Republicans, including former Reagan and Bush administration figures James Baker and James C. Miller, both of whom live nearby.
"Any statewide campaign now needs a significant presence in northern Virginia, but it didn't used to be that way," said Linda "Toddy" Puller, a state delegate and Democratic activist. "We were the stepchild to Richmond and downstate, and they made all the decisions."
Northern Virginia has established liberal leadership in some local governments, but is hardly a Democratic monolith. Fairfax, the largest locality and possessed of the nation's highest median household income, has been the site of a two-year fight between Christian activists and free-speech advocates over a gay newspaper.
Robb and North, like most people in northern Virginia, are from somewhere else. Robb settled in Virginia as a child, while North arrived 20 years ago. And 1990 Census figures show a third of the region's people were born outside Virginia.
Many of the newcomers have never had to pick a candidate in a Virginia Senate race.
Robb won with 71 percent of the vote in 1988. Virginia's other senator, Republican John Warner, ran unopposed in 1990.
"It's clear it's going to be Robb's best area," said University of Virginia political scientist Larry Sabato. "The question is, will northern Virginia lead the state in getting Robb re-elected, or will it be isolated from the state as the sole area of strength for Robb?"
Television advertising is key in northern Virginia, campaign aides said.
"It's five times more expensive to run an ad in the Washington area as it is in Richmond or Norfolk or Roanoke," said Mark Merritt, deputy campaign manager for North. And because Washington television stations broadcast in Maryland, Virginia and the District of Columbia, candidates spend a lot of money to send their message to people who can't vote for them.
North, who has raised more than $ 15 million so far, is currently running two ads in the Washington market. Robb, who has reportedly raised less than a third of that amount, also has two ads on the air there.
North, campaigning as an outsider who spits the words "professional politician" with distaste, has a tougher sell in northern Virginia, where many federal workers live, Rozell said.
"That's not the case," Merritt said. "Some of the most frustrated people in the Washington system are those who work within it."
 Load-Date: October 10, 1994

 

End of Document
