

Delta Air Lines: A Mega-Carrier Rising from the Ashes of Pan Am
The Associated Press
November 1, 1991, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 671 words
Byline: By DIRK BEVERIDGE, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Delta Air Lines, which began business in the 1920s by spraying cotton-gobbling boll weevils, became a full-fledged aviation superpower Friday, absorbing most of the fading Pan Am.
It was the end of one era of commercial flight and another milestone in the modern age of growing "mega-carriers."
Westbound Pan American World Airways jets made their last trans-Atlantic flights into New York and Delta planes roared off in the other direction, toward such new destinations as the Soviet Union, India, Israel and Turkey.
"We're not unmindful of the fact that this is both a sad day and a happy day," said W. Whitley Hawkins, president and chief operating officer of Atlanta-based Delta.
"We've closed a chapter of the history of aviation in New York and the world, and on the other hand, we are opening a new chapter," Hawkins told a news conference at John F. Kennedy International Airport, where Delta took over Pan Am's international hub.
Delta also got Pan Am's European hub in Frankfurt, Germany, in a $ 600 million acquisition that puts it into 21 new international cities.
Delta now comes closer than any other U.S. carrier to spanning the globe, with an extensive route network that stretches across the Atlantic as far east as New Delhi, India, and across the Pacific as far west as Bangkok, Thailand.
By picking up the largest package of international route authorities ever sold in one chunk, along with planes and nearly 7,000 workers, Delta approaches the size of rivals American Airlines and United Airlines.
Some industry analysts believe the big three might be the only large U.S. airlines to survive in a few years. Weaker rivals, like Pan Am, have been landing in bankruptcy and selling assets.
Pan Am's retrenchment comes in the wake of Eastern Airlines' death and the consumption of bankrupt Midway Airlines by Northwest Airlines. Other carriers in serious trouble include Continental Airlines and America West Airlines, both operating under bankruptcy court protection, and Trans World Airlines.
Pan Am hopes to emerge from bankruptcy as a smaller carrier that moves from New York to Miami and focuses on serving Latin America.
The new carrier, informally dubbed "Pan Am II," will be owned 45 percent by Delta and 55 percent by Pan Am creditors. Delta's purchase of the Pan Am overseas routes and the reorganization of Pan Am came in a deal struck in Pan Am's bankruptcy case.
"We think they can survive, given half a chance," Hawkins said. The Latin American routes have for some time been Pan Am's most lucrative.
Pan Am's retreat into that market is essentially a return to its roots. Founder Juan Trippe began the airline in 1927 with a mail run from Key West, Fla., to Havana, Cuba.
Delta had similarly humble beginnings, starting out in 1924 as a crop-dusting concern, Huff Daland Dusters, based in Macon, Ga.
"In fact, if the boll weevil had not marched out of Mexico prior to the turn of the century to devastate the cotton fields of the South, there might not have been a Delta Air Lines," says a brief company history provided by Delta.
Delta seeks to promote a down-home, conservative image, but a nervous rival, the German airline Lufthansa, sought Friday to portray Delta as an inexperienced player in the global arena.
Lufthansa tried, but failed to prevent Delta from taking over Pan Am's hub in Frankfurt, where Delta promises to be a much tougher competitor.
In a full-page newspaper ad, Lufthansa said it wanted to "congratulate" Delta on getting 27 destinations in Europe, while pointing out it had that many in 1966, when bell-bottom blue jeans were fashionable and the Beatles were gaining popularity.
"We wouldn't want to take the wind out of Delta's sails," Lufthansa said. "You'll understand, however, if we don't get too excited."
Delta executives privately called the ad a cheap shot, but they declined to get into a public war of words.
"I'm glad they spelled our name right," Hawkins told the news conference. "We're glad they spent that much money to put Delta in a full-page ad in The New York Times."
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto

 

End of Document
