

Despite the Price, The Coffee Love Affair Continues
The Associated Press
September 13, 1994, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 885 words
Byline: AP Business Extra, By LISA GENASCI, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Coffee. Through the centuries, muse to poets and composers, artists and scholars, bankers and businessmen.
Johann Sebastian Bach praised coffee as "the most precious of blisses" in his 1734 "Coffee Cantata."
In London, financial brokers met regularly at a coffee house called Johnathan's until 1773, when the business and building were purchased and renamed the Stock Exchange. Another coffee shop, opened by Edward Lloyd in 1688, eventually became Lloyd's of London.
Coffee is providing inspiration again. Coffee houses, long a part of European life, are proliferating in the United States, and the specialty brews they sell are humbling the regular cup of joe.
The invasion has spawned a new coffee culture, which by most accounts began in Seattle, spread South and most recently headed eastward to the Big Apple.
People who used to ask for a cup of black coffee are now asking for caffe lattes, espressos and cappuccinos.
They're even reading about coffee, in journals and trade magazines with names like Literal Latte, The Bean, Java Journal, Cafe Au Lait and Fresh Cup that have cropped up, filling espresso bar magazine racks.
"It's a megatrend," said Ted Lingle, executive director of the Specialty Coffee Association of America. "People are going through lifestyle changes. They are taking more time to enjoy life and are looking for better quality."
Not even the soaring price of coffee over the past few months has deterred the search for the perfect cup.
Two frosts in Brazil, the world's largest coffee exporter, helped boost the price of beans from $ 1.26 a pound earlier this year to $ 2.74 in mid-July on New York's Coffee, Sugar & Cocoa Exchange. And price volatility is expected for some time, since the damage done was to the crop to be harvested in mid-1995.
Many coffee bars and roasters have absorbed the additional expense, but others have raised prices between 10 and 30 percent.
While a standard cup of coffee goes for 50 cents, one New York coffee bar was selling its largest caffe lattes (espresso and steamed milk) and cappuccinos for $ 2.90, while mochas (espresso, cocoa, steamed milk and whipped cream) were $ 3.15 - and that's before New York's 8.25 percent sales tax.
Part of the steep price is profit, but the hand-selected, usually fresher specialty coffee beans cost significantly more than the commercial-grade product usually sold on supermarket shelves.
Higher prices haven't kept Julien Rose from her daily iced latte.
"Addiction is addiction," Rose said as she sipped her coffee in one of New York's newer establishments. "The price increase only makes it more desirable. You always want what you can't afford."
That's the attitude coffee bar entrepreneurs are counting on.
In 1989, there were 200 coffee cafes in the United States, the Specialty Coffee Association said. By the century's end, there will be 10,000 cafes, espresso bars and carts nationwide, Lingle estimated conservatively.
With more than half the population 10 years of age or older drinking coffee, java is the second most popular beverage in the United States after soft drinks, according to the National Coffee Association.
Per-capita coffee consumption is about 1.8 cups per day. Still that's lower than in 1962, when about 75 percent of Americans were consuming 3.1 cups daily. And most of it is still the regular brew.
But it's the top-of-the-line drinks and their promise of hefty profits that have encouraged coffee-minded entrepreneurs.
The Speciality Coffee Association estimates cafes average $ 300,000 per year in sales, espresso bars $ 150,00 and espresso carts $ 75,000. Sales will reach $ 1.5 billion annually by 1999.
Costs, even with the higher price of beans, are relatively low. A pound of specialty coffee that averages $ 6 at the wholesale level yields between 50 and 60 cups.
In New York, the New School and The Learning Annex, centers for continuing education, offer courses on how to start a coffee bar. On the West Coast, the Specialty Coffee Association and others also offer seminars.
Starbucks Coffee Co., the Seattle-based chain considered to have initiated the java boom, has grown from four coffee bars in 1983 to 420 company-owned stores nationwide. Within four years, 100 more are planned in New York City alone, said chairman Howard Schultz.
Starbucks currently serves over 2 million mugs of joe a week, said Schultz, a six-cup-a-day man.
Borders Books & Music now has 57 espresso bars in stores in 32 states. Fifty opened in the last two years alone, said Dan Conetta, the Ann Arbor, Mich.-based company's vice president for marketing.
The increased competition is actually good for business, Schultz said. "It can help to educate the consumer."
In other words, once you've tasted the real thing, there's no going back to your old cup of java.
What is it about the good stuff that hooks people?
"There's a certain decadence to coffee but it's not dangerous," said Barnaby Hall as he downed a machiatto (espresso with a drop of steamed milk) in a New York coffee shop. "You can sit and soothe and intellectualize for hours. It makes you feel frightfully French and academic."
Some of the attraction is physical. Caffeine is a central nervous system stimulant that increases feelings of energy, alertness and general well-being, according to Roland Griffiths, a Johns Hopkins Medical School professor.
 Load-Date: September 13, 1994

 

End of Document
