

Director Tries to Surmount Politics to Depict the Real Cuba
The Associated Press
April 1, 1994, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 765 words
Byline: By SUSAN LINNEE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MADRID, Spain
Body




On first reading, "Strawberry and Chocolate," the Cuban entry that won the Silver Bear at last month's Berlin Film Festival, is about homosexuality, a politically charged subject in the Caribbean island nation.
But for director Tomas Gutierrez Alea, his ninth feature-length film is, even more, a pointed reminder that above and beyond politics there is the country called Cuba and its culture.
"This is a story about an educated, cultivated homosexual in love with his country," the veteran director said in an interview in the Spanish capital where he was presenting a retrospective of his work.
"Through him, we can speak about the country, about its culture, its music and about the city of Havana."
The 65-year-old director of "The Death of the Bureaucrat," "Memories of Underdevelopment" and "The Last Supper," feels there is too much polemicizing about Cuba.
"It's seen either as a Communist hell or a Communist paradise," he said. "It's hard to focus attention on the real country."
"Strawberry and Chocolate" takes place in Havana in 1979, an era when the Cuban government was arresting homosexuals as social deviants and imprisoning them in "re-education camps."
David, a university student who believes in the ideals of Fidel Castro's 1959 revolution, encounters Diego, a homosexual who at first tries to seduce him with hard-to-obtain Latin American novels, Indian tea and Scotch.
Gutierrez Alea uses the nonsexual friendship that develops between the two men as the canvas on which to explore the nature of creativity and to illustrate how inquiring minds are caught in the web of a repressive, unimaginative regime.
In a crash-course on Cuban culture, Diego plays music by 19th-century composer Iganacio Cervantes and chides David for not recognizing a photograph of author Jose Lezama Lima - "our genius."
At one point, Diego, a free-lance photographer and artist brillantly portrayed by 28-year-old Jorge Perugorria, shows David a crumbling, delapidated Havana, demanding to know what right "they" have to allow a city once known as "the pearl of the Caribbean" to fall into ruin.
In the end, Diego is forced into exile because he is not free to function as a creative person in his own country.
Gutierrez Alea, who studied at Rome's Experimental Film Center in the 1950s, says he really has never contemplated exile, despite his many misgivings about the Cuban system.
Before 1959, Gutierrez Alea said there was no Cuban film industry of which to speak. About 85 percent of films shown were from the United States, subtitled in Spanish. The rest were Mexican, aimed at the rural market that couldn't read.
The 33-year U.S. economic embargo has had one positive effect, he said. Cubans have been able to make and see their own movies.
Gutierrez Alea said he had no trouble getting his script for "Strawberry and Chocolate" approved by the Cuban Institute of Cinematic Art and Industry (ICAIC). The film was co-produced by the the Spanish Society of Authors and Composers and Madrid's regional television station, Telemadrid. The lab work and sound mixing were done in Mexico.
He said the film would be shown commercially in several European countries, including France and Spain. He wasn't sure about distribution in the United States.
Things haven't always gone so easily for him.
"I have had great periods of contradiction and divergence with the system. There were times when I was marginalized and unable to travel abroad," he said. "But in the end, they have always had the maturity to respect me and my work."
Gutierrez Alea credits directors' groups within the ICAIC with providing creative and emotional support for film projects that might get a bureaucratic thumbs-down if a director confronted the system alone.
Before traveling to Berlin, he spent several weeks in New York working on a new script with his old friend, Edmundo Desnoes, author of the novel "Memories of Underdevelopment" on which the 1967 film was based. Desnoes left Cuba for the United States in the mid-1970s.
Gutierrez Alea said they talk often about exile and the virulence of those who have left the country they love just as much as those who remained.
The new script is based on "The Lost Steps," a novel by Cuban author Alejo Carpentier.
The director is also at work on a treatment for "a black comedy" that takes place in today's economically strapped and fuel-starved Cuba.
"Someone dies in Guantanamo, but he has to be buried in Havana across the island. There isn't enough gas to transport the corpse all the way, so the coffin is transferred to another vehicle in the next province. Then something happens. ..."
 Load-Date: April 1, 1994

 

End of Document
