

Drug Trade From Colombia Changes Life On The Border
The Associated Press
January 1, 1992, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 693 words
Byline: By JOHN R. ENGEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN ANTONIO DEL TACHIRA, Venezuela
Body




Colombians have always poured over the Tachira River into this bustling border town to buy electronics, clothes and other duty-free goods.
In recent years, however, something else has been making the journey: Colombian drugs.
As the Colombian government has cracked down on the illicit drug trade within its own borders, the amount of raw cocaine and marijuana crossing the river into Venezuela has increased at an alarming rate.
The influx of money and violence that accompanies the drug trade has changed life dramatically for residents in the southwestern border state of Tachira, one of Venezuela's poorest.
"The natural way from Colombia to Europe and the United States is through Venezuela," said Enrique Rivas Gomez, minister of Conacuid, the federal agency charged with fighting the growing influence of drugs in Venezuela.
"We are like a bridge - a depository … and Tachira is the principal point of import for the whole country," he said in an interview.
During the past year, about 90 tons of illicit drugs - more than double the amount of 1990 and about one-fourth of the total shipped out of Colombia to the United States and Europe - entered Venezuela, Gomez said.
About two-thirds of that was cocaine, and most of it passed over the loosely regulated 1300-mile border that San Antonio sits on.
It's not difficult to understand why.
Border guards in San Antonio sit back as cars laden with boxes funnel across the bridge between the two countries. It would be impossible, officials say, to check every vehicle with the available manpower.
Meanwhile, many entreprising traffickers simply hop across the stones dotting the mostly dry riverbed to avoid guards.
"Walk out on the bridge across the border and you can see people - thousands of them a day - walking across the river with big boxes on their heads," Gomez said. "They do it right in front of the authorities. And we know a lot of those boxes have drugs in them."
The drug trade has brought a big influx of money to the impoverished region, as residents turn to drug smuggling for profit.
A kilogram (2.2 pounds) of cocaine sells in Colombia for about $ 1,500, officials say. Across the border, it goes for about $ 3,000 - a handsome profit in an area where the average annual income is less than $ 2,000.
The millions of precious dollars brought to Tachira by drugs may be good for the people who earn it. But the money also draws crime and pushes the price of almost everything up. For instance, real estate prices in some parts of the state have jumped by nearly 100 percent during the past two years.
With drugs more readily available, addiction - never really a problem in Venezuela before - has mushroomed. More than 40,000 Venezuelans are now hooked on cocaine, Gomez estimates.
The addiction, combined with low incomes, increases crime and violence along the border. Kidnappings and robberies have increased sharply.
Security, both private and police, have become the area's No. 1 legal industry.
Most residents can tell a local-boy-gone-bad story, of youths being arrested for smuggling. If caught, a trafficker faces roughly 10 years in a badly overcrowded Venezuelan prison.
"My nephew got wrapped up with the drug traffickers and went to prison," said one resident, who asked not to be identified. "They are bad people, who only want what's best for themselves. They don't care about the damage they cause."
The governments of the two countries, recognizing the problem, have signed a number of high-level agreements aimed at stemming the flow of drugs - but so far to little avail.
Gomez estimated that less than 10 percent of the drugs passing through Venezuela each year are seized. The remainder make the journey deeper into the country, where they are processed and packed for shipment overseas.
The disruption of life for residents in areas such as Tachira is perhaps the most serious consequence of the drug trade for Venezuela, Gomez said. "People now have fears, for their towns and for their children."
In San Antonio, many residents will not walk the streets of their own town at night. "It's too dangerous," a woman sitting outside her home warned a visitor. "You shouldn't be out at night."

 

End of Document
