

Earth Summit Refrain: This Is Only The Beginning
The Associated Press
June 13, 1992, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 876 words
Byline: By PAUL RAEBURN
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




For diplomats, environmentalists and journalists alike, it was a daunting task: how to make sense of the Earth Summit.
One critical point was that the summit was about more than the environment. As suggested by the formal name - the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development - it dealt with economics as well as the environment.
A second point, which became the continuing refrain in 12 days of difficult talks, was that the Earth Summit was only the beginning.
"The Rio conference is not a culmination," said Richard Benedick, a veteran U.S. State Department negotiator. "It's a step along a path that may continue."
If the agreements reached in Rio - many of them not legally binding - lead to new international law, the Earth Summit will have been a success, Benedick said.
If diplomats return to their homes and to business as usual, the summit will be no more than a historical footnote.
"You can't really judge it for years afterwards," said Benedick.
The Earth Summit had two broad goals: to put environmental concerns squarely in the middle of global affairs, and to move toward a new economic order in which developing countries would have a greater say in their future.
East-West tensions had faded into history. The new concern was about North-South tensions - between the wealthy industrialized countries of the northern hemisphere and the poverty-stricken nations of the south.
The summit ends with several significant environmental agreements. For the first time, nations have agreed on steps to curb global warming and protect threatened plants and wildlife.
They reached agreement on nearly all of a giant document, hundreds of pages long, called Agenda 21, a blueprint of environmental actions for the 21st century. The Rio Declaration, a philosophical statement of environmental rights and responsibilities, was affirmed.
Summit negotiators also agreed to establish a new U.N. body, the Commission on Sustainable Development. It is a monitoring agency without enforcement powers, but diplomats said it could play a critical role in continuing the process begun at the conference.
The conference reflected the difficulties of reaching agreement on environmental issues.
A proposed treaty to protect forests was abandoned long before the summit convened. A weaker statement of "forest principles" caused some of the most acrimonious debate, even though it was not legally binding.
Money remained an ever-present, unresolved issue. Maurice Strong, secretary-general of the Earth Summit, said wealthy countries must contribute $ 125 billion a year to meet the summit's goals. Few expect assistance to come anywhere near that.
"It's very easy to talk," said Fabio Feldman, a Brazilian environmentalist and legislator. "But it's very difficult to act."
Greenpeace, one of the most aggressive environmental groups, prepared a report branding the summit a failure before it began. The conference "is rubber-stamping, marginalizing, manipulating and ignoring us," said Tani Adams of Greenpeace.
Hilary French of the Worldwatch Institute in Washington, D.C., believes the Earth Summit will ultimately be seen as a milestone in environmental affairs and international relations.
"Even though it can look disappointing, the political will created can lead to commitments of a more binding nature," she said.
In a report prepared before the conference, she looked back at the consequences of the Stockholm conference on the environment, held 20 years ago.
The Stockholm conference itself was mostly a statement of intentions. Its most important immediate action was to create the U.N. Environment Program.
Yet it proved far more important than many had expected, French said.
"A lot of things came out of it that had a big impact around the world," she said. "Many of them were not signed and delivered when the conference ended."
Governments of the world have adopted 170 environmental treaties, two-thirds of them since the Stockholm conference, French said. The problem, she added, is that the treaties are not comprehensive enough or strong enough to alleviate the world's environmental ills.
The Earth Summit was convened to remedy that problem. It has led to some of the most sweeping environmental accords ever, she said, although they still do not go far enough.
"I'm disappointed about the results being less than what we'd hoped for and needed," she said.
French feels some of the problems result from the U.N. system. Ratification of treaties can take years, enforcement is virtually non-existent and, as others noted, living up to treaty commitments costs money.
That is where the new U.N. Commission on Sustainable Development comes in. If it can keep pressure on countries to live up to and extend their summit commitments, diplomats said, the Earth Summit will be a success.
Environmentalists have argued that time is running out to save species, protect the ozone layer, curb global warming and clean up lakes, rivers and oceans.
It took 20 years after Stockholm for the United Nations to get around to a second environmental meeting. If current problems are not addressed, 20 years from now might be too late, environmentalists said.
Maurice Strong agreed. The summit, he said, is "a historic opportunity, one which may not recur in our times, if ever."

 

End of Document
