

Eddie! Where's the President?
The Associated Press
December 10, 1994, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 396 words
Byline: By ANDREW SELSKY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MIAMI
Body




President Clinton went running at dawn Saturday, leaving a reporter and a Secret Service agent scrambling to find him.
As the sun rose over the Atlantic Ocean, Clinton slipped out of his hotel for a jog on the beach. A pool reporter designated to report on the morning run missed the president's exit from the hotel, but managed to find his motorcade prowling a nearby street.
Minutes later, a Secret Service agent furiously pedaled past the motorcade on a bicycle, shouting: "Where is he, Eddie?"
Clinton was spotted returning to the hotel a half-hour later, wearing black sweatpants and a black T-shirt with "Eat Doe's Place" emblazoned across it.
Asked how the summit was going, the president, red-faced and breathless, gave the thumbs-up sign.
 
 ---
The summit, full of protocol, speech-making and photo sessions, is proceeding on schedule, despite Dominican Republic President Joaquin Balaguer's painfully slow entrance to summit venues.
The 88-year-old Balaguer took several minutes to walk from his car into the Biltmore Hotel on Friday for a state dinner hosted by Clinton, a trip his more youthful counterparts made in seconds. Cameras whirred and a color guard stood patiently at attention as Balaguer, who is blind, made mini-steps along the red carpet.
On Saturday, Clinton helped Balaguer up some steps to a platform for the opening of a summit work session at another venue, then grasped his arm and helped him down again.
Balaguer is the oldest head of state at the summit, and the only leader to have attended both this and the last summit, held in Uruguay in 1967.
 
 ---
It's official. The free-trade area the summit seeks to establish will be called the Free Trade Area of the Americas, or the FTAA. Initially, planners wanted to call it the Americas Free Trade Area, or AFTA. But then someone discovered the acronym is similar to aftosa, a Spanish word for a disease afflicting cattle.
 
 ---
The one sustained ovation of the 34 leaders' afternoon session at Villa Vizcaya went to Haitian President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
President Clinton said it was only appropriate for Aristide to open a discussion of democracy.
Aristide, the first freely elected leader of Haiti, returned to power in mid-October after the United States pushed out the Caribbean nation's military leaders.
"Haiti was an inspiration to all those who were there," said Secretary of State Warren Christopher.
 Load-Date: December 10, 1994

 

End of Document
