

Endara, In Debt To the U.S., Lends Clinton a Hand
The Associated Press
July 5, 1994, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 588 words
Byline: By GEORGE GEDDA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




In seeking a helping hand on Haiti, the Clinton administration turned to the Latin American leader who owes more to the United States than any other: President Guillermo Endara of Panama.
Even before the latest upsurge in Haitian boat people, U.S. officials were working on contingency planning with Panamanian authorities in case the refugee problem reached crisis proportions.
And crisis is the best word to describe what happened starting last Friday. U.S. Coast Guard cutters picked up 5,884 Haitians during the four-day period ending on Monday - roughly one a minute.
The high administration hopes that the exodus of Haitians would be manageable failed to take into account just how many desperate Haitians there are these days. The Haitians simply were overwhelming the facilities set up by U.S. officials just three weeks ago to process them.
The administration had hoped that Haitians seeking political asylum would apply at U.S. offices set up for that purpose inside Haiti, instead of heading out to sea. It was a bad miscalculation; on Monday alone, 3,247 were picked up by the Coast Guard.
So the administration had to find a way to induce Haitians to stop seeking salvation by taking off in rickety boats - and praying that the United States might somehow be their destination.
For an administration in need of help, Endara was a logical choice. He might have been one of history's footnotes were it not for what happened in a few December days of 1989 when President Bush ordered the invasion that deposed Manuel Antonio Noriega.
A year and a half earlier, Endara had won Panama's presidential election but Noriega prevented him from taking power. Bush rescued Endara from almost certain oblivion and, in effect, enforced the outcome of the May 1988 elections. Thanks to Bush, Endara wound up with the presidential sash. Noriega wound up in a Florida prison on drug charges.
Now Endara is responding to an SOS from Uncle Sam. As a lame duck with just a few months left in office, Endara had little to lose by going along with administration requests for help on Haiti.
Endara has agreed to grant a safe haven to Haitian boat people deemed by U.S. officials to have a well-founded fear of persecution. The administration hopes that Haitians will think twice about heading out to sea if they realize there is no chance of ending up in the United States.
Will Haitians continue to take to the sea if the best case scenario is a refugee camp in Panama or some other Caribbean nation? The administration hopes not.
Political IOUs are not the only reason Panama seemed a good choice to help out a beleaguered U.S. administration. There are military facilities there which can be used to house Haitians temporarily while other facilities are constructed.
There are some advantages for Panama as well. Panamanian enterprises are certain to fill at least some of Haitians' material needs, giving a boost to the local economy. Also, the camps for the Haitians will be built with U.S. - not Panamanian - money. In addition, Panama has received assurances that the Haitians sent to Panama will be sent back home once constitutional rule is re-established in Haiti.
When that will occur is anybody's guess. It was just a year ago this week that a "definitive" solution to the Haitian crisis was signed at Governor's Island in New York.
But the Haitian military is still in charge, having shredded that agreement just three months after signing it.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - George Gedda has covered foreign affairs for The Associated Press since 1968.
 Load-Date: July 5, 1994

 

End of Document
