

Environmental Czar: The Greening of Gorby
The Associated Press
April 24, 1993, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 399 words
Byline: By KELLY SMITH TUNNEY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KYOTO, Japan
Body




Mikhail S. Gorbachev sat in a darkened hotel bar and held his nose. He was talking about stinky water and dead fish.
The river in Brugge, Belgium, he said, was once so polluted it was difficult to breathe, but the Belgians cleaned it up. "People had come to their senses," he said.
"We are in a race against time to save the planet," said the hottest new celebrity on the world environment circuit.
Gorbachev, until 16 months ago the president of the Soviet Union, was installed this week in Kyoto as president of the International Green Cross, a new group that hopes to intervene in man-made disasters.
"Political leaders must grow accustomed to the fact that the questions of harmonious development of humankind and the biosphere will be their responsibility," he said.
Does this mean Gorbachev is a Green?
His credentials as a leader in the environment are questionable, as is his motivation. Years of neglect and inept bureaucracy by a central Moscow government left the former Soviet Union in environmental crisis with natural resources ravaged, air and soil poisoned and vast areas without potable water.
"I have ethics," Gorbachev insisted. "I am with this process from the start … There is no doubt about my commitment."
Gorbachev said his commitment to saving the planet was not a flash of insight, but a long, troubling path that began with childhood worries of drought.
Later, as the top Soviet agriculture official, he agitated over deteriorating fisheries and forests. soon after he took office as Soviet president, he had to grapple with the 1986 explosion at the Chernobyl nuclear reactor, the earth's worst nuclear accident.
The Soviet government kept silent about Chernobyl for two days until high levels of radiation were detected in Scandinavia. Gorbachev later ordered full disclosure, but the state-controlled Soviet news media initially released very little information.
"I am a man of the soil," said Gorbachev, who was born into a farming family in the Northern Caucasus. "People who spent early years in cities don't have the relationship with the soil as people who work on the land."
The 30-member Green Cross board includes scientists, politicians and explorers. The Dutch and Swiss governments have offered support, and a fund- raising campaign is to begin soon. A resolution calling for creation of the group was adopted at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, last June.

 

End of Document
