

Even Rebels Getting Out the Vote in Guatemala's Presidential Race
 The Associated Press
November 6, 1995, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 725 words
Byline: By CHRISTENA COLCLOUGH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GUATEMALA CITY
Body




Call it getting out the vote guerrilla-style: Three dozen leftist rebels with rifles march out of the jungle to exhort the residents of a bustling crossroads town to vote for president.
Walking past the pink, green and blue houses of Pajapita, they head for the market, where townsfolk are busy with their Saturday morning shopping amid sacks of beans, spices, cornmeal and avocados.
The guerrillas seize the rifles of the town's six policemen, emptying the bullets, and order people to gather round. They then launch into a 20-minute political speech urging voters to participate in the general election coming up this Sunday.
Witnesses say residents of the town 150 miles west of the capital listened nervously as the guerrillas in olive fatigues called voting a civic duty needed to achieve full democracy for Guatemala.
Vote for any of the 19 presidential candidates, the guerrillas urged. Any, that is, but the candidate put up by the party of former dictator Efrain Rios Montt, a general who oversaw one of the bloodiest eras of the civil war, which is about to enter its 35th year.
The rebels scrawled graffiti on the town hall, then slipped away to avoid the army. No one was injured in the Oct. 21 foray and no shots were fired.
Pamphlets the rebels left behind said they "continue the fight." But now the battle is clearly an electoral one, even for the rebels, who have visited other rural towns and stopped cars outside Guatemala City with similar "go vote" speeches recently.
This past Wednesday, the rebels began a unilateral two-week cease-fire to permit a peaceful election. The vote also will select a vice president, all 80 members of the National Legislature, 332 mayors and town councils nationwide and 20 members of a newly formed Central American Parliament.
In previous elections, the guerrillas told voters to stay home, sometimes enforcing their demands with violence. But peace talks have begun making some headway and the rebels clearly have a stake in seeing the election of president with whom they can negotiate.
Some 3.7 million people are eligible to vote in the election, which will choose a successor for President Ramiro de Leon Carpio. The human rights activist was elected by the legislature to replace Jorge Serrano, who tried to dissolve the Congress and courts in a 1993 attempt to seize extraordinary power.
Twenty-eight parties are fielding 19 candidates, some of them shared and most of them conservative. If no candidate wins half of the votes plus one there will be a runoff between the two top contenders Jan. 7, with the winner taking office Jan. 14.
The front-runner is Alvaro Arzu, 49, a businessman and former foreign minister representing the conservative National Advanced Party.
"I would not dare to say whether I will win or not," Arzu told The Associated Press. "The electorate is very volatile, but this year there is much enthusiasm and support both in the city and in rural areas."
Recent polls said about one-fifth of voters back Arzu's party, double the support for the second-place party, Rios Montt's Guatemalan Republican Front.
The constitution barred Rios Montt from running because he took power after a military coup in 1982. He is best remembered for implementing a scorched-earth program to root out support for the guerrillas in which 440 villages were razed.
His hand-picked candidate is Alfonso Portillo Cabrera, 44, a lawyer and economist, who admits a first-round victory is unlikely.
Guatemalans usually vote for personalities or follow their family's voting pattern, but this year many are studying party platforms and organization, political analyst Gabriel Aguilera said. He attributes this to public demand for wider participation, coupled with peace talks with the rebels.
Whoever wins will inherit the job of ending Central America's last and longest-running civil war, which has killed more than 140,000 Guatemalans.
Negotiations between the Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity rebels and de Leon Carpio's government have made halting progress - though battles continue.
Last week, de Leon Carpio suggested the rebels were fielding candidates through the New Guatemala Democratic Front, whose platform incorporates many rebel demands.
But rebel spokesman Francisco Villagran denied the allegation Monday.
"The URNG has no links to any political party in Guatemala," he told Radio Sonora.
 Load-Date: November 7, 1995

 

End of Document
