

Excerpts of Testimony in the O.J. Simpson Trial
The Associated Press
June 19, 1995, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1326 words
Body




EDITOR'S NOTE - Excerpts are from unofficial trial transcripts compiled by West Publishing Co. and made available on its WESTLAW(r) service. Any use of these transcripts must be credited to West Publishing Co.
---
By The Associated Press
Excerpts of testimony Monday in the O.J. Simpson murder trial:
(In the following segment, FBI Agent William J. Bodziak explains the steps he took to identify the type of shoe that caused the bloody footprints at the Bundy Drive crime scene:)
PROSECUTOR HANK GOLDBERG: Now, turning to your involvement in this case, when you first became involved in the case, what type of analysis were you asked to perform?
BODZIAK: Initially, I was asked to determine what type of shoe, what brand or manufacturer type of shoe made the impressions that were located in blood on the Bundy sidewalk.
GOLDBERG: And did you consult any reference collections of the sort that you mentioned previously in order to do that?
BODZIAK: Yes, I did. I initially consulted the FBI's reference collection, which involves thousands of impressions on computer and in photographs and catalogs, but I was unable to find that particular design.
GOLDBERG: And how long has this reference collection been in existence?
BODZIAK: Well, we have changed it over the years, but it was initially started in 1937 basically as a rubber heel file.
GOLDBERG: Is it a computerized system?
BODZIAK: Part of it is computerized, yes, sir.
GOLDBERG: And you were unable to locate the design in your reference catalog?
BODZIAK: That's correct.
GOLDBERG: Now, after you were unable to locate the design based upon your own resources, did you take some additional steps?
BODZIAK: Yes, I did.
GOLDBERG: What did you do?
BODZIAK: In looking at the detail in the shoe impressions in the 30 photographs which I was submitted, which were the impressions from the Bundy location, I observed that there were certain features about that shoe that strongly suggested that it was a high-end, that is, a very expensive Italian brand shoe. So I looked through our written reference material. And I - I identified approximately 75 to 80 manufacturers and importers of high-end Italian shoes and some South American shoes or Brazilian shoes. And I prepared a sketch and a - one of the photographs, a composite photograph - excuse me, a composite sketch and three photographs of heel impressions from the Bundy scene along with a letter and contacted those manufacturers and importers to see if they recognized or knew the origin of that particular design.
GOLDBERG: Did you get any information back as a result of that?
BODZIAK: Yes, on August 17, I received a reply from a Mr. Peter Gruderich of the Bruno Magli UMA shoe store in New Jersey.
GOLDBERG: And did he send you anything?
BODZIAK: Yes, he sent me two shoes that were left over from a Bruno Magli distribution of his in 1991 and 1992. These were both right shoes. One was a size 9 and a half and one was a size 12. And I believe from looking at them they were probably samples that were just left over.
…
GOLDBERG: Now, in addition to the information that you sent out that you just told us about to these shoe manufacturers, did you send out any other inquiries to law enforcement agencies?
BODZIAK: Yes. Also sending - I sent an inquiry to eight international laboratories which I knew had computerized reference collections, such as the FBI, and I sent them pictures of the sole of the shoe as well as the pictures from the crime scene, a couple pictures from the crime scene at Bundy, and asked them the same question, if - could identify the brand name or manufacturer of this shoe.
GOLDBERG: Were any of those countries with computerized systems similar to the FBI's able to provide you with any information?
BODZIAK: Yes, seven of them responded and said they did not have this shoe in their collection. The eighth one, the National Police Agency in Tokyo, Japan, responded and advised that they had a shoe that they had obtained from a merchant of this design that was distributed in Europe and was made in Italy.
GOLDBERG: Now, as a result of the information that you've just talked to us about, did you determine who the manufacturer was of the Bruno Magli shoe?
BODZIAK: Yes. … Up in the top corner here is the word Silga, S-I-L-G-A, which to answer your question, this is the manufacturer in Italy of this outsole.
(In the following segment, Bodziak identifies the shoe prints as being an American size 12 with a European size 46 sole:)
GOLDBERG: All right. Now, based upon all of the information that you had from your visit to Italy, from the lasts and the soles and the photographs of the Bundy crime scene location, were you able to form an opinion regarding the size of the shoe - the size of the shoes that caused the shoe prints at the Bundy location?
BODZIAK: Yes, I was.
GOLDBERG: And what's that opinion?
BODZIAK: That size was an American size 12 with the European size 46 sole attached to it. … You can place this overlay back and forth and see the corresponding pattern agrees. Using this method, I was able to take the size 42 through 47 shoes of both left and right, and I was able to make test impressions through direct physical contact in a transparency form. I was able to place these over the crime scene impressions and determine which size of the European soles made that impression and eliminate the others. And in doing so, with regard to these two, I determined the left size 46 sole positively made the impressions. And the 42 through 45 and 47 soles could positively be eliminated.
GOLDBERG: And with respect to the print on the right that says, "shoe print FBI Q68," even though only a heel of that is visible, you were able to determine that was a 46 European sole?
BODZIAK: Yes.
GOLDBERG: How?
BODZIAK: Because the heels, like the rest of the shoe, are distinct - distinctly different, and so no other heel in the other sizes could have made that impression.
 
 (In the following segment, Bodziak compares a 12 Bruno Magli with O.J. Simpson's Reeboks:)
GOLDBERG: Sir, showing you People's 384 for identification, can you remove the item from that package and tell us what you're doing.
BODZIAK: 384 is a pair of Reebok shoes, white in color, what I would call a low profile, that were represented to me as the shoes of the defendant.
GOLDBERG: And what did you do with those Reebok shoes?
BODZIAK: I made measurements of the exterior, length of the sole, as best I could, without cutting the tops off. I made measurements of the inner length of the insole. And I made a direct physical comparison between them and a size 12 Bruno Magli shoe.
GOLDBERG: What size did you determine the Reebok shoes to be?
BODZIAK: Oh, the Reeboks are labeled U.S. size 12.
GOLDBERG: Now, sir, in making a determination of the defendant's shoe size, could the - why not just measure the defendant's feet instead of doing this?
BODZIAK: Because of the factors of personal preference of fit and other factors which come into consideration. Measuring the feet would not be the most accurate way of determining shoe size.
…
GOLDBERG: Now, can you show us in terms of a demonstration here what you did to compare the Reeboks to the Bruno Magli shoes that you had?
BODZIAK: Yes, I had a size 12 right Bruno Magli shoe, the one which was from the original shipment from Bruno Magli in New Jersey that Mr. Peter Gruderich had provided to me and that is marked 12 in - in a U.S. 12 and was the shoe that was made on the American 12 last with the 46 sole. And I took this shoe and made the same linear measurements of the outer sole and inner sole and found that they were within a couple millimeters of one another; essentially they were the same. And I took the shoes and, matching the heel and the toes, compared the dimensions of those shoes and found that they were of similar construction and were for all practical purposes identical in the size and shape features. In other words, the person wearing one certainly would be a candidate for wearing the other.
 Load-Date: June 19, 1995

 

End of Document
