

Excerpts From Testimony in the O.J. Simpson Trial
The Associated Press
February 24, 1995, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1025 words
Body




EDITOR'S NOTE: The following excerpts are from unofficial trial transcripts compiled by West Publishing Co. and made available on its WESTLAW(r) service.
---
By The Associated Press
Excerpts from testimony Friday in the O.J. Simpson trial.
(In the following segment, Rosa Lopez admits she has not made plane reservations for El Salvador. She previously said she had such reservations:)
DEPUTY DISTRICT ATTORNEY CHRISTOPHER DARDEN: OK. Ms. Lopez, we just called the airline; they don't show a reservation for you. Can you explain to the Court why it is that you just told us you have a reservation?
ROSA LOPEZ: Because I am going to reserve it, sir, as soon as I leave here. I will buy my ticket and I will leave. If you want to, the cameras can follow me.
DARDEN: So you have not made a reservation?
LOPEZ: But I will make it as soon as I leave here.
DARDEN: You have not made a res -
LOPEZ: At 1 in the morning because the airlines are closed at that time. I have to wait.
DARDEN: You just told us you already made a reservation?
LOPEZ: But I will make the reservation, sir, and I will leave. That is for sure, today.
DARDEN: When you told us you already made a reservation, you were lying?
LOPEZ: No. Because I will make it, sir.
DARDEN: You told us you made a reservation prior to coming to Court this morning, Ms. Lopez?
UNIDENTIFIED DEFENSE ATTORNEY: Objection.
JUDGE LANCE ITO: Overruled.
DARDEN: Your Honor, can you instruct the witness to answer the question.
ITO: Wait. Wait. Wait.
DARDEN: May I re-ask the question?
ITO: All right. Restate your question.
DARDEN: Ms. Lopez, didn't you tell us that you made the reservation prior to your coming to Court today, yes or no?
LOPEZ: No.
DARDEN: You didn't just tell us that?
LOPEZ: Yes, I told you.
DARDEN: But you knew when you told us that that you had not made a reservation, correct? Yes or no, correct?
LOPEZ: Correct.
DARDEN: You lied to us, didn't you? Yes or no?
ITO: She can explain. You can explain.
LOPEZ: Because the agencies are closed. They open at 10 in the morning. And I was brought here very early, sir.
DARDEN: You don't have any plans to leave Los Angeles at all, do you?
LOPEZ: Of course, sir. My bags are packed.
LOPEZ: Everything is ready.
LOPEZ: Everything is ready.
DARDEN: When you left the Sallingers you told them you were leaded to El Salvador, didn't you, be instructed to answer the question?
LOPEZ: I told him he was going for two weeks. I asked him to give me a two week vacation and they didn't want to.
DARDEN: When you left the Sallingers you told them that you were leaving and going directly to El Salvador, didn't you? Yes or no?
LOPEZ: Yes, because I had thought of going that week.
DARDEN: But you didn't go, did you? Yes or no?
LOPEZ: Because my daughter asked me to stay with my granddaughters.
DARDEN: She can answer the question yes or no. No police officer has been allowed to explain their answer in these proceedings.
ITO: Wait. Wait. Wait. And Ms. Clark, all right. Did you tell the Sallingers you were going to leave and go to El Salvador?
LOPEZ: Yes, sir.
ITO: Next question.
DARDEN: And you didn't go, did you? Yes or no?
LOPEZ: No.
DARDEN: And you had not made a reservation to go?
LOPEZ: No.
LOPEZ: No.
---
CLARK: We would ask leave of the Court to recess at this time so that we can convene present with the appellate counsel tomorrow morning.
ITO: It's a pretty simple procedure. Do you wish to pursue this?
CLARK: We are only asking for the opportunity at this time to confer with counsel.
ITO: Well, you seem to have two options: Either you offer an apology to the Court and we proceed, or we proceed to a contempt hearing. Those are your choices. Request for continuance is denied.
CLARK: May I have a moment, Your Honor?
ITO: Sure.
CLARK: We would like the opportunity to confer with counsel before we resolve this matter, Your Honor. And is the Court then not going to afford us that opportunity?
ITO: Nope.
CLARK: We could proceed with a trial and resolve the matter at the conclusion of the day or in the morning tomorrow. And that way we wouldn't have to take up anymore court time with this matter at this time.
ITO: It's a very simple way to terminate this, Ms. Clark.
CLARK: I'm aware of that.
ITO: I think I have offered it to you twice already now. I don't know that I have to do it a third time. But I'm prepared to go forward if you wish to choose, if you choose otherwise.
CLARK: Well, even if the Court is prepared to go forward with the contempt proceeding, we're entitled to counsel; are we not?
ITO: This is civil contempt, counsel. It has to be adjudicated immediately. Unless you want to make it a criminal contempt and have a jury trial? Love to see the voir dire on that case.
CLARK: Me too.
DARDEN: (Inaudible).
CLARK: Can we use the same jury, Your Honor?
ITO: Ms. Clark, all levity aside, I have offered you now three times an opportunity to end this right now. This is very simple.
CLARK: Perhaps.
ITO: And perhaps if Mr. Darden had the opportunity to review the transcript that I have before me, he would see the wisdom of that.
CLARK: And perhaps we would like to review it as well, but - Why don't we review the transcript, Your Honor?
ITO: (Inaudible.) Mr. Spencer, your comments aren't necessary.
CLARK: I didn't hear him.
ITO: I heard him. I have great ears.
CLARK: I'm sorry.
ITO: Never mind. You make me feel like Mr. Kimball.
CLARK: Who?
ITO: Never mind.
CLARK: I'm not literate enough.
ITO: Me see counsel at the sidebar without the reporter, please. Mr. Hodgman, you want to join us, please.
---
ITO: All right. Thank you, counsel, Mr. Darden.
DARDEN: Your Honor, thank you for the opportunity to review the transcript of the sidebar. It appears that the Court is correct that perhaps my comments may have been or are somewhat inappropriate. I apologize to the Court. I meant no disrespect. I did have some concerns, and concerns I would like to take up with the Court when the Court is available to hear my concerns. I apologize.
ITO: Mr. Darden, I accept your apologies. I apologize to you for my reaction as well. You and I have known each other for a number of years, and I know your response was out of character, and I'll note it as such. Thank you.
DARDEN: Thank you, Your Honor.
 Load-Date: February 24, 1995

 

End of Document
