

Excerpts in the O.J. Simpson Case
 The Associated Press
August 28, 1995, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1125 words
Body




EDITOR'S NOTE - Excerpts are from unofficial trial transcripts compiled by West Publishing Co. and made available on its WESTLAW(r) service. Any use of these transcripts must be credited to West Publishing Co.
---
By The Associated Press
Excerpts Monday in the O.J. Simpson murder case:
(In the following segment, criminalist Henry Lee testifies that he relies on the PCR technique for DNA testing in certain cases:)
PROSECUTOR HANK GOLDBERG: Just so that we're clear, you are an expert in forensic DNA technology, is that correct?
LEE: A lot of people refer me as an expert, yes.
GOLDBERG: And you consider yourself to be an expert in forensic DNA technology?
LEE: I know something about DNA, a little bit, not everything.
GOLDBERG: OK. Quite a bit, right, in terms of its forensic application?
LEE: Forensic application, yes.
GOLDBERG: All right. And Mr. Scheck was asking you about some of the things that your laboratory does in the forensic area. This - is - is this laboratory exclusively a forensic laboratory?
LEE: Yes, sir.
GOLDBERG: All right. And are you using RFLP technology in forensic cases?
LEE: Yes.
GOLDBERG: And are you also using PCR technology in forensic cases?
LEE: Yes.
GOLDBERG: Dr. Lee, are you using PCR technology in criminal cases both to include and exclude people as having committed a crime?
LEE: Yes.
GOLDBERG: All right. Now, you were asked about some of the cases that you and your lab people have participated in involving the identification of human remains, do you remember that?
LEE: Yes, sir.
GOLDBERG: Now, most of the cases that were referred to happened abroad, I think one in South America and then there was a number of instances in Europe, is that correct?
LEE: Some in this country, too, yes.
GOLDBERG: What were the technologies that are being used in the cases that you referred to on direct examination for purposes of human identification?
LEE: Human identification basically involves - technique depends on the bone sample. Smaller sample we have to use PCR, no other choice. If no high molecular DNA was extract from the sample, we have to do the best we can do. If a large sample, of course, RFLP is a choice.
GOLDBERG: OK. And, sir, when you're saying that you used PCR technology, does that include the cases that you were referring to in - as a result of the conflicts in Europe to identify people that have been - have been killed as a result of the war there?
LEE: Yes. Those victim was found in … grave or mass grave, unidentified human remains. For the humanity reason, we want to find out what's the loved one, so we try to help those country identify those human remain.
GOLDBERG: And, Dr. Lee, is it your stated position that forensic scientists are in the best position to evaluate whether PCR technology is ready to make the technology transfer into the forensic field?
LEE: I think forensic scientists should have a good say about what method we should do, what's the reliable procedure, what kind of applications. Certain sample doesn't matter what we do, we have problems. Other samples, forensic scientists, we should have a choice not dictated by molecular biologists or other scientists tell us what to do.
(In the following segment, Goldberg cross-examines Lee on swatches that had blood transfer stains:)
GOLDBERG: Now, if there is in fact, a situation where a swatch is packaged when it's still damp -
LEE: Uh-huh.
GOLDBERG: - in a bindle and there's a transfer, is that situation going to cause the blood to change into someone else's blood?
LEE: That's a difficult question. If that's original bindle, therefore, should not change. If it's not the original bindle, then going to change.
GOLDBERG: OK. Let me give you a hypothetical so we're clear on what you're saying.
LEE: Right.
GOLDBERG: Let's say I'm a criminalist and I take some swatches out of a drying cabinet in a test tube, I don't touch them to see whether they're dry -
LEE: OK.
GOLDBERG: All right, but I think that they look dry. I'm looking through the test tube and they look dry, and I dump them out into the bindle, are you following me so far?
LEE: Yes, sir.
…
GOLDBERG: Now, Dr. Lee, let's say that I dumped it out into the bindle and I just didn't wait long enough, OK, and I closed up the bindle and there's a transfer in the bindle, following me?
LEE: Yes.
GOLDBERG: Is that going to change the blood into someone else's blood in my hypothetical?
LEE: In theory, will not.
 
 (In the following segment, Lee is questioned about the ankle stains on one of the socks found at the foot of Simpson's bed:)
GOLDBERG: On the socks, there was a sock that you were asked about that we've numbered 13A. Do you know what I'm talking about?
LEE: Yes.
GOLDBERG: Would you agree, sir, that it's difficult if not impossible, to reconstruct all of the various ways the different parts of a sock could come into contact with each other when you're taking it off?"
LEE: Yes, sir.
GOLDBERG: And would it - there's a stain on the sock that has been labeled "42A?"
LEE: Yes.
GOLDBERG: And you know what I'm talking about?
LEE: Ankle stain.
GOLDBERG: And are you generally aware that that has been identified as having blood that was consistent with Nicole Brown?
LEE: Yes.
GOLDBERG: OK. And then there's another stain that we've been referring to in the testimony that's on the inside, what we've been referring to as "Wall 3." Do you know what I'm talking about?
LEE: Yes.
GOLDBERG: Now, doctor, is it your position that we cannot say with positiveness whether stain 42 is, in fact, related to the stain on wall 3?
LEE: That's correct.
 
 (In the following segment, Lee explains why he couldn't personally examine Simpson's Ford Bronco:)
GOLDBERG: Now, let's get to the issue, Dr. Lee, of the Bronco that you testified to a little bit in your direct testimony. Now, did you ever physically inspect the Bronco yourself?
LEE: No. As I indicate to you, the jury, I never physically, personally look at the Bronco.
GOLDBERG: And were you present - excuse me. Did you note there was a search of the Bronco that was done on August the 26th of 1994?
LEE: I don't remember specifically.
GOLDBERG: OK. Were you generally aware of some research of the Bronco that was done in August of '94 at which some defense people and some -
LEE: Yes.
GOLDBERG: - prosecution people were present?
LEE: Yes.
GOLDBERG: OK. And did someone disallow you from coming there or?
LEE: Not exactly, the situation disallow me. I only can work on my spare time -
GOLDBERG: OK.
LEE: - on weekends. I cannot come here. I have an official duty. Also the world cannot stop just because this case.
GOLDBERG: OK. So with respect to your analysis in - in this case, is it true that part of the limitation was your own busy schedule?
LEE: Yes, because the day I wanted, it's not available to me. And the day they want it, I cannot come here.
 Load-Date: August 28, 1995

 

End of Document
