

Expedition Seeks Brew of the Incas
The Associated Press
March 11, 1991, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 448 words
Dateline: CINCINNATI
Body




Not just any beer will do for Alan Eames. He's going the extra mile - into the highlands of South America - in quest of a beer quaffed by the Incas.
Eames - sometimes called "the Indiana Jones of beer" - is studying a purple beer made from corn by the Conibo and Shipibo Indians in Peru.
"It's one of the few places where we can see a 10,000-year-old process that is older than the making of wine and bread," Eames said before leaving for South America last month.
The Hudepohl-Schoenling Brewing Co., looking for a way to promote beer's historic importance, decided to sponsor Eames' trip, said Ken Lichtendahl, the brewery's president. "There was a feeling that there was a lost treasure to be found."
Eames, a self-taught "beer archaeologist," has spent 25 years studying the history of beer in Europe, the Middle East and South America.
The Peruvian beer called chicha is made of chewed corn in a process that has not changed in 500 years, Eames said. The brewing is done entirely by women.
"Essentially, we are going to be interviewing the woman brewers of the most remote areas of the Andean highlands and trying to get some sense of how they regard what they do," he said.
Lichtendahl doesn't think he'll get a chance to try it.
"Unfortunately, their ability to preserve any product for travel is low. Anything that would be brought back would not represent the real product."
---
 
 Rocket-Mounted Telescope Takes Photos of Solar Activity
ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. (AP) - An astrophysicist says he has 18 photographs of the sun taken by a rocket-mounted telescope that soared 150 miles above White Sands Missile Range.
"I'm really pleased," said Leon Golub, a Harvard University astrophysicist who heads the research. "This flight was a great success and it's an especially unusual opportunity because the sun is very active right now."
The 50-foot National Aeronautics and Space Administration sounding rocket was launched Feb. 22 from the missile range to take X-ray photographs of solar activity, Golub said.
His study will focus on solar activity, particularly the sun's corona, where dynamic events such as solar flares occur. The sun currently is at the peak of an 11-year cycle for flare activity. Golub said the minimum solar activity should be about six years from now.
Solar flares burst suddenly from the surface of the sun, sending waves of electromagnetic radiation and charged particles into space. Those can disrupt communications and cause northern lights on Earth.
One basic question is why the sun has a corona at all, he said. "We know it is related to the magnetic fields that bubble up from inside the sun, but how that produces such hot gases above the surface is still subject to debate.

 

End of Document
