

First Lady Takes Her Issues to the World
The Associated Press
March 23, 1995, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 792 words
Byline: By NANCY BENAC, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Halfway around the globe from the Indian subcontinent, poor people in the Arkansas delta can borrow money through a program inspired by a bank for impoverished women in Bangladesh.
Hillary Rodham Clinton helped create the Arkansas program and now she's about to visit the Bangladeshi one.
Assuming an increasingly vocal role as an advocate for women, Mrs. Clinton is going global with some of the same issues she has long championed at home.
On Friday, she embarks on one of the most extensive foreign trips ever undertaken by a first lady traveling without her husband. Her 12-day visit to India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Nepal and Bangladesh will take her to some of the world's most remote and exotic settings to discuss some of the most basic of human needs.
From Mother Teresa's orphanage in Old Delhi to a women's craft show in Katmandu, Mrs. Clinton's agenda will be health care, education and pushing back the tide of poverty, all with special emphasis on the needs of women.
Along the way, Mrs. Clinton and her 15-year-old daughter Chelsea (taking an expanded spring break) will catch magnificent sights such as India's storied Taj Mahal and the wildlife preserves of Nepal.
In announcing the trip, President Clinton called his wife "the best imaginable emissary to deliver a message to South Asia that this administration's concern for those countries is deeper than traditional geopolitics."
Demonstrating the administration's desire to strengthen ties to the populous and impoverished subcontinent, planning for the trip went forward even after an attack in Karachi, Pakistan, earlier this month left two Americans dead and another wounded.
Mrs. Clinton is emerging as a more visible women's advocate after lowering her profile when the administration's health-care reform effort foundered.
She will be bringing much the same message to Asia that she delivered earlier this month at a poverty summit in Copenhagen and at the United Nations, where she warned that if women don't thrive, neither will the world.
Her trip equates with neither Jacqueline Kennedy's touristy "good will" tour of India and Pakistan nor Rosalynn Carter's diplomatic march across Latin America in which she discussed everything from nuclear weapons to Fidel Castro.
As she charts a course in the middle, don't expect Mrs. Clinton to pose for many photos atop elephants, and don't expect her to lecture India and Pakistan on their refusal to sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
"Before I go telling anyone about anything, I'd like to learn a bit more," she said in setting modest expectations for her trip.
Of course, should her hosts choose to raise the treaty or any other thorny matter, the first lady will be ready to advocate administration policy.
At Mrs. Clinton's first stop, Pakistani officials are hopeful the first lady will gain a greater understanding of the country's challenges and its progress, helping to ease strained relations between the two nations.
But Abida Hussein, a leader of the main opposition group to Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, cautions that Mrs. Clinton shouldn't "give Mrs. Bhutto undue credit and ignore her incompetence because she's a woman."
The trip is sure to test Mrs. Clinton's diplomatic skills as she champions women in a male-dominated society where "dowry deaths" and other gender-based violence is a serious problem and women's opportunities are severely limited.
"The Hillary police are going to be keeping a close eye on everything she says, but … Hillary Clinton is quite capable of dealing with that fine line between being a first lady and being an advocate for women," predicted Dianne Sherman, a longtime women's activist.
Mrs. Clinton's schedule is crafted to highlight programs that work, such as schools for girls, a self-employed women's association in Ahmedabad, India, and the Grameen Bank in Bangladesh, the inspiration for the Arkansas lending program.
The bank extends money to landless and illiterate villagers - most of them women - who otherwise could never get credit to build homes, buy cattle or start small businesses.
Women's advocates hope Mrs. Clinton's latest activities will turn out to be a prelude to her participation in the mammoth U.N. conference on women scheduled for September in Beijing.
The first lady says she would like to go but isn't sure if she'll attend. Already, though, she has been lobbying to keep the United Nations and the Chinese from excluding certain groups that are controversial for one reason or another.
For now, her immediate focus is elsewhere.
"I hope that I will have gotten through five countries in 10 days still standing up," she says. "I just hope that it's a trip that really says to the people in those countries the United States is concerned about you as human beings."
 Load-Date: March 23, 1995

 

End of Document
