

For Romania's Desperate, Argentina Is Now The Promised Land
The Associated Press
March 19, 1993, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 654 words
Byline: By DAN PETREANU, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUCHAREST, Romania
Body




Spiridon Stoica balanced his crutches in the dirty slush for hours as his healthy brother pushed and shoved with hundreds of others to reach the front of the line. The prize, for once, was not bread or sugar, but the hope of escape from Romania.
The brothers, who traveled 100 miles from Vilcea, are among 20,000 Romanians who have flocked to the Argentinian Embassy since it announced three weeks ago that it would issue immigration visas. The catch: Prospective immigrants must have enough cash to support themselves.
The prospect of leaving one of Europe's poorest countries has made it worth their while to wait hours in freezing cold and snowstorms to receive application forms.
The riotous crowds highlight a painful paradox of post-Communist life in countries like Romania, where new governments are desperately trying to revive their collapsing economies.
Instead of prosperity, freedom has brought a growing desire to emigrate. People may now leave, but almost no country will take them in.
As Western countries shut their gates fearing an exodus from the former Communist bloc, some 230,000 Romanians - one in 100 - were granted immigrant visas in the past three years. Most were from minority groups resettling in Germany, Hungary and Israel.
Ethnic Romanians can barely get out.
"There are phenomenal levels of pressure" to emigrate, said Padraig Czajkowski, acting head of the Bucharest office of the Geneva-based Organization for Migration.
The daily scene at the Argentinian embassy "is a strong warning for the entire world … a lot of Romanians want a new life, and the problem is they want it now," he said.
Many try to reach Germany, which has sent about 6,000 back to Romania since November. One group recently went to Canada stowed in a ship's cargo hold.
On March 1, the Argentinian ambassador, Oscar Eduardo Torres Avalos, stunned would-be emigrants by openly inviting them to his embassy. Limits on immigration were relaxed in the hope of attracting east Europeans for industrial and agricultural projects in Argentina.
"All 23 million Romanians may apply … regardless of race, ethnic or other background," Avalos told The Associated Press.
President Carlos Menem of Argentina won kudos last year when he announced his country was willing to accept thousands of East Europeans.
But on one, poorly-publicized condition: They must have cash.
The response in Romania was far larger than in other East European countries, Avalos said. But he had no idea how many would actually be accepted.
"The forms are sent to Argentina to a special commission," Avalos said. Those "presumed" professionals would be chosen first.
Most of those applying were unskilled, and apparently unaware that their chances of settling in Argentina were dim. Eyes shining, some were already plannng their new lives.
"I haven't eaten meat in three months," said Lenuta Rosoleanu, a jobless 32-year-old. "The place I live is full of lice. Argentina will be much better."
"I'm prepared to do anything for a better life in Argentina. Anything," said Stoica, 15 who was born with a badly deformed left leg.
For now, all he could do was wait while his brother waded through the crush 11 times - once for each family member wanting to apply.
Stoica said he had "no hope left" for a good life here. Being handicapped, he felt he was most likely to join Romania's fastest-growing minority - the jobless.
"We're dying of starvation here," said Constantin Stelian, 40, an unemployed welder who said he waited four days to get application forms.
Most of the applicants knew little about their promised land, and almost none spoke its language.
"Spanish? I'll learn it," said Mihaela Fieraru, 18, an unemployed mother of two who is seven months pregnant.
About 20 riot police eyed the crowd, but could do little to stem the mob scene or the shady figures offering to fill out forms for applicants who know only Romanian, and selling application forms, some reportedly fake.

 

End of Document
