

Foreigners Ask: Could the Waco Siege Been Handled Better?
The Associated Press
April 20, 1993, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 572 words
Byline: By LESLIE SHEPHERD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Foreign newspapers bluntly criticized U.S. authorities' handling of the Waco standoff, saying miscalculations cost dozens of lives.
"What happened in Waco is unbelievable. And for the FBI, unpardonable," the Portuguese daily Diario de Noticias said Tuesday. "What is inexcusable, for such a powerful American federal agency, is that at the end of those 51 days everything happened exactly the way David Koresh said it would."
America's detractors "will be only too happy to exploit once more the stereotype of the trigger-happy cop," said the English-language Gulf News in the Persian Gulf emirate of Dubai.
Assaf Hefetz, the founder of a special Israeli anti-guerrilla unit, criticized the FBI for using armored vehicles to punch holes in the cult's compound and pump in tear gas.
Tear gas gives the other side "time and room for action," said Hefetz, who is a deputy to Israel's national police commissioner.
Hefetz was strongly criticized in 1978 after a police squad he led assaulted a hijacked bus, resulting in the deaths of six Palestinian guerrillas and 37 Israelis, including 25 civilians.
Necdet Menzir, police chief of Istanbul, Turkey, said the Waco operation could have been planned and executed better. He blamed the outcome on the inexperience of Americans in dealing with religious zealots.
"These people are fanatics. Such an end should have been calculated in advance," Menzir said.
As many as 24 Britons were believed in the compound when it burned down, and a member of Parliament called Tuesday for laws barring religious cults from recruiting in Britain.
But Prime Minister John Major said there already were criminal and immigration laws that the government was "prepared and willing" to use to prevent cult members from violating the rights of others.
Foreign experts on religious cults said it was no surprise that members of the Branch Davidian cult chose mass suicide rather than surrender and suggested the FBI should have realized that.
"The United States has not learned the lesson of similar incidents in the past and apparently invited the results of pushing this group further into a corner," Masato Shimizu, an expert on religion, was quoted as saying by the Japanese newspaper Asahi.
De Telegraaf, the Netherlands' most popular daily newspaper, asked why the FBI did not take seriously Koresh's threat that something terrible would happen if federal agents moved against the compound.
"It has, after all, long been known that such figures are capable of committing the most horrible atrocities at a cost of many lives," De Telegraaf said, referring to the 1978 mass suicide at Jonestown, Guyana, by Jim Jones and 912 followers.
The Daily Telegraph in London said some good could come out of the tragedy if President Clinton uses it as an opportunity to tighten gun control laws.
It said the Waco tragedy "will add to the general concern in the country of an administration which lacks judgment in a crisis and has yet to assert control over the bureaucracy."
La Stampa newspaper of Turin, Italy, asked, "Who finally became too anxious, the prophet or the authorities?"
Mexico's La Jornada newspaper said the "the enshrining of individual liberty" in the United States is so great that it has led to "fertile terrain for the emergence of messianic, fundamentalist and apocalytic religious movements."
"Extreme, almost Utopian liberalism" enshrined in the U.S. Constituion "deprives the State of all preventative power."

 

End of Document
