

Forget Kite Flying, These Kids Want to Change the Atmosphere
The Associated Press
December 27, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 626 words
Byline: By SALLY WILLIAMS COOK
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body



For AP Special Features
 Two years ago, 15-year old Penny Knopsnyder was bothered by the threat of landfills in her bucolic western Pennsylvania neighborhood.
Determined to fight a dump in her backyard, she changed her own habits and those of her family, and turned her home into a virtual recycling center.
In Berkeley Heights, N.J., 12-year-old Warren Wolf helped his father, a landscape architect, develop a leasing plan for customers buying live Christmas trees. Instead of cutting the trees down and discarding them at the end of the holidays, customers lease a tree, enjoy it, and return it for replanting.
"I told my father that huge forests were being destroyed," says Warren. "He wanted to help, especially when I told him that the Earth's temperature is rising partly because we're losing so many trees."
In the last few months, these two concerned young people have joined forces with scores of students across the country and have turned their attention to global warming.
One special campaign: the "CO2 Challenge," launched by kids' environmental groups across the country. Students are signing petitions and sending them to the President, urging him to meet with other world leaders and to attend an "Earth's Summit" meeting, convened by the U.N. Conference on Environment and Development, and to be held in June 1992 in Rio de Janeiro.
A crucial point at the "Earth's Summit" meeting is what to do about carbon dioxide created mainly by burning fossil fuels, generating electricity and auto emissions. Carbon dioxide traps heat and some scientists believe this creates a "greenhouse" effect. A "CO2 Challenge" petition asks the President to pledge that the United States will produce 20 percent less carbon dioxide by the year 2000.
This is not the first time that young people have organized for the environment. Kids fought the use of polystyrene at McDonalds and backed the Save the Dolphins campaign.
"Kids really care about the Earth. They sense that their future and the future of the Earth is at stake," says Annie Brody, project director of the Children's Earth Fund, the group coordinating the campaign drive. "They are enthusiastic about the 'CO2 Challenge' because it offers them the opportunity to get involved individually and to be a part of a larger group to inspire their government's leaders."
The Children's Earth Fund is a not-for-profit project based in New York City, whose purpose, the group says, is to help kids coordinate their "Earth-saving actions in a collective, measurable way."
At Rockwood High School in Rockwood, Pa., Knopsnyder and her friend, Nikki Coughenour, have been talking to classes of children from kindergarten through sixth-grade about the dangers of high levels of carbon dioxide emissions.
"I tell the kids that they can make a difference just by turning off lights," Knopsnyder says. "It's important for them to make a simple connection like that."
Knopsnyder and her classmates have been actively involved in the other facet of the 'CO2 Challenge," which is gathering pledges from students and their families to reduce the amount of carbon dioxide in their homes. The pledge urges the President to take the same energy-saving action at the White House.
The girls and their schoolmates have collected 542 signatures pledging to save over 500,000 tons of carbon dioxide over the next year. The steps are easy, they say: turn out the lights, walk or cycle instead of driving and keep the family car well maintained.
"We've got to think globally, but act locally," says Knopsnyder, using a phrase that is becoming familiar with kids across the country.
---
For information about how kids can become involved in the "CO2 Challenge," write to: The Children's Earth Fund, Box 2335, 175 Fifth Ave., New York, N.Y. 10010.

 

End of Document
