

Gates Is On The Witness List In George's Iran-Contra Coverup Trial
The Associated Press
July 10, 1992, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 447 words
Byline: By PETE YOST, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




CIA Director Robert Gates is a prospective witness in the upcoming Iran-Contra coverup trial of the agency's former spymaster, Clair George, according to jury questionnaires issued Friday.
Gates, whose role in the Iran-Contra scandal underwent intensive scrutiny at Senate confirmation hearings last year, is among 42 potential witnesses for the George trial, according to the questionnaires.
Other prospective witnesses include Sens. William Cohen, R-Maine, and John Kerry, D-Mass., Rep. Lee Hamilton, D-Ind., and former Sen. Thomas Eagleton, D-Mo.
George is accused of concealing a secret White House-run Contra arms network from Congress late in 1986. Oliver North, the fired National Security Council aide who operated the arms-running network, also is listed as a prospective witness.
North assisted the Contras in 1985 and 1986 when Congress had barred the CIA from providing military assistance to the rebels fighting the leftist government of Nicaragua.
Testimony in the George trial is expected to begin July 20, while pretrial closed hearings on the use of classified information will be conducted next week.
The 36-page questionnaires that will be handed out Monday zero in on whether prospective jurors might be biased against the CIA.
For example, the prospective jurors will be asked whether they feel movies such as "JFK" and "Patriot Games" offer an "unfair portrayal of the CIA."
The same question is asked about books that are critical of the spy agency, such as "CIA and the Cult of Intelligence" and "Inside the Company."
At least seven current and former CIA officials besides Gates and George are on the list of possible witnesses, including former CIA Director William Webster.
At the time the Iran-Contra scandal broke, Webster was director of the FBI.
George, the CIA's former deputy director for operations, is charged with three counts of obstructing Congress and a federal grand jury and six counts of perjury and making false statements.
Lawyers for George have said they want to introduce earlier congressional testimony by Gates in the Iran-Contra scandal. In order to delve into those statements, the defense would have to call Gates as a witness, U.S. District Judge Royce Lamberth, who is handling the case, has said.
If Gates were to testify as a defense witness, he could then be subjected to cross-examination by Iran-Contra prosecutors.
Gates has said he didn't know about North's Contra resupply operation, and that became the focal point for intense questioning during his Senate confirmation hearings last year. George's lawyers have said they want Gates' testimony to Congress on Oct. 8, 1986, in an effort to show the CIA knew little about North's operation.

 

End of Document
