

Gore Rebukes Bush on the Environment
The Associated Press
July 14, 1992, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 493 words
Byline: By ROBERT NAYLOR JR., Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Sen. Al Gore today delivered a stinging rebuke of White House environmental policies, saying George Bush is "as phony as a three-dollar bill" in offering himself as the environmental president.
"He can't really use the phrase any more without kind of wincing ..." Gore said in a morning speech to the Sierra Club. "It's a joke."
Gore blamed not only Bush but former President Reagan for actions on the environment ranging from the appointment of James Watt as secretary of the Interior to allowing clear-cutting of timber in the national forests.
"Americans were embarrassed" by the president's performance at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro last month, Gore said. He said Bush "went down there and stonewalled our people and the rest of the world."
He said the American people "have figured out, on the environment, George Bush is as phony as a three-dollar bill."
During an appearance Monday night on Public Broadcasting System's "MacNeil-Lehrer News Hour," Gore characterized Vice President Dan Quayle as "a nice fellow" but part of an administration that "has been a disaster for this country."
Gore avoided a direct assessment of Quayle's performance as vice president, saying that he "would leave that to others."
But he attacked the Bush administration for what he called its failure to match actions with its rhetoric about family values, a theme that Quayle has sounded repeatedly this year.
Gore recalled President Bush's veto of legislation passed by Congress that would guarantee workers leave for family emergencies.
"How can they talk about family values and when Congress overwhelmingly passes a family leave bill to say, 'No, we're going to veto that because were afraid that might cost some money to the wealthy and powerful?' " the Tennessee senator asked.
"Families only matter as political symbols" to the Bush administration, Gore said.
Gore wore several faces as he took the spotlight as Clinton's running mate.
Gore the reluctant vice presidential candidate:
"I didn't even want it for myself. But the question came not in terms of what do you personally want, but are you willing to help your country."
Gore the environmentalist:
"We are burdened with leaders who want to protect the old, inefficient, outdated, polluting ways of the past," he told the New York League of Conservation Voters. "The Bush-Quayle administration has conducted policy as if this might be the last generation we have to worry about."
Gore's environmental stands have been criticized by Republicans who claim the senator would place the environment ahead of jobs.
But Gore, in an appearance on CBS-TV's "This Morning," responded that "this supposed choice between jobs and the environment is a bogus issue."
He said Germany and Japan, two of the nation's biggest trading rivals, are "both saying to the entire world the biggest new market in the history of world business is the market for the new products and processes that allow progress without environmental destruction."

 

End of Document
