

Gore Succeeds in the Family Business - Politics
The Associated Press
July 9, 1992, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 596 words
Byline: By BILL RAWLINS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NASHVILLE, Tenn.
Body




Sen. Albert Gore Jr. was born in the nation's capital and was just 28 when he went into the family business - politics.
Gore, 44, followed his father into the Congress and will take another step up the political ladder as Bill Clinton's choice for the vice presidency - a job he described four years ago as "a political dead end."
But he has survived other political blockades, including the admission that he smoked marijuana during his college days.
While he calls Carthage, Tenn., his home, Gore was born and raised in Washington as a senator's son. He attended prep school there and went on to graduate from Harvard University.
Gore's political heritage complicated his life early, as he faced the choice of many in his generation: whether to serve in the armed forces during the Vietnam War. Albert Gore Sr., a strong opponent of the war, was locked in a bitter re-election battle with Bill Brock in 1970 as the younger Gore faced the prospect of the draft.
Caught between politics and his opposition to the war, Gore joined the Army and was sent to Vietnam, where he was a combat journalist. Some of his letters from Vietnam were published in The (Nashville) Tennessean newspaper, where he worked after returning from the war.
Looking for a career, he attended both law school and divinity school at Vanderbilt University but did not graduate.
Gore won his first political race in 1976, when he clinched a seat in the House. Back in Washington, he dove into environmental and defense issues. In 1984, he moved over to the Senate when former Sen. Howard Baker retired.
As a senator, Gore's environmental advocacy has made him the leading congressional spokesman on the subject - including authorship of a popular new book, "The Earth in the Balance" - and a leading critic of President Bush's policies.
Gore attended the 1989 international conference on the environment in London, and wrote the World Environment Policy Act that called for a ban on chlorofluorocarbons, blamed for depleting the ozone layer of the Earth's atmosphere.
This summer led a Senate delegation to the environmental summit in Rio de Janeiro. He made a series of speeches, first attacking Bush for snubbing the summit, and then when Bush decided to go, slamming the president for attending without a strong commitment.
Gore was one of the handful of Democratic senators who broke with his party and voted with Bush on starting the war in the Persian Gulf. But he has been less supportive on other defense issues, and has been a harsh critic of the Strategic Defense Initiative anti-missile program.
He also has worked on landmark legislation concerning organ transplants and telecommunications, and is an advocate of space and technology programs.
Gore's wife, Tipper, has made headlines herself with a successful campaign to get recording companies to put warning labels on music with lyrics that are offensive.
The Gores have four children, - Karenna, Kristen, Sarah and Albert III. Gore said the near death of their son after a car accident kept him from running for president this year.
During the 1988 campaign, Gore admitted to smoking marijuana while in college. Mrs. Gore said she had tried the drug also.
Gore won several states in the 1988 Southern "Super Tuesday" primaries, but lost Texas and Florida, and thus the nomination, to Dukakis.
Soon after the 1988 campaign, Gore was attending a baseball game in Baltimore with young Albert when the boy dashed out into the street. His father watched as he was nearly killed, and the Gores kept a round-the-clock vigil at the hospital until he was out of danger.

 

End of Document
