

Government Pulls Ads on Braulio the Penis Following Outcry
 The Associated Press
September 16, 1995, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 459 words
Dateline: BRASILIA, Brazil
Body




AIDS awareness ads showing a womanizer arguing with his penis, nicknamed Braulio, were pulled from the airwaves Saturday in part because children named Braulio were being teased.
The children's mothers had complained of the teasing by schoolmates, the newspaper Jornal do Brasil reported in Sunday's editions, quoting Health Minister Adib Jatene.
The Health Ministry's department for sexually transmitted diseases also fielded at least 18 telephone calls from men named Braulio who were upset about the use of their name, the daily newspaper O Globo said.
Jatene ordered the TV and radio spots taken off the air Saturday until a new nickname is chosen, TV Globo reported.
The government will also review the spots this week to decide if they're obscene, O Globo said.
The ads, first aired on TV and radio on Thursday, feature a man at odds with his penis, which insists on having indiscriminate sex with as many women as possible without using a condom.
Lair Guerra de Macedo, coordinator of the Health Ministry's AIDS Prevention Program, told O Globo that Braulio's owner "is the typical Brazilian male who knows all about the disease but refuses to take any preventive measures."
In one spot, Braulio's owner, played by a fully-clothed actor sitting in a chair, has the following dialogue with Braulio:
Braulio: "This place is full of interesting women."
Owner: "Behave yourself, Braulio."
Braulio: "How do you expect me to behave with so many beautiful women?"
Owner: "OK, but if you come out you're going to have to use a condom."
Braulio: "OK, you win. But get the condom quickly because there's this gorgeous woman staring at me."
The CBN all-news radio network said its Brasilia station got indignant calls from relatives of Braulios concerned about jokes and improprieties.
"In a First World country, we'd be getting rich with a libel suit," said businessman Braulio Torres, 58, who told the daily Estado de Sao Paulo he's been the brunt of jokes since the ads began. "This is humiliating."
But why Braulio?
The Health Ministry hired the Master polling agency in the southern city of Curitiba to find out popular nicknames for the male sex organ, newspapers reported. Among them were Anastacio, Bimbo, Tonho, Petronio and Braulio.
The other names reportedly were discarded for different reasons - Petronio was too long, Bimbo too childish. Braulio was felt to be just right.
The Roman Catholic Church says the campaign has gone too far.
The secretary general of the National Conference of Brazilian Bishops, Monsignor Raimundo D'Amasceno Assis, said "the moral and ethical aspects of this campaign are totally unacceptable."
He said it promotes indiscriminate sex and "gives the false impression that the use of a condom is 100 percent effective against the disease."
 Load-Date: September 16, 1995

 

End of Document
