

Government Plans To Jail Escobar in The Town He Once Ruled
The Associated Press
June 6, 1991, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 582 words
Byline: By STEVEN GUTKIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ENVIGADO, Colombia
Body




When cocaine kingpin Pablo Escobar indicated his intention to surrender, authorities began converting a drug rehabilitation center in his hometown into a jail that can hold him in comfort.
It's located in the misty hills that surround Envigado, the Medellin suburb where Escobar is loved by thousands of residents for bankrolling improvements including soccer fields, street lights and roads.
The facility features panoramic views, a soccer field, a 900-square-foot game, private baths and televisions.
In a written statement last week, Escobar said he was accepting the government's offer not to extradite him to the United States - the fate he has always feared most - if he turns himself in.
By surrendering and confessing to at least one crime, the head of the Medellin cocaine cartel becomes eligible for a reduced jail sentence.
Three other Medellin cartel leaders already have surrendered. They are the Ochoa brothers, Jorge Luis, Juan David and Fabio.
U.S. drug enforcment officials say Colombia's Medellin and smaller Cali cartels supply about 80 percent of the cocaine on the U.S. market.
Everyone in Colombia knows that Envigado, a town of 80,000 people, is Escobar territory. Most of the land surrounding the jail is believed to belong to either Escobar or his associates.
Last year, police raided a ranch house belonging to the Medellin cartel just one mile from the jail.
They found a cocaine processing laboratory and nine bodies buried beneath the living room floor. Authorities said the victims were tortured and murdered by Medellin traffickers.
At another house near the jail, troops confiscated scores of weapons used in the cartel's terrorist attacks.
Officials deny they have made any special deal with Escobar to persuade him to surrender.
But the government canceled plans for the drug rehabilitation center and started preparing the jail as soon as Escobar indicated he wanted to be housed in Envigado.
The drug lord also has been allowed to dictate security arrangements at the facility. Authorities met his demand to have the army guard it instead of the more dogmatically anti-drug police.
Escobar apparently believes the Envigado facility is the only place in Colombia where his enemies can't get at him.
Thousands of people throughout the country who want to see him dead.
An 82-year-old Catholic priest mediating Escobar's surrender said he wants to establish a "university of peace" at the Envigado jail.
The Rev. Rafael Garcia said in an interview with The Associated Press that Escobar will study law with about 100 colleagues who also will surrender.
Asked why Escobar deserves a better jail than other criminals, Garcia said "it's the law of the world that some people go to five-star hotels and some people don't."
Authorities blame the drug lord for murdering hundreds of his countrymen, including a justice minister, an attorney general and a leading presidential candidate.
"There are no luxuries at the jail," said Marta Luz Hurtado, the court official who is to receive Escobar.
But there's no denying its comfort.
And it's in Envigado, a city that became known as the Monaco of Colombia because of the opulence cocaine money bought.
There also is a darker side to Envigado.
Last year, officials arrested 18 members of a drug-financed police force that was running the city.
Police accused them of committing murder and carrying on a reign of terror.
When the government and the Medellin cartel declared war on each other in August 1989, Envigado was placed under army occupation.

 

End of Document
