

Guatemala's New President: A Dark Horse In The Winner's Circle
The Associated Press
January 7, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 590 words
Byline: By CANDICE HUGHES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GUATEMALA CITY
Body




Guatemala's new president is a dark horse who suddenly found himself in the winner's circle, a Protestant president to lead a nation where the chief executive traditionally has been Roman Catholic.
When Jorge Serrano takes office Jan. 14, he will also become the first elected civilian in Guatemalan history to take over from another elected civilian.
"What a beautiful moment we are living," he told a rally of campaign workers and supporters when on Sunday night he was declared victor over his rival, newspaper publisher Jorge Carpio Nicolle.
Friends and foes alike describe Serrano, 45, as a straight-laced technocrat, a proud and prickly man. Some compare him to former President Jimmy Carter, also a deeply religious man with a taste for administrative detail.
"Jorge runs the risk of the details blinding him to the larger problems," Serrano's former boss, Efrain Rios Montt, said in a recent interview.
Serrano, the son of a congressman, has had political ambitions since his youth. He was active in student politics at the National University of San Carlos in the 1960s, along with outgoing President Vinicio Cerezo.
"Jorge has politics in his veins," said Harris Whitbeck, a former U.S. Marine who served with Serrano in the 1982-83 Rios Montt government.
After receiving a degree in industrial engineering in Guatemala, Serrano did graduate work in the United States, earning a doctorate in education from Ace University in Lewisville, Texas.
Serrano held several minor public jobs in the 1970s, primarily in education, and was on an executive council within the Organization of American States.
"I've wanted to do something for my country ever since I was a little boy," Serrano said in an interview.
He first caught the public eye during Rios Montt's dictatorship, when he headed the Council of State that Rios Montt set up after suspending the constitution and dissolving the congress.
Serrano has described this service as proof of his commitment to democracy. Rios Montt, deposed after 16 months in power, had promised to return Guatemala to civilian rule, and the council was supposed to lay the groundwork.
Many Guatemalans, fed up with rampant crime and corrupt government that has soured this fledgling democracy after only five years, now remember the Rios Montt years fondly.
Serrano became Rios Montt's natural heir when the Supreme Court ruled in October that the former general was ineligible to run for president.
With Rios Montt out of the race, Serrano improved in the polls. He campaigned on the law-and-order platform that had made Rios Montt a front-runner. At the same time, he promised to repair Guatemala's tattered human rights image and negotiate an end to the 30-year-old leftist insurgency.
Serrano has been pivotal to the incipient peace process in Guatemala, where a dominant and recalcitrant right-wing has long shunned talks with the rebels.
He headed the National Reconciliation Commission delegation that signed accords in Norway in March, laying the groundwork for peace talks.
"He won't betray his signature in Oslo," said Mario Permuh, who was in the delegation. "Serrano will achieve peace. He still has the trust of the guerrillas. He's not a fanatic - religious or otherwise."
Religious tension can run high in Guatemala, where the religious right and the political right have been linked since the days when Rios Montt, an evangelical preacher, spoke about God and anti-communism on TV every Sunday.
Serrano is far more moderate in his manner. He repeatedly dismissed the religious question during his campaign.

 

End of Document
