

Haiti, Long at the Fringes, a New Headache for Bush
The Associated Press
November 25, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 785 words
Byline: By GEORGE GEDDA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The anguish of Haitians fleeing their homeland in unseaworthy boats has put an emotional face on the crisis in that troubled nation.
Haiti had receded into the background in the weeks since a coup toppled elected President Jean-Bertrand Aristide. But the drama of Haitian boat people is forcing the Bush administration to make life-or-death decisions.
Some of these decisions have touched a raw nerve in Congress, where members accused U.S. officials last week of being oblivious to the fate of would-be migrants who are black, no matter how desperate their plight.
The strange turn of events concerning the Western Hemisphere's poorest country is rooted in the decision by the United States and other hemispheric nations last month to impose economic sanctions against Haiti's coup makers. U.S. officials seemed confident then that the de facto government would not last long.
After all, Haiti's economy is highly dependent on imports and fragile in the best of times. Sanctions, officials believed, were just the right medicine to force the ouster of Haiti's new rulers and to reinstate Aristide.
But history suggests sanctions often cause hardship among the most vulnerable sectors of a population without having much impact on the country's leadership.
After 15 months of a worldwide embargo, Iraq's Saddam Hussein seems firmly entrenched. Two years ago, when it became apparent that sanctions were not working too well against Panama's Manuel Noriega, President Bush decided to send in the troops. And Fidel Castro still runs Cuba despite 31 years of a U.S. trade embargo.
The sanctions against Haiti have been in effect for only a few weeks, but the pattern is much the same as it has been elsewhere. The regime seems dug in while most Haitians have slipped into despair and hardship.
And as the full impact of the sanctions began to take effect, Haitians by the hundreds began to flee on unseaworthy boats toward the more congenial environment of South Florida. Few reached their destination.
Those who didn't drown en route were intercepted by Coast Guard cutters, creating an agonizing dilemma for the administration: where should desperate refugees be sent?
Initially, the problem seemed manageable, but things got out of hand when the number of refugees in Coast Guard custody off the Haitian coast leaped from 500 to about 1,800 in just a few days.
Legally, officials felt they could not admit the Haitians to the United States because almost all were regarded as economic, rather than political, refugees. Other Caribbean countries showed little interest in taking them in, so the administration decided last Monday to send them back to Haiti.
All this was too much for some members of Congress. "Any place but Haiti," thundered Rep. Charles Rangel, D-N.Y. He like many others felt the administration should provide refuge for the Haitians in the United States until the political and economic situation returned to normal.
The administration argued that policy would only encourage more boat people, resulting in large numbers of deaths on the high seas. It also rejected congressional arguments that many of the repatriated Haitians could suffer political persecution back home.
Some lawmakers felt the administration's policy reflected racial bias. Robert Gelbard, a top State Department official, said the policy was aimed primarily at saving lives, but Rep. Major Owens, D-N.Y., said the administration's actions were the kind that ex-Ku Klux Klan leader David Duke might embrace.
Rangel wondered whether a different approach would have been found if the refugees were Irish.
Indeed, the administration has just concluded a no-questions-asked lottery under which 40,000 undocumented aliens are being given residence visas - and 16,000 of the winners, according to the rules, must be Irish. But it was Congress, not the administration, that set those rules. There was no provision for Haitians in the lottery.
The administration seemed more vulnerable on another point. It has protested loudly the forced repatriation of Vietnamese boat people from Hong Kong, describing the policy as "unacceptable" until conditions in Vietnam improve.
The policy toward Haitians also contrasts sharply with the welcome the United States gives to fleeing Cubans. But Gelbard noted that Cuba, unlike Haiti, metes out stiff jail terms for people who try to leave without authorization.
Owens, who has many Haitian emigres in his Brooklyn district, believes such statements miss the point. He contended the Haitians "are fleeing a reign of terror."
The furor died down last Tuesday when a federal judge in Miami ordered the repatriations to Haiti temporarily stopped. The administration will try to get the order reversed this week.

 

End of Document
