

Haiti's New Police Soon Will Be On Their Own: Are They Up To The Job?
 The Associated Press
December 13, 1995, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 723 words
Byline: By MICHELLE FAUL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ST. MARC, Haiti
Body




When protesters got violent and started stoning the keepers of law and order, Haiti's new National Police abandoned their mentors, the Canadian Mounties, and fled.
When one of their own shot a bus conductor in an argument over one gourde (a nickel), the police hurried the perpetrator to safety in another town. Angry townspeople set up burning barricades, and the police barricaded themselves in their station.
"I thought you were supposed to serve us. That's what they said," a teen-age schoolgirl told a policeman behind the barbed-wire fence ringing the station on Tuesday. The policeman ignored her.
There are doubts that, even with foreign advisers, civilian police will be able to guarantee security when U.N. peacekeepers start leaving Haiti in February.
St. Marc, the scene of many violent protests over the years, will provide a preview of just how prepared the rookie cops are. They'll be without experienced backup after the Royal Canadian Mounted Police pull out next week and Honduran troops follow in two weeks' time.
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide's most popular act was to disband the armed forces that had ousted him in 1991 and had policed Haiti, often brutally, for decades. In the three years after the coup, the army and its paramilitary allies killed as many as 4,000 civilians.
Aristide was restored to power after a U.S. invasion last year. With U.S. funding, a police academy was established and American, Canadian and French instructors set about training bright, young people whom they praised for the eagerness with which they absorbed lessons in human rights.
Yet in recent months, police officers have been accused of excessive force on at least 12 occasions. One policeman shot and killed his girlfriend. None have been disciplined or charged.
Justice Minister Rene Magloire blames the "youth and inexperience" of officers who average 23 years of age and get only two months' training in Haiti and two months more at Fort Leonard Wood in Missouri.
More importantly, perhaps, the civilian police lack manpower and equipment.
The initial plan envisaged a police force of 5,000 to replace the 7,500-strong army, which was backed by some 20,000 rural sheriffs and deputies and tens of thousands of gunmen known as "attaches."
To reach that goal, Aristide last week integrated a 1,400-member interim police force into the National Police. The move was unpopular because nearly half of the interim police force consisted of former soldiers. The soldiers had been screened for human rights abuses.
In Cap Haitien, Haiti's second largest city with 200,000 people, Police Chief Francois Louis recently complained that his 280-member department had only a dozen vehicles - nine of which were being repaired.
In the town of Marchand Dessaline, near St. Marc, a half-dozen policemen panicked during a protest last month by dozens of people and fired into the air.
What disturbed U.N. human rights monitors who visited the scene afterward were the spent shells, which came from semiautomatic rifles and not the .38-caliber revolvers issued to police. The rifles apparently were among guns seized in a U.S.- and U.N.-led disarmament campaign.
In the latest incident, a policeman on Monday shot and critically wounded a bus conductor whom he accused of overcharging by a nickel. The policeman claimed that the conductor threatened him with an iron bar, but witnesses disputed his account. Other police officers who were at the scene claimed they were too far away to see what happened.
Aristide has admitted there are problems. "From now to February, I expect the National Police force to be more qualified. Will they be ready? I hope so," he said in a recent interview with foreign journalists.
Meanwhile, half of the 900 U.N. police officers giving the Haitians on-the-job training have left Haiti. The four Canadian Mounties in St. Marc are leaving on Sunday, and 120 Honduran troops in the area will leave in January.
While U.N. peacekeepers are scheduled to pull out starting Feb. 7, dozens of U.N. police officers will stay behind in a training program that will run until 1999.
Victor Benoit, an opposition candidate in Sunday's presidential election, says the trainers have a tough task.
"The mere fact of its creation (the police force) hasn't destroyed the traditional mentality" of bullying by the people who have the guns, he said.
 Load-Date: December 13, 1995

 

End of Document
