

Has the Shining Path Leader Really Changed?
The Associated Press
November 7, 1993, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 944 words
Byline: By MONTE HAYES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LIMA, Peru
Body




The beard is gone, the belly too, and the ranting has given way to public peace overtures by Abimael Guzman, imprisoned leader of the deadly Shining Path guerrillas.
It is a remarkable transformation, if true. That last part is what bothers Peruvians.
Guzman, serving a life sentence, appears in two videotapes released by the government in October, reading letters that call for peace talks.
In both, the 58-year-old former university professor is clean-shaven, slim and subdued, in contrast to images broadcast after his capture in September 1992 during a police raid on a house in suburban Lima.
After his arrest - bearded, fat and dressed in prison stripes - Guzman paced his cell raging at the government and President Alberto Fujimori, whom he had described in propaganda as a "reptilian traitor" and "genocidal rat."
He said his imprisonment was "only a bend in a long road" and vowed it would not halt his Maoist revolution, which has resulted in nearly 30,000 deaths in 13 years.
Now, he respectfully calls Fujimori "Mr. President." Dressed in military-looking khaki on one tape and a sports jacket on the other, he said his capture and those of other high-ranking Shining Path figures raised "fundamental questions of leadership" in the group.
His organization, Guzman said, faced a "historic decision."
"Just as yesterday we struggled to initiate the people's war, today with equal firmness and resolution we must struggle for a peace accord," he declared. "Peace has become an unavoidable necessity for the Peruvian people."
Fujimori has rejected negotiations, saying Guzman must order his followers to lay down their weapons. He also has said Guzman's life sentence will not be reduced.
Despite his dramatic change of tone, Guzman neither recanted his beliefs nor suggested a cease-fire, and the Shining Path Path has continued its attacks.
After the tapes were released, guerrillas killed 15 members of an army-backed peasant militia in the Ayacucho region and exploded a car bomb outside a five-star hotel in Lima, killing three people and wounding 49. Another car bomb at the international airport killed one person and wounded a dozen.
Guzman's appeals for peace were far out of character.
"I was flabbergasted, given what we know about Guzman and his history of total rejection of any kind of negotiated settlement," David Scott Palmer said in a telephone interview.
Palmer, a professor at Boston University, is an expert on Peru who was a faculty colleague of Guzman in the 1960s in Ayacucho, the Andean city where the Maoist movement was born.
He said Guzman may be playing for time, to allow his followers to regroup after the capture of so many of their leaders in recent months.
Some experts who knew Guzman years ago believe the dogmatic rebel leader could not take the rigors of solitary confinement in a tiny concrete cell on a navy base in Callao, the Lima port. They note that he was not even allowed reading material, which would be mental torture to an intellectual.
Guzman was more ideological guru than guerrilla commander. He directed the Shining Path from hideouts in Lima's wealthy neighborhoods, leaving others to do the fighting in the frigid Andean heights and steamy jungles.
"When they captured him, he was fat and greasy - soft, lazy, living a life of fine wine and excellent cuisine," said Carlos Tapia, a fellow professor in the 1970s. "They didn't have to torture him, just put him on a diet."
It appears that the contents of the letters Guzman reads on the tapes were negotiated through Vladimiro Montesinos, a shadowy intelligence official who is one of Fujimori's closest advisers. Fujimori has acknowledged using an intermediary, jokingly referring to him as his "emissary" and "Agent 002."
Intelligence sources told local news magazines that Montesinos met with Guzman at least 20 times and that Fujimori had two six-hour sessions with the guerrilla chief at Guzman's request.
According to the sources, Guzman won some concessions, including weekend conjugal visits with Elena Iparraguirre, his lover and second-in-command. She was captured with him and is held in a separate cell at the navy base.
Iparraguirre also signed the letters and appears in the videos - in one, wearing a look of disgust as Guzman signs the letter. Fujimori said she put up more resistance than Guzman, but warmed up after the president sent her a cake on her birthday.
Fujimori hoped even a slim prospect of peace would help him to a strong victory in the Oct. 31 referendum on a new constitution that allows him to run for a consecutive five-year term. But it was approved by only a narrow margin.
In April 1992, Fujimori disbanded Congress and suspended the 1979 constitution, assuming dictatorial powers with army support.
Gustavo Gorriti, author of an exhaustive study of the guerrillas, said Guzman's offer of peace talks "will cause a true earthquake within the Shining Path because it is going to force them to reconsider his leadership."
Statements to a Peruvian magazine by Shining Path members, who were not identified, indicate a split in the movement.
Some said they accepted the decision to seek peace, but a member of the "metropolitan committee" called the televised messages a "dirty trick mounted by the government to discredit Presidente Gonzalo," as Guzman is known to his followers.
"The people's war will continue," the guerrilla leader said.
There are signs that some members feel the Shining Path no longer needs Guzman.
In the Puno region, high in the Andes on the Bolivian border, wall writings have appeared that say "Long Live Presidente Feliciano!"
Feliciano is the code name of Guzman's third-in-command, Oscar Ramirez Durand. He is still free.
 Load-Date: November 7, 1993

 

End of Document
