

Hashish, the Rif's No. 1 Product, Difficult to Weed Out
The Associated Press
October 9, 1991, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 771 words
Byline: By SUSAN LINNEE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KETAMA, Morocco
Body




As the mist rises from the Mediterranean far below, a four-wheel-drive vehicle nudges the outsider's car from behind, hoping to persuade the driver to stop on the narrow road that snakes through the Rif Mountains.
Men and boys jump out from the roadside, hissing and rubbing thumbs and forefingers together in the classic sales pitch for hashish. It's the economic mainstay of the Rif, a tough and desolate region of northern Morocco that, for a brief period in the 1920s, was an independent republic.
There are no reliable figures on how much money hashish produces in the Rif. But everyone from the locals to senior government officials in faraway Rabat knows that without money from sales of the drug, the Rif's only cash crop, the economically depressed area would be even worse off.
Now, however, the government, facing pressure from other nations, is slowly beginning to crack down, and a U.N. agency is trying to encourage marijuana farmers to grow other crops.
Hashish is derived from the resin secreted by the flowering tops of female marijuana plants.
The Moroccan Rif and Lebanon's Bekaa Valley are among the few places in the world where marijuana produces resin rich enough to make hashish, a brown crumbly substance that, when fresh, looks like compressed gingerbread. It takes its name from Hassan e Sabbah, the 11th century Persian founder of the Assassins, a sect of paid killers.
Marijuana is grown on up to 74,000 acres in the Rif, according to some estimates. Farmers make about $ 2,000 for every 2 acres of cut plants.
Farmers sell the plants to family based gangs that process the marijuana to extract the resin. A kilogram, or 2.2 pounds, of good quality hashish goes for $ 890 to $ 1,000 in Ketama.
"Put it this way," said Ali Mizab, assistant manager of Ketama's Hotel Tidighine, where dealers rub elbows at the bar each night with local law enforcement officials. "Fez has embroidery, Marrakech has leather, Safi has pottery. Hashish is the Rif's contribution to the nation's artisanal industry."
Most of Morocco's hashish is sold in Europe, where many nations have decriminalized the so-called "soft-drug." But now the nations fear this liberal policy has led to a climate of laxity toward growing cocaine and heroin use.
According to diplomats, drug enforcement agents and the Moroccans themselves, there is increasing evidence of cocaine in Morocco and concern that the hashish-smuggling networks could be used to move the Latin American drug into Europe.
A program run by the Vienna-based U.N. Drug Control Program and the Moroccan Western Rif Development Office is trying to persuade farmers to replace their marijuana crops with fruit trees and livestock.
U.N. official Bill O'Hara says the 2-year-old project in the town of Issagen appears to be working.
"The local people are finally coming to understand the need to get away from hashish," he said. "The head man, who had an interest in the business himself, showed me that he's now got strawberries in a patch where he used to grow cannabis."
The program is the U.N. agency's first attempt at trying to stop the cultivation of hashish. It runs similar projects to stop coca farming and cocaine production in Latin America and opium poppy cultivation in Southeast Asia.
Rifians are descendants of the Berber warriors who fought the Spanish and French under Abd El Krim and the Rif Republic in the 1920s.
They have smoked marijuana, or "kif," for centuries. It plays a central role in their musical culture and religion, which combines elements of mysticism with Islam. In the late 1960s, Western musicians like the Rolling Stones journeyed to the village of Jujuka to hear the kif-inspired music.
Although the law prohibits the production, sale and consumption of hashish throughout the country, it is commonly understood that the region around Ketama is exempt.
Until recently, official Morocco appeared to believe that hashish was a problem for consumer nations, not a Moroccan concern. But this view is changing.
In 1988, the United States, which is not an important hashish market, made all aid to developing countries that are also drug producers conditional on their efforts to fight drug production and smuggling.
Morocco receives $ 150 million a year in U.S. economic and military aid, and it recently established agreements with Britain, Germany and Spain to fight drug trafficking.
Morocco also has begun reporting its own drug arrests. According to the latest figures available, 5,000 Moroccans and 100 foreigners were arrested in 1989 in connection with hashish sales and smuggling. Officials say 1,474 acres of marijuana were destroyed the same year.
 Graphic



 
LaserGraphic Planned

 

End of Document
