

HBO's 'The Burning Season' and the Martyrdom of Chico Mendes - Correction Appended
The Associated Press

  Correction Appended
 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 622 words
Byline: By SCOTT WILLIAMS, AP Television Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The ecstasy of St. Sebastian prefigures all that follows in HBO Pictures' "The Burning Season," premiering Saturday night. It is the first of many martyrdoms to follow.
The statue of the saint, transfixed by arrows, head lolled back, eyes heavenward in the martyr's semi-voluptuous gaze, stands by the river in the village of Xapuri, a few thousand miles from anywhere else in Brazil.
The image greets the canoe of the boy Chico Mendes, paddling into town with his father and the raw latex they have gathered from the rain forest to sell to the exploitive local rubber boss.
Chico witnesses the horrible murder of a union organizer, a nameless martyr.
So the boy grows to manhood. Mendes (exquisitely played by Raul Julia) works as an organizer for the Rural Workers Union, rubber tappers trying to preserve their jobs against the encroachment of developers.
He joins union leader Wilson Pinhiero (Edward James Olmos) and academic Regina De Carvalho (Sonia Braga), who lead non-violent protests against the slash-and-burn clear cutting of the forest.
This puts them in dangerous conflict with cattle ranchers who want to clear the land for grazing and push a highway to Peru through the Amazon.
The death of Chico Mendes, when it comes, is as inevitable as the fate pf martyrs.
What saves "The Burning Season" from hagiography are the performances by Julia and his supporting cast, a tight, unsentimental script, and director John Frankenheimer's subtle mastery of the little screen.
Julia has played in this arena before. He won his best actor Oscar in the role of a political prisoner in "Kiss of the Spider Woman," and portrayed Oscar Arnulfo Romero, the Nicaraguan archbishop assassinated in 1980, in "Romero."
When a bloody setback forces Mendes to flee, his bus is stopped at a roadblock. We see his face in closeup while, coming from the opposite direction, an invading army of heavy construction equipment rolls by.
Mendes goes back. Later, when he travels to Miami to lobby the World Bank against development loans to Brazil, he's stunned to find himself a media hero and learns he's been given an award by the United Nations for his work.
"For the union?" Mendes asks.
"For saving the rain forest!"
Pounded by the maddening irony of that moment, Mendes is almost in tears as he tries to explain his cause: "We want jobs! We WANT development! … But we want it to happen in a way that doesn't keep us poor!"
Julia creates a man who is determined to obtain economic justice for his people, but who is tortured, literally and figuratively, by the human cost it exacts.
The supporting cast is superb. Olmos, as the union leader, does his usual great job, subdued yet somehow larger than life. Carmen Argenziano dodges stereotypes and brings humanity to his role as a greedy land baron.
Pay special attention to Thomas Milian, as the brutal killer Darli Alves. He is a jowly, unkempt, trashy, corrupt excuse for a human being who is supremely angry and alive.
Julia, though, had the toughest job. He managed to create a Mendes who's no saint and who would despair of what has become of his work.
Or would he? Death waits for us all, out of sight over the horizon. It is people like Mendes, who see it coming all the way yet carry on in defiance of it, who can be said to ennoble the name of humanity.
---
Elsewhere in television …
GOLDMAN FAMILY ON '20-20': In their first interview as a family, the father, stepmother and siblings of Ron Goldman - who died June 12 with Nicole Brown Simpson - talk to Barbara Walters on tonight's edition of "20-20." In the ABC interview, taped Aug. 24 at the Goldman home in California, the family talked about the man they knew: his life, his family relations, his plans for the future, and how his death affected them.
Correction




The Associated Press reported erroneously on Sept. 16 that Raul Julia won an Academy Award for best actor for 1985's "Kiss of the Spider Woman." The Oscar was won by his co-star, William Hurt. Correction-Date: October 19, 1994
 Load-Date: September 16, 1994

 

End of Document
