

High School Students The New Protest Leaders in Venezuela
The Associated Press
November 23, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 652 words
Byline: By JOHN R. ENGEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARACAS, Venezuela
Body




Angered by higher prices and poverty, high school and junior high students have begun taking to the streets in a wave of unrest many officials fear is leading to social breakdown.
In the past three weeks, four students and two police officers were killed after nationwide protests over government-mandated price increases in gasoline and public transportation turned violent.
Schools were shut down throughout Venezuela on Thursday and Friday to avert more confrontations in this nation of 19 million.
Venezuela, like other world oil producers, has been squeezed by falling crude prices caused by an oil glut as it tries to make payments on a $ 31 billion foreign debt and maintain social programs.
The 2-year-old government of President Carlos Andres Perez is increasing gas prices and transit fares as part of an austerity program to reduce subsidies and shift to more free-market policies.
The government plans to raise gasoline prices from 28 cents a gallon to 40 by the end of 1992 - hardly an exorbitant price by world standards.
But the move is especially painful in a country where the largest trade union estimates 80 percent of the population lives in poverty. Even the government admits 43 percent of Venezuelans eat no more than one meal a day and average income is $ 100 a month.
"We want to put pressure on the government to lower the prices; to make life better for the people. And we can do it," said Alberto Lopez, a 17-year-old student from the Caricuao district of Caracas.
"My family does not have much money," added Maria Marcano, 16. "When the government raises the prices, it hurts. We want them to stop."
The lifting of price controls puts a severe squeeze on the poor - and the poor make up a huge bloc in Venezuela.
Venezuela's inequities have long been protested by university students, "but this is the first time that high school students have really protested," said Glenn Marron, an American psychologist who lives in Caracas.
"I think it's a sign that they're more desperate; that they have more worries about the future," she added.
The moves toward making the economy more efficient have brought Venezuela plaudits from abroad and seem to sit well with the country's elite. The gross national product is growing at a healthy 8 percent annually and inflation, although still 30 percent annually, is far down from its worst level.
Those benefits haven't trickled down to the poor, however.
"The dominant political and economic groups are getting what they want (from the changes), while 95 percent of the population is dominated," said Marcos Rivera, a 19-year-old student from Caricuao.
"They're using their policies as a vehicles of oppression on the people," he added.
In the past week, some political and business leaders, including former President Rafael Caldera, have said that the protests have brought the country to the edge of "anarchy."
Business and political leaders on Friday demanded emergency meetings to deal with the wave of strikes, riots and violent crime connected with the economy.
The students' zeal for protest was increased by the death of 17-year-old Jimmy Hernandez Calderon, who was hit by a bus during a demonstration Nov. 14. The day after, thousands of students filled the streets of central Caracas chanting and singing songs of protest and grief.
At this point, the students' anger is deeper than their sense of how to resolve Venezuela's agony.
"The future of Venezuela looks terrible," Rivera said. "I think we're nearing a civil insurrection … but I don't know exactly what we should do about it."
To communicate this jumbled message, students take to the streets in unorganized, chaotic masses, hoping their numbers will register on the country's elite and the policy-makers.
There's evidence that such actions might work. Two weeks ago, the government set a precedent by granting pay increases to union members who threatened to strike against the gas price increase.

 

End of Document
