

Hitler Murdered? Yet Another Theory on The Dictator's Demise
The Associated Press
April 8, 1995, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 792 words
Byline: By ARTHUR ALLEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BONN, Germany
Body




Theories about Hitler's death and what became of his remains are a bit like UFO sightings: they pop up from time to time and are hard to disprove in the absence of solid bone.
In his will, Hitler ordered every trace of his existence destroyed when he died. This last wish was almost granted, though not as Hitler imagined.
The Red Army inherited Hitler's mortal remains after capturing the bunker where he died on April 30, 1945. Because of Soviet bungling and scheming, it has taken decades to learn what became of what was left of him.
"The tomb of Napoleon is in the middle of Paris; the remains of Stalin are in the Kremlin Wall," British historian Norman Stone wrote in the Evening Standard on Thursday. "But what ever happened to Hitler? For decades this has been a great mystery."
Before and since communism's fall, Russian intelligence officials have conducted a brisk trade in the Hitler file. The selective release of artifacts stashed in various Soviet ministries and archives has resulted in a series of press canards, and laid fertile ground for hoaxes.
In 1983, Stern magazine published what it believed were Hitler's diaries, recovered from a long-abandoned plane wreck. They turned out to have been written by a neo-Nazi hired by a Stern reporter.
Two years ago, to much fanfare, Russian authorities said they had found pieces of Hitler's skull in a Moscow archive. But Werner Maser, a well-known Hitler biographer, says they were fakes.
Now - in time for the 50th anniversary of Hitler's death - a British surgeon has challenged the widely accepted version that Hitler committed suicide. He also says Hitler's wife, Eva Braun, did not die by his side.
In "Doppelgangers: The Truth About the Bodies in the Berlin Bunker," Dr. Hugh Thomas says newly opened Russian files show that an SS guard murdered Hitler and burned his body with that of a woman who was not Braun.
Maser says Thomas' version fits the pattern of misinformation about Hitler's death. More than 200,000 books have been written about Hitler and his era. One version has it that he fled to Ireland and then to Argentina.
"The Russians have made a huge business of coming up with new evidence on Hitler," said Maser. The bones and forensic records examined by Thomas were "the seventh Hitler body the Russians have offered to scholars," he said.
Thomas, a former British Army doctor, previously has written books claiming Hitler aide Rudolf Hess was murdered in 1941 while flying to Scotland with a proposal to end the war. He claimed the Hess who died in 1987 at Berlin's Spandau prison was an imposter.
"Outrageous bunk," said Maser.
In the new book, to be published April 24 in Britain by 4th Estate Ltd., Thomas writes that Hitler was strangled by Heinz Linge, his SS valet.
The SS men living in Hitler's bunker were eager for Hitler to die so they could get out and flee the approaching Soviet troops, Thomas said.
The widely accepted account, based on witnesses, is that Hitler shot himself while chewing a cyanide capsule on April 30, 10 days after his 56th birthday, and that Braun, whom Hitler had married two nights earlier, poisoned herself.
That version is confirmed by Dr. Ernst G. Schenk, 90, who was a German army doctor stationed near Hitler's bunker. Schenk said Walter Hewel, a senior Hitler aide, told him about the suicide a few hours after it happened.
"Then Hewel killed himself. He did it in my presence, the same way he described Hitler's death - biting a cyanide capsule and shooting himself in the head," Schenck said in a telephone interview from his Aachen home.
Guards partially incinerated the Hitler and Braun bodies and dumped them in a shell hole with 14 other corpses. The shallow "grave" was repeatedly struck by Red Army shells. Then the Soviets dug up the remains, and it was several decades before anyone learned what became of them.
Witnesses who had seen Hitler's body parts were kept in Soviet prison camps for 10 years, British historian Stone said.
Stalin at first suspected his men's account of Hitler's death and later sought to create a Cold War myth that Hitler was living under British or American protection.
Soviet troops in 1946 reburied the remains - mixed with those of the six children of Josef Goebbels, Hitler's propaganda chief - in Magdeburg, East Germany. Goebbels and his wife, Magda, killed their children before committing suicide.
Germany's Der Spiegel magazine, quoting KGB files, reported last week that KGB chief Yuri Andropov ordered the bones dug up and burned in 1970.
Stone and other scholars say the Spiegel documents appear to be genuine. Andropov wanted Hitler's bones destroyed because the burial spot was about to be made into a parking lot, and the Soviets didn't want Hitler's ghost to dwell there for neo-Nazi pilgrimages.
 Load-Date: April 8, 1995

 

End of Document
