

Hurricane Season: 'Let's Face It, This Time The Atlantic Won'
 The Associated Press
November 27, 1995, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 718 words
Byline: By WILL LESTER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MIAMI
Body




One day during the memorable Atlantic hurricane season of 1995, an exasperated forecaster sighed to his colleagues at the National Hurricane Center: "Let's face it, this time the Atlantic won."
The June-through-November season was the busiest in more than 60 years: 11 hurricanes, eight tropical storms, 121 killed, $ 7.7 billion in damages - 36 killed and $ 5 billion in damages in the United States.
"It was all a bit overwhelming," said Bob Burpee, the new director of the hurricane center, who took the job in July. "We had to learn a lot of things very quickly."
When Burpee started, Hurricane Allison had already swept ashore on the Florida Panhandle. The earliest hurricane to hit Florida did light damage and foreshadowed more serious problems.
By the end of July, a virtual hurricane assembly line started in the tropical region west of Africa known as "hurricane alley."
The onslaught of storms, unmatched since 21 formed in 1933, battered the islands of the eastern Caribbean, assaulted both Florida coasts, and battered the Yucatan peninsula and Guatemala. Hurricane Felix meandered off the mid-Atlantic coast, drowning August vacationers in savage riptides.
In one frantic period in late August, forecasters tracked three Atlantic hurricanes at one time, while watching more storms brewing daily. During a 50-day period, the center was tracking a named storm every day.
"I can't believe it," veteran forecaster Max Mayfield groused at the time. "I keep looking for the on-off switch and I can't find it."
Hurricanes Marilyn and Luis did the most damage to the islands this year. St. Thomas, St. John, St. Maarten and Dominica are still struggling to recover.
Cruise ships are starting to return to resort areas, although many island residents are still homeless, unemployed or both. About 200 yachts still rest on the bottom of the bay at St. Maarten and some major hotels there and on St. Thomas won't reopen for the winter tourist season, the pillar of local economies.
Dominica, now getting millions of dollars in foreign aid, was savaged by both hurricanes, losing 90 percent of its crucial banana plantations to Luis. Two weeks later, Marilyn finished off what was left.
On the U.S. mainland, Florida was hardest hit, and its big troubles started with Hurricane Erin, which swept ashore below Cape Canaveral, caused widespread destruction across central Florida and exited into the Gulf of Mexico as a tropical storm.
Hurricane warnings were posted from the Florida Panhandle counties to the mouth of the Mississippi as Erin moved west toward New Orleans. Then Erin jogged north as authorities scrambled to notify stubborn residents of the barrier islands.
Erin blew ashore again in the morning hours of Aug. 3, toppling structures, tearing off roofs and dousing power for hundreds of thousands. Residents had learned a lesson about tardy evacuation.
When Opal formed in the Gulf of Mexico by late September, it was the Florida Panhandle's turn for evacuation problems.
As Opal's winds swirled to 150 mph in the Gulf of Mexico and the air pressure dropped, forecasters warned Opal could be the most devastating storm to ever hit the United States and residents fled by the thousands.
By dawn, highways heading north were in gridlock.
"The evacuation was pretty sorry," said Penascola Beach resident Larry Matthews, who lost his roof to Erin and his entire home to Opal. "We left about 7 in the morning and it took us nine hours to get to Tallahassee (normally a three-hour-drive). A lot of people ran out of gas, gas stations were closed. It was a comedy of errors."
When Opal finally hit the Panhandle by late afternoon on Oct. 4, it had mercifully lost some punch, but still roared ashore with gusting winds up to 144 mph and a storm surge of up to 14 feet.
Homes, condos, hotels and the sugary beaches all along the Panhandle's barrier islands took a severe beating, with total damage estimates up to $ 3 billion. Opal became the third costliest storm to hit the United States, after Andrew and Hugo.
While the evacuation caused problems, Burpee pointed to the results. "We did get the word to them and there was no loss of life from the storm surge."
The Panhandle has been rebuilding steadily since Opal, although it could take a year or more to restore beaches and bring back devastated beachfront communities.
 Load-Date: November 27, 1995

 

End of Document
