

In Bolivia, A Peaceful Revolution To Help the Poor
 The Associated Press
December 26, 1995, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 823 words
Byline: By PETER McFARREN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: COLLANA, Bolivia
Body




Bolivia's government wants a revolution.
A peaceful one, to be sure, but it is pursuing a radical spending overhaul it hopes will produce some of the deepest social and economic changes in Latin America.
A year ago, President Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada began a program to distribute some government money directly to previously ignored Indian communities and poor city dwellers.
Residents of this Aymara Indian town just put the finishing touches on a community and handicraft center built with money provided under the president's Popular Participation Program.
"Popular Participation is a very good thing for us because we receive help that was never available before," said Ramulo Paivo Escobar, leader of this community nearly 13,000 feet up in the Bolivian highlands. "This can help us improve our lives. There are so many things we need."
Before, funds were given to regional agencies that were meant to oversee economic development, but most of the programs were mismanaged and a lot of the money went to pay for big bureaucracies. Aid money also was concentrated in the biggest cities and rarely reached rural areas.
Now, the national government distributes 20 percent of its budget to newly established municipalities, with allocations based solely on population. An oversight committee is elected by each community to make sure the money is used properly by their leaders.
"We did something very simple and very democratic: We distributed the income according to the population," said Sanchez de Lozada, who was a mining executive before entering politics.
"The concept that's hit people is that every Bolivian is worth as much as any other Bolivian," he added.
The promise of the aid program was a key plank, along with education reform and a universal pension system, in Sanchez de Lozada's winning campaign for the presidency in 1993.
The money is allowing rural communities to build schools, clinics and roads and to finance environmental, education and sports activities.
Collana, population 2,100, and surrounding farm areas received the equivalent of $ 45,000 this year, compared to zero in 1993. Achacachi, an Aymara town to the north, with a population of 45,000, received $ 1.4 million.
That goes a long way in a country with per-capita income of $ 934 a year, one of the lowest in Latin America, and the money is pumping new life into poor urban neighborhoods and rural communities.
Communities throughout the country proudly show off buildings, roads and other projects they have built under the program and are busily planning new ones. In Collana, for instance, residents will build a school in 1996 so their children do not have to walk to a neighboring village.
The communities provide labor and some building materials, such as sand and stone, and they manage the projects. That has lowered construction costs significantly, Sanchez de Lozada says.
Communities also are responsible for maintaining what is built and are no longer dependent on a centralized bureaucracy to look after schools, hospitals and other facilities.
The government hopes that by earmarking money to rural municipalities, services will improve and fewer people will be tempted to migrate to urban centers.
"In other countries, revolutions had to be fought for such a distribution of wealth to take place," Sanchez de Lozada said.
To help implement the social program he chose as his Vice President Victor Hugo Cardenas, an Aymara Indian intellectual and educator who was raised in an adobe hut on the shores of Lake Titicaca.
Sanchez de Lozada noted that in Bolivia "the upper 20 percent has an income about 30 times higher than the lower 20 percent. What this means is that there are some very, very poor people in Bolivia."
"So we decided that if you have five loaves of bread and 10 mouths, the least you can do is make sure you give half a loaf to every mouth," he said. "Not three loaves to one and two to the next, and then you have eight without anything."
The president also is pushing improvements for Bolivia's schools.
And he is restructuring six major state industries to finance a universal pension fund system. The result will be that residents of Collana and all other Bolivians will have retirement benefits, something that never existed before for the rural and urban poor.
The pension and education reforms have drawn opposition from urban unions and students groups, but the Popular Participation Program has received overwhelming support. Only a few politicians in cities that are getting less money have criticized the program.
Ronnie MacLean, a leader of the opposition Nationalist Democratic Action Party, said his only reservation about the program is that the president could use it for political advantage. Otherwise, he has nothing but praise.
"Popular Participation is a way to involve grass-root communities, and for them to make their own decisions," he said. "It is revolutionary. It is putting into practice the idea of empowerment."
 Load-Date: December 26, 1995

 

End of Document
