

In Nicaragua, Life Goes on Whatever the Politics
The Associated Press
August 29, 1993, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 564 words
Byline: By ANITA SNOW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MANAGUA, Nicaragua
Body




When the rebels who held hostages nearby began shooting, Julia Rodriguez and her three children cowered under their rusty, cardboard-covered bed, shivering with fear.
"We didn't sleep all night long," she told a reporter who found her in the gutted building where squatters have lived since it was heavily damaged in the earthquake of 1972.
Aside from the shooting that night last week, which began when photographers got too close to the stronghold of the pro-Sandinista rebels, Nicaragua's dual hostage crisis made little impression on the capital's poorest residents.
Political crises and violence have been a part of their lives for years. With unemployment at about 60 percent and poverty everywhere, most Nicaraguans are more interested in feeding their children than in politics.
Generally, they went about business as usual during the eventful week, oblivious to what was going on. The hostage standoff ended Thursday when the last captives were freed by the pro-Sandinistas in Managua and former Contra rebels near the northern city of Quilali.
"None of that affects us," said Rodriguez, 45. "We're too busy just trying to survive."
She and the children have squatted in the five-story former office building since 1988, when her husband and eldest son, both Contras, were killed by Sandinista soldiers in the north.
Vidal Bonilla, who works a few blocks away at a taxi cooperative, said he was not surprised that few of the poor took note of the crisis.
"The people here are dying of hunger," Bonilla said. "They don't have time to think about these things. And now, with this, things are going to get worse."
He predicted foreign investors would leave Nicargua "and we will be left with even more hunger."
The concrete ruin, which has no plumbing or electricity, sits in a grassy patch about 400 yards from President Violeta Chamorro's offices. Barefoot toddlers, chickens and stray dogs wander among the broken walls.
None of the 30 or so residents seemed clear about what had happened that week.
Rodriguez wanted to know whether Antonio Lacayo, the president's chief of staff, had been released. She was surprised to learn he had not been among the hostages.
Lilia Socorro Guerrero, 23, had been too absorbed in domestic problems to even hear of the hostage drama. Her husband's new, jealous girlfriend had attacked her, leaving large purple bruises on her arms and back and deep, long scratches that were beginning to scab on her face.
Guerrero also had been worried about the little white bumps starting to pop up on the face and neck of her 9-month-old daughter, Marta.
Rodriguez blamed the skin problem on a lack of calcium. She said Marta, a listless child dressed only in a filthy white T-shirt, had not had milk in months and was getting only sugar water in a bottle.
Other children in the building have assorted ailments that go untreated because their parents cannot afford medical care.
In a first-floor room partitioned by hangings of rags and muddy burlap, Rodriguez's 19-month-old grandson, Luis, wailed in a filthy burlap hammock.
His mother, Rodriguez's daughter-in-law Rosario Landera, said she believed Luis had severe anemia and a serious ear infection. A thin liquid oozed from his right ear.
Landera, 28, said the last two of her four children were born in the ruined building, without a doctor or midwife, and that the one she is carrying probably will be born there too.

 

End of Document
