

In the Groove: Audio Reviews
The Associated Press
April 4, 1994, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 628 words
Body




"Vauxhall and I" (Sire) - Morrissey
 
 Morrissey's inconsistent solo career continues apace with "Vauxhall and I."
On 1992's "Your Arsenal," it seemed the ex-Smiths singer had again found a band to challenge him. Due largely to the work of the late Mick Ronson as producer, the music crackled behind Morrissey's monotone.
On the new album, producer Steve Lillywhite inexplicably mutes this talented band. The music lacks urgency and creativity, and occasionally sounds as if a wet blanket has been tossed over the speakers. And without a strong musical personality to match him, Morrissey can quickly become tiresome.
The song "Speedway" is a particularly painful missed opportunity. Morrissey may be at his most self-pitying - "You won't rest until the hearse that becomes me finally takes me" - but it's an extraordinary piece of writing that builds to a real climax. You hardly know it from the music.
The self-involved singer is strongest on the single "The More You Ignore Me, the Closer I Get." It's vintage Morrissey wedded to a solid melody: "When you sleep, I will creep into your thoughts like a bad debt."
"Now My Heart Is Full" stands as one of Morrissey's best singing performances. He coaxes sincere beauty out of a voice that's too often simply melodramatic.
Too bad much of this album is an ordeal. "Lifeguard Sleeping, Girl Drowning" is excruciating, and a few of the more subdued tunes in this album's second half are real drowsers. He's capable of much more.
- By David Bauder, Associated Press Writer.
---
"Voices of Forgotten Worlds" (Ellipsis Arts) - Various
 
 Australian Aboriginals play a love song on a hollowed-out a eucalyptus branch. Kanak clanspeople inaugurate a church in New Caledonia. The descendants of the Incas blow on panpipes and flutes in the Bolivian Andes.
These are a few of the images recorded on "Voices of Forgotten Worlds," a two-CD collection of traditional music from 28 indigenous groups from around the world.
The set, which helps mark the United Nations' Year of the World's Indigenous People, follows two world music packages by Ellipsis Arts: "Global Meditations" and "Global Celebrations."
"Voices," however, is more focused, targeting music least likely to have reached Western ears and most in danger of vanishing as the cultures that produced it fade.
The set opens with Tuvan throat-singers of Central Asia, who have trained their vocal cords to produce up to four distinct tones at the same time. Over the course of the next 90 minutes, we are introduced to indigenous music from such diverse places as Belize, Finland, Scotland, Afghanistan, Brazil, Eritrea.
Some of the tracks border on the academic: an unaccompanied woman singing in Ainu, the indigenous language of Japan, and an Inuit man from Greenland beating a simple drum with a stick.
To help listeners baffled by such music, the set comes with a 96-page book filled with color photographs, explanations of the selections and informative notes on the cultures represented.
Armed with this material, listeners can decipher the consolation song of the Bunin of Taiwan and the corn ceremony music of the Kayapo people of Brazil.
The collection also includes a long list of exotic instruments. The Aboriginal didgeridoo is made from a eucalyptus tree limb hollowed out by termites; the Pashtun of Afghanistan play a robab, a short-necked lute made of mulberry wood; the Bunin punctuate their singing by shaking rattles made from the bones of wild boars.
Despite the diversity, many of the tracks echo each other and non-indigenous music. The droning voices of changing Tibetan monks, for example, recall the drone of the didgeridoo; and the damnyan of the Ladakhis of Jammu-Kashmir state in India is remarkably similar to the banjo.
- By Joseph Coleman, Associated Press Writer.
 Load-Date: April 4, 1994

 

End of Document
