

In The Combat Zone, Fighters Are Skeptical of Peace Predictions
The Associated Press
October 14, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 574 words
Byline: By DOUGLAS GRANT MINE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: EL ROSARIO, El Salvador
Body




Negotiators may herald breakthroughs in peace talks in New York or Mexico City, but the war looks different over the sights of an assault rifle in these contested hills northeast of the capital.
For the past 18 months, leaders of the rightist government and the leftist guerrilla army have met throughout the hemisphere under U.N. auspices, trying to end 12 years of fratricidal conflict.
In a watershed round of peace talks last month at the United Nations in New York, both sides predicted that peace was at hand.
But in the combat zone, officers and troops on both sides are skeptical of their enemy's claims of good faith.
The killing has escalated even as the latest round of peace talks got under way in Mexico on Saturday. In recent days, dozens of combatants have died in northern and eastern provinces and just north of San Salvador.
In conversations with guerrillas in El Rosario and with government forces dug in six miles away, combatants express for the other side only contempt and distrust.
They say they are willing to go on fighting for many more months or years.
"The accords are signatures on pieces of paper. Until they are implemented, no way will we hand over our guns," said Rudy Amaya, commander of a guerrilla unit in this small town 65 miles from San Salvador.
El Rosario sits in the heart of mountainous Morazan province, which has seen some of the war's heaviest and most sustained fighting.
Of prospects for peace, Amaya said: "It's our greatest desire that the space for peace grow wider. But there is still space for war."
He accused the government of trying to draw out negotiations in the belief that its forces can defeat the rebels in the short term.
He also emphasized doubts about the military's willingness to give up much of its power and privilege - as stipulated in the accords reached last month.
According to those agreements, the traditionally repressive armed forces will be purged of abusive officers and drastically reduced. In addition, the current militarized police force, under the command of the Defense Ministry, will be replaced by a civilian-controlled corps including former guerrillas.
"They (the rebels) don't really want the war to end. They want a truce in order to reorganize and resupply," said Lt. Col. Juan Mendez, commander of the elite Belloso Infantry Battalion.
His unit is occupying the town of Perquin, six miles north of El Rosario.
Mendez said guerrilla attacks have been limited to harassment of sentry positions.
"They fire a few shots and take off," said the commander.
Even so, two Belloso soldiers were killed by guerrillas last week while on patrol a mile west of town.
Mendez, in an interview outside his command post on the shell-scarred grassy plaza, said he hopes negotiations end the war soon.
"But in any case, we're winning. The enemy is weak. With the fall of communism, they have lost their external sources of support. If we are assured of (U.S.) military aid for another year, we will win," he said.
The United States has given the rightist armed forces more than $ 1 billion since 1980. That has paid for a four-fold increase in their size - to 56,000 members - and their equipment with sophisticated weapons, including warplanes and helicopters.
Despite the massive aid, the military has been unable to defeat a guerrilla force estimated at about 7,000 combatants.
Most independent military analysts describe the war, which has killed an estimated 75,000 people, as a stalemate.

 

End of Document
