

Indian Women Find Equal Opportunity in the Ranks of Mexico Rebellion
The Associated Press
January 20, 1994, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 618 words
Byline: By TRINA KLEIST, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LACANDON FOREST, Mexico
Body




You might call her the guerrilla next door.
Lucia was 10 when she joined the ranks of rebels, then grew into a woman while waiting for the uprising. She's 18 now, armed with a rifle and the rank of lieutenant in the Zapatista National Liberation Army.
Lt. Lucia now totes her weapon across the jungles and mountain ravines of the Lacandon Forest, east of the town of Ocosingo.
She's one of an estimated 200 women in the 2,000-strong Zapatistas, who declared war on Mexico's government and the poverty of its people on Jan. 1.
Most women in the Mayan highlands of Chiapas state live traditional lives in the shadow of their husbands and in the hard service of large families.
But the young women of this rebel army say they have no interest in boyfriends or babies, only in their struggle to defeat what they say is an oppressive government.
"My family explained to me that we had nothing, there was no money, nothing," Lucia said, speaking softly through a blue ski mask that partially hid her broad Indian features and shoulder-length black hair.
"My parents had known of the (Zapata) organization. They explained why it was here and that they were disposed that I should fight for the people," Lucia said.
She slipped on the leaf-covered slope, then regained her balance and shifted self-consciously in her brown long-sleeve shirt, black fatigues and worn army boots.
Lt. Rigoberta, also 18, begged her parents to let her join up six years ago when recruiters passed through her village. Her mother cried when Rigoberta left, but she said her parents and 11 brothers and sisters believe in the cause.
Rigoberta, Lucia and two other women were part of a 35-member unit that met with reporters on a hillside in the heartland of guerrilla territory. All of them declined to give their last names.
Unlike most of their village counterparts, these young women work side-by-side with men.
"We have nothing, just like the women. Misery unites us," said 19-year-old Capt. Victor, who denied any resentment of his female peers.
"Men and women are treated equally. Women can hold rank," said the unit's leader, Capt. Cristobal. Traditional female tasks such as cooking and cleaning are performed by all rebel soldiers according to their turn, he added.
During the 1910 Mexican Revolution, soldiers' wives followed their warriors on campaigns and provided food and shelter. In modern Latin American guerrilla movements, women have participated in combat in such rebel groups as the Sandinistas in Nicaragua and the Shining Path in Peru.
For many of the rebel women, camping in these wooded mountains is little different from the lives they left behind.
In villages throughout this region, women wash their families' clothes in rivers and, barefoot, haul water from miles away for drinking, cooking and bathing. They cut firewood and carry it home to cook on primitive open hearths in dirt-floor kitchens.
Where there is no electricity, they grind their corn by hand. Often, they bear their children with no medical attention.
"A woman thinks about the needs of her family, but not just to eat. A woman thinks about the whole situation," Rigoberta said. "That is why we take up arms … What are we to do? How are we to stand the misery?"
Although some of the rebel women are married, none here has children.
"A revolutionary cannot have children," Rigoberta said. She never thinks about wanting a boyfriend, she said, because she is too busy fighting to end the poverty that entraps her people.
Yet beyond the ski masks and the guns and the uniforms, these women still have a bit in common with the girls from the villages.
One 15-year-old rebel had sewn strands of bright green and blue thread into her brown shirt.
"A luxury," laughed the girl.
 Load-Date: January 20, 1994

 

End of Document
