

International News Briefs By The Associated Press
The Associated Press
July 7, 1993, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 556 words
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




As Russia forges a capitalist economy, a new breed of criminals is busy forging dollars, rubles and privatization vouchers, police said.
In the first five months of this year, Russian law enforcement agencies recorded 783 cases of counterfeiting - 112 more than the previous five years combined.
The rise apparently is connected - at least in part - to the mushrooming of currency available to the average Russian. The country has legalized foreign currency trading and produced a dizzying variety of its own new banknotes.
With so many relatively unfamiliar banknotes available, it is less easy to recognize a fake one.
"International forgers look at Russia as an unsaturated sales market for counterfeit money," said the deputy head of the ministry's economic crime department, Maj. Gen. Mikhail Serdyuk.
 
 SAN SALVADOR, El Salvador (AP) - A former air force chief named in a U.N. report on the killings of six Jesuit priests in 1989 will run for president next year, the former ruling party said.
The announcement Tuesday of Ret. Air Force Gen. Juan Rafael Bustillo's candidacy marked the return of the military to Salvadoran politics a decade after the last military government gave up power.
Bustillo, who will be the candidate of the National Conciliation Party, led the air force throughout El Salvador's 12-year civil war. Critics blamed many of the 75,000 wartime deaths on indiscriminate bombing of civilian areas.
Bustillo was named in the U.N.-organized Truth Commission report as being present when the decision was made to kill the Jesuit priests.
The general denied the allegations.
 
 LONDON (AP) - A royal commission appointed to probe the failures of England's courts and constables has called for restrictions on the ancient right of trial by jury.
The proposal, intended to relieve court congestion, was one of hundreds in a report released Tuesday that set off immediate controversy. The report left the government with a difficult decision about whether to propose legislation to curb jury trials.
"Once you start tinkering with that you are tinkering with a fundamental freedom," said Richard Ferguson, chairman of the Criminal Bar Association.
The Royal Commission on Criminal Justice was appointed after several IRA bombing convictions were reversed on appeal.
Its proposals, which apply only to England and Wales, could be implemented only by legislation. Scotland and Northern Ireland have separate legal systems.
 
 MOSCOW (AP) - A Soviet war hero stripped of his rank and imprisoned in mental hospitals for campaigning for individual rights was recognized as a victim of Soviet communism on Tuesday, five years after he died in exile in New York.
President Boris Yeltsin's office reinstated Pyotr Grigorenko as a major general as part of the effort to restore the reputation of millions of people executed, imprisoned and confined to mental institutions during seven decades of Soviet rule.
Grigorenko was a division commander during World War II and a senior lecturer at Moscow's elite Frunze Military Academy who became disillusioned with communism in the early 1960s.
He denounced the regime in 1961 and was stripped of his rank and expelled from the Communist Party.
He was stripped of his Soviet citizenship in 1978 while he and his wife were visiting their son in the United States, and was not allowed to return to Russia.

 

End of Document
