

International News Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
October 22, 1992, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 601 words
Dateline: AMSTERDAM, Netherlands
Body




Dutch investigators say they believe a crack in a link between engine and wing may have caused an El Al cargo jet to crash into an Amsterdam apartment complex on Oct. 4.
In a statement, the Dutch Aviation Inspectorate said metal fatigue and corrosion may have caused the assembly that connects engine to wing to crack, in turn snapping the fuse pins.
The statement came after investigators found a broken pin mount amid the wreckage of the Boeing 747-200's two starboard engines.
The crash killed at least 70 people, most of them residents of the apartments. The jumbo jet lost both starboard engines following takeoff from Schiphol airport.
In Seattle, Boeing Commercial Airplane Group spokesman Chris Villiers declined comment on the Dutch statement.
---
TORONTO (AP) - The campaign against a constitutional reform package aimed at keeping Canada unified appears to be gaining strength.
A Gallup poll published in the Toronto Star on Wednesday indicates that 50 percent of Canadians oppose the deal, 40 percent support it and 10 percent are undecided. Gallup surveyed 1,007 adults for the poll, which had a margin of error of 3 percent.
The reform package, to be voted on Monday, would recognize Quebec as a "distinct society" and guarantee the French-speaking province a permanent, 25 percent share of seats in the House of Commons.
It also would create a more powerful Senate with more equal representation from each province, give provinces greater autonomy, and recognize aboriginal rights to self-government.
The referendum is non-binding. But since the package must be approved by the federal Parliament and the legislatures of all 10 provinces, it would be difficult for elected bodies to take action shown to be unpopular.
---
UNITED NATIONS (AP) - The United Nations and Baghdad have agreed on a plan to send $ 200 million in humanitarian aid to Iraq.
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali sent the Security Council a letter on Tuesday endorsing the aid plan, although with reservations.
The agreement, negotiated in Baghdad last week, calls for about half the food, medicine and shelter to go to Kurdish rebels in northern Iraq. Such aid is becoming critically important as winter approaches.
A U.N. source said Boutros-Ghali was concerned that the new agreement does not explicitly authorize aid workers to travel throughout Iraq and that U.N. guards would not be allowed in southern Iraq, where Saddam Hussein's troops have been fighting Shiite Muslim rebels.
The source spoke on condition of anonymity.
The United States had objected that the agreement could restrict the movement of aid workers. The U.N. source said, however, that Iraq routinely controls the movement of all foreigners and that aid workers were not being singled out.
---
BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) - Eighteen people were killed in a wave of leftist violence that included firebomb attacks on 14 buses in Bogota, government officials say.
No one was injured in the bus burnings Wednesday, but efforts to dislodge rebel roadblocks Tuesday resulted in heavy casualties.
At least 10 soldiers were killed Tuesday night when guerrillas ambushed a caravan of soldiers on the road between two major central cities some 150 miles north of Bogota.
The soldiers had been on their way to remove a guerrilla roadblock that had paralyzed traffic between Bucaramanga and Barrancabermeja all day.
Other confrontations Tuesday in towns in northeast and northwest Colombia claimed the lives of seven guerrillas and one soldier, said the defense ministry.
The rebel activity is apparently in response an army offensive last week that left at least 36 guerrillas dead.

 

End of Document
