

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
January 19, 1993, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 569 words
Dateline: KIEV, Ukraine
Body




Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk says he wanted more assurances of economic and political independence before signing a charter of the struggling Commonwealth of Independent States, which holds a summit on Friday.
Kravchuk said Monday that he is wary of letting any other former Soviet republic have control over Ukraine.
"Do we want to hand the resolution of our government affairs to someone else again? Or can we really believe that somebody else will do it instead of us?" he told a news conference. "It is for us alone to solve our problems."
The Commonwealth has been hobbled by indecision and competing interests since it succeeded the Soviet Union in December 1991. Most republics have turned to bilateral and multilateral pacts to govern their ties.
Kravchuk is being pressured by Ukraine's powerful industrial lobby to strengthen ties with other Commonwealth states, especially Russia, in hopes of easing a paralyzing breakdown in trade.
On the agenda at the meeting in the Belarussian capital of Minsk is a new Commonwealth charter. Directors of floundering state-run companies are pushing for approval of the document, but Kravchuk and many lawmakers fear it would damage Ukraine's independence.
 
 BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) - Fugitive druglord Pablo Escobar says he is renewing war on the government with a private army he will lead himself.
He wrote the attorney general complaining of human rights abuses of his colleagues and kin by police and warning, "There's no alternative but to give up the judicial struggle and assume an armed fight,"
A copy of his handwritten letter to Attorney General Gustavo de Greiff, which bore his fingerprint, was received by The Associated Press on Monday.
Escobar is chief of the Medellin cartel, which killed more than 600 people in a 12-month drug war that ended in 1990.
Escobar, one of the world's wealthiest men, and nine of his lieutenants escaped from their luxurious prison near Medellin. Since the jailbreak, Escobar has said he would turn himself in if the government guaranteed him certain conditions, such as imprisonment with fellow cartel members in a police training school in a Medellin suburb.
The government issued a communique Monday denouncing Escobar's threats.
---
JERUSALEM (AP) - A court has overturned the conviction of three newspapermen for violating military censorship by revealing that an investigation was held into the deaths of two Palestinians captured after hijacking a bus.
The Tel Aviv District Court on Monday rejected the military censor's argument that their report jeopardized state security.
At issue was the daily Hadashot's report on the government's appointment of a secret committee to investigate how the Palestinians died. Newspaper photographs showed them alive and under arrest after Israeli troops stormed the hijacked bus.
The 1984 incident prompted the censor to close Hadashot for three days - one of the harshest punishments it has imposed - and to take Hadashot to court. In 1989 a Tel Aviv magistrate fined three editors a total of $ 1,000.
By then, the inquiry had convulsed the Shin Bet, the domestic secret service, finding that it was involved in beating the two Palestinians to death and covering up the affair. The head of the Shin Bet resigned.
Monday's ruling said editors Yossi Klein, Rino Zror and Danny Dor, could not be legally faulted because the censor's list of sensitive topics had never been published as laws.

 

End of Document
