

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
February 16, 1993, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 763 words
Dateline: BRATISLAVA, Slovakia
Body




A former banker has been named Slovakia's first president, breaking a deadlock that had threatened to destabilize the newly independent country.
Parliament on Monday elected Michal Kovac, the last speaker of Czechoslovakia's federal parliament before the country split peacefully into Czech and Slovak states on Jan. 1.
Parliament failed in two tries last month to choose a head of state when none of four candidates won the necessary three-fifths majority.
Kovac, the only candidate in Monday's vote, won 106 votes in the 150-member parliament, 16 more than needed.
"We have to increase the credibility of Slovakia in the world," said the 62-year-old president-elect, who will be sworn in March 3 for a five-year term.
He will preside over 5 million people in a poor state saddled with outdated Communist-era industries and soaring umnemployment.
Kovac was the nominee of Premier Vladimir Meciar's governing Movement for a Democratic Slovakia. He was among a half-million people expelled from the Communist Party after the Soviet-led invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 crushed the Prague Spring reforms.
 
 ---
SAO PAULO, Brazil (AP) - Police are searching the Amazon jungle for nine escaped prisoners, including two men convicted in the slaying of well-known rain forest protector Francisco "Chico" Mendes.
Darcy Pereira, his father Darli Alves da Silva and the others broke out late Sunday from a penitentiary in the Acre state capital of Rio Branco, about 2,200 miles northwest of Sao Paulo.
Police said the men sawed through cell bars in the loosely guarded prison.
Da Silva, a rancher, was accused of ordering Mendes' killing, and Pereira of carrying it out. The two were sentenced to 19 years in jail in December 1990, two years after the slaying.
Mendes' shooting highlighted the often-violent struggle between conservationists and ranchers in the Amazon rainforest. Mendes was president of the rubber tappers union in his hometown of Xapuri and led a crusade to preserve the forest.
Da Silva had been scheduled to be flown to the southern state of Parana to stand trial March 23 for another murder in which he has been accused.
State police chief Carlos Alberto da Silva said more than 100 policemen were searching for the escapees.
 
 ---
MANAMA, Bahrain (AP) - The editor of Saudi Arabia's leading English-language daily has been fired after the paper published a news agency story that included remarks critical of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak.
Arab News published an announcement today that Farouq Luqman was named editor-in-chief by the publishers, Saudi Research and Publishing Co. He replaced Khaled al-Maeena, editor-in-chief for more than 10 years.
No reason was given for the change, but it followed the newspaper's absence from stands Sunday and the publication Monday of a front-page apology "to President Hosni Mubarak, the government and the Egyptian people for the error in publishing the news item on January 22, 1993."
The item was an Associated Press report on a U.S. immigration hearing for an Egyptian fundamentalist leader, Sheik Omar Abdul-Rahman.
The sheik was quoted as saying: "The Egyptian people will not accept being whipped and raped and robbed by the corrupt Mubarak regime."
Arab diplomats, who could not be named under their embassy rules, said the quote angered Mubarak, and Cairo took up the issue with Saudi authorities.
Egypt is a close ally of Saudi Arabia and the leading Arab country in the U.S.-led coalition in the 1991 Persian Gulf War.
Maeena was in London and unavailable for comment.
Saudi Research and Publishing is owned by the family of Prince Salman, governor of Riyadh.
 
 ---
FRANKFURT, Germany (AP) - Prosecutors have opened a criminal investigation into the security lapse that let an Ethiopian carry a pistol onto a Lufthansa airliner and hijack it to New York last week.
The probe could lead to a charge of violating Germany's air transport laws, Hubert Harth, spokesman of the Hesse state prosecutors, said Monday.
The hijacking Thursday ended without injury when the hijacker surrendered at John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York. FBI agents arrested Nebiu Zewolde Demeke, 20, who said he had hidden a starter's pistol in his hat during the security check in Frankfurt.
The criminal probe in Germany will look into, among other things, whether anyone helped Demeke.
Security at Frankfurt international airport was tightened after a Pan Am jumbo jet carrying a bomb exploded over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988, killing 270 people. A suitcase containing the bomb is believed to have been transferred from a connecting flight at Frankfurt.

 

End of Document
