

International News Briefs by The Associated Press
The Associated Press
October 1, 1992, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 694 words
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




Almost a year after the West demanded the surrender of two Libyans accused of blowing up a Pan Am jetliner, Moammar Gadhafi is insisting yet again that the suspects be tried at home.
"What have we got to do with planes that took off and fell in their countries?" Gadhafi said in a speech Wednesday night in the northeastern Libyan town of Sirte.
The two alleged Libyan agents were accused last November of planting an bomb in a Pan American jumbo jet in December 1988 that exploded over Lockerbie, Scotland, and killed 270 people.
The U.N. Security Council has in force air, arms and diplomatic sanctions against Libya for refusing to hand the pair over for trial in the United States or Britain.
In London, a Foreign Office spokesman asked about Gadhafi's comments said: "Our position is absolutely clear. We want Libya to comply with the U.N. Security Council resolutions and the two men to be handed over to Britain or the U.S. for trial there."
The Libyan leader's remarks reflect Libya's constant position of refusing to surrender the men for trial in the West.
 
 SANTIAGO, Chile (AP) - Ricardo Lagos, a socialist who won national prominence as a leading opponent to the former military regime on Gen. Augusto Pinochet, on Thursday announced he will seek nomination in next year's presidential election.
Lagos, 53, said he will work to ensure that the center-left coalition backing the government of President Patricio Aylwin remains united behind a single candidate.
The other main contender for the nomination is Sen. Eduardo Frei, 50, of Aylwin's centrist Christian Democratic party.
Lagos, a lawyer and economist, resigned as Aylwin's education minister on Monday.
In the right-wing opposition, at least four leaders are also actively seeking the nomination: former Pinochet Labor Minister Jose Pinera, his brother Sen. Sebastian Pinera, congresswoman Evelyn Matthei and Hernan Buchi, who was finance minister under Pinochet.
The election is scheduled for December 1993.
 
 AMMAN, Jordan (AP) - King Hussein issued a royal decree Thursday delaying the opening of a regular Parliament session for 60 days.
In another development, the government on Thursday began registering political parties.
Hussein's decree, carried by the state-run media, coincided with the ongoing trial of two lawmakers charged with attempting to topple the monarchy and illegal possession of arms and explosives.
The lawmakers, Yaqoub Qarrash and Leith Shubeilat, have pleaded innocent to a seven-count indictment, which accuses them of affiliation with an illegal militant Muslim group.
In the decree, Hussein used a constitutional provision to rule that the 80-man Chamber of Deputies would resume its regular annual session on Dec. 1 instead of Oct. 1.
Officials attributed the postponement to Hussein's recent illness.
Hussein spent five weeks abroad recuperating from cancer surgery. Surgeons at The Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., said they removed the king's left ureter and kidney to isolate malignant cells.
Parliament recessed Aug. 26 after a 10-week summer session, during which it enacted new legislation clearing the way for licensing political parties, banned since an abortive leftist coup attempt in 1957.
 
 MOSCOW (AP) - Making good on a promise this week, President Boris Yeltsin on Thursday ordered the elimination of dozens of departments and ministries to streamline the bureaucracy.
Presidential spokesman Vyacheslav Kostikov said Yeltsin signed decrees on the "system" and "structure" of the national executive branch, and on streamlining consultative bodies, the ITAR-Tass news agency said.
However, Kostikov did not detail the cuts, other than to say they would help the government conduct its reforms by trimming down the government. Yeltsin in the past has accused bureaucrats of blocking his reforms.
Earlier this week, Kostikov said the orders would eliminate three of the 36 government ministries and cut the number of central executive bodies from 131 to 73.
The Ministry of Industry was to be scrapped and be replaced by a state committee on industrial policy. That would mean the industry minister would no longer be a Cabinet-level position.
ITAR-Tass gave no other details.

 

End of Document
