

International News Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
October 6, 1992, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 474 words
Dateline: BRASILIA, Brazil
Body




The country's acting president, Itamar Franco, has indicated he may seek to steer Brazil away from the conservative economic policy of his impeached predecessor
On Monday, he termed "cruel and criminal" the free-market reforms of Fernando Collor de Mello, whose austerity policies initially brought down inflation but have led to an economy mired in a steep recession.
"A country cannot have its modernity confined to wealthy sectors while the rest of the population confronts hunger, desperation and illness," he said.
Franco, who took office Friday following Collor's impeachment for corruption, swore in five new Cabinet ministers on Monday and said Brazil will not see "happy times, but times of sacrifice."
Collor, accused of receiving millions of dollars from a crooked businessman, now faces trial in the Senate, where a conviction is considered a certainty. That would lead to his permanent removal from office.
---
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia (AP) - Only 2,509 people signed up on the first day of voter registration for next year's general election, officials said today.
The low turnout was attributed to widespread fear and suspicion of politicians and other authority figures after two decades of war and bloody repression.
Voter registration, which opened Monday in Phnom Penh, will extend to other areas of the country over the next few weeks and is to be completed by Dec. 31. The polling is to be held by May under the supervision of U.N. peacekeepers.
The U.N. official in charge of the election process, Reginald Austin, predicts that 5 million of Cambodia's estimated 9 million people eventually will register.
The peace process remains in disarray as the Communist Khmer Rouge guerrilla group refuses to disarm or otherwise cooperate with the peacekeepers. The group is demanding a share of government power in the period before the election, but that is not provided for in the peace accord which it signed to end 13 years of war with the Vietnamese-installed government.
---
BEIJING (AP) - China's Communist Party has a record membership of more than 51 million people, up 17 percent from five years ago, an official report said today.
The Chinese Communist Party, the world's largest, has 7.51 million more members now than in 1987, the Xinhua News Agency said.
With a population of 1.13 billion, party members account for less than 5 percent of the population.
The party faces growing complaints over corruption within its ranks, and many members say privately that they joined because of the perks and advantages party membership brings.
The Xinhua report said one-third of China's 24 million professionals and technicians are party members.
In the past 14 years, the educational level of party members has improved. Thirty-five percent of party members have at least a high school education, up from less than 13 percent in 1978, Xinhua said.

 

End of Document
