

International Briefs by The Associated Press
The Associated Press
August 7, 1992, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 832 words
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Russian officials issued a warning Friday against eating or picking mushrooms as cases of mushroom poisoning spread through Russia and Ukraine, leaving at least 64 people dead.
Mushroom-picking is a favorite summer pastime for many Russians and Ukrainians, and mushrooms provide a welcome addition to their often limited diet.
Since the end of July, cases of mushroom poisoning have been reported in the Voronezh region south of Moscow, in the Volga River city of Volgograd, as well as in the Saratov and Lipetsk regions.
The ITAR-Tass news agency said there also were more than 400 cases of mushroom poisonings in the Lugansk, Donetsk and other regions of Ukraine. At least 40 Ukrainians, half of them children, have died, ITAR-Tass reported.
At least 24 people, including 14 children, of the nearly 200 people hospitalized across Russia have also died from mushroom poisonings.
Yuri Tzitovski of the State Committee for Sanitary and Epidemic Inspection said people should "abstain from picking and using mushrooms, categorically exclude them from children's ration and fully refrain from buying mushrooms at the markets and from private individuals," ITAR-Tass reported.
 
 BEIJING (AP) - China has said it will continue pressing the Khmer Rouge to abide by the Cambodian peace accord, a senior Western diplomat said Friday.
"We're inclined to believe they may still have some influence, at least psychological," said the diplomat, who talked with reporters after visiting Cambodia and then meeting with Chinese officials in Beijing.
He spoke on condition neither he nor his country be identified.
The Khmer Rouge, a radical leftist guerrilla group that killed hundreds of thousands of people while ruling Cambodia from 1975-78, has refused to disarm or let U.N. peacekeepers into areas under its control.
Under a U.N.-approved peace plan intended to end Cambodia's 13-year-old civil war, the various fighting factions are to hand over their weapons and send their soldiers to barracks.
The head of the U.N. peacekeeping forces, Yasushi Akashi, has appealed to China in particular to pressure the Khmer Rouge to comply with the peace plan it signed last year. China was the Khmer Rouge's main weapons supplier, although it says it has not sent weapons since the peace agreement was signed.
The Western diplomat said there is no evidence the Khmer Rouge are getting any supplies from China, but that they appear to be getting funds by trading gems and timber across the border to Thailand.
 
 KINGSTON, Jamaica (AP) - A Jamaican businessman has filed suit against two U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration agents, claiming he was kidnapped from Jamaica and taken against his will to the United States.
Norris Barnes also claims he was falsely imprisoned in the United States on drug charges from 1988 to 1990.
There was no immediate DEA comment. The lawsuit follows widespread Latin American and Caribbean criticism of a U.S. Supreme Court ruling July 5 upholding the DEA kidnapping of a Mexican doctor to face American court charges.
In the lawsuit, filed Wednesday, Barnes says an undercover policewoman lured him aboard a yacht in May 1988 in Montego Bay. He identified as DEA agents Peter Saren and Julio Torres, who he said posed as yachtsmen.
Upon heading below deck, Barnes said he was handcuffed as the boat headed into international waters and was met by a U.S. Coast Guard cutter, which took him to the U.S. Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. He said a DEA plane then flew him to Miami, where he was tried and convicted on drug charges.
Upon his release after two years in prison, he was detained for three weeks by the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service before he was deported, the suit says.
The suit does not specify the damages Barnes is seeking.
 
 SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) - The government halted a restoration project in colonial Old San Juan on Friday after workers discovered a 100-foot-long wall built nearly two centuries ago to fend off English pirates.
Archeologists who rushed to the bayside site also unearthed wine bottles, medicine flasks, shoes, coins, cannon balls and ceramic fragments from the era.
The wall, long thought to have been destroyed by the Spaniards to develop the city, provides more clues for researchers and historians still trying to trace the Caribbean port's intricate colonial-era defense system.
The Institute of Puerto Rican Culture ordered a private construction company to stop construction at the site, part of a $ 120 million development of Old San Juan's bayside.
Miguel Rodriguez, director of the institute's archaeologhical department, told The Associated Press the historial value of the discovered objects alone warranted the work stoppage.
A preservationist group sought the government order Thursday after the discovery of the wall, which is 10 feet wide and once stood as high as 45 feet. historical documents show. The Spaniards built over the site, and projects over the years have extended the present shoreline 100 feet into the San Juan Bay.

 

End of Document
