

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
February 25, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 659 words
Dateline: SEOUL, South Korea
Body




Kim Young-sam was sworn in as South Korea's first civilian president in 32 years Thursday and pledged to build a new Korea with a cleaner government and stronger economy.
"Misconduct and corruption are the most terrifying enemies attacking the foundations of our society," Kim said in his inauguration speech. "Immediate reform will start at the very top."
Kim also challenged North Korean leader Kim Il Sung to discuss unifying the divided Korean peninsula.
"If you really care about the Korean people and desire genuine reconciliation and unification … we can meet at any time and in any place," Kim said.
On the same day, however, North Korea denounced Kim as a traitor for his recent call for a swift special inspection of the North's nuclear facilities.
North and South Korea, hostile enemies since partition in 1945, signed a reconciliation pact last year. But implementation of the accord has been stalled by disputes over whether the North is developing nuclear weapons.
---
JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) - Fighting in Angola has blocked food shipments to the needy and threatens mass starvation comparable to the crisis in Somalia, the United Nations World Food Program said Thursday.
Relief flights to provincial centers risk being shot at by rebel forces controlling about 70 percent of the countryside, said WFP spokeswoman Mercedes Sayagues. Road transport also is being blocked, mostly by fighters of the UNITA rebel movement, she told a news conference in Johannesburg.
Harvests in Angola have been poor the past year, and without food aid, conditions outside provincial centers are deteriorating, Sayagues said.
"It is going to get much worse as the year goes by. We feel a famine is coming," she said.
WFP officials in Angola say peasants have largely exhausted food stocks and have resorted to eating seeds.
Sayagues did not say how many people were in danger of starvation.
Fighting has raged in Angola since UNITA rebel leader Jonas Savimbi refused to accept defeat in U.N-sponsored elections last October. Thousands of people have died in the renewed fighting, which has also crippled efforts to revive commercial activities and agriculture.
---
SAO PAULO, Brazil (AP) - Police said Thursday they had smashed a Chilean drug trafficking ring which for the past two years has been sending cocaine to Spain.
Inspector Rui Fontes, of the narcotics division, said by phone that police seized 25 pounds of cocaine Wednesday and arrested three Chilean drug buyers and the six Bolivians who sold it to them.
They bought the cocaine for $ 50,000 and planned to resell it in Barcelona, Spain for $ 400,000, he said.
The Chileans, all residents of Brazil, hired couriers to take the drug to Spain once every two weeks, Fontes said.
If convicted, the nine traffickers face up to 30 years in jail.
---
JAKARTA, Indonesia (AP) - Torture of detainees is pervasive in Indonesia and procedures for redress are ineffectual, the New York-based Lawyers Committee for Human Rights said in a report issued Thursday.
The 90-page report said a monthlong fact-finding mission to Indonesia in June and July 1992 found serious failings in the Indonesian criminal justice system.
The committee's report said victims of torture and illegal detention face enormous hurdles in seeking redress for the violations of their basic rights.
It said it found rights violations "such as incommunicado detention" in the prosecution of East Timor rebel leader Jose Alexandre "Xanana" Gusmao. Gusmao led FRETILIN - the Revolutionary Front for the Independence of East Timor - until his capture last November. He now is being tried in Dili, capital of the Portuguese colony annexed by Indonesia in 1976.
On Thursday, German Chancellor Helmut Kohl told reporters he had discussed human rights in Indonesia with President Suharto, but gave no details.
"I told President Suharto that it is natural between friends that we hold discussion on human rights and it is not always nice for the nation," Kohl said.

 

End of Document
