

International News Briefs by The Associated Press
The Associated Press
October 22, 1992, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 427 words
Dateline: BRASILIA, Brazil
Body




The government has refused permission for a Japanese freighter loaded with plutonium to enter Brazilian waters.
The foreign ministry on Thursday said the freighter Akatsuki Maru was "unwelcome" and that Brazil's Atlantic coast and waters "should not be exposed to risks."
The Akatsuki Maru left Japan on Aug. 24 for Cherbourg, France, to pick up one ton of plutonium, one of the most toxic substances in the world.
The shipment is the first of 45 tons of plutonium oxide powder Japan plans to import in the next decade, for use as fuel in fast-breeder nuclear reactors.
Several countries along possible routes have said they would refuse the freighter passage through their waters because of the risk of an accident or terrorist attack.
Argentina, Chile, Uruguay, Indonesia, Malaysia, South Africa, Hong Kong and Singapore have either denied passage or asked that the freighter be re-routed to avoid populated areas.
 
 AMSTERDAM, Netherlands (AP) - Over 1,000 illegal aliens have claimed they lived in the 77 apartments crushed by an El Al cargo jet after the authorities offered an amnesty to those affected by the Oct. 4 crash, City Hall said Thursday.
Up to 70 people are believed to have died when the Israeli Boeing 747 sliced through a 10-story suburban apartment complex after losing its two right engines.
After initial missing persons estimates soared to 250, largely due to difficulty of tracing illegal aliens, Mayor Ed van Thijn urged them to come forward and promised he would do all he could to prevent their deportation.
The disproportionate number of amnesty applicants was only the latest indication of the illegal immigration problems that have beset this nation reputed for its tolerance of foreigners.
The crash occured in the poor Bijlmermeer suburb, home to multitudes of immigrants from developing nations hoping for a better life in prosperous Holland.
 
 GENOA, Italy (AP) - Romano Merlo, the Social Democrat mayor of Genoa, resigned Thursday following the flop of the Columbus Expo - a costly exhibition in the hometown of Christopher Columbus.
Merlo, 53, who was also president of the agency that organized the three-month-long show, took responsibility for the disclosure of false attendance figures, according to news reports.
The Genoa newspaper Il Secolo XIX reported this week that the exhibition drew 817,000 visitors instead of the 1.7 million organizers had claimed.
The city had estimated initially the exhibition would draw at least 3 million people, revitalizing tourism in the port city.
The Expo cost an estimated $ 770 million to put on.

 

End of Document
