

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
March 11, 1993, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 758 words
Dateline: WARSAW, Poland
Body




Twenty-four Communist-era police officials, including former Interior Minister Czeslaw Kiszczak, went on trial in the shooting deaths of nine striking miners in 1981 under martial law.
The trial in southern Poland began Wednesday and is expected to last at least a year, with testimony by almost 250 witnesses. It coincides with an interrogation of Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski by a parliament committee investigating whether the former Communist leader should be prosecuted for declaring martial law.
Kiszczak, Jaruzelski's interior minister throughout the 1980s, is accused of "creating a situation of universal threat" by allowing police to use weapons against strikers who protested the martial law decree of Dec. 13, 1981.
Police fired on workers in three mines in the southern region of Silesia, killing nine workers in the Wujek mine and wounding 49 others.
More than 2,000 policemen, a dozen tanks, armored vehicles and water cannon were used to subdue the Wujek miners on Dec. 16, 1981, the worst bloodshed of the martial-law period.
Kiszczak, citing a heart condition, declined to appear before the district court in Katowice. But he told the Zycie Warszawy newspaper he is innocent.
 
 ---
MEXICO CITY (AP) - Honest cops now have an extra incentive to stay clean: cash.
Friends and relatives packed a room at the attorney general's headquarters Wednesday as he handed out 20 yellow envelopes - each containing three months' additional pay - to anti-drug agents and other Federal Judicial Police officers who shunned the many temptations for dishonesty.
The bonuses were part of Attorney General Jorge Carpizo's program to eradicate corruption from the federal force, which is Mexico's top law enforcement agency and oversees anti-drug officials.
Carpizo said further reforms will include a professional code of ethics and the additional training for federal police agents.
Payoffs to police are so common Mexicans have a name for them - "la mordida" or "the little bite."
The ceremony came the same day the newspaper La Jornada reported Carpizo had unmasked some 425 agency "employees" who were receiving wages but performing no work.
Douglas Payne, the Latin America expert at the New York advocacy group Freedom House, welcomed Carpizo's actions since taking office.
But he added: "All power radiates from the presidency, and whether this appointment of Carpizo was made to appease international critics or whether there will be real progress on human rights is the test now facing" President Carlos Salinas de Gortari.
 
 ---
MILFORD HAVEN, Wales (AP) - Fishermen overturned about 200 crates of French-caught fish at an auction house as anger grew on both sides of the English Channel over the impact of cheap imports on fish prices.
French fishermen accuse Britain of dumping cheap fish on France's market. The weakness of the pound has made British catches highly competitive.
British and French fishermen both are deeply worried about cheap imports from outside the European Community.
In Nantes, France, up to 800 fishermen protested imports and demanded increased government aid on Tuesday. Some ransacked a refrigerated storage area and displayed pieces of boxes showing the fish had been imported from Senegal, New Zealand and Madagascar.
Pickets in Grimsby, England, turned back two truckloads of French fish on Tuesday destined for the town's market. Trawlermen poured oil on a Russian ship's catch in Peterhead, Scotland, late Monday.
The National Federation of Fishermen's Organizations said Wednesday a blockade of British ports was "definitely a possibility" if imports, mainly from Russia and Norway, keep coming.
 
 ---
CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) - Russia signed a pact with Venezuela that could lead to Russian membership in OPEC, an official said.
Russia's deputy energy minister, Edouard Grushevenko, told reporters Wednesday the five-year accord for technological cooperation is part of Russian efforts to halt a steep production decline and increase pumping capacity.
Venezuela is a founding member of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, and Grushevenko said the agreement "would create conditions necessary for a decision on joining OPEC."
But he set no timetable for joining the 12-nation group. "Joining in OPEC would be a point of future negotiations," he said.
Grushevenko said Russia is campaigning to attract private foreign capital to explore more than 100 oil fields.
Most Russian and Venezuelan oil is heavy and laden with sulphur. Venezuelan officials said their country has developed refining technologies that Russians could use.

 

End of Document
