

International News Briefs By The Associated Press
The Associated Press
June 14, 1993, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 482 words
Dateline: ANKARA, Turkey
Body




A U.S.-educated economist has been elected leader of Turkey's most powerful political party, assuring her appointment as the nation's first woman premier.
Tansu Ciller on Sunday was elected leader of the center-right True Path Party, the senior partner in the governing coalition, after two rivals conceded defeat following the first round of balloting at a party congress.
President Suleyman Demirel has said he would name the winner of the party congress as premier. He was expected to appoint her today.
Ciller, 47, received her master's degree from the University of Connecticut and also studied at Yale University. Most recently, she served as economics minister under Demirel.
Demirel, a seven-time premier, quit his Cabinet and party posts last month to succeed the late Turgut Ozal in the largely ceremonial presidency. Ozal died April 17.
She would be the third woman to head a predominately Muslim country after former Pakistani Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto and Begum Khaleda Zia, prime minister of Bangladesh.
 
 PREVEZA, Greece (AP) - A sharp earthquake measuring 5.4 on the Richter scale jolted this west coast Greek town early today but no serious damage or injuries were reported.
The Geodynamic Institute said the tremor hit at 2:27 a.m. in the coastal waters off Preveza, 188 miles northwest of the Greek capital.
Police said the earthquake created some panic among the population and numerous cracks in buildings.
Many of the town's residents spent the night outdoors for fear another tremor would hit.
The Richter scale is a gauge of energy released by an earthquake as measured by ground motion recorded on a seismograph. A magnitude 5 quake can cause considerable damage if its epicenter is in a densely populated area.
 
 BANGKOK, Thailand (AP) - A fire and explosions at a Bangkok distillery that makes Thailand's well-known Mekhong whiskey killed at least two people today, witnesses said.
The fire at the five-story Suramaharat Co. distillery on the bank of the Chao Phraya River sent hundreds of gallons of the brew pouring into the river.
Kitklai Pawongan, head of company's firefighting team, said cause of the fire was not known.
The blaze came a month after history's worst factory fire, which killed at least 188 people at a doll factory, Kader Industrial (Thailand) Co. Ltd., in a Bangkok suburb. Police arrested a worker for investigation of whether his cigarette might have been tossed among fabrics.
 
 GUATEMALA CITY (AP) - Two rebels and one army soldier were killed in a clash in central Guatemala, the army said.
The clash happened when leftist guerrillas set off a land mine aimed at a truck full of soldiers near Lake Atitlan, about 30 miles northwest of the capital, the army's press office said Sunday.
More than 120,000 people have been killed and an estimated 100,000 driven into exile during Guatemala's 30-year civil war, the longest ongoing conflict in Latin America.

 

End of Document
