

International New Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
May 7, 1993, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 585 words
Dateline: SAO PAULO, Brazil
Body




Latin America simply cannot repay its $ 400 billion foreign debt, lawmakers from the region and from Europe say.
In a 31-point document approved at the end of the 11th European Community-Latin America Interparliamentary Conference Thursday, the legislators also warned that free market reforms are causing widespread poverty.
More than 150 European and Latin American legislators took part in the four-day meeting at the Latin American Parliament's new headquarters in Sao Paulo.
Debt-mired Latin American governments have repeatedly asked for relief from foreign lenders. But new debt rescheduling agreements have been slow in coming because of global recession, Latin American economic instability and political differences.
---
LISBON, Portugal (AP) - Doctors battling a cholera epidemic in Angola also must fight thieves who steal drugs, cots, surgical tubing, hypodermic needles, gauze and even disinfectant.
"As fast as we carry drugs through the door of the cholera wards, they disappear through the window," said Dr. Vincent Bercruysse, director of Doctors Without Borders in the Angolan capital, Luanda. He spoke in a telephone interview Thursday.
Andre Brandao, Angola's transportation minister, said the problem was "critical" and that corrupt police were involved in the thefts.
Much of the stealing occurs in Angola's ports, before the supplies even reach the hospitals, Brandao said in a telephone interview.
More than 1,200 people a week were admitted to the city's cholera wards last month, surpassing the 850 per week registered in 1989 during what was then the worst epidemic in the history of the war-torn former Portuguese colony.
On some days, up to 200 hospitalized adults die of cholera, Dr. N'doza Luwawa of the National Cholera Program said by telephone.
---
PRAGUE, Czech Republic (AP) - Czech police have arrested five foreigners suspected of planning to assassinate President Vaclav Havel, and a report linked the plot to Havel's stand on Bosnia.
Interior Minister Jan Ruml, speaking Thursday on Czech national television, did not reveal the nationalities of the suspects. A sixth man was still on the run.
Czech television claimed a likely reason for the alleged plot was Havel's recent comparison of Western allies' passivity toward Nazi dictator Adolf Hitler's annexation of parts of Czechoslovakia in 1938 to what he described as the West's cautious approach to the Serbs' military campaign in Bosnia.
Ruml said the arrests followed an anonymous message. He did not specify when the suspects were arrested nor did he give the date of the planned assassination.
---
BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) - Nobel laureate Gabriel Garcia Marquez won't have legitimate copies of his books competing with unauthorized editions.
Garcia Marquez's Colombian publishing company, Black Sheep, sued two of its former employees last year for allegedly forging 1 million books. Most of the forgeries were works by Garcia Marquez.
But a Bogota judge ruled there was insufficient evidence to link the forged copies to the former Black Sheep employees and ordered some 800,000 confiscated copies back to bookstores.
"I don't have any other recourse but to take all my legal books off the Colombian market," the Colombian author wrote in a statement Wednesday from Mexico, where he lives half the year.
He said competing with the forged copies was not only impossible, but undignified.
Garcia Marquez is best known for "One Hundred Years of Solitude" and "Love in the Time of Cholera." His works have been translated into 42 languages.

 

End of Document
