

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
November 16, 1992, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 454 words
Dateline: ZAGREB, Croatia
Body




The largest U.S. contribution to peacekeeping efforts in former Yugoslavia is open for business but hoping not to be very busy.
The 212th Mobile Army Surgical Hospital opened Sunday at Zagreb airport.
At the hospital's opening ceremony, Sen. Dennis DeConcini, D-Ariz., said the United States should get more involved in ending the bloodshed in former Yugoslav republics: "The U.S. must be out in front in leadership role."
The mobile hospital, which was transferred from Germany, will provide a full range of health care for the U.N. peacekeepers in former Yugoslavia.
The U.N. force had been putting a strain on Croatian civilian medical facilities, occupying about 40 hospital beds. Since the U.N. soldiers were deployed in April, 20 have been killed and 273 wounded.
Until now, the United States' major contribution to the peacekeeping effort has been monitoring Yugoslavia's coast as part of the U.N. economic embargo on Serbia and Montenegro, the two remaining republics in the Yugoslav federation.
The world community has largely blamed Serbia for fomenting the war in Bosnia.
 
 ---
PANAMA (AP) - Panamanians have voted overwhelming against a proposal to eliminate the army.
Early results showed an overwhelming majority of voters rejecting a referendum that proposed to eliminate the army in Sunday's election, the first national vote since the 1989 U.S. invasion that ousted Gen. Manuel Noriega.
Unofficial tallies from just over half the nation's polling stations showed 175,143 people had voted to reject the reforms while 97,671 voted in favor.
Some 1.4 million Panamanians were eligible to vote Sunday on 58 separate changes in the constitution.
The referendum was seen as a vote on the leadership of President Guillermo Endara, who took office after Noriega's ouster and supported all the proposed changes.
 
 ---
AMSTERDAM, Netherlands (AP) - Nearly 200 people who were injured or lost relatives or property last month when an Israeli jet crashed into an apartment block have enlisted a U.S. law firm to seek compensation from Boeing Co., the plane's manufacturer.
Arthur Ballen of New York-based Speiser, Krause and Madole said his firm would first seek an out-of-court settlement for claims resulting from the Oct. 4 crash of the El Al 747 cargo jet, in which 43 people died.
Initial talks have been held with lawyers from Seattle-based Boeing, he said Sunday.
Ballen said Boeing would be sued in a U.S. court if the talks on a private settlement fail.
Boeing spokesman Tom Cole confirmed that the aircraft manufacturer had met with about 20 Dutch lawyers representing claimants and had "an amicable first meeting."
He noted that since the cause of the crash has not been established, "We don't admit culpability. Not yet anyway."

 

End of Document
