

International News Briefs by The Associated Press
The Associated Press
October 14, 1992, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 483 words
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Russian President Boris Yeltsin issued a decree Wednesday allowing the sale of land and housing for vouchers in an effort to speed up his privatization program, the ITAR-Tass news agency reported.
Government economist Alexei Ulyukayev said the decree refers to all kinds of land, including lots for agricultural use, as well as state reserves and forests.
Banks earlier this month began distributing millions of privatization vouchers, which can be used by Russian citizens to buy shares in state-owned factories, stores and other enterprises as part of Yeltsin's ambitious market reforms.
The latest decree allows vouchers to be used for the purchase of state and municipal housing, as well as municipal property, ITAR-Tass said. Vouchers can also be used to buy land being used by factories once they are privatized.
 
 LIMA, Peru (AP) - Pro-Cuban guerrillas launched three mortars at the Defense Ministry, where President Alberto Fujimori often spends the night for security reasons, police said Wednesday.
Members of the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement carried out the attack from a car late Tuesday, police said. The mortars landed 65 feet from the heavily guarded compound in Lima's middle-class San Borja district.
No injuries or damages were reported.
The group, whose leader Victor Polay was captured in June, is smaller and less dangerous than Peru's main guerrilla movement, the Maoist Shining Path.
The bombings are the latest in a string of attacks carried out by the Tupac Amaru group to protest the 500th anniversary of Christopher Columbus' arrival in the Americas.
Also Tuesday, the rebels occupied the offices of a local radio station and the news agency United Press International, forcing them to transmit condemnations of the anniversary.
 
 KARLSRUHE, Germany (AP) - Two Lebanese and an Iranian have been arrested in the murder of four Iranian Kurdish officials, the federal prosecutor's office said Wednesday.
The first two Lebanese suspects were arrested Oct. 4.
The four Kurdish officials were assassinated Sept. 17 in a restaurant in Berlin. The victims included Sadiq Sharafkindi, head of the Kurdistan Democratic Party of Iran.
While investigators still cannot say who ordered the killings, authorities believe the Kurds were murdered at the orders of political opponents.
The Kurdish Democratic Party of Iran seeks autonomy for the 6.5 million Kurds in Iran.
 
 KAHRAMANMARAS, Turkey (AP) - Clashes between Turkish Kurdish rebels and security forces killed 31 people Wednesday in four areas of southeastern Turkey, the Anatolia news agency said.
The Turkish Kurdish guerrillas are from the banned Kurdistan Workers' Party, or PKK, which recently has been fighting Iraqi Kurds in northern Iraq.
The PKK has been fighting for self-rule since 1984. The death toll from the fighting this week is more than 80. More than 5,000 people in the region have been killed over the past eight years.

 

End of Document
