

International News Briefs by The Associated Press
The Associated Press
June 25, 1993, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 541 words
Dateline: BERN, Switzerland
Body




The Swiss government has approved the free distribution of hard drugs to 700 addicts in a 3 year experiment.
Results of the trials in eight cities will help the government decide whether to legalize consumption and dealing of hard drugs, the Federal Health Office said Thursday.
The project's focus is Zurich, where a burgeoning drug scene has regrouped after authorities last year closed a notorious park that had become a open-air drugs bazaar and junkie hangout.
One aim of the trials, taking place under doctors' supervision, is to compare the usefulness of heroin, morphine and methadone, a synthetic substitute, in controlled distribution, the office said.
Supporters see legalization as a way to curb crime, prostitution and the spread of AIDS.
---
LISBON, Portugal (AP) - Angola's UNITA rebels allowed the evacuation of 120 Portuguese and Brazilians stranded since March in the rebel-held town of Huambo, several days after Portugal threatened to free them by force.
A Red Cross transport plane airlifted 115 Portuguese and five Brazilians from the central Angolan city Thursday. More than 500 foreigners have been trapped in Huambo since UNITA overran the city.
The evacuees arrived in the west African nation of Sao Tome and Principe after engine trouble forced an unscheduled landing in the Angolan capital of Luanda, the Portuguese news agency LUSA reported.
The layover forced the cancellation of a second flight that was scheduled to bring out 150 more people.
Last week, Portugal threatened to use military force to remove its citizens if UNITA didn't let them leave.
The rightist rebels have battled the southwest African nation's leftist government since independence from Portugal in 1975. A 1991 peace accord halted the fighting and paved the way for U.N.-monitored elections last fall, but the rebels returned to arms when they lost the vote.
---
DUBLIN, Ireland (AP) - Lawmakers approved a bill allowing homosexual activity among people ages 17 and older, effectively ending years of official intolerance of gays.
Justice Minister Maire Geoghegan Quinn said Thursday's vote will enable homosexuals "to express themselves in personal relationships without the fear of being branded and punished as criminals."
The parliament's upper chamber, or Senate, must still approve the measure, but passing the lower house, or Dail, was the major hurdle.
Opponents knelt in prayer outside parliament as the measure was debated.
---
BEIJING (AP) - Some progress has been made in talks between Britain and China over the last elections to be held in Hong Kong under British rule, Britain's ambassador said today.
Sir Robin McLaren refused to give any details.
"There is still quite a way to go," he told reporters after ending his sixth round of talks with Chinese Vice Foreign Minister Jiang Enzhu about Hong Kong's 1994 and 1995 elections.
The two sides later said the next round will be held on July 5 and 6.
The talks were prompted by China's angry rejection of a proposal by Hong Kong Gov. Chris Patten to slightly expand popular participation in the elections for district boards and a territory-wide legislature. China, which retakes control of Hong Kong in 1997, said it would oust the elected bodies if it didn't like the election process or the victors.

 

End of Document
