

International Briefs from The Asociated Press
The Associated Press
November 27, 1992, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 589 words
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




An appeals court has cleared an Israeli Arab writer of charges his poetry incited Palestinians to violence against Israel.
The Haifa District Court on Thursday overturned a three-year suspended prison term and $ 3,000 fine given to Shafik Habib.
Habib, author of a 1990 book of poetry about the Palestinian uprising in the occupied territories, was the first Israeli Arab to be sentenced to jail for his writings.
"This is a victory for the freedom of expression," Habib told Israel radio. "I'm certain the (lower court) had wanted to set a legal precedent to restrict freedom of expression among both Arab and Jewish writers."
Police alleged that Habib's book inflamed Palestinians to violence. They confiscated all copies from bookstores.
Habib, an accountant from the town of Deir el Hanna, said Thursday his poems simply described conditions in the occupied lands.
---
PARIS (AP) - Prosecutors are demanding that the Supreme Court reinstate charges against suspected Nazi collaborator Paul Touvier, the right-hand man of "Butcher of Lyon" Klaus Barbie.
In April, a lower court dismissed charges stemming from the killing of Jews and Resistance leaders.
The case has sparked widespread outrage and reopened debate on whether France is willing to confront the legacy of the Vichy regime, the puppet government that collaborated with the Nazis from 1940 to 1944.
Barbie, a Gestapo officer, was convicted in Lyon of crimes against humanity after a three-month trial in 1987. He died in prison last year.
The lower court found there was insufficient evidence to support five charges against Touvier. It said a sixth - involving the execution of seven Jewish hostages - was a war crime, on which the 40-year statute of limitations had expired when Touvier was arrested in 1989.
---
SAN SALVADOR, El Salvador (AP) - Leftist rebels charge that right-wing military officers are conspiring to seize power to head off a purge of the armed forces mandated by the country's U.N.-sponsored peace process.
The Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front in a statement Thursday called on its fighters and sympathizers to go on alert.
President Alfredo Cristiani denied the existence of a plot against him, saying the FMLN had started coup rumors to avoid further demobilization of its forces.
The former rebel group did not reveal the sources of its information.
A U.N.-brokered accord in January ended a 12-year civil war in which 75,000 people died. The agreement called for the rebels to have disbanded all of its armed units by Oct. 31, and for the army to demobilize five U.S.-trained anti-guerrilla battalions. But demobilizations were delayed by disputes.
---
BANGKOK, Thailand (AP) - Two hard-line, pro-Vietnamese Communists have been named to take over the top leadership posts of Laos that were held by Kaysone Phomvihane until his death last week.
The two men were the closest associates of Kaysone, who died Saturday at age 71. Their appointment signifies little change in government. The trio was popularly known as "the iron triangle."
Nouhak Phoumsavan, the National Assembly chairman, was named president on Wednesday, official Laotian radio said in a report made available Thursday.
Gen. Khamtay Siphandon, the premier, took over as head of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party.
Kaysone, Khamtay and Nouhak long have monopolized power in Laos, an impoverished, landlocked country. They were among a small core of Communist Pathet Lao who fought against the U.S.-buttressed government in Vientiane and then retained power after the Communist victory in 1975.

 

End of Document
