

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
June 10, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 590 words
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Armenia and Azerbaijan on Thursday endorsed a European plan for reviving peace talks in their 5-year-old war over the mountainous enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh.
But there was no word on whether Nagorno-Karabakh's local leaders would accept the proposal from the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
The leaders recently rejected a peace proposal from Russia, the United States and Turkey. They said it did not guarantee the safety of civilians after troop withdrawals.
More than 15,000 people - many of them civilians - have been killed since Armenia and Azerbaijan began fighting over Nagorno-Karabakh, a mostly Christian Armenian enclave inside Muslim Azerbaijan. Hundreds of thousands of people have become refugees.
Armenia's Foreign Ministry said Thursday that it would accept the CSCE proposal. The Azerbaijani president's office also welcomed the initiative, the ITAR-Tass news agency reported.
The CSCE initiative is based on a resolution adopted by the U.N. Security Council on April 30, after Armenian forces seized the Kelbajar region of western Azerbaijan.
The resolution called for withdrawal of troops from Kelbajar and an end to other "hostile acts."
---
GUATEMALA CITY (AP) - Vice President Gustavo Espina Salguero, rejected in attempts to assume the presidency, was granted asylum Thursday by Costa Rica.
Costa Rican President Rafael Angel Calderon told the daily newspaper La Nacion in San Jose that his government had granted asylum to Espina, who sought refuge Wednesday at the Costa Rican embassy here.
Espina, 47, tried to assume the presidency on June 2 when the army turned against President Jorge Serrano, who had seized near-dictatorial powers on May 25.
But Congress refused to confirm Espina's rise to power, arguing he had backed Serrano in an unconstitutional act. It elected the country's human rights prosecutor, Ramiro de Leon Carpio, instead.
A judge on Wednesday ordered the arrest of Espina Salguero and former Interior Minister Francisco Perdomo Sandoval on charges they tried to help former President Jorge Serrano subvert the constitution.
A judge on Tuesday froze 25 of Serrano's accounts in Guatemalan and foreign-owned banks, said to total millions of dollars.
---
ABU DHABI, United Arab Emirates (AP) - Scientists have found new fossil evidence that the arid Persian Gulf region was once covered in lush forests with abundant wildlife.
The animals included elephants, crocodiles, hippopotamuses and giraffes, according to early results of research detailed in the annual report of Abu Dhabi's leading oil-producing company.
Abu Dhabi today, like the other countries along the southern shores of the Gulf, is mere sand dunes as far as the eye can see. Temperatures are searing hot, and only a few inches of rain fall annually.
But over the past year, scientists have gathered evidence showing that Abu Dhabi was once "so different as to be almost unbelievable, different climate, different landscape and different inhabitants," said the 1992 report of the Abu Dhabi Co. for Onshore Oil Operations, or ADCO.
Some 8 million years ago, Abu Dhabi had large areas of lush forests and marshland, with freshwater lakes and rivers, the report said.
Some years ago, a geologist discovered a fossil that turned out to be an elephant bone. That provided the first clue that there might be more to the landscape of Abu Dhabi than just sand.
The discovery prompted a thorough examination of the area by experts from the Natural History Museum of London and Yale University in the United States, which began in January 1992.

 

End of Document
