

International News Briefs from The Associated Press
The Associated Press
September 18, 1992, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 881 words
Dateline: JALAPA, Mexico
Body




Authorities declared a state of emergency in the gulf state of Veracruz after heavy rains and flooding left at least two dead, the news agency Notimex reported.
The rains have also caused flooding in the neighboring states of Oaxaca and Puebla as well as in Campeche on the Yucatan peninsula, the state-owned agency said Thursday.
Eight rivers in Veracruz have overflowed, affecting 100 communities and leaving more than 20,000 people with property damage, Notimex said.
Gov. Dante Delgado Rannauro toured affected areas and spoke with 150 residents in the town of Tlacotalpan forced from their homes because of danger of flooding of the Rio Papaloapan river, the agency said.
Flooding from the rains has also cut roads and highways, Notimex said.
State civil protection officials are working with the Mexican army, navy and health authorities to provide temporary shelter and food, the agency said.
---
CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) - A 22-year-old student was shot dead during a clash with members of the National Guard in a provincial city as students renewed anti-government demonstrations after a two-month lull.
Luis Lander was shot in the face Thursday during a clash between students and the National Guard in Maracay, about 95 miles west of Caracas, media sources there said.
Leaders of the Maracay students movement said the National Guard occupied part of the Maracay University campus and attacked demonstrators who were handing out pamphlets supporting the imprisoned leaders of a failed military coup.
At least six students were killed in almost daily demonstrations up to mid-July. The protests died down during summer vacation.
Student organizations announced Wednesday they would stage demonstrations throughout the country Thursday to renew demands that President Carlos Andres Perez resign and to reject proposed constitutional reforms.
The students blame Perez' austere economic policies for declining living standards.
---
BEIJING (AP) - Shanghai's first English-language newspaper in four decades, the Shanghai Star, started publication today.
The 16-page weekly tabloid is aimed at foreign tourists and businessmen, according to its sister paper, the Beijing-published China Daily.
The first issue carries articles about Shanghai's economic development and an interview with the chairman of a Chinese-Japanese joint venture.
"I believe Shanghai Star will help promote understanding, friendship and business contacts between the 13 million Shanghai people and people in other parts of the world," China Daily quoted the new paper's publisher, Chen Li, as saying. Chen also is editor-in-chief of China Daily.
Before the Communists took power in 1949, Shanghai and other leading Chinese cities had English newspapers, some completely run by foreigners. The Communist government shut them down as it put all media under official control.
The China Daily, the country's only foreign-language daily, was started by the central government in 1981 as part of the new policy of expanding foreign contacts after years of isolation. It is distributed at tourist hotels in major cities and is sold abroad.
Like the Chinese-language media, the China Daily follows the government line but it sometimes carries information not reported to the domestic audience.
---
BANGKOK, Thailand (AP) - Vietnam now allows travelers to bring foreign currency worth up to $ 3,000 into the country without declaring it, the official Vietnam News Agency reported today.
The State Bank of Vietnam ruled that, effective this past Tuesday, both Vietnamese and foreigners may import and export the sum without listing it on a customs form or obtaining special permission, said the report, monitored in Bangkok.
Travelers had been required to declare all money in their possession upon arrival, and officially were supposed to account for all their spending upon departure. But enforcement of the rules has been lax in recent years, as the Communist government in Hanoi has liberalized the economy and sought to attract foreign tourists and businessmen.
---
ADELAIDE, Australia (AP) - A U.S. expert on Nazi atrocities will testify at a war-crimes hearing Monday via satellite in what is believed to be a first for Australia.
Prosecutors called Christopher Browning, a professor at Pacific Lutheran University in Tacoma, Wash., to testify against Heinrich Wagner.
Wagner, 68, is charged with the murder of 19 part-Jewish children and a railway construction worker and with being involved in the murder of 104 Jews near the village of Izraylovka in Nazi-occupied Ukraine between 1942 and 1943.
Prosecutor Grant Niemann has told the court Browning was available to travel to Adelaide if required, but it would be less expensive and more convenient for him to be questioned from Tacoma.
Browning and another historian, Martin Dean, are expected to be the final witnesses of the five-week hearing, being held to determine whether Wagner will have to face trial. Magistrate Kym Boxall will hear final submissions from prosecution and defence lawyers on Oct. 9.
Australia conducted a series of war-crime trials against Japanese soldiers soon after World War II.
However, Wagner is only the third man to be prosecuted under recent Australian legislation designed to catch suspected European war criminals who migrated here in the 1940s and '50s.

 

End of Document
