

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
January 13, 1993, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 645 words
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Newly declassified documents show the Soviets, vilified as powerful enemies during the Cold War, often felt threatened and unsure of themselves.
The picture emerging from the minutes of Politburo meetings, KGB reports and Soviet diplomatic cables is that "the Soviets were not as tall as they seemed," Vojtech Mastny, professor of international relations at Johns Hopkins University, said Tuesday at a conference of Russian and American historians.
The historians were given unprecedented access to Soviet archives over the past year.
"It's very obvious that there was a great deal of uncertainty in their minds, that they were much less self-confident, that they felt genuinely threatened and were not … as determined as they appeared," Mastny said.
Information has trickled out of Communist Party archives since the Soviet Union collapsed in December 1991.
The three-day conference, which opened Tuesday at the Russian Academy of Sciences, is turning the trickle into a flood.
---
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (AP) - The government has named outspoken opposition leader Benazir Bhutto to head a parliamentary watchdog committee on foreign policy.
Ms. Bhutto was surprised by the appointment but called it a "positive step" toward breaking the longstanding impasse between her left-leaning Pakistan People's Party and the conservative administration of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif.
Ms. Bhutto was unanimously elected Tuesday as chairperson of the Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs of the National Assembly, the lower, lawmaking house of parliament.
Ms. Bhutto, whose government was unseated in 1990 amid accusations of corruption and abuse of power, has been trying vainly for three months to drum up grassroots support for new elections. She contends Sharif's government is corrupt and that it rigged elections in 1990.
---
CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) - A special military tribunal sentenced 97 soldiers and civilians to up to 20 years in prison for staging a failed coup attempt in November, the Defense Ministry says.
The military court also acquitted 99 prisoners, said Gen. Nestor Lara of the ministry.
It was the first time since the 1960s that the government used such a special military tribunal, which speeds trials.
Defense lawyers, who were barred from the courtroom during sentencing, are challenging the legality of the tribunal before the Supreme Court.
Before sentences were announced Tuesday, imprisoned military officers seized a hostage, demanding a quick ruling by the Supreme Court on the legality of the proceedings. The hostage was later released after soldiers fired tear gas at the captors.
Some 230 people were killed in the Nov. 27-28 uprising, which was put down by loyal army units.
---
MANILA, Philippines (AP) - More than 10,000 Chinese-Filipinos marched today at a teenager's funeral, displaying outrage at what they call the government's failure to curb violence against their influential minority.
Charlene Sy, 15, was killed Thursday during a gun battle between police and gunmen who had kidnapped her. More than 100 Chinese-Filipinos have been kidnapped over the past year.
Many of the kidnappings are believed carried out by police and soldiers.
Diplomats from China and Taiwan have publicly urged the government to stop the attacks.
Today's procession to a cemetery in suburban Quezon City was led by Manila Mayor Alfredo Lim, a former police chief and a prominent Chinese-Filipino.
Sen. Dominique Coseteng, a Chinese-Filipino, called the turnout "a strong signal that victims of violence will not keep quiet."
The kidnappings have brought out deep-seated resentment which many Filipinos feel toward the Chinese minority, which includes some of the country's wealthiest businessmen.
In an editorial Tuesday, the independent Philippine Daily Globe newspaper deplored the kidnappings but accused many Chinese of using illicit methods to protect their business interests.

 

End of Document
