

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
April 27, 1993, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 631 words
Dateline: SEOUL, South Korea
Body




North Korean President Kim Il Sung appears feeble on television and has shortened his speeches, a South Korean news agency reported Tuesday.
Kim's health is closely watched by outsiders who believe that his death may precipitate a power struggle in the world's most isolated Communist state.
Hard information is lacking, however, and the 81-year-old Communist leader has outlived many rumors over the years about his health.
"Judging from his movement as shown on television and in other intelligence reports, his health must be deteriorating rapidly," the national Yonhap news agency quoted an unidentified intelligence official as saying.
North Korean television is not available in pro-West South Korea, but its programs are monitored by intelligence agencies.
---
NICOSIA, Cyprus (AP) - Iran's armed forces staged war games Tuesday in the Persian Gulf that included submarines, Tehran radio reported.
The broadcast, monitored in Nicosia, said 36,000 men took part in joint maneuvers involving ground, naval and air forces of the armed forces and the Revolutionary Guards Corps.
Two hundred ships and high speed boats, plus helicopters and submarines are engaged in the six-stage maneuvers, the radio said.
Tehran radio said in a commentary that Iran would like other Gulf states to join in the annual war games in order to do away with the need for foreign forces in the region.
Ever since the end of the 1991 Gulf War, Tehran has unsuccessfully been trying to talk its Arab neighbors into forging a defensive alliance under Iranian leadership.
---
BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) - Rescue crews at the site of a flash flood in northwestern Colombia said Tuesday that at least 59 people were killed, the Caracol radio network reported.
About 60 people were wounded in Monday's flood, officials said, and at least 40 others were still missing.
Recent heavy rains caused the Taparto river to swell early Monday morning, creating a huge flow of mud, rock and water that careened through the village of Taparto, 140 miles northwest of Bogota.
About 50 homes and five bridges and herds of domestic animals were swept away, Bogota's El Tiempo newspaper reported Tuesday.
People were washed from their homes as they slept Monday night, police told radio networks.
Some 1,200 people live in the region, and most earn their livings growing coffee. Television footage showed nothing but mud fields where settlements once stood.
Helicopter rescue teams arrived at the scene early Tuesday to continue the search for survivors.
---
STUTTGART, Germany (AP) - Seven right-wing radicals went on trial Tuesday for the 1992 murder of a guest worker from former Yugoslavia who was awakened from his sleep and beaten with baseball bats.
The two extremists accused of wielding the clubs - one alleged by police to be a neo-Nazi leader - wore handcuffs as they were escorted into Stuttgart State Court. Both are charged with murder.
The seven are accused of forcing their way into an apartment building for foreign guest workers on July 8, 1992.
A 55-year-old former Kosovo resident died from head injuries received in the beating,. Another victim, 46, survived and is to be a witness at the trial.
All seven suspects have admitted the crime. Defense attorneys apparently will try to persuade the court that the suspects deserve leniency because of hard lives.
---
PARIS (AP) - A Chopin musical score stashed in a trunk marked "old clothes" during World War II to protect it from Nazis goes on the auction block May 26.
Composed by Frederic Chopin in 1833, the score of "La Grande Valse Brillante" is in unusually fine condition and is expected to fetch $ 200,000.
It will be sold by auctioneer Jacques Tajan at the Drouot house in a sale of musical scores including works by Beethoven and Schubert, plus another by Chopin, "Polonaise-Fantasie."

 

End of Document
