

International News Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
October 5, 1992, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 633 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body




The consortium building the tunnel under the English Channel said today that the opening date has been postponed six months, until Dec. 15, 1993.
Alastair Morton, chairman of the Anglo-French Eurotunnel consortium also told the British Broadcasting Corp. that the tunnel will be not be running at full capacity until late 1994 because of delays in manufacturing the trains that will carry passengers and cargo through the 31-mile tunnel.
In its regular half-year statement, Eurotunnel said it might have to seek additional funding for the project, which had originally been estimated at $ 8.7 billion but is now costing at least $ 14.7 billion
Workers have completed the tunnel's two rail tubes and a maintenance tube between Folkestone in England and Calais in northern France. But tracks must still be laid and power, signals and other facilities installed.
---
SEOUL, South Korea (AP) - President Roh Tae-woo resigned from the governing Democratic Liberal Party today, setting the stage for the appointment of a neutral Cabinet that he says will ensure fairness in the presidential election.
The election is expected to be held in December. Charges of vote-rigging in elections earlier this year have raised widespread concern that the presidential balloting would be unfair.
Roh announced his intent to resign from the party two weeks ago in an attempt to regain public trust of the government.
"By electing a new government in fair elections, we will resolve differences and establish a stable political climate for the future," Roh said in a statement. By law, he cannot run for re-election.
---
CANBERRA, Australia (AP) - Two centuries of tradition formally ceased today when British Queen Elizabeth and Prime Minister Paul Keating agreed to end knighthoods and other royal honors for Australians.
For generations, federal and state governments have recommended to British monarchs that they bestow titles plus a range of orders and medals on selected citizens.
Politicians, businesspeople, bureaucrats, sporting champions, military officers, expert specialists, charity workers and entertainers were regular recipients of imperial honors, known colloquially as "gongs".
The Australian Labor Party, however, has frowned on the practice and refused to take part whenever it was in power.
In 1975 the Labor government of former prime minister Gough Whitlam introduced an alternative indigenous Order of Australia honors system.
Since then, most state and federal governments have adhered exclusively to the Australian honors.
Like Canada and New Zealand, Australia kept the British monarch as head of state upon independence from colonial rule.
---
BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) - The head of Colombia's national police is blaming drug boss Pablo Escobar for the recent murders of policemen in the city of Medellin.
Another judicial employee was reported murdered in Medellin on Sunday, bringing to 19 the total number of functionaries believed killed by Escobar's Medellin cartel in the past three weeks.
Joaquin Emilio Isaza, a chauffeur for the Medellin public prosector's office, was gunned down along with his brother-in-law as they repaired an office vehicle on a Medellin street, said a local police bulletin.
The national police chief, Gen. Miguel Gomez, said in an interview with the El Tiempo newspaper Sunday that Escobar was ordering the murder of policemen. It was the first official confirmation from police about who was responsible for killing 17 police agents in Medellin during the past three weeks.
Escobar and nine of his lieutenants escaped from their resort-like prison July 22 during a bungled military operation to transfer them to a more secure facility.
"The agents' deaths were ordered by the escapees, who seek to discourage security forces from carrying out the mission to capture them," Gomez said.

 

End of Document
