

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
February 3, 1993, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 634 words
Dateline: VOLGOGRAD, Russia
Body




The 50th anniversary of the Battle of Stalingrad was a day of emotional reunions, outrage over the Soviet collapse and muted attempts at reconciliation.
The battle remains a powerful symbol of the sacrifice that the Soviet republics made during World War II, which claimed the lives of an estimated 26 million Soviet citizens.
A Russian honor guard laid more than 90 wreaths at the Eternal Flame Tuesday. The monument stands near the old department store where Nazi Field Marshal Friedrich Paulus surrendered on Feb. 2, 1943, ending the 200-day battle and the German's eastern advance.
At one point, Yevgeny Shaposhnikov, military commander of the Commonwealth of Independent States, was surrounded by a few of the veterans gathered here, who demanded to know why the military had allowed the Soviet Union to collapse.
Officials from Volgograd and its German sister cities of Cologne and Chemnitz opened Reconciliation Square, a grassy area near the Volga that previously was called Friendship Square.
---
ATHENS, Greece (AP) - Greece is cracking down on illegal immigrants, who are increasingly blamed for unemployment and crime.
The government announced a nationwide sweep on Tuesday. Public Order Minister Nikos Gelestathis said foreigners in the country illegally would be arrested and quickly expelled.
He said police estimate about 400,000 illegal aliens are in Greece. Other ministries have put the number as high as 600,000, or 6 percent of Greece's population of 10 million.
Advocates for immigrants criticized the crackdown. Lawyer Ioanna Kurtovic said police measures would not solve the social problems created by the flood of foreigners.
Gelestathis said statistics tie immigrants to a sharp rise in crime. Public anger also is high over the perception that skilled foreigners, who often work for as little as one-tenth the minimum wage, steal jobs from Greeks.
Many of the immigrants have fled the former Soviet Union and eastern Europe to seek work.
---
PRAGUE, Czech Republic (AP) - Vaclav Havel, the new Czech president, says the revolution is over. Now the hard part begins.
"This is the time of everyday, common and hard work," the playwright-turned-politician told cheering Czechs at his inauguration Tuesday.
Havel, once Czechoslovakia's leading dissident, became its president in December 1989 after Communism were ousted in a peaceful revolution.
Czechoslovakia split into the Czech Republic and Slovakia on Jan. 1 after leaders failed to reconcile growing differences over the pace of economic reform. Those problems were stoked by nationalism in Slovakia.
Last week, Havel easily won election in the Czech parliament as president of the new Czech Republic.
Also Tuesday, the parliaments of the Czech Republic and Slovakia approved separate currencies for their lands.
Slovakia, burdened with obsolete industries built during the Communist era, may be forced to devalue its currency.
---
LIMA, Peru (AP) - Shining Path leader Abimael Guzman's lawyer and another attorney for the Maoist-inspired rebels have been sentenced to life in prison for terrorism.
Alfredo Crespo, the Guzman's lawyer, and Jorge Cartagena, who represented high-ranking guerrilla leader Marta Huatay, were sentenced Jan. 27, national penitentiary official Henry Williams said Tuesday.
The news was delayed for security reasons, he said.
Crespo and Cartagena were arrested Jan. 11 on terrorism charges. They belonged to the Democratic Lawyers Association, a legal group accused of links to the Shining Path. Ms. Huatay was a former president of the association.
Crespo defended Guzman during his 10-day military trial in October and Cartagena defended Ms. Huatay in her November trial. Both Guzman and Ms. Huatay were sentenced to life in prison for terrorism.
Guzman's 13-year insurgency has claimed more than 25,000 lives on both sides.

 

End of Document
