

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
February 4, 1993, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 528 words
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




In another effort to hold down the price of food, the government will collect 3 percent of the revenues from all Russian businesses to help the country's ailing farm sector.
Agriculture Minister Viktor Khlystun told reporters in Moscow Wednesday that farms need more than $ 1 billion, at a minimum, for spring sowing.
The government has promised only $ 750 million, and owes farmers $ 437 million for purchases last year, Khlystun said.
Also Wednesday, Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin signed an order corralling the price of bread and grain.
The order limits the profit margin of all bread-related businesses to 15 percent, and recommends that local officials try to reduce retail markups on bread and bread products.
---
ABU DHABI, United Arab Emirates (AP) - Kuwait will never forgive the government of Saddam Hussein for Iraq's invasion of the emirate, its foreign minister says.
"Forgiveness is in our nature," Sheik Sabah al-Ahmed said Wednesday after delivering a message from the Emir of Kuwait, Sheik Jaber al-Sabah, to the president of the United Arab Emirates, Sheik Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan.
"Circumstances may one day restore our relations with others as we do not wish to have the boycott forever," he added. But "there is no place for forgiveness in the heart of any Kuwaiti with the Iraqi regime."
A U.S.-led coalition drove Iraq from Kuwait in 1991.
---
KHARTOUM, Sudan (AP) - Rebels have looted three U.N.-flagged ships of food destined for hungry people in southern Sudan, the United Nations says.
U.N. officials in Khartoum said the Nassir faction of the rebel Sudan People's Liberation Army intercepted the steamers on Jan. 18 on the Nile some 750 miles south of Khartoum.
The statement said the supplies had been destined for areas of "extreme need" like those in the besieged southern city of Juba. Of Juba's 400,000 residents, 80 percent depend on relief food for survival.
The statement said that by looting the food, the Nassir faction has breached an agreement reached in Kenya with the main SPLA group to allow relief reach all needy people.
The SPLA was formed by Col. John Garang, who has led a rebellion against the government seeking greater autonomy and economic development for the south.
In August 1991, the Nassir faction declared it was splitting off and accused Garang of dictatorial rule and human rights abuses.
---
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) - Government agencies have not been forthcoming about Nazis in Argentina in order to protect the reputation of Gen. Juan Peron, a Nazi-hunter says.
"Obviously, the arrival in Argentina of numerous Nazi high officials implied a protection by the government of that moment, led by Gen. Juan Peron," Simon Wiesenthal was quoted Wednesday by the newspaper Pagina 12 as saying Wednesdy.
"The reason for hiding the truth is exactly that."
President Carlos Menem signed a decree on Feb. 3, 1992, ordering state agencies to turn over all their files to the National Archives.
The Federal Police, Interior Ministry and state intelligence service say they did, but their records on Adolf Eichmann, Martin Bormann, Josef Mengele and others were mostly news clips and photographs that revealed little new information.

 

End of Document
