

International News Briefs by The Associated Press
The Associated Press
October 2, 1992, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 491 words
Dateline: VATICAN CITY
Body




The Vatican says Pope John Paul II's visit to the Dominican Republic is not linked to celebration of Christopher Columbus's arrival in the new world.
At least two people have been killed in recent clashes in the Dominican Republic over the commemoration of Columbus' arrival, and the military has threatened to use deadly force if the protests continue during the five-day papal visit that begins Oct. 9.
"The pope is not going to pay homage to the arrival of Columbus," said papal spokesman Joaquin Navarro. He said the church is marking the arrival of the first Christian missionaries.
Protesters link the arrival of Columbus to the beginning of subjugation and extermination of native peoples. They also accuse Dominican President Joaquin Balaguar of squandering money on multimillion-dollar Columbus lighthouse memorial.
---
STOCKHOLM, Sweden (AP) - German paleontologist Adolf Seilacher, awarded the prestigious Crafoord Prize, says the theory of evolution has advanced beyond Darwin.
Seilacher, who teaches at Yale University in New Haven, Conn., received the $ 430,000 prize Thursday from the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. The award is given in sciences not eligible for Nobel Prizes.
Seilacher has investigated how geological changes have affected the environment. The academy said "his results have led to totally new concepts of understanding the evolution of life."
Evolutionary theory has advanced since the discoveries of 19th century naturalist Charles Darwin, Seilacher told reporters.
The study of fossils now shows that there are "evolutionary cascades," such as mass extinctions and new life forms appearing as "serendipitous events" that cannot be explained by classical Darwinian theory.
---
MONTEVIDEO, Uruguay (AP) - A referendum will be held in December on whether to repeal the law allowing the sale of state companies, Uruguayan voters have decided.
By late Thursday, 30 percent of the 2.3 million voters had opted for a review of last year's law, a spokesman for the Pro-Referendum Commission said. The minimum needed was 25 percent.
In the referendum, opponents of the law will need 51 percent of the vote in order to have it repealed.
President Luis Lacalle and key factions of the governing National Party had urged that the law be upheld so the government could proceed with the sale of the state airline Pluna and phone company ANTel.
---
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) - The Senate has voted to ban smoking in elevators and other enclosed public places and to severely restrict related advertising.
The legislation approved Wednesday night also would ban cigarette sales to youths under 16.
Argentines bought 2 billion packs of cigarettes last year. One in three adult Argentines smokes, and 40,000 die every year of smoking-related ailments, according to the Argentine League to Fight Cancer.
The rules approved by the Senate have been approved by the lower house of Congress, and President Carlos Menem is expected to sign them.

 

End of Document
