

International News Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
November 10, 1992, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 569 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Three businessmen have been acquitted of selling arms-making equipment to Iraq, and the prosecution acknowledged its case had been destroyed by testimony that the government approved the exports.
Paul Henderson, 52, former managing director of Matrix Churchill Corp.; the Iraqi-owned company's former sales director Peter Allen, 46; and its former commercial director Trevor Abraham, 45, were cleared Monday.
The three had been accused of deceiving government Trade Department officials by claiming machine tools had peaceful purposes when they were specifically designed to make fuses for shells.
The defendants claimed the government was aware of the use of the machinery and denied violating export agreements. Henderson was quoted by the Financial Times today as saying he had worked for British intelligence in the former Soviet bloc and Iraq for more than 15 years.
A senior trade official acknowledged during the trial that the government approved the exports in exchange for information on Iraq's nuclear capability.
---
TOKYO (AP) - The Japanese publishers of Madonna's "Sex" said today that they will retouch several of the book's photographs to avert a likely government ban.
An official at publisher Dohosha, speaking on condition of anonymity, said several photographs would be altered in the Japanese edition before its first run of 150,000 copies goes on sale Dec. 1.
He said the company already has received orders for the entire run.
The decision comes two weeks after customs officials barred copies of "Sex" from being imported unless portions were blocked out.
It was likely that Japanese police, who enforce obscenity laws for books published domestically, would also object to the book's depictions of sexual acts.
Unwritten and inconsistently enforced standards allow a wide range of often graphic sexual material as long as genitals or pubic hair are not displayed.
The Dohosha official said Warner Books, the American publisher of "Sex," would not block the retouching of the Japanese edition.
---
MOGADISHU, Somalia (AP) - About 20 Pakistanis supervised the unloading of prefabricated homes from a U.N. ship at Somalia's port in the first deployment of the armed U.N. force.
U.N. officials said they had won a special agreement from Gen. Mohamed Farrah Aidid, Somalia's main warlord, for Monday's deployment.
The materials unloaded will provide housing for 500 Pakistani U.N. troops. The soldiers completed their arrival in Somalia on Sept. 28 but have not yet been deployed because of Aidid's objections.
The troops are to protect the port and airport, the main points of entry for relief supplies for the nation's millions of starving people. The areas often are raided by armed bandits.
---
BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) - The country's media, which is subject to censorship by President Cesar Gaviria's declaration of a state of emergency, back his efforts to crack down on leftist rebels.
Government and financial leaders also expressed support Monday for Gaviria's move, announced Sunday.
"The president has finally realized that attempts at a negotiated solution (with the guerrillas) have been and will continue to be futile," said the El Espectador, one of two leading Bogota dailies.
Newspapers are prohibited under the decree from publishing rebel statements.
The emergency powers, which will last 90 days, also enable the president to order action against the rebels without consulting Congress or the courts.

 

End of Document
