

International News Briefs by The Associated Press
The Associated Press
October 8, 1992, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 431 words
Dateline: NEW DELHI, India
Body




Sotheby's held the first international art auction in India's history on Thursday, opening the largest collection of works ever offered for sale in the nation.
The event was significant in a 5,000-year-old country that lost millions of art works to invaders, colonial rulers and smugglers.
To make sure foreigners didn't walk off with any major works, the government had Sotheby's forbid the export of all items more than 100 years old or considered national art treasures.
In the opening session, Sotheby's auctioned 122 watercolors and paintings that Indians had purchased in Europe between 1890 and 1940, when their nation was ruled by England. Even though none of the works were by local artists, India had Sotheby's list 28 of them as unexportable.
Only about 40 percent of the 122 works drew high enough bids to sell; half were purchased by Europeans.
"Bath of Venus" by British artist John William Godward drew the highest bid: $ 93,000.
 
 BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) - Twenty-five years ago, Ernesto "Che" Guevara, the Argentine-born medical doctor who was Fidel Castro's right-hand man during the Cuban revolution, was a legend.
Today, most Argentines apparently don't know who he was.
According to a poll published Thursday by the leftist newspaper Pagina 12, 53 percent of the people they surveyed had no idea who "Che" was, or no opinion about him.
Slightly more than 32 percent remembered him favorably. The rest did not.
Friday is the 25th anniversary of "Che's" death in the jungles of Bolivia, where he was trying to coordinate a Communist revolution.
"Che" is an Argentine word for "hey" or "you." It's used commonly in conversation here, though not elsewhere in Latin America. Cubans found it pleasingly odd and took to calling Guevara by that word.
 
 BEIJING (AP) - Olympic diving star Gao Min will be among the more than 2,000 delegates gathering for the Chinese Communist Party congress next week, an official report said Thursday.
But two of the 1,991 delegates elected to the congress, held once every five years, won't be in attendance.
Hu Qiaomu, a member of the Standing Committee of the party's Central Advisory Commission, and Wang Mini, a Beijing hotel employee, have died, the official Xinhua News Agency reported.
Gao, the 22-year-old Olympic diver, is the youngest delegate to the congress. The delegate's average age is 54, Xinhua said.
More than 70 percent of the delegates are college graduates, 11 percent more than attended the last congress in 1987, it said.
The congress is to open Monday and is expected to convene for eight days in a show of party unity and harmony.

 

End of Document
