

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
January 8, 1993, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 616 words
Dateline: DRESDEN, Germany
Body




The Semper Gallery, home of one of Europe's great Old Masters collections, has closed one of its halls after damp invaded the building, just one month after it reopened following a $ 60 million restoration.
Officials said a combination of cold weather, warm visitors and thin walls apparently let moisture collect in the German Hall.
Wet spots developed early this week behind paintings by the 16th-century masters Duerer and Cranach, especially those hung in niches.
"The niches - we forgot them during the planning. I can't talk about it," groaned Wolf Reidner, construction department head in the Saxony state government, at a news conference.
The damp affected only one hall, and 93 percent of the Semper collection of some 700 paintings was still on view. The gallery's most famous painting, Raphael's "Sistine Madonna," is "safe as in the bosom of Abraham," gallery director Harald Marx said.
The Semper Gallery, built in the 19th century to display paintings collected by Saxony's 18th-century kings, was closed as a firetrap in 1988. Its reopening was greeted as a high point in the cultural life of former east Germany.
 
 ---
KHARTOUM, Sudan (AP) - Another acute gasoline shortage in Sudan has nearly emptied the streets of Khartoum and has cars lined up for miles at gas stations.
Sudan is running out gas because foreign countries owe it money for exports, Abdul-Rahim Hamdi, Sudan's finance and economic planning minister, was quoted Thursday as saying in the daily al-Inqaz al-Watani newspaper.
Hamdi also criticized Sudanese expatriates for spending their foreign currency to import large numbers of used cars.
The gasoline shortage is affecting private and public transport and forcing Sudanese to spend long hours traveling to and from work.
Because of its failing economy, Sudan has long been plagued with gasoline shortages. It depended on Libya, Iraq and other Gulf countries to provide gasoline, but the Gulf War disrupted that traditional route.
 
 ---
GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP) - Peace Corps volunteers will return to Guyana this year, more than a decade after soured relations with the United States led to a collapse of the program in the South American republic.
Foreign Ministry officials on Thursday said negotiations to reactivate the program will begin this week.
Corps members first came to this former British colony in 1967, but the program had collapsed over Guyana's now-abandoned socialist orientation.
Now officials say that up to 30 volunteers will come here this year to work in education, health, agriculture, water quality management, fisheries and statistics.
Relations between Washington and Georgetown are at an all-time high, with the United States among a coalition of Western nations bankrolling an economic recovery program supervised by the International Monetary Fund and World Bank.
 
 ---
MEXICO (AP) - Mexican prices rose by 11.9 percent in 1992, the lowest annual inflation rate in 17 years, according to figures released late Thursday by the country's central bank.
The rise was the lowest since 1975, when inflation hit 11.3 percent, the Banco de Mexico said in a statement.
Inflation in 1991 was 18.8 percent, 29.9 percent in 1990 and 19.7 percent in 1989.
Prices rose by 159.2 percent in 1987 and by 51.7 percent in 1988, the year President Carlos Salinas de Gortari took office.
But the rate has declined in three of the four full years that Salinas has held office. Analysts give much of the credit to the president's market reforms and reduction of government spending.
But experts say prices must continue to come down nearer to the levels of the United States and Canada if Mexico is to fully benefit from the recently signed North American Free Trade Agreement.

 

End of Document
