

International Briefs from The Asociated Press
The Associated Press
December 5, 1992, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 615 words
Dateline: BERLIN
Body




Officials have charged a Palestinian with the 1986 disco bombing that killed two U.S. soldiers, and said Libyan embassy workers helped plot the attack.
It was the first time anybody has been charged in the bombing, which led to retaliatory air strikes on Libya.
The officials credited information gleaned from the files of former East Germany's Communist secret police, which harbored terrorists for decades and apparently knew about the disco bomb plot before it took place.
The Berlin Prosecutor's Office on Friday charged a 37-year-old man identified only as Imad M. with conspiracy and murder in connection with the bombing of the La Belle disco in former West Berlin.
The April 5, 1986, attack killed the two off-duty American soldiers and a Turkish woman and injured 229 others. The United States held Libya responsible and bombed Tripoli and Benghazi 10 days later.
---
MEXICO CITY (AP) - Led by a gold-caped wrestler, about 50 demonstrators stormed a Sheraton Hotel to protest U.S. businesses that heed new restrictions on trade with Cuba.
"Cuba Si, Sheraton No!" shouted the wrestler, SuperBarrio, a popular figure who crusades for the poor. Others in the Friday demonstration unfurled banners showing the late revolutionary Che Guevara and calling for an end to the 30-year-old trade embargo.
Some of the protesters briefly scuffled with bellhops before raising the Cuban flag in the lobby. Elegantly dressed guests scurried out of the way and no one was injured.
Under the law, foreign subsidiaries of U.S. companies may be prosecuted if they do business with Cuba.
Many European and Latin American nations, including Mexico, have criticized the law as excessive punishment for a country struggling with severe economic hardship after the collapse of its Soviet bloc trading partners.
---
LONDON (AP) - The Middle East peace process has received an apparent boost with Israeli and Palestinian negotiators issuing optimistic statements and Arab leaders deciding to attend the next round of talks in Washington.
"I believe that we are on the verge of peace in the Middle East," said Israeli Deputy Foreign Minister Yossi Beilin on Friday. "Provided we do the utmost … to compromise, then it may be a matter not of years, but of months."
Both sides said Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's more conciliatory tone has fostered optimism.
In Beit Meri, Lebanon, Arab foreign ministers overcame Palestinian objections and decided unanimously to attend the eighth round of peace talks on Monday. The talks, sponsored by the United States and Washington, include Israel, Palestinians, Lebanon, Jordan and Syria.
Palestinian negotiator Muhammad Hallaj in London said: "There is reason for optimism."
---
SEOUL, South Korea (AP) - An accounting clerk for the giant Hyundai conglomerate said today the company spent at least $ 40 million in illegal presidential campaigning for Hyundai's founder, Chung Ju-yung.
The revelation came one day after police and tax officers ransacked the Seoul headquarters of the conglomerate for evidence of illegal campaigning for Chung.
Chung is one of the three front-runners in the campaign for the Dec. 18 election to pick South Korea's first truly civilian president in 32 years.
The ruling Democratic Liberal Party has accused Chung of buying votes and using Hyundai's business connections and money to campaign for the 77-year-old tycoon.
Chung Yoon-ok, 27, an employee at Hyundai Heavy Industries Co., told a news conference that the Hyundai subsidiary $ 40 million in company funds to Chung's United Peoples' Party.
"The charge is groundless," said Byon Jong-il, a spokesman for the United People's Party. He contended a mere clerk cannot know the flow of such a huge fund.

 

End of Document
