

International News Briefs from The Associated Press
The Associated Press
March 24, 1993, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 769 words
Dateline: SAN SALVADOR, El Salvador
Body




The Salvadoran army has attacked a U.N.-backed report blaming the military for the bulk of wartime atrocities.
Defense Minister Rene Emilio Ponce, flanked by a dozen other officers, delivered the military's first response to the March 15 report on television late Tuesday.
"The clear intent was to discredit the Armed Forces," said Ponce, who claimed that abuses committed by the former Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front had been ignored "in selective form."
The three-member independent Commission on the Truth recommended firing about 40 military officers and imposing a 10-year ban on public office by leftist rebels and civilians also implicated as having committed abuses during the 12-year war.
But the National Assembly passed a "general and absolute amnesty" on Saturday.
Only days before release of the commission report, Ponce had offered his resignation. But President Alfredo Cristiani has yet to accept the offer.
---
LONDON (AP) - The Old Royal Observatory, which made Greenwich in southeast London the center of time and space for 300 years, is reopening as a museum.
Starting today, visitors can walk through 16 new galleries in of four buildings, seeing how scientists worked with the instruments that measured time, mapped the heavens and determined longitude to enable sailors to find out where they were.
The prime meridian line of zero longitude, from which east and west are measured, runs through Greenwich.
American art historian Kristen Lippincott headed the renovation and transformation, which cost nearly $ 3 million. She is curator of astronomy and head of navigational sciences at the nearby National Maritime Museum.
The observatory was founded in 1675. The astronomers left Greenwich 45 years ago to find clear skies and are now based in Cambridge, 56 miles north of London, while their observatory is on the Spanish Canary island of La Palma off northwest Africa.
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - A federal appeals court has rejected a retrial for the rancher who planned the killing of rain forest defender Chico Mendes.
But Tuesday's ruling in the case of Darli Alves da Silva has little immediate effect - Alves da Silva and his son Darcy Perreira, the actual killer, escaped from prison in February.
Alves da Silva was convicted of first-degree murder for ordering Perreira to slay Mendes in his backwoods hometown of Xapuri in 1988.
In February 1992, a state judge ordered Alves da Silva retried on grounds that the testimony of the prosecution's main witness was biased.
"This court can only modify a decision made by a jury in the event that the decision taken is frankly contrary to the evidence produced in the trial," the appeals court said in a statement to the press.
Alves da Silva and Perreira, who was also convicted of first-degree murder, were each sentenced in 1990 to 19 years in prison.
The case drew world attention to the often-violent struggle between conservationists and ranchers in the rapidly disappearing Amazon rain forest.
---
SAN'A, Yemen (AP) - Yemeni Jews are emigrating to Israel after the government apparently relaxed restrictions on travel for the remaining members of an ancient community that once numbered more than 50,000.
Reports that Yemen's Jews, now estimated to number only 1,200, were leaving first surfaced in the London-based Saudi newspaper Asharq Al-Awsat.
The newspaper reported last week that the government in San'a had bowed to pressures exerted "by the network of Western Zionist organizations" on behalf of Yemen's Jewish community.
Foreign Minister Abdul-Karim al-Iryani confirmed the report this week, but said: "We do not sanction their travel to Israel."
Arab countries except Egypt are still technically at war with Israel, and their citizens are not allowed to travel to the Jewish state.
The Arabs are particularly sensitive about the migration of Jews to Israel on the grounds it would lead to more settlements in the occupied territories at the expense of the Palestinians.
---
TAIPEI, Taiwan (AP) - The United States may take retaliatory trade measures against Taiwan unless this island makes a stronger commitment to protect copyrights and patents, a U.S. official said today.
"The Clinton Administration (wants) to maintain fair and open trade and we will resort to any tools to accomplish it," Natale Bellocchi, chairman of the American Institute in Taiwan in Washington, said at a news conference.
The institute is the unofficial U.S. mission established in 1979 to oversee U.S. interests in Taiwan after Washington switched diplomatic recognition from the Nationalist Chinese in Taipei to the Chinese Communist government in Beijing.

 

End of Document
