

International News Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
February 10, 1993, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 589 words
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Both El Salvador's army and its leftist rebels have been criticized by the U.N. Security Council.
In a statement adopted unanimously Tuesday, the council said it was concerned the government has failed to fully comply with its mandate to purge officers responsible for massacres or atrocities or who are linked with rightist death squads.
On the other hand, the council also worried that the leftist Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front rebels had not yet destroyed all its weapons.
"The Security Council strongly urges the parties to persist in their determination to complete the process of bringing peace and national reconciliation to El Salvador," it said.
The 15 council members also approved a plan by Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali to send U.N. observers to monitor the country's first postwar national elections in March 1994.
---
OTTAWA (AP) - A small group of Indians is expected to be moved from a bleak island back to the mainland after a rash of suicide attempts.
The Canadian government moved the Innu Indians to Davis Inlet, a village on a barren island off Labrador, 26 years ago with the promise of better living conditions.
But the island has no running water or sewage treatment, and the Innu suffer from rampant substance abuse and family violence.
The community's health center has reported that 25 percent of the adults attempted suicide last year. It was not clear how many succeeded. Leaders say 42 children in the community are addicted to fumes from solvents.
Indian Affairs Minister Tom Siddon said Tuesday that the settlement "can no longer exist in its present location."
He said a new site has not been chosen. But the community is expected to be moved back to the mainland, closer to the herds of caribou that form a vital part of their culture.
---
TOKYO (AP) - A local court gave a three-year suspended sentence to a teacher today for accidentally slamming a school gate on a 15-year-old student's head and killing her.
The case is viewed as a symbol of the sometimes brutal rigidity of the Japanese educational system.
Toshihiko Hosoi could be sent to jail for one year if the teacher breaks any law during the three years.
On July 6, 1990, Hosoi closed the front gate of Hyogo Prefectural Takatsuki High School in Kobe at 8:30 a.m. in an effort to teach students a lesson about coming to school on time.
Ryoko Ishida, 15, was slightly tardy and was caught in the heavy metal gate. Her skull was crushed.
The judge said the teacher's negligence resulted in Miss Ishida's death. But he said he handed down a suspended sentence in part because he had shown remorse.
---
NEW DELHI, India (AP) - McDonald's plans to invest $ 20 million and take on a local partner in a chain of fast food outlets in India.
The giant burger chain's venture into India is likely to be a challenge - beef is taboo to most Hindus, who are 82 percent of the nation's 875 million people.
The government on Tuesday approved $ 54 million investment by 25 foreign firms, including the Oak Brook, Ill.-based multinational.
It was not immediately known how many outlets McDonald's plans to open in India. Some will be operated by a subsidiary of the American chain and others by an unnamed Indian partner, newspapers said.
McDonald's proposes to invest $ 20 million over a seven-year period, a government statement said.
Prime Minister P.V. Narasimha Rao has cut corporate taxes, scrapped irksome rules, reduced import tariffs and allowed firms to take profits out of India to attract foreign investment and expose Indian companies to competition.

 

End of Document
