

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
April 5, 1993, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 440 words
Dateline: MANILA, Philippines
Body




President Fidel Ramos signed legislation today granting him emergency powers to cope with the electricity crisis that has put thousands out of work and crippled the Philippine economy.
He urged the public to be patient as the government struggles to overcome years of neglect and mismanagement by the administration of his predecessor, Corazon Aquino.
The bill, approved last week by Congress, will allow Ramos to build generating stations without public bidding, reorganize the National Power Corp., fix the corporation's financial rate of return and divert profits from the state gaming monopoly to the power company.
The electricity shortage has brought daily power cuts of up to 10 hours in Manila and other major cities.
Many small and medium-sized companies have to shut down during the outages. The power crisis has cost 71,000 jobs in metropolitan Manila alone, the government says.
---
BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) - A paramilitary group in Medellin says it is ending a one-month truce and renewing its war on fugitive drug lord Pablo Escobar.
The secretive group, which calls itself "Persecuted by Pablo Escobar," sent a written statement Sunday to the RCN radio network, which shared it with The Associated Press.
For the first time, he group explicity stated that its mission is to kill the Medellin drug lord, who escaped from jail last July.
The group, known informally by its Spanish acronym, "Pepes," began attacking Escobar's interests and murdering his aides in February. They destroyed about a dozen properties, including Escobar's prized classic car collection, and killed at least 15 people.
Officials suspect the group was formed by disgruntled drug traffickers who broke with Escobar over brutal purges carried out inside the Medellin cartel.
---
PARIS (AP) - Ex-mercenary Bob Denard, who retired after leading raids and coups across Africa for 30 years, was convicted today of criminal association and given a five-year suspended sentence.
He was found guilty of recruiting French mercenaries for a failed coup against the Marxist government in the west African nation of Benin in 1977.
Denard, 64, also faces charges of murder and theft in connection with the 1989 assassination of the president of the Comoros Islands.
He was freed today pending trial on these charges.
Denard, who fled to South Africa in 1989, was arrested on Feb. 1 when he returned to France hoping to clear his name.
Denard served as a quartermaster in the French army in Indochina and Algeria before leading mercenaries in the Katanga Republic, Biafra, Portuguese Angola, white Rhodesia, the late Shah Mohamed Reza Pahlevi's Iran and the ill-fated monarchy of Yemen.

 

End of Document
