

International News Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
February 11, 1993, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 621 words
Dateline: BONN, Germany
Body




Unemployment is growing and the economy shrinking in Germany, Europe's financial engine.
A gloomy government report Wednesday was the first official acknowledgement Germany is in recession.
"A downturn is also a recession. I cannot judge whether it is the deepest in the postwar era. We must do everything to ensure that it does not become the deepest of the postwar era," Economics Minister Guenter Rexrodt told reporters.
Growth will be zero and could even contract by 0.5 percent, Rexrodt said.
Unemployment for all of Germany in 1993 is expected to climb from 7.7 percent last year to 9 percent.
German economic troubles result from the mammoth costs of unifying former East and West Germany and worldwide economic stagnation.
---
VIENNA, Austria (AP) - The International Atomic Energy Agency is considering the unprecedented step of ordering a special inspection in North Korea because the country barred experts from two facilities.
If Pyongyang refuses to allow a special inspection, the matter could eventually go to the U.N. Security Council.
IAEA spokesman David Kyd told The Associated Press Wednesday that North Korea reneged on promises to grant unrestricted access at its Yongbyon complex. It also denied inspectors entry to two buildings where nuclear waste is stored.
Kyd said IAEA chief Hans Blix has consulted with the 35 nations - including the United States - on the agency's board of governors about whether to request a special inspection.
A special inspection is expressly requested from the agency rather than negotiated between the agency and a nation. Kyd said the agency - the United Nations' nuclear watchdog body - had never requested a special inspection before.
North Korea has repeatedly denied it has a nuclear weapons program, as international analysts suspect.
---
TAIPEI, Taiwan (AP) - The man likely to be Taiwan's next premier was born on the island, marking a historic shift in power from old guard Nationalists to a younger generation.
President Lee Teng-hui named Taiwan provincial governor Lien Chan premier on Wednesday. Lien is Taiwan's first native-born premier.
The appointment is considered a victory for Lee, 70, who has championed democratic reforms and pursued a pragmatic policy toward China since taking power in 1988 as Taiwan's first native-born president.
Analysts expect Lien, a political scientist educated at the University of Chicago who has served as governor since 1990, to follow Lee's policies.
Lien's appointment followed weeks of intense fighting between conservatives and reformists within the governing Nationalist Party.
---
BRASILIA, Brazil (AP) - The government says it will use the air force, army and federal police to drive thousands of wildcat miners from the Amazon reserve of the Yanomami Indians.
Justice Minister Mauricio Correa said Wednesday that 250 pilots, police officers and soldiers will take part in "Operation Free Jungle II," a three-month campaign beginning on Feb. 25 to expel 11,000 miners from the 37,000-square-mile reservation.
"We hope that the miners will leave on their own, peacefully, with the announcement of this operation," said Correa.
He said government forces would concentrate on the Surucucu, Paapiu, Parafuri, Serra da Estrutura, Catrimani and Mucajai areas, the regions most populated by the Yanomami.
The Yanomami, members of the world's largest Stone Age tribe, were largely ignored until 1987, when the discovery of large deposits of gold, diamonds, tin and uranium on their land triggered an invasion of miners.
The miners have brought disease and environmental havoc to the pristine rain forest, home of 9,000 Yanomami in Brazil and 11,000 more in Venezuela.
In four years, an estimated 2,000 Yanomami have died from disease and violence.

 

End of Document
