

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
May 28, 1993, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 695 words
Dateline: AMSTERDAM, Netherlands
Body




The city's famed marijuana-dealing coffee shops are feeling the heat of police scrutiny after decades of official tolerance.
Only about 80 coffee shops remain in Amsterdam, with their distinctive cannabis leaf logos, down from a high of about 300 a decade ago.
The crackdown threatens the image Dutch policy-makers cultivated of the coffee shops as the only safe way to regulate the trade in marijuana and its hashish derivative.
Police launched raids on seven more coffee shops this week as part of a crackdown on heroin dealing and the receiving of stolen goods. Five were shut down.
Police spokesman Klaas Wilting on Friday cited "'nuisance" rather than just the presence of hard drugs as the reason for the raids.
But the closures have sparked a public debate on the issue, playing into the hands of other European Community countries that object to the liberal Dutch drug policy.
Although marijuana and hashish are still technically illegal, Dutch authorities tolerate their sale in an estimated 1,500 coffee shops around the nation. The shops are banned from dealing in hard drugs.
---
LONDON (AP) - The government handed over $ 500,000 of confiscated drug money to the United States on Friday - the first time Britain has shared such spoils with another country.
Britain recovered the cash in a long-running operation by Britain, the United States and Colombia against drug trafficker Jose Rodriquez Gacha, a leading figure in the Medellin cartel who was killed in a 1989 shootout in Colombia.
Several months earlier, he had been indicted on drug charges in the United States. British authorities said their work on the case led to a number of arrests and the freezing of assets worth more than $ 2 million.
The Home Office said its transfer of cash to the United States "marks a significant step forward in international co-operation against serious crime."
The United States has already given Britain nearly $ 5.5 million in drug spoils for its assistance in similar investigations.
---
MOSCOW (AP) - A Russian communications satellite has veered off course after launch and will have to be replaced, a space agency official said Friday.
The $ 1 million Horizont satellite was launched Thursday from the Baikonur cosmodrome in the former Soviet republic of Kazakhstan.
It was commissioned by the Communications Ministry for broadcasting and signal relay within the former Soviet Union, the Interfax news agency said.
Anatoly Tkachev, an official with the Russian space agency, said the satellite will eventually burn up in the atmosphere. He said the loss would have no immediate effect on communications.
---
BEIJING (AP) - Three political activists have been arrested in Shanghai as authorities prepare for the fourth anniversary of the crackdown on the 1989 democracy movement, a veteran dissident said Friday.
The three, Gao Xianliang, Yao Tiansheng and Han Lifa, were arrested Wednesday morning, the dissident, Zhang Xianliang, said by telephone from Shanghai.
The three were active in an unofficial labor union founded during the 1989 democracy movement, which started in Beijing's Tiananmen Square and spread to about 80 cities around the country.
He said the three had talked of planning some kind of large-scale activity on June 4.
"This is a warning," Zhang said of the arrests.
He said another Shanghai activist, Yao Kaiwen, has been missing since May 1. Yao was good friends with the three arrested this week, and Zhang feared that he also may have been arrested.
---
PRAGUE, Czech Republic (AP) - The Czech Republic and Slovakia, formerly united in the Czechoslovak federation, formalized diplomatic relations with the opening of embassies in each other's capitals, media reported Friday.
The two states became independent of each other on Jan. 1, 1993, with the peaceful breakup of Czechoslovakia.
At the opening of the Slovak embassy in Prague, Slovak Ambassador Ivan Mjartan expressed concern that the 300,000 Slovaks living in the Czech Republic were subject to "mild discrimination," concerning education, social security and medical insurance, the state CTK news agency reported.
Czech Deputy Foreign Minister Alexander Vondra denied there was any intentional discrimination.

 

End of Document
