

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
May 26, 1993, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 608 words
Dateline: TAIPEI, Taiwan
Body




Legislators traded kicks and splashed water at each other from paper cups Wednesday during a debate on the government budget.
The scuffle erupted when legislator Ko Yu-chin of the ruling Nationalist Party proposed a vote on the budget, saying the debate would delay its passage.
Her proposal triggered protests from about a of legislators of the opposition Democratic Progressive Party, who surrounded Ko at the podium. Nationalist lawmakers also approached the podium to argue with the opposition.
When the lawmakers began pushing each other, opposition legislator Chen Wan-chen threw a document at Ko and other Nationalist lawmakers retaliated by hurling water from paper cups.
Amid the chaos, Nationalist legislator Liao Fuw-pen, who chaired the session, decided to take a vote on the budget. Angry opposition members pulled Liao to the floor and pushed him out of the meeting hall.
Earlier, opposition legislator Li Ching-hsiung traded kicks with ruling party member Chen Ching-pao, after Li claimed Chen had disrupted his speech with shouts. The two men fought briefly before they were pulled apart.
The ruling Nationalists want to pass the budget before the end of May as originally planned. But the opposition said parliament should trim more funding.
---
BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) - Colombian airline pilots, outraged by the crash of a jetliner because crucial guidance equipment on the ground was missing, want two of the country's airports closed, Bogota newspapers said Wednesday.
A Boeing 727 of the Colombian airline SAM crashed last Wednesday near the airport in Medellin, northwestern Colombia, killing all 132 people aboard.
The airline pilots association says the plane was off course because a transmitter that guides the planes had been blown up by guerrillas a year ago and was never replaced.
The pilots want the Cucuta airport on the Venezuelan border closed for the same reason, the newsapers El Tiempo and El Espectador said.
The pilots also want the airport in Riohacha on the Caribbean coast closed because of what they called faulty communications equipment, the newspapers said.
The director of the Civil Aeronautics Agency, Jose Joaquin Palacio, said the cause of the SAM crash can't be determined until there has been a full investigation, El Espectador said.
The pilots say it is unsafe to fly in Colombia. Palacio says equipment is adequate.
---
CHITTAGONG, Bangladesh (AP) - Two groups of rival college students attacked a commuter train with guns and crude bombs Wednesday, injuring at least 100 people, police said.
Seven Chittagong University students were hospitalized with bullet wounds after men from the Chittagong Polytechnic College attacked the train in retaliation to Tuesday's beating of a colleague, police said.
The others were injured when firecrackers exploded, officials said. The campus shuttles are used exclusively by about 8,000 students in Chittagong, 135 miles southeast of capital Dhaka.
Three polytechnic students were arrested after they fired with sawn-off handguns and set off crude bombs, police said.
---
HEPPENHEIM, Germany (AP) - A fire in a shelter for asylum-seekers killed three young Eritrean children Wednesday. Police said there was no indication arson was involved.
The children, ages 1, 2 and 4, were alone in the house when the fire broke out, said police spokesman Peter Rauwolf. The children's father was at work and the mother had gone to the doctor. The cause of the fire wasn't known.
Right-wing radicals have frequently attacked asylum homes with firebombs over the past two years. Rauwolf said there was no indication of any attack on the house in Heppenheim, south of Frankfurt in Hesse state.

 

End of Document
