

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
January 21, 1993, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 586 words
Dateline: BRUSSELS, Belgium
Body




France and Germany agreed today to put their new joint European Corps under NATO command during emergencies, a move designed to allay fears the unit could hurt the alliance.
U.S. Gen. John Shalikashvili, top NATO commander in Europe, joined the defense chiefs of Germany and France in signing the accord at a special ceremony at the headquarters of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
The document sets out general guidelines for use of the 35,000-strong corps within the alliance. In an emergency, it could come under NATO command.
France and Germany proposed the unit as a way of building up Western Europe's military muscle and giving it a strong defense role in the post-Cold War era.
When the plans were unveiled in 1991, the force was seen as the forerunner of an all-European army, possibly competing with NATO. France, while it belongs to NATO, is not a member of its joint military command.
The United States, the lead member in NATO, reacted sharply. To dispel American fears, France and Germany agreed to negotiate conditions under which the unit would be tied to NATO's military command.
---
BEIJING (AP) - Police have arrested eight people who pulled off Communist China's largest museum heist, according an official report.
Police have recovered 60 of the 69 relics stolen from the Kaifeng Museum in central China's Henan province.
Four suspects broke into the museum in the early hours of Sept. 18, cracked eight safes and stole 69 of the most precious pieces, some dating to the 14th century.
The Wednesday report by the official Xinhua News Agency described it as the largest museum heist since 1949, when the Communists took power in China.
Police last month arrested four people who stored and removed the stolen relics and provided cover for the thieves. They arrested the other four this month, the last of them on Wednesday, Xinhua said.
Chinese museums are perennially short of funds. They have poor security systems, if any at all, and lack the facilities for proper exhibitions.
---
HAMBURG, Germany (AP) - Two operating reactors at the Chernobyl nuclear power complex in Ukraine urgently need significant repairs to prevent fires, according to a study commissioned by the European Community.
A German engineering firm that conducted the study at the site of a 1986 disaster, which released radiation over Europe, said Wednesday that "comprehensive fire-protection measures" are needed for two reactors still operating there.
Among other hazards, Systems and Process Technology GmBH of Hamburg said it discovered overheated wiring and inadequate fire hoses. The firm demanded immediate measures to make the reactors fireproof.
---
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) - An aging Argentine nuclear reactor spilled radioactive heavy water last weekend, plant director Juan Carlos Duarte said.
In his comments Wednesday to the state news agency Telam, Duarte attempted to minimize the incident.
"The plant is in good condition. We prefer to talk about a spill rather than a loss because it can be recovered," Telam quoted him as saying.
The report gave no details. The commercial nuclear reactor Atucha 1 is in the town of Lima, 62 miles northwest of Buenos Aires.
Atucha 1, inaugurated in 1974, is a natural uranium, heavy water reactor capable of generating 335 megawatts of electricity.
Technicians acknowledged after a 1988 accident that small pieces of metal from a fuel rod break remained loose inside the reactor. Critics, including the environmental group Greenpeace, protested that the reactor should be shut down.

 

End of Document
