

International Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
November 25, 1992, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 668 words
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




The U.N. embargo on trade with Iraq will remain in place, Iraq having failed in its latest attempt to have the harsh measures lifted.
The Security Council on Tuesday unanimously rejected Baghdad's claim that it has met the terms of the Persian Gulf War cease-fire.
Iraq is seeking the gradual easing of the embargo as it satisfies the cease-fire terms and other U.N. resolutions.
Tuesday's decision followed two days of speeches by Iraq's top diplomat, Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz, council members and U.N. officials.
Aziz had insisted Iraq had complied with all crucial U.N. demands and demanded the lifting of the embargo, which prohibits all Iraqi trade with the world except for food, medicine and emergency humanitarian supplies.
It was the second time in eight months that Aziz has pleaded Iraq's case before the council.
President Bush and Prime Minister John Major of Britain have said they would oppose lifting the embargo as long as Saddam Hussein remains in power because they consider him a destabilizing force in the region.
---
BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) - Former leftist rebels turned politicians have quit the government to protest President Cesar Gaviria's crackdown on holdout guerrillas.
"Our resignation is an honest political act because we don't want to continue participating in a government where we have such fundamental differences," M-19 leader Antonio Navarro Wolff said in an interview Tuesday with the Caracol radio chain.
M-19 member Gustavo de Roux was health minister, and Alberto Caicedo was national hospital director.
Some 800 M-19 rebels laid down their arms in 1990 to become a political party. But the much larger Simon Bolivar Coordinated Guerrilla Front continues to fight.
Two weeks ago, Gaviria declared a national state of emergency to combat violence by the country's leftist rebels.
Gaviria promised to apply a "firm hand" to the 8,000 combatants of the Simon Bolivar front.
"We Colombians want a change, but a peaceful one," Wolff wrote in a letter to the president published Tuesday in local newspapers.
---
NICOSIA, Cyprus (AP) - Iran has accused the United States of trying to cripple the country by denying it arms and advanced technology.
The state-run Islamic Republic News Agency said Tuesday that Washington was exaggerating Iran's arms purchases.
The goal, according to the broadcast, was to scare Iran's neighbors into buying "more and more of the weapons manufactured by America and the West."
CIA Director Robert Gates, in an interview with The Associated Press on Monday, said Iran is "engaged in a multiyear military buildup" and could pose a threat to the United States and its allies within three to five years.
Washington has denied advanced technology to Iran under an embargo imposed soon after Iranian militants stormed the U.S. embassy in Tehran in November 1979.
The U.S. embargo also applies to hi-tech equipment incorporating even some U.S.-made parts. As a result, Iran has been unable to buy such items as commercial airliners.
"The U.S. is aiming to cripple Iran not militarily but also economically and industrially," IRNA said.
---
UNITED NATIONS (AP) - Burmese Muslims have been the victims of torture and other atrocities, a U.N. human rights investigator says.
A report issued Tuesday by Yozo Yokota of Japan, the U.N. Human Rights Commission envoy to Burma, also contains a denial by Burma's military government.
The government says religious freedom and legal due process exist in Burma.
Yokota said the United Nations has well-documented information about more than 100 cases of torture or cruel, degrading treatment allegedly meted out by the army in carrying out forced recruitment and labor.
He said many of the cases involved Muslims in northern Rakhine state. About 250,000 Muslims have fled Burma to Bangladesh.
Yokota said the U.N. also has received information about 914 cases of alleged arbitrary detention of members of parliament, political leaders, writers, students, business people, teachers, Buddhist monks, civil servants, farmers and peddlers.

 

End of Document
