

International Briefs by The Associated Press
The Associated Press
August 8, 1992, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 628 words
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Azerbaijan claimed Saturday its forces recaptured two Armenian-controlled villages and pushed its offensive in the disputed Nagorno-Karabakh enclave.
The Azerbaijani Defense Ministry was quoted by the Baku-based Turan news agency as saying that Azerbaijani units took control of Mutudara, near the Armenian border northwest of Nagorno-Karabakh. The village was captured by Armenian forces on Thursday.
Azerbaijani forces also captured nearby Artsvashen, the report said.
On Friday, Armenian units managed to establish a land corridor linking mostly Christian Armenia with Artsvashen. Armenia considers the village and its surroundings Armenian land.
According to Armenian officials, up to 18 Armenians were killed and several dozen were wounded in Saturday's fighting. Three Armenians also have died in shelling by the Muslim Azerbaijani forces of Armenian border regions, especially the town of Goris.
Armenian reports, meanwhile, said Azerbaijanis also continued to attack in the area of Mardakert in Nagorno-Karabakh, following an unsuccessful offensive that began Thursday.
Nagorno-Karabakh is an ethnic Armenian region within Azerbaijan. It has been the scene of four years of fighting, the worst ethnic bloodshed in the former Soviet Union.
 
 JERUSALEM (AP) - Two Arab guerrillas were killed in a clash with Israeli soldiers in southern Lebanon, the army said Saturday.
The confrontation occurred late Friday or early Saturday near the village of Barasheet in the central sector of Israel's self-declared security zone in south Lebanon, the army said.
The guerrillas carried a Soviet-made Kalashnikov rifle, backpacks and other equipment, the statement said.
The army did not give further information, including which group the guerrillas belonged.
Israel established the security zone in 1985, when the bulk of its troops withdrew from Lebanon after a three-year occupation. The zone is patrolled by the Israeli army and the Israeli-financed South Lebanon Army, a Christian militia.
 
 QUITO, Ecuador (AP) - The United States and Ecuador have signed an agreement to help combat drug-money laundering in this small South American nation that borders Peru and Colombia.
Under the agreement signed Friday, Ecuador will for the first time report the names, addresses and occupations of people who deposit more than $ 10,000 in foreign currency in Ecuadorean banks.
The information will be shared with the United States and could be used to track proceeds from the drug trade, said interim U.S. Ambassador James Mack, who signed the agreement with Foreign Minister Diego Cordovez.
Ecuador developed the plan in response to a U.S. request to improve bilateral cooperation in the fight against drug trafficking.
Peru grows more than 60 percent of the world's supply of coca leaf, the raw material used to produce cocaine; and Colombia is home to the some of the world's largest drug trafficking organizations.
Because of its location, Ecuador is a convenient transport point for drug shipments and lax banking laws have facilitated the laundering of drug money, officials say.
 
 JAKARKTA, Indonesia (AP) - U.N. Secretary-General Boutros-Boutros Ghali and Cuban President Fidel Castro will attend the 10th summit of the Non-Aligned Movement next month, the official Antara News Agency said Saturday.
Antara said the heads of states from the Bahamas, Guatemala, Jamaica, Nicaragua and Panama are among about 101 countries that have agreed to come to the Non-Aligned Conference on Sept. 1-6 in Jakarta.
Minister of Trade Arifin Siregar, who recently visited several Middle East countries, said Friday that Iraqi President Saddam Hussen would participate in the summit if he was allowed to fly to Jakarta in one of the Iraqi aircraft held in Iran since the Gulf War or other neighboring countries.

 

End of Document
