

International News Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
February 13, 1993, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 793 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Dubbed the bible of the left, the political magazine New Statesman and Society says it's on the brink of financial collapse over Conservative Prime Minister John Major's libel suit.
The influential weekly founded by playwright George Bernard Shaw and other high-minded socialists 80 years ago has appealed to readers for funds to fight the court action initiated by Major and caterer Clare Latimer.
Major and Ms. Latimer sued after the magazine reported about gossip that the two have been having an affair.
Major, who is married, and Ms. Latimer, who is single, were not swayed by New Statesman's argument that it was clear in its article that the allegation of an affair was untrue.
On Friday, in an out-of-court settlement announced by Major's lawyer, the magazine's printer, its distributor and a chain of stores that sell magazines issued a formal apology to Major and Ms. Latimer and lawyers agreed on damages and legal costs to be paid to them. The amounts were not disclosed.
Friday's settlement doesn't affect the separate libel actions against New Statesman and Scallywag, a minor satirical magazine that also published the rumor.
---
BRUSSELS, Belgium (AP) - The European Community reached agreement early today on importing bananas into the single market, narrowly avoiding a political crisis and clearing the way for EC farm reform.
Agriculture ministers of the 12 nations agreed to maintain quotas on bananas produced outside the EC's protectorates and its former colonies, but loosened the rules on how often the quotas could be revised.
The 12 EC members needed a common import rule to take the place of their national policies after the border-free zone was established in Europe Jan. 1.
The banana quotas were part of an agreement reached in December that also covered other farm goods, as well as arrangements for currency fluctuations and agricultural development. Some feared that undoing the banana accord might endanger the rest of the deal.
The banana battle pitted France, Spain and Britain against Germany.
Germans, the biggest banana-eaters, want access to cheap produce from Latin America.
But Paris and Madrid want to protect banana growers on the French islands of Martinique and Guadeloupe and Spain's Canary Islands. And Britain favors its former colonies in the Caribbean.
---
GUATEMALA CITY (AP) - A security officer for a former president has been found guilty of murder in a notorious Guatemalan human rights case.
Sgt. Noel Beteta was sentenced to 12 years in prison after the judge pronounced the verdict on Friday.
Beteta, a former sergeant in the presidential high command's security section, was convicted of killing social anthropologist Myrna Mack Chang. Chang had been researching the plight of more than 500,000 Guatemalans displaced during 32 years of civil war.
Beteta worked for the administration of former President Vinicio Cerezo. He was captured in Los Angeles in late 1991 and returned to Guatemala for trial.
U.S. Embassy spokesman Lee McClenny said, "The Mack case and others like it are milestones along the road that leads to an end of human rights abuses and legal impunity and leads to the complete affirmation of democracy and the rule of law."
---
ST. PETERSBURG, Russia (AP) - Russians faced for the first time with making investment decisions have been swindled out of millions of rubles.
Thousands of people poured into the streets of St. Petersburg, Russia's second-largest city, this week to protest and demand their money back.
City officials said Friday that St. Petersburg residents have lost at least 1 billion rubles - about $ 1.7 million - since summer.
About 500,000 people, or almost 10 percent of the city's population, found they had been cheated out of money and privatization vouchers over a six-month period, said Vladimir Baryshnikov, an official with the mayor's office.
The vouchers were issued last year as part of President Boris Yeltsin's program to privatize formerly state-run industries.
Baryshnikov said criminal investigations have begun against two St. Petersburg investment companies and that seven or eight other firms are suspected of swindling people.
---
TOKYO (AP) - Japan's princess-in-waiting has a small request for the media: Can she take a walk without being hounded by photographers and reporters?
TV entertainment shows are expected to go along with the request, passed along Friday by palace officials. But some magazines balked.
More than 100 reporters and camera crew members rushed to Masako Owada's house in Tokyo last month upon word she would be Crown Prince Naruhito's bride. Dozens remain.
"We only ask that they limit their coverage … In short, Miss Owada's family wants to be able to take a walk peacefully," said Hiroyuki Suzuki, spokesman for the Imperial Household Agency .

 

End of Document
