

Iran-Contra's Final Lesson: The Risks of Inquiry
The Associated Press
September 21, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 800 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




When executive scandal is in the air, Congress can't be far behind. But the lawmakers now know - thanks to Oliver North, a hang-tough Marine - that today's probe risks tomorrow's prosecution.
That doesn't mean the end of the splashy, televised investigation when constitutional-sized corruption is suspected, especially if the trail leads to the White House and if Congress is controlled by the party not in power there.
But the North case - as quirky as they come - underscored that if Congress wants to question underlings to get at overlings, it easily can wind up nabbing neither.
"It's a tradeoff between national publicity and a big investigation on the one hand, and criminal prosecutions on the other," said Thomas Mann, a congressional expert at the Brookings Institution. He said that in the future Congress will decide which it wants "with difficulty and probably without consistency."
There's scant middle ground. Lawmakers could wait until trials are held, but by then public interest would make hearings anticlimactic. Lawmakers could investigate behind closed doors, but at the cost of drawing object lessons, or glory, from the scandal at hand.
"I think it's a terrible thing for the country," said Harvard law professor Philip Heymann, bemoaning the consequences of the North case.
"I think that in cases of major national scandal involving the executive branch, and it happens in all administrations, it's very important that Congress be able to get the facts out very quickly. And I think that it's important that courts be able to prosecute."
The facts around North are never likely to be duplicated. The House and Senate committees investigating the sale of arms to Iran and the illegal diversion of profits to anti-Communist rebels in Nicaragua wanted to hear his account in the expectation it would lead to higher-ups, up to and perhaps including President Reagan.
North would not willingly testify, on grounds of self-incrimination. So Congress granted him immunity - or imposed it on him - so that what he said before Congress could not be used to convict him in court.
After he told his story to Congress, he was tried and convicted of three felonies. Special Prosecutor Lawrence E. Walsh's staff took extraordinary measures to develop a case independent of his congressional testimony.
Walsh's quarantined lawyers may have been the only people in America who missed North's bravura portrayal of a Marine officer who acted out of patriotic zeal, more martyr than villain.
North appealed, and the appeals court directed the trial court to determine whether witnesses at his trial had been influenced by his congressional testimony.
To the surprised dismay of the prosecutors, Robert McFarlane, North's former boss at the National Security Council, said his testimony at North's trial was "colored" by North's appearance before Congress.
"In watching four days of riveting testimony by a man who was like a son to me, I was affected," McFarlane testified. "How could I have not been?"
On Monday, Walsh acknowledged he could not prove otherwise. He asked the trial judge to throw out the case against North. He said McFarlane's testimony made a prosecution all but impossible. The judge complied.
Now the five guilty verdicts against McFarlane's successor, John Poindexter, are also thrown in jeopardy. Poindexter is appealing on the grounds North used.
And Congress is left awkward. Its inquiry had not gotten from North testimony that implicated Reagan. It had not answered questions about President Bush's knowledge and role; the testimony it got from North led to his release from further legal consequences.
Whether that outcome is tolerable depends on where one sits.
Rep. Lee Hamilton, D-Ind., who sat as chairman of the House committee that investigated Iran-contra, said it was tolerable. "The hearings were more important than the trial," he said.
Walsh, in carefully chosen words, clearly thought otherwise. "This is a very, very serious warning that immunity is not to be granted lightly," Walsh said. "Now I have never criticized Congress. I urged them not to grant immunity, but they have the very broad political responsibility for making a judgment as to whether it's more important that the country hear the facts quickly or that they await a prosecution."
Congress, in fact, does not grant immunity lightly. It argued a lot before immunizing North.
Nearly a decade ago, in the Watergate scandal, Congress granted immunity to John Dean, counsel to President Richard Nixon, and about 30 other witnesses. Without Dean's revelations, it is possible, Nixon would not have been forced to resign the presidency.
So immunity worked in Watergate and backfired in Iran-Contra. Nothing in that track record suggests Congress is about to forfeit its inclination to investigate the next big scandal.

 

End of Document
