

Is Military Force the Answer to Rio's Crime and Drug Woes?
The Associated Press
November 29, 1994, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 740 words
Byline: By TODD LEWAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




With Brazil's No. 1 tourist city awash in violent crime as corrupt police stood idly by, the feeling grew to a conviction: Only the army could fix Rio.
So on Nov. 18, President Itamar Franco unleashed Operation Rio in this sprawling seaside city, which had been hit by a wave of drug-related deaths, kidnappings and armored car holdups just at the start of the peak tourist season.
Thousands of soldiers were sent to capture the drug lords who control organized crime from armed strongholds in hillside shantytowns.
At first, residents applauded as the number of murders, car thefts and bank robberies plunged in Rio, where police say about 20 people were being killed every day. Morgue workers claim the toll was twice as high.
But as the campaign unfolded, some unsettling questions arose. Is sending troops after crooks an admission that civil solutions don't work? What are the army's limits - if any - in arresting and questioning suspects?
And, worst of all, what happens if the army fails?
"Prestige is being sought here by both sides - the army and the traffickers - and if the drug lords are successful in holding off the mighty armed forces, we are going to be in for serious, serious trouble," said Rene Dreifuss, a professor of political science at the Fluminense Federal University.
During the military regime that ran for two decades and ended in 1985, the army used torture and assassinations to repress urban guerrilla movements. With this history, many Brazilians still have reservations about using the armed forces to fight crime.
But the military has put on a great show.
TV news programs broadcast nightly images of ski-masked soldiers in jungle camouflage raiding shantytowns, with olive green helicopters circling above and tanks parked alongside.
"We are carrying out psychological warfare," said Col. Ivan Cardozo, an army spokesman.
As the army sweeps through the slums, the notoriously corrupt police force is being cleaned up, too. At least 33 officers accused of torture and extortion, including eight top commanders, have turned in their badges in just two weeks.
Forty-two policemen and dozens of lawyers and judges are under investigation for links to gambling and crime lords. Drug bosses had often been tipped off in advance of raids, allowing them to flee their fortresses and remove stockpiles of drugs and weapons.
"Police were shooting innocent civilians and running the distribution of arms and drugs," said Rubem Cesar Fernandes, an anthropologist heading a grass-roots anti-crime group called Viva Rio. "The army needs to contain the anarchic atmosphere while it rebuilds Rio's police from scratch."
But there is a price to military involvement.
In their zeal to catch traffickers, soldiers are trampling on constitutionally protected rights - body-searching slum dwellers at gunpoint, arresting people without warrants, and interrogating suspects in secret.
When the Brazilian Bar Association protested last week, Gen. Roberto Senna, the commander in charge of Operation Rio, retorted: "We're not a battalion of social workers."
Another worry is whether traffickers will use guerrilla-style attacks to provoke soldiers into open battles in the densely populated shantytowns, endangering civilians. Some 1.2 million of Rio's 6 million people live in its scores of slums.
Until now, however, few shots have been fired. The army has reported 54 arrests and the seizure of 32 guns, three grenades and small amounts of cocaine and marijuana.
Gen. Senna says there's a reason for the meager results: the crime bosses, estimated to include 1,800 cocaine barons, aren't in Brazil.
"The 'generals' are in Miami and Europe," he said. "The privates, corporals and sergeants are in the slums."
All of this has raised doubts whether army intelligence is prepared to map the cocaine route and get to the businessmen behind it. The generals are wary about a long-term military action against drug traffickers, fearing soldiers could be corrupted or co-opted by the wealthy traffickers over time - as happened with the police.
But the risk of an army fiasco is what worries criminal and military analysts most.
"If the army doesn't do the job, it will demoralize the troops and hurt public faith in the competence of the armed forces," said David Fleischer, a political scientist.
"The army is the most organized, traditional public institution in Brazil," he added. "If it fails to stop the drug trade, the country is in for big trouble."
 Load-Date: November 29, 1994

 

End of Document
