

Kids Plan It for the Planet
The Associated Press
April 23, 1993, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 558 words
Byline: By SALLY WILLIAMS COOK
Dateline: ORLANDO, Fla.
Body




Never underestimate the power of kids, especially when it comes to protecting the Earth. At least that's the message from the first Kids World Council, attended by children from six countries - and Vice President Al Gore.
The three-day event, called Plan It for the Planet!, was organized by the Children's Earth Fund, a nonprofit organization that coordinates kid's Earth-saving actions, and hosted by Nickelodeon, a cable network and producer of children's television programming. Nickelodeon says it will host another Kids World Council next year, on another topic of importance to kids.
The mission of this year's meeting: to make a plan that will help kids move the United States and the world toward a clear energy future by saving energy and switching to sun power.
Gore spent an afternoon at Nickelodeon Studios, where the "kids' Earth summit" was held. The vice president answered questions from the 55 delegates that ranged from why adults don't seem to care as much about the environment as kids do, to economic issues affecting the environment.
During a 90-minute question-and-answer session at a televised forum, Gore emphasized the value of partnerships - within the family, within the United States and among nations.
When Tally Trip, a young delegate from Round Rock, Texas, said she didn't think adults were concerned about the environment "because they're grown-up and half of their future is about over," Gore replied, "A lot of adults have decided that it's just too big of a problem to solve, so they kind of give up a little bit."
Nickelodeon taped the town meeting with Gore for a television special, moderated by Linda Ellerbee.
"We've all been saying that we're making history here, but it's just the opposite," said 12-year-old Chris DiNero of Elbon, N.J., chairperson of the Kids World Council meeting. "We're here to make our future."
DiNero, and 15-year-old John Hegstrund, were among those who testified at a Senate hearing on global warming in Washington, D.C., last year. "We need to bug the politicians more," John said. "On a local level, the kids' environmental groups are doing great, but we should also be focusing globally, too."
John was a charter member of Kids for Saving the Earth in 1989, and was at the event to help the delegates devise a plan.
The 50 U.S. delegates to the Kids World Council either wrote winning essays or represented kids' environmental groups such as Kids for Saving the Earth, the Natural Guard, founded by singer Ritchie Havens, and the Florida Kids for Clean Air. Also attending were delegates from Guatemala, Belize, the United Kingdom, the Philippines and Nigeria. They were selected by the Children's Earth Fund.
Kari Cambron, a 5th-grader from Middlesboro, Ky., said she became concerned about the environment when she saw someone "throw a lot of trash out of a car window." Since then, Kari says she has been actively involved in recycling and has spoken before the Youth Council of Middlesboro's City Council on pollution in local creeks and streams.
The 55 delegates, who ranged in age from 9 to 14, were divided into five groups to come up with ideas that a smaller delegation will present to the White House in June. Among their recommendations: make pollution expensive, share information about alternative energy sources and, oh yes, install a solar water heater in the White House.

 

End of Document
