

Latin American Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
March 26, 1993, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 577 words
Dateline: ASUNCION, Paraguay
Body




The head of the ruling Colorado Party says he'll use his own money to buy votes if that's what's necessary to win May 9 presidential elections.
"Now is not the time for theory," Blas Riquelme told supporters at an out-of-town rally Thursday night. "This is a war we have to win by assault."
In remarks given prominent play in newspapers Friday, Riquelme added, "I personally will supply the means for the tricks, whether that is money, paper (ballots) or whatever."
The party, in power since 1947 and a mainstay of President Gen. Alfredo Stroessner's 34-year dictatorship, which ended in a 1989 coup, is fighting for its political life.
Its candidate, Juan Carlos Wasmosy, is locked in a three-way race with independent businessman Guillermo Caballero Vargas and former exile Domingo Laino of the Authentic Radical Liberal Party.
The elections are said to mark the first democratic presidential vote in Paraguay's 180-year history.
 
 ---
GUATEMALA CITY (AP) - American nun Dianna Ortiz, who alleges that Guatemalan security forces kidnapped, tortured and raped her, accused the National Police on Friday of covering up evidence.
"Not only did they attmept to cover up their crimes, but specifically, I have learned that there was a special investigation done by the National Police that has never been presented to the court," the 34-year-old New Mexico native told reporters.
She alleges she was kidnapped from a convent in Antigua, 28 miles west of Guatemala City, repeatedly raped, burnt with cigarettes and beaten in November 1989.
Government officials have said they doubt the attack took place, saying there were inconsistencies in her accounts.
Ortiz, who left Guatemala last year, returned to fulfill a Guatemalan legal requirement of reconstructing the alleged attacks.
 
 ---
MEXICO CITY (AP) - Negotiators for the Guatemalan government and leftist rebels arrived in Mexico City on Friday for another round of peace talks aimed at ending Guatemala's 30-year civil war.
The government's chief negotiator said he was ready to sign a peace agreement.
"The government of President Jorge Serrano Elias comes with the firm conviction to sign peace agreements, if necessary at this meeting," Manuel Conde Arellana told reporters on arrival.
The meetings scheduled to start Friday evening and last through Monday mark the third round of peace talks this year between the government and rebels of the leftist Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity.
The three-decade civil war has killed more than 120,000 people, most of them civilians. The 2-year-old peace process has broken down several times.
 
 ---
LIMA, Peru (AP) - Anti-narcotics police seized a 580-pound shipment of cocaine at Lima's international airport, an official said Friday.
The shipment, with an estimated street value of $ 20 million, was the largest drug seizure ever at Lima's Jorge Chavez airport, said Capt. Luis Otoya, head of the airport narcotics division.
The drug was concealed inside 24 cases of cotton T-shirts which were to be exported to New York on a Lan Chile flight Thursday, Otoya said. The cocaine had been placed in taped plastic bags soaked in kerosene to fool drug-sniffing dogs.
In a separate operation, 100 members of the police, air force and U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration destroyed a cocaine laboratory in the northern jungle near the Brazilian border, police said Friday.
The lab belonged to Peruvian drug trafficker Evaristo Porras Ardiles, captured last week in Colombia, police said.

 

End of Document
