

Latin American Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
March 29, 1993, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 609 words
Dateline: MEXICO CITY
Body




Peace talks to end a 30-year rebel insurgency in Guatemala have stalled, the mediator said Monday.
"It is a very difficult negotiation, like a sailor's knot, and it will be difficult to arrive at an agreement," said mediator Msgr. Rodolfo Quezada Toruna, the Roman Catholic archbishop of Guatemala.
Quezada said the main issues dividing the sides are the timing of a cease-fire and formation of a commission to investigate human rights abuses.
The rebels want the commission to begin work immediately, while the government wants it to wait until 30 days after a cease-fire.
More than 120,000 people have died in the fighting, many of them Indians suspected of leftist sympathies.
The warring parties have been negotiating for two years to reach a settlement, and the current round started on Friday.
 
 ---
SANTIAGO, Chile (AP) - The government on Monday asked the United States to let an international arbitration panel rule on its request for $ 218 million in compensation for losses during the 1989 embargo on Chilean grapes.
Foreign Minister Enrique Silva handed a request to U.S. Ambassador Curtis Kamman to summon the Bryan-Suarez Mujica Commission, a five-member panel empowered to arbitrate disputes between the two countries. Its ruling cannot be appealed.
The Chilean move came after the failure of direct diplomatic negotiations, and after a U.S. court turned down a Chilean request for a compensation.
Chilean grape growers claim they sustained the losses after the Food and Drug Administration ordered a nationwide embargo on the sale on Chilean grapes because two grapes laced with cyanide were found in a shipment in Philadelphia.
The Chilean growers and the government claim the grapes were poisoned in the United States, not in Chile.
 
 ---
SAN SALVADOR, El Salvador (AP) - Former Salvadoran rebel leaders said Monday they will turn over weapons stored in Nicaragua to Nicaraguan authorities for destruction.
The estimated 600 rifles and other weapons are to be destroyed in the presence of delegates of the U.N. Observers' Mission to El Salvador.
The Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, in a statement, said the delivery of the weapons is to comply with U.N.-brokered agreements calling for the rebels to disarm.
On Friday, seven surface-to-air missiles belonging to the FMLN were destroyed in Nicaragua.
Salvadoran authorities and their U.S. backers had long contended that Nicaragua, then governed by the leftist Sandinistas, served as a support area and supply line for Salvadoran rebels.
While some such activity was fairly open, the extent of it has never been determined.
The rebels and government signed a peace agreement last year, and have been moving step by step to implement its provisions.
 
 ---
PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti (AP) - Police confiscated 227 pounds of Colombian cocaine in nine suitcases that were intended for an American Airlines flight to New York, officials reported Monday.
Four people were arrested by airport security during the confiscation Sunday, said Col. Antoine Atouriste, chief of the army's narcotics information bureau.
The seizure was the second-largest haul since the army ousted President Jean-Bertrand Aristide in 1991. Aristide alleges that large-scale drug transshipments to the United States were curtailed during his seven-month administration, but resumed following the coup.
The island of Hispaniola - which includes Haiti and the Dominican Republic - is one of the major transfer points for South American-U.S. drug traffic.
From 1987 to 1993 police arrested nearly 1,000 people for drug dealing. Almost none were prosecuted. Haitian drug enforcement authorities have accused the judicial system of corruption.

 

End of Document
