

Latin Amrican Briefs From The Associate Press
The Associated Press
March 24, 1993, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 639 words
Dateline: MEDELLIN, Colombia
Body




A former police official who became a key aide to drug boss Pablo Escobar has deserted the Medellin cocaine cartel, police said Wednesday.
Former police Lt. Pedro Chunza had assumed a leadership position inside Escobar's organization following his dismissal from the police force in 1989.
Intelligence reports from the Medellin police said Chunza decided to desert the cartel because of Escobar's recent setbacks at the hands of police.
Since the drug boss escaped from jail in July, security forces have killed or captured more than two dozen of his top hitmen. Last week, police in Medellin shot dead Escobar's chief bodyguard, Mario Castano.
The head of Medellin's secret police, Oscar Paredes, told reporters Wednesday that Chunza had been a key member of Escobar's inner security ring.
In December 1989, Chunza was fired from the police department following allegations of corruption. Courts have since charged him with various counts of kidnapping and murder. He remains at large.
---
LIMA, Peru (AP) - Economy Minister Jorge Camet said the government would continue strict austerity measures to lower inflation and raise badly needed tax revenue.
Inflation, which fell from 7,650 percent in 1990 to 57 percent last year, would be slashed to 2 percent a month this year, Camet said late Tuesday in his first televised message since taking office two months ago.
He calculated the economy would grow 3.5 percent this year and by five percent annually for the following two years.
Tax revenue rose to 10 percent of the gross national product this year, up from 3.6 percent in 1990. Camet said the government planned to increase revenues to 13.3 percent of GNP by 1995.
He ruled out any sudden devaluation of the local currency for exporters to avoid a surge of inflation, which he estimated would hit 4 percent this month.
---
QUITO, Ecuador (AP) - Heavy rainstorms have killed at least six people and caused nearly $ 4 million in damage over the past week, an official said Wednesday.
A civil defense spokesman said six people drowned when rivers overflowed.
Flooding destroyed dozens of homes and some 25,000 acres of farmland in the coastal provinces of Esmeraldas, Guayas, Manabi and El Oro, and in the highland provinces of Los Rios, Pichincha, Azuay and Loja.
The civil defense said farm organizations had estimated damage from flooding to be at least $ 3.9 million.
---
SAN SALVADOR, El Salvador (AP) - More than 2,000 people marched through the capital Wednesday to honor assassinated Roman Catholic Archbishop Oscar Romero, whose killing has been blamed on the founder of the governing party.
The marchers carried photos and flower-decked portraits of the archbishop, shot by a sniper on March 24, 1980. Recordings of his sermons were played as they walked.
The march comes less than two weeks after a U.N.-sponsored report found that the murder was ordered by the late Roberto D'Aubuisson, founder of the party now governing El Salvador.
The three-member commission also accused the supreme court of obstructing efforts to solve the crime.
"What the Truth Commission said everybody already knew, always has known," said one of the marchers, Maria Ester Chavez. "What we want today is justice."
The outspoken archbishop was known for his sermons blaming the government as well as the left for violence in the early days of El Salvador's civil war.
---
SAN CRISTOBAL DE LAS CASAS, Mexico (AP) - The government has promised to spend more than $ 300,000 to help restore a 16th Century church ravaged by fire.
The El Carmen church, dating to 1595, was damaged early Tuesday. Also lost were 64 paintings, sculptures and other works of art, some dating to the early 1600s.
Mexico's Department of Social Development said it would earmark more than dlrs 300,000 to restore of the building, which is on the United Nations inventory of the "heritage of humanity."

 

End of Document
