

Latin American Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
March 19, 1993, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 516 words
Dateline: PHILIPSBURG, St. Maarten
Body




Church leaders have threatened to "go to any lengths" to stop a Caribbean gay pageant in St. Maarten.
On Friday, the lieutenant governor of the Dutch part of the resort island, Russell Voges, was still weighing the Christian Council's demand to cancel the April 3 "Caribbean Gay of Gays Male Pageant."
Homosexuality is not openly expressed on the island, except in several bars and on nude beaches. The island is half a Dutch territory, and half French.
The Christian Council, in an open letter sent Wednesday, called the pageant a "detestable show" that "will only cause St. Maarten to slide further down towards the pits of degradation.
"We feel so strongly about this issue that if our advice is not heeded and the show canceled, the whole Christian community will be mobilized in protest. We are prepared to go to any lengths and do whatever it takes to nip this evil in the bud," the clergymen wrote.
The show has attracted entries from Aruba, Barbados, Curacao, Dominican Republic, Guadeloupe, Puerto Rico, St. Maarten, Trinidad and Tobago and Venezuela.
 
 ---
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) - Masked protesters battled riot police, burned tires and attacked government offices on Friday, the second day of a strike at the Dominican Republic's only operating gold mine.
One officer and two civilians were wounded by gunfire that erupted near the mine.
The strike began Thursday after the government ordered the Rosario Dominicana mine shut down within 90 days. More than 700 workers will lose their jobs.
Six people have been wounded and 40 arrested since the walkout began in Cotui, a village 60 miles north of the capital, Santo Domingo. Disturbances spread Friday to the nearby town of Maimon.
 
 ---
QUITO, Ecuador (AP) - New oil deposits discovered offshore and in the Amazon jungle will nearly double Ecuador's crude reserves within four years, the state oil company said.
Current reserves are 1.5 billion barrels of mainly light crude.
Foreign companies drilling in the northern Amazon jungle and off the Pacific Ocean coast have discovered deposits of 700 million barrels, Petroecuador said in a statement released late Thursday.
Petroecuador also has found 500 million barrels of heavy crude in the southern jungle, the statement said.
Ecuador, a member of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, produces 325,000 barrels a day and exports 210,000.
 
 ---
MEXICO CITY (AP) - Members of the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party want to extend the presidential term from six years to eight, the daily El Universal reported Friday.
"It could be one of the central topics of electoral reform," said Manuel Jimenez Guzman, a member of congress from the party, known as the PRI.
Mexico's constitution forbids re-election, but the country has been run by an unbroken string of PRI presidents since the party was formed as an offshoot of the government in 1929.
The party is trying to reform itself as a more independent force as part of broader efforts to make Mexico more democratic.
Jimenez said a longer presidential term might be discussed at the party's national conference next week.

 

End of Document
