

Latin American Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
April 6, 1993, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 441 words
Dateline: SANTIAGO, Chile
Body




The state television company apologized Tuesday for a character in a soap opera that "proved to be insulting to the Jeish Community."
"When one sector of the society is insulted, the entire society is affected," the state television said in a joint statement with the Committee of Jewish Communities in Chile.
The statement was issued after the Commmittee strongly protested to National Television executives over "Jacobo," a character in the soap opera Jaque Mate (Check Mate).
The character is a Jewish jeweler who consistently shows greed and even dishonesty in business dealings.
The character, the statement said, "hurts the dignity of Jews" and appears "as a caricature that could encourage anti-Semitism within the Chilean society."
It was not known whether the character will be modified or removed from the soap opera.
---
GUATEMALA CITY (AP) - Experts on Tuesday began investigating what caused a Salvadoran jetliner to skid off a rain-slickened runway and plow into homes in a poor neighborhood, officials said.
Investigators from El Salvador, Boeing and the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration arrived to join Guatemalan experts after TACA airlines flight 510 to Los Angeles overran a runway Monday evening.
All 215 passengers and 11 crew on the Boeing 767-200 escaped with only minor injuries. Five passengers and four people on the ground were treated at a local hospital.
Two homes were destroyed and two others damaged when the jet struck the Santa Fe and La Libertad neighborhood on the edge of Guatemala City's international airport.
The plane barreled down a hill into a poor neighborhood, smashing through one cinderblock house before coming to rest atop another, its left wing apparently clipped near the tip and its nose drooping to the ground.
---
MEXICO CITY (AP) - Negotiators between union workers and Ford Motor Co. have agreed to a new contract at its plant here, averting what would have been the company's third strike at a Mexican plant this year.
Union leaders accepted a 9.9-percent pay increase at negotiations that ended late Monday, news reports said.
The two-year contract for some 5,000 workers at Ford's plant in Cuautitlan, a Mexico City suburb, expired last week and the union had threatened to strike on Wednesday if no new agreement was reached.
The Cuautitlan complex built 127,076 cars and trucks for sale in Mexico last year.
Ford was hit by strikes earlier this year at its other Mexican plants in Chihuahua and Hermosillo. The 17-day strike last month by 2,100 workers at Hermosillo cost the auto giant production of about 9,800 Mercury Tracers and Ford Escorts, which are exported to the United States and Canada.

 

End of Document
