

Latin Nations Looking Across the Pacific For New Trade Partners
The Associated Press
November 9, 1993, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 656 words
Byline: By EDUARDO GALLARDO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SANTIAGO, Chile
Body




Trade and investment ties are beginning to grow across the Pacific between Latin America and Asia.
As Asian economic powerhouses seek other markets, they are looking more to Latin America - especially now that most Latin countries have established free-market economies and stable civilian governments.
And Latin American countries also are courting Asian trade partners.
Eleven Latin America countries sold $ 17.9 billion worth of goods to 12 Asian countries and bought $ 11.7 billion worth in 1991, according to the latest available figures from the U.N. Economic Commission for Latin America.
Japan accounted for about 50 percent of the trade both ways.
Chile and Mexico are doing the most to increase trade with Asia, followed by Brazil and Peru.
Some examples of Asian-Latin American trade:
-Japan displaced the United States as Chile's main trade partner in 1991 and 1992, with bilateral exchange reaching $ 1.6 billion, a three-fold increase from 1989. Asian markets now account for 31 percent of Chile's total exports.
-Brazil's exchange with the Asia-Pacific nations jumped to $ 8 billion in 1992 from only around $ 400,000 in the '70s.
In addition, Mexico and Chile have applied to join the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, a 15-country group started in 1989 to foster economic relations.
Trade ministers and other officials of APEC countries meet in Seattle Nov. 17-20, winding up with meetings between President Clinton and other heads of state.
There are indications that a consensus exists to invite Mexico.
APEC is comprised of the United States, Canada, Japan, China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Australia, Brunei, Singapore, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, New Zealand, the Philippines and Thailand.
"The Pacific Basin includes some the world's largest economic powers," said Carlos Portales, an official with the Chilean Foreign Ministry.
Latin officials appreciate what they see as Asia's adherence to free trade, as opposed to what they see as protectionism in the European Community.
"There is a strong commitment to a completely open regionalism in the Pacific Basin," Portales said.
Mexican President Carlos Salinas de Gortari describes "the consolidation of ties with the Pacific Basin nations" as a prime foreign policy goal of his government.
"Investments from that region in Mexico are growing and we see with optimism how our products are entering those markets," he said during a visit here in October. "Mexico has a great interest in strengthening its presence in that area."
Salinas is working hard to build a free-trade zone with the United States and Canada. Nevertheless, he has been stressing lately that the North American Free Trade Agreement - nearing a ratification vote in Washington - will not be Mexico's only avenue to develop trade.
But experts say the growth between Asia and Latin America does not imply any loss of business for the United States.
"I don't think the United States would lose any terrain," said Boris Yopo, a political scientist teaching at the Chilean Diplomatic Academy.
There will be no "closed bloc" excluding the United States, he said. After all, the United States is part of the Pacific Rim and has its own strong trade ties with Asian countries in place.
"It is just that small countries need a diversification in their economic and political relations," he said.
Armando Rodriguez, a Colombian sociologist, wrote in August's issue of Progreso magazine: "The U.S. investments in Latin America continue to occupy the first place, which means an economic dominance in our own territory."
Latin America rejects that dependency on the United States because it paralyzes its own development. For example, most industrial products that require high technology are not made in Latin America, and have to be imported from the United States, Rodriguez said.
Peruvian President Alberto Fujumori has traveled extensively in east Asia, and Peru has gotten loans and investments from Japan, the land of his ancestors.
 Load-Date: November 9, 1993

 

End of Document
