

Latin American Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
April 2, 1993, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 591 words
Dateline: CARACAS, Venezuela
Body




A truck lost its brakes and slammed into seven cars and a small bus at the start of a week-long national holiday, killing at least 14 people and injuring 38, authorities said.
The truck was traveling on a steep, winding highway leading from Caracas to the beach town of La Guaira, the state news agency Venpres reported.
Antonio Ledezma, governor of the federal district that includes Caracas, said reports indicated that the brakes failed because the truck was overloaded.
---
BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) - The government ended electricity rationing Friday after 13 months of daily blackouts that caused an estimated $ 4 billion in losses.
The worst energy crisis in Colombian history was caused by a prolonged drought, the abandonment of coal-generated plants, guerrilla attacks on electrical towers, and government mismanagement and corruption.
President Cesar Gaviria announced Thursday that the rationing would end because recent rainfall replenished water levels in Colombia's hydroelectric plants.
During the past year, electricity has been cut off between 12 percent and 40 percent of the day, depending on rain levels. The blackouts forced many companies to reduce production and fire employees.
 
 ---
REYNOSA, Mexico (AP) - Mexican police seized nearly half a ton of marijuana in two operations near Reynosa on the Texas border, the Excelsior news agency reported Friday.
In the first seizure, federal police found a Ford truck packed with 851 pounds of the drug on the banks of the Rio Grande, which marks the border between Mexico and the United States.
In the second, police found 132 pounds of marijuana in a private home, Excelsior said.
Reynosa is across the border from McAllen, Texas.
 
 ---
SANTIAGO, Chile (AP) - Chile and Venezuela signed a trade pact Friday that is expected to eliminate many customs duties between the two countries over the next four years.
Exempted from the accord is the Venezuelan oil sold to Chile.
Trade between the two countries reached $ 206 million in 1992, with Chile representing a $ 128 million surplus for Venezuela.
Local officials said the agreement will allow Chile to double its exports to Venezuela in two years.
Chile has already signed similar accords with Mexico and Argentina, and has advanced negotiations for others with Colombia and Bolivia. It is also seeking a free trade accord with the United States.
 
 ---
MEXICO CITY (AP) - Ford Motor Co. and union negotiators have extended until Wednesday the deadline to reach agreement on a new contract covering 5,500 workers.
The two-year contract between Ford and the Confederacion de Trabajadores de Mexico expired at midnight Wednesday. Both sides agreed to extend the talks, Ford spokesman Bert Serre said Friday from Detroit.
The complex at Cuautitlan near Mexico City builds Ford and Mercury trucks and cars, as well as delivery-type truck cabs and chassis.
More than 2,000 workers at Ford's Hermosillo assembly plant went on strike for 17 days last month over a pay dispute.
 
 ---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - A federal court on Friday suspended the sale of Brazil's largest steel mill hours before it was to have gone to auction.
Three petitions had sought to block the sale of the state-owned National Steel Co. in Volta Redonda, 80 miles west of Rio.
Two of the petitions claimed the government, which has been privatizing industry since 1990, had undervalued the company at $ 1.6 billion.
A third, filed by Volta Redonda Mayor Paulo Baltazar, requested that the buyer be required to pay a $ 58 million cleanup program for environmental damage caused by the mill.

 

End of Document
