

Latin Leaders Roiling Summit of the Americas
The Associated Press
December 8, 1994, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 762 words
Byline: By RITA BEAMISH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MIAMI
Body




Latin American leaders threatened Thursday to raise discordant subjects including Cuba and U.S. immigration at the Summit of the Americas where President Clinton is hoping to keep the focus on trade.
The weekend summit - featuring 34 of the Western Hemisphere's heads of state and excluding only Cuba - gets under way Friday evening with Clinton's formal greeting of the leaders and a ceremonial dinner.
Arriving Thursday night, Clinton told a group of summit volunteers and organizers that the leaders were "joining hands together not because we agree on everything but because we agree on the important things, and because we believe in the promise of freedom, the promise of democracy and the promise of open, free trade."
Participants agreed to make free trade the focal point for the summit, the first such gathering since 1967. Clinton wants to keep the momentum going from his recent successes in pursuing open markets around the world.
But Mexico's new president is promising to bring up the touchy topic of immigration.
Ernesto Zedillo said he will try to get summit presidents to repudiate California's Proposition 187, which would deny education and health services to undocumented aliens, the Miami Herald reported Thursday.
That would ruffle Clinton administration plans to keep the contentious subject off the summit agenda, though Clinton campaigned against the successful California ballot measure.
Assistant Secretary of State Alec Watson declined to say how Clinton might respond to Zedillo's idea, saying of the Mexican, "He's free to raise any issue he wants."
Clinton also may get caught up discussing Cuba - another non-agenda item that puts the United States at odds with some Latin governments.
Argentine President Carlos Menem, a strong critic of Cuban President Fidel Castro, said Thursday that he will make sure the summit discusses democracy in Cuba "even if I have to struggle alone."
Chile's President Eduardo Frei said Clinton was right to exclude Cuba from the summit on grounds it is the only nation in the hemisphere without democracy. But he reiterated Chile's opposition, shared by some other Latin nations, to the longstanding U.S. trade embargo against Cuba and said he expected at least informal discussion of the subject.
The White House is billing the summit as the capstone of a successful U.S. trade liberalization effort, which saw congressional passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement last year, followed by the Asia-Pacific trade conference last month and congressional approval this month of the international trade pact known as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Clinton on Thursday signed the legislation to approve the 22,000-page GATT, authorizing the United States to join 123 countries in lowering trade barriers.
Clinton, who has embraced free trade on the theory that new international markets will create U.S. jobs, said the United States "will not succeed and we will never restore stability to the lives of the working people of our country until we have more folks buying what we sell."
"Some say the answer is to try to just hunker down within our borders. That is clearly not an option. No country can escape the global economy," he said before leaving Washington.
In Miami, the summit leaders are expected to endorse a hemisphere-wide free-trade arrangement by 2005 - an earlier timetable than the recent agreement by Asia-Pacific partners to create free trade by 2020.
By 2005, Canada, the United States and its Latin and Caribbean neighbors will comprise a $ 13 trillion market with more than 850 million people, according to U.S. projections that also show the United States stands to gain an increase of 2.5 million jobs.
In addition, Clinton and the leaders of Mexico and Canada are expected to announce the launching of negotiations with Chile as the next member of NAFTA.
The summit leaders also will delve into the hemisphere's deep problems, promising efforts to curb narcotics trafficking and money laundering, protect the environment and find ways to guarantee education and health services.
Clinton is hardly alone on trade. Latin America also has made the conditions ripe for opening markets and has begun to do so on a regional and bilateral basis.
Many of its nations have reformed their economies to appeal to foreign investors. Nationalized industries have given way to privatization, inflation has slowed and market liberalization is taking hold. If the United States does not move to get a piece of the action, international suitors from Japan and Europe are waiting in the wings, analysts say.
 Load-Date: December 9, 1994

 

End of Document
