

Latin American Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
March 30, 1993, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 407 words
Dateline: PANAMA CITY, Panama
Body




Panamanians who lost family or property in the 1989 U.S. invasion rejoiced Tuesday over the Academy Award given to the documentary "Panama Deception."
The film examines the invasion that ousted Panamanian leader Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega, questions the official death toll of 423 people and probes ties the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency had at one time with him.
"Now it will be known what happened in the American invasion, and about our struggle," said Isabel Corro, president of a group who lost relatives in the fighting.
Magdala de Colamarco, wife of the head of Noriega's paramilitary forces, said the film was important because it showed "the horrors" committed by American troops in the invasion.
Her husband, Benjamin Colamarco, has been in jail since shortly after the invasion, which laid waste to much of a poor neighborhood that housed Noriega's headquarters.
Officially about 400 Panamanians, mostly civilians, and 23 American forces were killed in the fighting. Other sources put the toll much higher.
---
MEXICO CITY (AP) - Roberto Robaina Gonzalez, the head of the Cuban Communist party's youth wing, has been appointed as foreign minister, the Cuban news agency Prensa Latina said Tuesday.
The agency quoted the official Cuban newspaper Granma as saying Robaina Gonzalez, 37, was named by the Council of State, a powerful body roughly equivalent to a Cabinet and tightly controlled by President Fidel Castro.
The incumbent, Ricardo Alarcon, a former head of the Cuban interest section in Washington, D.C. and a former U.N. ambassador, has been named president of the National Assembly, elected in unopposed elections in February.
Robaina Gonzalez had been head of the Young Communists Union since 1986.
---
SAN JOSE, Costa Rica (AP) - Four members of a 120-member Cuban entertainment troupe are seeking political asylum in Costa Rica, a Cuban exile group said Tuesday.
The Costa Rican Comittee for Human Rights in Cuba said the troupe was made up of musicians, dancers, coreographers, singers and sound specialists in San Jose for the second annual International Arts Festival.
The group said soprano Xiomara Gonzalez and violinist Fidel Garcia deserted Friday and were joined Monday by soundman Orestes Renzoli and singer Omar Gonzalez.
"We made the decision to desert because the situation in Cuba is rather difficult, there is no freedom and everything is controlled and directed by the regime," Omar Gonzalez told a news conference.

 

End of Document
