

Latin American Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
March 18, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 675 words
Dateline: SAN JOSE, Costa Rica
Body




Three gunmen agreed Thursday to release five of 16 people they are holding hostage in the Nicaraguan Embassy and resume talks to end the standoff.
The gunmen, who are demanding $ 6 million and the replacement of top officials in the Nicaraguan government, said in a statement that they would free the five after the first round of negotiations.
The statement did not say when the talks would begin.
The Nicaraguan gunmen stormed the embassy on March 8, taking 25 hostages, but later releasing nine. The remaining captives include Ambassador Alfonso Robelo.
The gunmen said they seized the embassy to protest control of the police and army by leftist Sandinistas.
The Sandinistas, who governed Nicaragua during the nine-year civil war, lost power in 1990 elections. But President Violeta Chamorro has kept leftists in key positions to maintain peace in a country where the Sandinistas remain the largest party.
 
 ---
UNITED NATIONS (AP) - The Security Council on Thursday urged the Salvadoran government and opposition to stick to peace accords and bar human rights abusers from public office.
A unanimously adopted statement congratulated the rightist government of President Alfredo Cristiani and the leftist Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front for supporting the accords so far.
On Monday, a U.N.-appointed "Commission on the Truth" included top military officials and senior rebel commanders on a list of people it said should be barred from holding public office for at least 10 years.
The panel also recommended that some 40 active officers be fired and barred from public office for life.
The report blames the military for 85 percent of the abuses in El Salvador's 12-year civil war, which ended in 1992 after claiming 75,000 lives. Ten percent of the atrocities were blamed on right-wing death squads and the remaining 5 percent on leftist guerrillas.
Most of the 75,000 people killed in the war were victims of atrocities, according to the report.
 
 ---
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) - Police clashed with rock-throwing miners on strike at a state-run gold mine on Thursday. Three people were wounded and 20 arrested, police said.
The strikers burned tires in the streets and threw rocks at police officers and government buildings in Cotui, a village 60 miles north of the capital. Police had sent in reinforcements ahead of the strike to maintain order.
The miners began the strike Thursday to protest the planned shutdown of the Rosario Dominicana complex because of dwindling revenues. The gold mine, with nearly 800 workers, is the area's biggest employer.
 
 ---
BRASILIA, Brazil (AP) - President Itamar Franco on Thursday pledged $ 180 million to create jobs in Brazil's drought-ravaged northeast.
A two-year drought has left nearly 9 million people without work or food. Most are subsistence farmers, but the dry weather has wiped out their crops.
Hunger has led to looting and forced thousands of families to eat plants and roots with no nutritional value, according to a report by the Association of Workers of the Northeast.
The Planning Ministry released figures showing that one-fifth of Brazil's 150 million people don't earn enough to feed themselves. The report said 55 percent of the nation's poor live in the northeast.
 
 ---
MEXICO CITY (AP) - More than 2,000 Ford Motor Co. workers ended a 17-day walkout on Thursday and employees at one of the country's largest breweries agreed not to strike, news reports said Thursday.
While the first of the 2,200 Ford workers in Hermosillo, 990 miles northwest of Mexico City, went back to work, 5,000 Ford workers in Cuautitlan, on the outskirts of the capital, remained on strike.
The Ford plant in Hermosillo makes the Mercury Tracer four-door sedan and wagon and the four-door Ford Escort sedan and some Escort wagons. Cars built here are exported to the United States and Canada.
Some 4,500 workers at Modelo Brewery in Mexico City, the maker of Corona beer, had planned to walk out Thursday at noon. Unions at the brewery and the auto manufacturing plant settled for pay raises of 9.9 percent.

 

End of Document
