

Latin American Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
March 31, 1993, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 688 words
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia
Body




The man believed to have been the main contact between Peruvian coca producers and Colombian cocaine processors has been released from custody for lack of evidence.
Evaristo Porras was arrested March 17 at the Bogota airport. He was allowed to go free after officials said they had no evidence to try him in court, according to a report Wednesday from the prosecutor general's office.
U.S. and Colombian narcotics officials believe Porras spent most of the 1980s as the key middleman between Peruvian and Colombian drug traffickers. Most of the coca used to make cocaine is grown in Peru and Bolivia and processed in Colombia.
---
BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) - A hostage of the Medellin drug cartel was shot dead by his captors Wednesday as police tried to rescue him, officials said.
After a 30-minute shootout that killed four of the alleged kidnappers, the hostage, 30-year-old Lisandro Ospina, was found dead. He was chained to a bed and had bullet holes in his back and skull, said Gen. Luis Enrique Montenegro, head of the judicial police.
Ospina, a member of a prominent political family, was kidnapped in December apparently because his brother, Rodolfo, began testifying against drug boss Pablo Escobar.
It was the second violent episode related to the Medellin cartel in less than 24 hours. Jesus Munoz, a reputed financial manager inside Escobar's organization, was found dead Wednesday in Medellin.
He was believed to have been abducted by an armed group called the Pepes - "Persecuted by Pablo Escobar." Believed to be composed of disaffected cartel members, the Pepes have vowed to avenge each of Escobar's terrorist acts.
Escobar is at large after escaping prison last July.
 
 ---
CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) - Political corruption has run rampant in the past four years because Venezuela has no independent justice system to check it, the nation's independent prosecutor said.
"Four years ago, I said that there is no state of law in Venezuela and there has been very little progress up until now," prosecutor Ramon Escovar Salom said Tuesday after presenting his 1992 annual report to Congress, according to accounts Wednesday in Caracas newspapers.
Escovar Salom petitioned the nation's Supreme Court this month to try President Carlos Andres Perez on charges of embezzling $ 17 million. It was the first such petition against a sitting president.
Court decisions here have traditionally been political because the two leading parties used to appoint judges. Perez, however, has been trying to make the justice system more independent of politics.
A report this year by the newly appointed judges of Venezuela's highest court to hear corruption charges said that during the court's 10 years, it has heard 250 cases and issued only one sentence - an acquittal.
 
 ---
GUADALAJARA, Mexico (AP) - Federal police recovered 350 stolen archeological artifacts and arrested four people, including two Americans, the newspaper La Jornada reported Wednesday.
The Attorney General's office said the pieces had been looted from tombs in the states of Michoacan, Nayarit, Jalisco, Colima and Oaxaca and were from the Maya, Toltec and Teotihuacan cultures.
The paper identified the Americans as Arthur Esteves and Allan Long of New York.
Pre-Hispanic pieces in Mexico are considered government property and private ownership generally is prohibited. Authorities said the four were attempting to take the artifacts out of the country.
 
 ---
MEXICALI, Mexico (AP) - The Baja California state government has given its top human rights official three months to investigate charges of torture and corruption by state law enforcement officials.
The Chamber of Deputies on Tuesday authorized Jose Luis Perez Canchola, the state ombudsman for human rights, to launch a formal inquiry into charges made two weeks ago by Tijuana human rights activist Victor Clark Alfaro.
Clark has accused the state attorney general, Juan Francisco Franco Rios, of corruption.Rios has challenged Clark to prove his allegations.
Clark also has accused state judicial police in Tijuana of torture, and claims to have documented 84 allegations of physical abuse by plainclothes investigators.

 

End of Document
