

Latin American Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
April 28, 1993, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 509 words
Dateline: ARICA, Chile
Body




Police in this northern port city have seized dozens of small postcards laced with small amounts of cocaine that were addressed to Germany, authorities announced Wednesday.
Police said they are still trying to identify the sender of the cards, which were all mailed to the same undisclosed address in Germany.
According to police, about 50 cards have already been seized, all of them containing "a few grams" of pure cocaine carefully stuck to the card.
---
QUITO, Ecuador (AP) - Water has begun flowing out of a natural dam caused by a landslide in the southern Andes a month ago, reducing the danger of a collapse, an official said Wednesday.
The government, meanwhile, raised the official toll of dead and missing in the March 29 landslide to 300.
Until now, just 70 people were reported dead or missing in the landslide, which blocked the Paute River and formed a 4-mile-long lake in a valley 180 miles south of Quito.
Defense Minister Jose Gallardo said workers recovered 30 bodies, but hundreds more were buried in the landslide.
Civil Defense workers evacuated most of the valley's 14,000 inhabitants to tent cities higher up the valley slopes last week, fearing an imminent collapse of the dam.
The flooding set off by the landslide caused $ 400 million in damage to farms, roads, railways, bridges, homes, factories and a power plant.
---
MEXICO CITY (AP) - The government said Wednesday it is immediately slapping tariffs of up to 81 percent on a variety of steel imports from the United States.
Pedro Noyola, Mexico's undersecretary of foreign commerce, told the English-language News daily newspaper that the tariffs are being applied against U.S. hot- and cold-rolled sheet steel, plate and galvanized steel.
Noyola said the tariffs follow anti-dumping investigations carried out by Mexico's commerce department. He did not identify specific U.S. steelmakers in Wednesday's decision.
The government denied that it was imposing the duties in retaliation for tariffs on Mexican steel imposed by the U.S. government allegedly because of dumping, or selling at below-market prices.
---
BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) - Four jailed druglords, including the brother of Pablo Escobar, were isolated from fellow prisoners Wednesday as punishment for being caught with a mobile telephone and cash, the Justice Ministry said.
Roberto Escobar Gaviria and three other inmates will still be able to talk to each other, but are separated by a high wall from the other 15 inmates at the high-security prison in a suburb of Medellin, the home base of Escobar's cocaine cartel.
The Justice Ministry also announced that all 15 prisoners could only receive visits from relatives or lawyers.
The measures came after a police search of the prison turned up an illegal radiotelephone, about $ 1,000 in cash and furniture equipped with hiding places.
On Friday a man was arrested trying to smuggle the prisoners 20 coconuts that had been injected with anise-flavored liquor, a local specialty. A day later the father of a prisoner was caught trying to bring his son whiskey in a soup container.

 

End of Document
