

Latin American News Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
October 17, 1992, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 718 words
Dateline: SAN SALVADOR, El Salvador
Body




The government and leftist rebels have agreed to distribute land to former soldiers and rebels and to thousands of squatters.
Under the U.N. proposal agreed to Friday, plots would be distributed to an estimated 15,000 government soldiers, 7,500 demobilized rebel fighters and 25,000 squatters. Most of the squatters are rebel sympathizers.
In a January 1991 U.N.-brokered peace pact, the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front agreed to disband its leftist guerrilla army by Oct. 31.
The rebels have demobilized nearly half of their fighters, but have insisted on resolution of the land issue before disbanding. Land reform was a principal cause of the revolt.
The cost of the program is estimated at between $ 105 million and $ 143 million. The government has pledged $ 58 million, and the remainder is to be raised from foreign donors next year.
---
ROME (AP) - One of Cuba's best-known ballet dancers said he has sought political asylum at the U.S. Embassy, the Italian news agency ANSA reports.
The agency, quoting dancer Jorge Esquival, reported Friday that embassy officials assured him his asylum papers would be sent to the United States.
Esquivel said he feared for the fate of his daughter, who remains in Cuba, and for his own safety abroad.
"If I return to my country I would face serious dangers. And I don't exclude running into them also on foreign soil," he was quoted as saying.
Esquivel, 42, was in Italy to dance with the country's leading ballerina, Carla Fracci. He was the protege and longtime partner of well-known Cuban ballerina Alicia Alonso and was the country's leading male dancer for many years.
---
PANAMA CITY, Panama (AP) - Former President Manuel Solis Palma, accused of heading an unconstitutional paramilitary group under strongman Manuel Noriega, faces arrest.
Solis failed to respond to an order to appear for an Oct. 19 hearing, said Judge Damaris Caballero de Sanjur, who on Friday issued the arrest order to assure Solis' attendance.
The judge said immigration officials told him the former president had not left the country.
Noriega, overthrown by a U.S. invasion in December 1989, was convicted earlier this year in Florida of drug trafficking and money laundering.
Before the invasion, Solis headed several paramilitary groups, including the "Dignity Batallions" that Noriega formed to oppose foreign attack.
The government claims those organizations were not authorized by the constitution. The crime carries a possible penalty of six month to three years in prison, as well as a fine.
Solis was named president in February 1988.
---
SANTIAGO, Chile (AP) - President Patricio Aylwin says the government cannot afford salary increases and other benefits demanded by hundreds of doctors working at Santiago's emergency hospitals.
The doctors have threatened to resign at the end of the month unless their demands are met.
"I understand the legitimate desire and the needs of these professionals to improve their working conditions, but they should also understand that it is impossible to double their salaries," Aylwin said Friday.
The doctors ask for a 100 percent salary increase and other benefits, including exemption from night shifts of doctors with a 20-year seniority and restoration of special vacation benefits that were eliminated by the former military government.
Doctors working at emergency rooms in government hospitals make an average monthly salary of $ 933, the government says.
---
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) - Non-teaching employees at the University of Puerto Rico's 11 campuses say they are ready to strike for the next three months to press demands for more pay.
The workers paralyzed the university, which serves some 54,000 students, as the strike began Friday. Some professors and students joined.
The worker's demands include a pay hike of $ 150 a month. The university said it could only offer a pay hike of $ 30 a month. University president Jose M. Saldana said the workers receive an average of about $ 1,640 monthly.
"To accede to their demands would be an irresponsible move by the administration and would greatly affect the financial needs of the university," Saldana said.
Raul Santiago Melendez, a union spokesman, said the union is "financially prepared to strike for 90 days."
The union represents more than 3,000 workers, mostly maintenance employess.

 

End of Document
