

Latin American Briefs By The Associated Press
The Associated Press
April 14, 1993, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 670 words
Dateline: CANCUN, Mexico
Body




A vacationing teacher from Colorado was shot to death, because she was a bystander in the apparent assassination of a reputed drug trafficker, newspapers and officials said Wednesday.
Georgiann Knafelc, 33, of Nederland, Colo., was shot Monday evening while standing in front of a tourist submarine along this Caribbean resort's main tourist strip.
She was standing near Rafael Aguilar Guajardo, who the government daily El Nacional in Mexico City said was a drug trafficker along the U.S. border. He also was slain, and his wife and 11-year-old son were wounded.
Federal highway police on Monday arrested three men in the killing.
Reports said Knafelc, a native of LaSalle, Ill., had no ties to Aguilar Guajardo.
Officials said Aguilar Guajaro was connected to Colombian drug dealers and imported at least 400 tons of cocaine into the United States.
 
 ---
LIMA, Peru (AP) - State offshore oil company Petromar has boosted production to 24,000 barrels a day with the recent inauguration of two new wells off Peru's north coast, the government said Wednesday.
Petromar last week began full operation of the LO7-14 and LO16-8 wells, which produce 6,700 and 2,000 barrels a day respectively, according to a statement from the Energy and Mines Ministry.
Both wells are offshore of Lobitos, 660 miles northwest of Lima.
The increase in output from 16,000 barrels a day comes after U.S. company Petro Tech International signed a 20-year contract in February to operate Petromar's installations with a guaranteed investment of $ 45 million.
Peru produces 123,000 barrels a day of mainly heavy crude, most of it from northern Amazon jungle oilfields.
 
 ---
SANTIAGO, Chile (AP) - A storm raging over Chile since Monday has left seven people dead and at least 500 homeless, the government reported Wednesday.
In the port city of Valparaiso, one trawler sank and three others were severely damaged, the Interior Ministry said.
Weather conditions improved slightly Wednesday, but rain and strong winds continued to affect a large area, including Santiago.
 
 ---
MEXICO CITY (AP) - Protesters broke through a security cordon Wednesday at the hotel where Mexican, U.S. and Canadian officials were negotiating side accords to the proposed North American Free Trade Agreement.
There was pushing and shoving but no one was injured as protesters from the Mexican Action Network on Free Trade tried to deliver a document outlining their proposals for agreements on labor and environmental issues.
"We don't think the meetings should be going on in secret, behind our backs," network spokesman Alfonso Velasco said outside the room where negotiators have been meeting since Tuesday.
Velasco's group later succeeded in presenting copies of its proposals to U.S. and Canadian representatives. Mexican officials said a copy was also given to chief Mexican negotiator Herminio Blanco.
The proposals called for stronger protection of the environment and guarantees for Mexican workers, as well as side agreements on human rights and protection of Mexican migrant workers in the United States.
The treaty would eliminate tariffs and trade barriers between the three North American nations over 15 years, linking 360 million consumers from the Yukon to the Yucatan.
But President Clinton has said side agreements on protecting jobs and the environment are essential additions to the free-trade pact negotiated by the Bush administration.
 
 ---
GUATEMALA CITY (AP) - Guerrillas ambushed an army patrol in the western region of Quiche, killing a lieutenant and four soldiers, the military said Wednesday.
The military press office said the attack Monday occurred near the town of Playa Grande, close to the Mexican border.
Guatemala's 30-year insurgency continues sporadically despite peace talks between the government and an umbrella group of four rebel armies.
A new round of talks began in Mexico City on Wednesday. Progress has been slowed by a number of procedural matters, including the appointment of investigators to look into a long history of human rights violations.

 

End of Document
