

Latin American Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
March 17, 1993, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 575 words
Dateline: GENEVA
Body




Cuba on Wednesday appealed for food, medicine and other emergency aid to help 150,000 victims of last week's devastating storm.
The United Nations Department of Humanitarian Affairs, based in Geneva, published the appeal, which followed a two-day visit by U.N. disaster assessment experts to Havana and the countryside.
Tens of thousands of Cubans are living in temporary shelters and 150,000 need some form of emergency aid, the U.N. statement said. The storm destroyed 1,500 houses and damaged 37,000, it said.
The public plea was unusual for Cuba, which is one of the world's last Communist countries and prides itself on its self-sufficiency. Cuba's economy has been devastated by the collapse of the Soviet Union - once its major trading partner and subsidizer.
 
 ---
MEXICO CITY (AP) - U.S. Commerce Secretary Ron Brown met Wednesday with President Carlos Salinas de Gortari and declared that the Clinton administration was committed to securing a free-trade treaty by the beginning of 1994.
Clinton and Salinas "share a common goal" on the North American Free Trade Agreement, said Brown, adding that he was "confident we will reach a successful conclusion in the negotiations" in Washington.
Negotiators from the United States, Mexico and Canada began talks Wednesday on agreements demanded by Clinton to address labor and environmental concerns.
The free trade agreement also received the support of European Community President Jacques Delors, who met with Salinas Tuesday. Delors said he believed the emergence of such regional trade blocs would not impede world trade.
 
 ---
BRASILIA, Brazil (AP) - Buyers of the state-owned petrochemical company Poliolefinas will have to pay at least 30 percent cash, President Itamar Franco said Wednesday.
The previous minimum cash payment for the company, which goes up for auction on Friday, had been 17 percent, with the rest payable in government bonds and other papers.
Franco has complained about the excessive use of bonds - known here as "rotten currencies" - in Brazil's privatization drive. The bonds can be acquired abroad at discounts of 70 percent or more, but the government accepts them in auctions at face value.
The opening price for the company is $ 86.1 million.
The privatization campaign began in 1990. So far, 18 companies have been sold for a total of $ 3.8 billion. The enormous National Steel Company is scheduled to go on the block Apr. 2, for a minimum price of $ 1.6 billion.
 
 ---
PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti (AP) - A Haitian navy deserter whose arrest prompted strong criticism of Haiti's dominant military by President Clinton has been escorted from his homeland by U.S. officials, refugee advocates said Wednesday.
William Corascelan was in New York on Wednesday, preparing to rejoin members of his family who had fled to Miami, said Jocelyn McCalla, director of the National Coalition for Haitian Refugees.
Haitian police on March 11 had arrested Corascelan, who had gained U.S. refugee status, as he was preparing to board a plane to Miami with his wife and son.
In a meeting with ousted President Jean-Bertrand Aristide on Tuesday, Clinton credited the U.S. pressure with freeing Corascelan.
The 22-year-old sailor had tried to escape Haiti last year by sea, but was among thousands intercepted and returned under President Bush's policy to directly repatriate Haitians without checking to see if they were fleeing political persecution. The policy was denounced but later continued by Clinton.

 

End of Document
