

Latin American Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
April 18, 1993, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 443 words
Dateline: LIMA, Peru
Body




An army patrol clashed with Maoist guerrillas in the drug-rich northern jungle, killing 13 soldiers and rebels, the military said Sunday.
The fighting, which took place Thursday near Saposoa, 315 miles north of Lima, left two army corporals and 11 Shining Path guerrillas dead, an army communique said.
There were no reports of wounded on either side.
Saposoa is in the heart of the Upper Huallaga River Valley, which produces most of the world's supply of coca, the basis of cocaine.
The guerrillas provide protection for drug traffickers in exchange for weapons and money.
The Shining Path's 13-year insurgency has claimed more than 25,000 lives.
 
 OAXACA, Mexico (AP) - Insects, pollution, poor care, pigeon droppings and other ailments may be killing what is said to be the biggest tree in the world, the news agency Notimex reported.
The 2,000-year-old Savin tree, which stands in front of the Tule village church, is 138 feet high, 191 feet around at the base and is estimated to weigh almost 700 tons.
The tree is also being affected by acids in the excrement of pigeons and other birds, the agency said.
Agronomist Jose Francisco Mayra Skidmore said a study outlining dangers to the tree - a major tourist attraction - was presented to the government almost three years ago but no action has been taken.
Mayra Skidmore said $ 80,000 is needed to save the tree.
 
 MONTERREY, Mexico (AP) - Free trade, education, transportation, tourism and the environment along the U.S.-Mexico border will be on the agenda when governors from the two countries' border states meet here this week.
The governors will meet from April 22-23 in this northern Mexican city for the 11th Border Governors' Conference, according to officials planning the event.
The conference will include the governors of California, Arizona, New Mexico, Texas, and the Mexican states of Baja California Norte, Sonora, Chihuahua, Coahuila, Nuevo Leon and Tamaulipas.
 
 ---
ROME (AP) - A mob boss from a Mafia clan considered one of the biggest players in international drug trafficking returned Sunday to Italy after Argentina allowed his extradition.
Gaetano Fidanzati, known as "Don Tano," was convicted of drug trafficking and Mafia association in 1987 as part of a Palermo trial that put more than 370 Mafiosi behind bars.
But he fled Italy while free during the wait for his appeals trial.
Fidanzati was arrested in 1990 in Buenos Aires, where he was convicted of entering Argentina on false documents and sentenced to three years in jail.
The Fidanzati clan, led by five brothers, including Gaetano, is considered close to the Corleonesi, which authorities believe is the most powerful Sicilian crime family.

 

End of Document
