

Latin American News Briefs From The Associated Press
The Associated Press
October 16, 1992, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 487 words
Dateline: LIMA, Peru
Body




President Alberto Fujimori says anyone convicted of terrorism will face the death penalty in Peru. But the decision will not effect captured Shining Path leader Abimael Guzman.
The step announced Thursday appeared to be in response to popular sentiment - many had called for a death sentence against Guzman.
Peruvian law prohibited capital punishment except in cases of treason during external war. The nation's highest military court Wednesday upheld a sentence of life without parole for Guzman.
More than 25,000 people have died in political violence since the Shining Path took up arms in 1980.
Fujimori said the death penalty would be applied to guerrilla leaders who order attacks, as well as to the cadres who carry them out.
Subversion experts have said capital punishment would not be a very effective weapon against the Shining Path so long as acute poverty could continue to push converts into the Maoist rebels' ranks.
---
BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) - A top aide to Medellin cocaine cartel boss Pablo Escobar has surrendered, raising hopes Escobar would also give himself up soon.
Luis Carlos Aguilar, 42, surrendered Thursday to prosecutors in Medellin, Colombia's second largest city. The information was confirmed by a source in the Public Prosecutor's Office who spoke on condition of anonymity.
Aguilar was the seventh cartel leader to give himself up since Escobar and nine of his lieutenants escaped from their luxurious mountaintop prison on July 22 during a bungled government attempt to move them to a military facility.
Aguilar is said to be Escobar's head bodyguard. He was taken to a maximum security prison in the Medellin suburb of Itagui, where the other six cartel members are being held.
The El Tiempo newspaper, citing unidentified officials, said Thursday that Escobar would turn himself in within the next few days.
---
MEXICO CITY (AP) - Employment in Mexico's maquiladoras is expected to grow by more than 200,000 over the next five years, but many of the new jobs will be away from the border, according to Mexico City's English-language daily The News.
Under the proposed North American Free Trade Agreement between Mexico, the United States and Canada, jobs in the mostly foreign-owned assembly plants are expected to increase from 570,000 to 787,000 over the first five years of the accord, the paper said Thursday.
"However, the growth is expected to be slower at the border than in the interior," CCC de Mexico plant manager John Moore told The News.
Under the 25-year-old maquiladora program has brought jobs and economic benefits to the area along Mexico's border with the United States. But the rapid growth and concentration have also led to pollution and strained the region's infrastructure.
The Mexican government has been encouraging new plants to move to locations away from the border to take the load off that area's infrastructure, and also to boost economic growth in other parts of Mexico.

 

End of Document
