

LBJ Was Uneasy About TV, Gorbachev Likes It: The New Telediplomacy
The Associated Press
September 22, 1991, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 1071 words
Byline: By JAY SHARBUTT, AP Television Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Tom Johnson, once a press aide in the White House of Lyndon B. Johnson, recalls that LBJ wasn't comfortable with TV. Among other things, he said, the big Texan "didn't like the idea of makeup."
This month, Peter Jennings told viewers that Mikhail S. Gorbachev had arrived at the Kremlin for a historic joint appearance with Boris Yeltsin on ABC's "National Town Meeting," but wouldn't appear right away.
The Soviet president was having TV makeup applied, Jennings said.
That says it all.
Call it telediplomacy: the use of international TV by world leaders to make a case, issue warnings, court opinion around the world and in their own country, or even speak to each other, directly and indirectly.
In olden days, heads of state usually would say what they had to say to each other either in person or through their ambassadors and special envoys. It was anything but a public process. But TV has changed that.
"I think in many ways, it has replaced the diplomatic pouch," said Johnson, now president of CNN, the 24-hour global network to which many world leaders, as well as ordinary viewers, first turn at times of great crisis.
"It enables global leaders to address each other with immediacy. … You're actually seeing them, in some cases live and unedited, as they deliver messages to each other, others around the world and their own country," he said.
"It's changed the whole nature of international discourse," said Hewson Ryan, himself a former diplomat who now heads the Edward R. Murrow Center for Public Diplomacy at Tufts University.
The use of television for diplomatic purposes "is becoming one of the principal tools of the diplomat," Ryan said.
Things have reached the point that the State Department's training branch, the Foreign Service Institute, now gives courses in "television manners and television delivery for all of our ambassadors who are going abroad," he said.
And the State Department isn't alone.
"I understand that the Soviets do the same, and I've even heard that the Chinese have begun that now," said Ryan, a former U.S. ambassador to Honduras.
But television, with all its power, doesn't replace diplomacy, cautions ABC's Ted Koppel, whose interview logs contain a veritable Who's Who of world leaders since his "Nightline" became a series in 1980.
"It is an adjunct to diplomacy which most world leaders have learned to use pretty well," Koppel said.
Ryan agrees. Television can and does speed up things, and puts tremendous pressure on governments, he said.
But "it doesn't take fully the place of the formal diplomacy based on written records, agreements, constitutions, treaties and all the other paraphernalia of traditional diplomacy," he said.
One of telediplomacy's first major moments came in 1977. Nearly two years before the historic Irael-Egypt peace accords, CBS' Walter Cronkite and ABC's Barbara Walters got Anwar Sadat and Menahem Begin together for interviews linked via TV.
But it since has become almost routine with the arrival of the CNN on the scene, the most recent examples coming after the short-lived attempt to overthrow Gorbachev last month.
CNN, which went on the air in 1980, now is seen in 123 countries. Johnson gently reminded Soviet officials of that fact last month when, three days after ABC said Gorbachev and Yeltsin would appear on its "Town Meeting," he and CNN international editor Eason Jordan flew to Moscow.
They urged Soviet officials to let their network be the next to interview the two leaders. Soviet officials thought it'd be a very good idea, indeed.
CNN wound up with three exclusive interviews before ABC's show, first with Gorbachev, then with Russian President Yeltsin, then with the new chairman of the once-dreaded KGB, Vadim Bakatin.
Each interview also was shown in the Soviet Union.
During his turn, Yeltsin twice acknowledged CNN's influence, the second time when saying that the Soviet Union's "imperial attitudes" toward its republics are a thing of the past.
"I don't think there are any grounds for concern," he said, adding that he wanted to use his appearance before "the large audience of CNN, and assure that nothing of the kind will happen."
In ABC's ensuing show Sept. 5, audience members in 10 U.S. cities peppered Gorbachev and Yeltsin with questions for more than an hour.
The replies of the two men were rife with ramifications about such matters as trade with the United States, the future of communism, and coming changes in Soviet support of Cuba that no doubt are worrying Fidel Castro.
That show also was seen in the Soviet Union, as well as in eastern Europe, with Gostelradio, the Soviet state broadcasting company, providing it to Bulgaria, Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Romania.
ABC, for its part, was allowed to license the program to broadcasters in 14 other countries, among them Germany, Japan, Hong Kong, Spain, Canada and Australia.
Telediplomacy has its hazards. One, which predates broadcasting, is that what a world leader or his representatives says to the world on TV may be unclear - or not the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.
"Sometimes they're sending out conflicting messages," said Koppel, ABC's diplomatic corresondent in the early '70s. "Sometimes they're saying one thing in public and doing something totally else again behind the scenes."
Henry Kissinger, while Richard Nixon's secretary of state, "was a past master of that" during his Middle East shuttle diplomacy days, Koppel said.
Kissinger would give reporters background briefings while en route, but upon landing would assume his secretary of state role "and say something subtly different from what the 'senior U.S. official' on the plane had said, Koppel said.
"He'd use us to put a little pressure on the Israelis sometimes, and then come out and be clean as a whistle," he said.
Another hazard of telediplomacy is for a world leader to go on the tube live, notes CNN's Johnson. A slip of the lip can cause a tremendous uproar - or worse.
"Live television has the power to inform, but it also has the power to provoke," Johnson said. "And I'm sure that must be on the minds of those who go on live - that they don't have the chance to edit what they say or change how they say it."
"It can be dangerous," Ryan said. "It can be almost a Roman arena 'thumbs up, thumbs down.' But there are positive aspects. It does bring public opinion, in the broadest sense of the term, into the action. It's no longer an exchange among a small, elite group."

 

End of Document
