

Leading Human Rights Activist Promises to 'Save the Nation'
The Associated Press
June 6, 1993, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 759 words
Byline: By CHRISTENA COLCLOUGH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GUATEMALA CITY
Body




One of Guatemala's leading human rights advocates was sworn in as president Sunday, after Guatemala's powerful military permitted Congress to hold a special election to choose him.
The election of Ramiro de Leon Carpio late Saturday restored democratic rule to the Central American country days after the ouster of Jorge Serrano, who declared emergency power and seized near-dictatorial power on May 25.
It was unclear whether the country's long-dominant military would stay on the sidelines. Although the army permitted Congress to elect the president, the defense minister stopped short of saying that the army would back its choice.
Later in the day, De Leon Carpio called for a purge of the army, the Congress and other government institutions, although he said his first priority was to restore democracy.
He said in his inaugural speech that his mission was "to save the nation" and promised to appeal for the release of tens of millions of dollars in foreign aid suspended after Serrano seized power.
Along with possible military distrust, his immediate problems include declining living standards, a wide gap between rich and poor, and a 33-year-old leftist insurrection, the last and longest in Central America.
His promise to bring justice to the poor raised high expectations that may be difficult to fill.
"We face a challenge before the world, and before ourselves, to correct our errors and press on to a better destiny," said de Leon Carpio, 51, the government-appointed attorney general for human rights. His office was suspended under the emergency rule.
"Guatemala's international standing must be restored," he said in his inaugural speech.
At his first news conference, de Leon Carpio called for a purge of the army and other government institutions, "with the goal of pacifying Guatemala." Serrano shut Congress and the Supreme Court, complaining they were rife with corruption.
But it was not immediately clear how far the new president could go in reorganizing a powerful military that wields great influence and was the powerbroker that ended Serrano's absolute rule.
He said his first priority "was to consolidate democracy in Guatemala" before tackling an end to the country's long civil war.
De Leon Carpio's election was welcomed by hundreds of jubilant supporters, who surged past a police line and burst into Congress to watch his swearing-in.
The crowd sang the national anthem and cheered as the president donned a ceremonial sash. Fireworks crackled outside and cheering erupted in the street.
The election of a human rights activist was unprecedented in a country with a poor human rights record, civil war, and a military that has long played a role in the country's political life.
Gen. Jose Domingo Garcia Samayoa, the defense minister, promised to let the election proceed, but had stopped short of saying whether the powerful army would back Congress' choice.
In Washington, the White House viewed the election with cautious optimism.
"We are tentatively encouraged by the restoration of democracy and civilian rule in Guatemala," a White House spokesman said Sunday. He did not give his name.
In Managua, Nicaragua, where the Organization of American States held informal discussions Sunday, OAS Secretary-General Joao Baena Soares said "constitutional normality" had returned to Guatemala.
The vote count was 107 for de Leon Carpio, six abstentions and two votes for others not nominated. One deputy in the 116-seat Congress was absent. His candidacy was strengthened after another leading candidate withdrew.
He will serve out Serrano's term, which ends January 1996.
Ten days ago, de Leon Carpio was a military target.
He was placed under house arrest May 25 by troops backed by armored carriers, but escaped over his rooftop and appeared at a clandestine news conference the next day to denounce Serrano's move.
De Leon Carpio had long been a fierce critic of the government of Serrano, who was the first elected civilian president to succeed another in more than 150 years of Guatemalan history.
As an attorney general, de Leon Carpio oversaw the investigations into two of Guatemala's most publicized human rights cases: the June 1990 slaying of American innkeeper Michael Devine, and the September 1990 stabbing death of Mirna Mack Chang, a reknowned Guatemalan anthropologist.
In the Devine case, six soldiers and Capt. Hugo Contreras were convicted on evidence amassed by de Leon Carpio's office. A presidential security officer was convicted in the death of Mack Chang, who was investigating abuses against Guatemalan war refugees.

 

End of Document
