

Leg Belonged to Black Woman: That Could Hurt the Defense
 The Associated Press
September 1, 1995, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 661 words
Byline: By PAUL QUEARY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: OKLAHOMA CITY
Body




The defense theory that the leg found in the rubble of the federal building belonged to the "real bomber" has apparently been undermined by scientists' conclusion that the limb was that of a black woman.
Authorities believe the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building was bombed on April 19 by someone sympathetic to predominantly white right-wing groups.
"If we are now locked into the white supremacist theory, then I presume a black person's leg doesn't fit the stereotype we've been asked to accept," said Gerry Goldstein, a Texas attorney and former president of the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers. He is not connected to the case.
The leg was clad in a size 7 military-style boot and an olive drab strap of the sort used by soldiers to tuck their pants into their boots. That led Stephen Jones, Timothy McVeigh's lawyer, to speculate that the limb might be the remains of the "real bomber."
However, tests conducted by the FBI found the leg belonged to a black woman age 16 to 30, not a light-skinned man with dark hair, as had first been first concluded.
Renowned forensic anthropologist Clyde Snow told The Daily Oklahoman for Friday's editions that he, not the state medical examiner's office, is to blame for any errors in identifying the gender and race of the leg.
Snow, who identified the remains of Nazi war criminal Josef Mengele in Brazil, among other cases, worked extensively with the medical examiner's office in trying to identify the bombing victims.
Snow said he issued a July 19 report on his initial leg examination, assisted by researchers at the University of Tennessee. Their recommendation was that there was a 75 percent probability that the leg belonged to a man, and a 25 percent chance it was of a female.
"We shouldn't have used the 75 percent. That percentage doesn't cut it," he said.
The FBI tests failed to match the leg to any of the known victims, prompting the medical examiner's office to raise the death toll from the bombing to 169.
"If there was a bad call, it was my call," Snow told the Oklahoman.
Sgt. Bill Martin, a spokesman for the Oklahoma City Police Department, said police have retrieved five missing persons reports that could match the source of the unidentified leg. Martin refused to release the names of the missing women noting that the case had been turned over to the FBI.
FBI spokesman Dan Vogel refused to confirm or deny receiving the missing persons reports from police.
Although the conclusion that the leg belonged to a black person weakens the "real bomber" theory, it will give the defense ammunition to attack the government's forensic evidence, Goldstein said.
"No question about it. They seem to have been dead wrong that it was a white male," Goldstein said. "I mean, what next?"
Jones immediately adopted such a strategy. "With this disclosure," he said, "no one can have confidence in any of the forensic work in this case."
McVeigh and Terry Nichols face conspiracy and murder charges in the bombing and could get the death penalty if convicted.
Prosecutors have maintained that they were not interested in the leg except as a possible 169th victim.
"It clearly appears now that it is another victim. It doesn't impact the case against McVeigh or Nichols," Assistant U.S. Attorney Steve Mullins said.
Meanwhile, the wife of Michael Fortier, who is expected to be a key prosecution witness, has begun discussions with federal prosecutors about protection for herself and the couple's 2-year-old daughter, The Washington Post quoted sources as saying.
The newspaper quoted sources as saying Lori Fortier moved in with her parents after receiving threatening phone calls and letters and after her dog was killed.
Fortier, an acquaintance of both McVeigh and Nichols, pleaded guilty Aug. 10 to charges of not going to authorities with his knowledge of plans for the bombing before it occurred and lying to the FBI. Sentencing on the charges has been postponed until after trials for McVeigh and Nichols.
 Load-Date: September 1, 1995

 

End of Document
