

Looking For A New Investment? How About The Turkish Fund?
The Associated Press
February 24, 1992, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 622 words
Byline: By DAVID SMYTH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




They started springing up like mushrooms on U.S. stock exchanges a couple of years ago: the Argentina Fund, Brazil Fund, Chile Fund, First Philippine Fund, India Growth Fund, Taiwan Fund, Turkish Investment Fund.
Investors on Wall Street had discovered foreign stock markets.
Nor have they forgotten them: today these funds are still growing in number and value among American investors and investment managers.
The funds are investment pools that buy the shares of companies abroad. That allows investors to buy into foreign stock markets in a single packaged investment. The Italy Fund, for example, has the shares of dozens of Italian companies in its portfolio.
Encouraged by startling results at some overseas bourses - four formerly somnolent Latin American bolsas gained more than 100 percent in value last year - Americans eagerly snapped up the funds.
The funds have also been helped by a wave of liberalization around the globe, which has given investors easier entry into previously restricted markets such as Korea, Turkey and Brazil.
Now the number of funds listed on the New York Stock Exchange has grown from 14 in 1989 to more than 50, with total assets of more than $ 4 billion.
Countries represented on the NYSE include Austria, Australia, Britain, France, Germany, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Portugal, Singapore, Spain, South Africa and Switzerland.
Some funds, such as Asia-Pacific Fund or the Emerging Markets Fund, specialize in geographic areas rather than single countries. Others invest in foreign bonds instead of stocks.
These stock-exchange-listed investments are called closed-end funds, which means they contain only a limited number of shares. They are traded on stock exchanges just like IBM, Ford or any other publicly owned American stock company.
There are also nearly 200 mutual funds with overseas investments. Mutual funds sell their shares directly to the public and repurchase them from investors without going through the stock markets.
The mutual funds range from Japan Fund to Vanguard World Fund, and their total investments amount to $ 33.4 billion, according to Lipper Analytical Services Inc., an outfit that keeps track of mutual funds.
However, for all their recent popularity and growth, financial experts view some of these funds with a wary eye. To begin, their prices are volatile. While the Chile Fund was climbing 80 percent at one point last year, the Turkish Investment Fund was plunging 50 percent.
The funds are also subject to the vagaries of international politics and speculative sentiment. Iraq's invasion of Kuwait and the ensuing Gulf War sent many foreign funds sliding lower.
The Portugal Fund, launched on the NYSE after a 1980s boom in its home stock market, languished in 1991. Lisbon analyst Jeronimo Lopes said he saw few signs of a rebound early this year without a worldwide economic recovery.
Still, the funds have attracted much attention. The Brazilian Central Bank said foreign investors poured $ 770 million into the Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro stock exchanges in 1991.
In Thailand, Robin Fox of the firm W.I. Carr (Far East) said foreign investors accounted for 14.4 percent of all trading value in 1991.
The increased interest in international investing has led to another development. It's stimulated business for information services such as Political Risk Services of Syracuse, N.Y., which evaluates the risks of various investments around the globe.
Meanwhile, the march of funds goes on. Investment adviser Thomas J. Herzfeld of Miami, a specialist in closed-end investment funds, has registered two new entrants - the Cuba Fund and First Cuba Fund. They'll be ready for the day when the Fidel Castro regime falls and capitalism returns to Havana.

 

End of Document
