

Ludwig, 'The Invisible Billionaire,' Dead at 95
The Associated Press
August 28, 1992, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 635 words
Byline: By RICK HAMPSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Daniel K. Ludwig, a publicity-shy shipping tycoon who remained a billionaire despite losing a billion-dollar investment in an Amazon plantation, has died at the age of 95.
Ludwig's heart failed Thursday at his home in Manhattan, said R. Palmer Baker Jr., executor of his estate. He said Ludwig had been ill for some time and had not been active in years.
Ludwig parlayed a $ 5,000 loan from his father into a global business empire, National Bulk Carriers Inc., based on a fleet of supertankers. He also owned citrus farms in Panama, coal mines in Australia, hotels in the Caribbean and a salt plant in Mexico's Baja California.
He once was the world's richest man, with estimates of his fortune ranging from $ 2 billion to $ 3 billion before his loss in Brazil. Forbes magazine estimated his fortune last year at $ 1.2 billion. But he showed little interest in yachts or other ornaments of wealth.
Baker said Ludwig's will "is structured primarily to benefit cancer research."
In later years, Ludwig devoted much of his attention to the Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, which he founded in 1971. The institute has a staff of more than 500 working in 10 offices in seven nations.
Ludwig quit school after the eighth grade. He entered the shipping business by borrowing $ 5,000 from his father to convert an old steamer into a barge that plied the Great Lakes.
In 1936, Ludwig hit upon the financing scheme that would start his fortune. He got oil companies to charter tankers for future oil deliveries, then used the charters as collateral to borrow money to build the tankers. The fees from the charter covered the loan and interest, and still left Ludwig a profit and a working tanker.
During World War II, Ludwig built oil tankers for the government. Most of the vessels reverted to him after the war, and gave him the most modern fleet afloat.
During the 1950s, he leased a shipyard in Japan and began developing ever-larger tankers. His 100,000-ton supertanker was built about the time the Suez Canal crisis created a demand for huge ships to move Mideastern oil around the Cape of Good Hope.
During the bull stock market of the 1960s, he bought 4.1 million shares of Union Oil Co. of California and sold them at a $ 46 million profit. A $ 12 million investment in container ships turned into $ 60 million.
But Ludwig lost money in Brazil, where a plantation bigger than the state of Connecticut swallowed an estimated $ 1.1 billion.
In the mid-1960s, he had learned of a fast-growing tree native to India, gmelina arborea, whose wood could be used both for pulp and lumber. He bought 4 million acres of Brazilian rain forest and planted gmelina.
He had a floating paper mill built in Japan and towed half way around the world and up the Amazon and Jari rivers to the site. It went into operation in 1979.
But the operation lost a reported $ 100 million a year. The Brazilian government transferred ownership to a consortium of banks and private businesses. Ludwig got $ 50 million and a promise that if the plantation showed a profit his cancer institute would receive dividends.
Ludwig was more successful in his efforts to avoid publicity. He stopped talking to reporters in 1963 and for 20 years did not allow himself to be photographed.
Baker said Ludwig shunned publicity because "he just wasn't interested in what the outside world thought of him."
But Jerry Shields, who wrote a biography of Ludwig, "The Invisible Billionaire," offered another theory: "He didn't like publicity because he had things to hide - like the fact that he got rich largely through government contracts."
Ludwig and his second wife, Gertrude, had no children. Ludwig had a daughter with his first wife, whom he divorced in 1937, but "she is not recognized as such by him," according to Baker.
Funeral arrangements were private, Baker said.

 

End of Document
