

Manny Hanny: Banker to Latin America, The Donald, and New York Jocks
The Associated Press
July 15, 1991, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 445 words
Byline: By RICK GLADSTONE, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




When Manufacturers Hanover Corp. fades from view with the marriage to rival Chemical Banking Corp., it will be remembered as the bank left holding the bag for two famous borrowers: Latin America and Donald Trump.
The absorption of Manny Hanny, as it is often called by bankers, also will create a void in the world of high-profile sports sponsorship, where the bank was considered a leader.
"Manny Hanny is the undisputed sugar daddy of New York City sports," says the reference book Everybody's Business, a guide to 400 leading American companies. The book described the bank as "the firm of jolly jocks" because it helps sponsor the New York City marathon and was a prominent advertiser for the New York Mets, Giants, Knicks, Rangers and Islanders.
Manufacturers Hanover was borne out of the 1961 merger between two old-line New York banks, Manufacturers Trust Co. and the Hanover Bank. Manufacturers specialized in small-business customers, while Hanover focused on large clients and international banking.
The combined bank plunged in a big way into lending staggering amounts of money to the developing nations of Latin America and became the biggest foreign banker to Chile and Argentina.
In the 1980s, when the borrowers began balking on repayment, Manny Hanny's exposure was among the highest relative to its size, and the bank fell from fourth place to eighth.
Compounding problems was the bank's eagerness during the booming 1980s to lend money to Trump, the New York property and casino developer who's net worth has since plunged - by some rankings into negative territory.
Last year the bank lost $ 4 million on the $ 158 million in loans it had made to Trump's gambling parlors and other properties.
Furthering the bank's misery was the ill-fated 1984 acquisition of CIT Financial Corp., a commercial loan company, which was losing $ 20 million a year four years later. Manufacturers sold a controlling interest in CIT to Japan's Dai-Ichi Kangyo bank, the biggest bank in the world, in 1989.
That sale was part of a broader purge at the bank to control costs and stem losses. Under Chairman John F. McGillicuddy, Manufacturers dismissed 5,000 employees.
"It's a hell of a lot more fun building thengs than downsizing them," McGillicuddy said at the time.
Because its headquarters faces Chemical's on midtown Manhattan's Park Ave., there have been numerous stories of each bank raiding the other's top staff.
Among the best-known Chemical defectors were Darla Moore, specialist in bankruptcy financing, and the bank's one-time president Thomas Johnson.
"A lot of people have gone from their shop to ours and our shop to theirs," said Manufacturers spokesman John Meyers.

 

End of Document
