

Massacre at El Mozote: 'I Could Hear The Children Crying'
The Associated Press
June 27, 1992, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 2278 words
Byline: By GEORGE GEDDA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




It was December 11, 1981, and the Reagan administration thought it appropriate to use that day - International Human Rights Day - to swear in a new human rights chief.
By the cruelest of ironies, an American-trained military battalion operating in a pastoral mountain setting in the northern part of El Salvador was committing perhaps the worst atrocity in a war notorious for brutality. As many as 1,000 Salvadoran men, women and children - almost all civilians - were put to death in a massacre that began on Human Rights Day.
Normally, a tragedy of this magnitude would provoke an international outcry. But the massacre at El Mozote and in neighboring hamlets penetrated the international consciousness only briefly.
The victims at El Mozote died anonymously, for the most part, because of the remoteness of the region and the joint efforts of the U.S. and Salvadoran governments to nurture skepticism that a massacre had occurred at all.
That skepticism has been diminishing since the publication of a report last fall by a Salvadoran church-sponsored human rights group, Tutela Legal.
The report lists the names of 794 victims - most of them children - who died Dec. 11-13 in El Mozote and several neighboring hamlets during an operation carried out by the 1,200-member Atlacatl military battalion. The report suggests that several hundred others may have died as well. The findings of the study tend to bear out accounts on the massacre in January 1982 by The New York Times and The Washington Post.
In graphic detail, the Tutela Legal report outlines what happened in El Mozote on the morning of Dec. 11.
"The soldiers … started ordering all civilians from their homes, putting them in groups in the plaza. The civilian population gathered there totaled several hundred, among men, women, children and the elderly. The soldiers ordered the people to make two lines, one for men and the other for women and children."
At about 7 a.m., the men were sent to a church and the women and small children to the home of a man named Alfredo Marquez. At 8 a.m., the executions began. Many of the men were beheaded, the women shot to death. In one house, the report said, "blood covered the entire floor." Women clutching babies were fired on. As evening fell, the soldiers killed the children who had been separated from their mothers.
Afterward, the report said, troops burned to the ground the houses where the slayings took place.
Tutela Legal lists the names and ages of 393 people who were said to have died at El Mozote. First on the list is a man named Domingo Claros, a 29-year-old wood cutter. The next four names are those of his children, aged 9, 5, 3, and eight months. Next is his 60-year old aunt, Isidra Claros, a domestic.
Later that day and in the following days, the killings continued in neighboring hamlets. In La Joya, 138 victims are listed; in Rancheria, there were 53; in Los Toriles, 62; in Jocote Amarillo, 16; in Cerro Pando, 112; and Cerro Ortiz, 14.
The report tells the story of a La Joya man identified only by his last name, Lopez. He spent much of Dec. 11 hiding out with a companion in a nearby river. In early evening, Lopez returned to the hamlet in search of his family. About 50 yards from his house, under a cluster of mango trees, he found the bodies of his wife and six of their children, aged 12 to eight months. All had been shot to death. He discovered the remains of a seventh child later on and those of eight other relatives. He buried all 16 family members in two graves.
Barring major inaccuracies in the Tutela Legal report, the events at El Mozote and the nearby communities rank as one of the worst massacres in recent history, and it occurred in a country that was perhaps the closest U.S. ally in the hemisphere during the 1980s.
The administration's support for the Salvadoran government already had been under fire in Congress, and a massacre of civilians, if confirmed, could have led to an aid cutoff. But in the absence of film footage or other hard evidence, the administration's policy escaped virtually unscathed.
The doubts expressed by administration officials at the time that a massacre had taken place seemed genuine. But in a period when the Cold War seemed to intensify by the day, the administration felt it could not afford to allow El Salvador to become a member of the pro-Soviet camp.
As one official involved in Central America policy during that period said, "There was a realization at the time that this was the kind of incident that could have led to the unraveling of the U.S. effort to promote a rapid expansion of Salvador's military forces."
And the assistant secretary for human rights who took office on the day of the massacre, Elliott Abrams, believed that the worst human rights calamity that could befall El Salvador was a takeover by the Soviet-backed FMLN guerrillas. Even the most ardent critics of the administration's policy agreed that the insurgents' reputation for ruthlessness was well-deserved.
Today, with peace prevailing for the first time in 12 years thanks to a settlement reached in January, some Salvadorans have been trying to find out what really happened on those terrible days a decade ago. Forensic experts are seeking permission to poke through the grisly remains in El Mozote and neighboring communities, and a "truth commission" has been appointed to examine the most egregious rights violations of the war.
But tentative efforts to bring the guilty from the El Mozote massacre to justice have borne little fruit. Indeed, in early April, the Salvadoran Catholic Church accused President Alfredo Cristiani, Defense Minister Emilio Ponce and the Salvadoran judicial system of orchestrating a cover-up.
But getting to the bottom of the massacre has never been easy. For those in authority, it was clearly a case of the less said about it, the better. The massacre story in the winter of 1981-82 behaved akin to a comet: here one day, gone the next. In contrast, much smaller atrocities in El Salvador, such as the murders of four American churchwomen in 1980 and the execution of six Jesuit priests in 1989, remained in the spotlight for years.
El Mozote was a much more difficult challenge because of the inaccessibility of the area. Leftist guerrillas were in control there and only rarely gave permission to outsiders to enter. Once permission was granted, a visit required a bumpy 12-hour ride from Tegucigalpa, Honduras, followed by an exhausting four-day trek by foot through El Salvador's northern hills.
In training the Atlacatl Battalion, U.S. advisers stressed the need to go after the guerrillas instead of simply responding to attacks. So it was that Lt. Col. Domingo Monterrosa, the Atlacatl commander, dispatched his forces to El Mozote during the second week of December. "We must liberate our peasant brothers, slaves of the communist terrorism in the northern hills of the country," he said.
Monterrosa viewed the El Mozote region as a breeding ground for rebel sympathizers, with no clear distinction between military and civilian enemies. Still, to this day there is no coherent explanation as to why his forces executed children along with adults.
El Salvador had been a killing field since late 1979, the start of an intense guerrilla war in the countryside, coupled with hundreds of incidents of urban and rural terrorism committed by both sides.
The Atlacatl Battalion withdrew from the El Mozote area two weeks after the massacre took place, enabling the FMLN to regain control. The insurgents then gave Raymond Bonner of The New York Times and Alma Guillermoprieto of The Washington Post permission to visit the area. Bonner was accompanied by Susan Meiselas, a photographer.
The stories of the two reporters appeared on the same day, Jan. 27, 1982. Both were on page one, and much like the Tutela Legal report, relied heavily on the testimony of Rufina Amaya, a Mozote resident who escaped death by slipping away from her guards and climbing a tree. She is the only known survivor. She was alone when she spoke with Guillermoprieto and broke down when speaking of the deaths of her four children.
"I could hear the children crying," Guillermoprieto quoted her as saying. "I heard my own children. When it was all over late at night, the lieutenant ordered the soldiers to put a torch to the corpses."
Mrs. Amaya told Bonner that she could hear her son scream: "Mama, they're killing me. They've killed my sister. They're going to kill me."
Maria Julia Hernandez, the head of Tutela Legal, refused recently to say whether the section of the report dealing with El Mozote was based solely on Amaya's comments or whether military personnel were interviewed as well. "I'm sorry, but that question we cannot answer now," she said in response to a reporter's query.
As for eyewitnesses in La Joya, about two miles from El Mozote, Guillermoprieto spoke to Jose Marcial Martinez, 14, who said he watched from a cornfield as his parents, brothers and sisters were killed. Jose Santos, 15, said he witnessed the killing of seven family members.
After The Times and The Post reports appeared, the Reagan administration dispatched two embassy officials to Morazan province, where they spent a day speaking with refugees. El Mozote was back in guerrilla hands, and the two officials never visited El Mozote or any of the neighboring villages. The report of the two officials was the principal basis for the administration's response to congressional and press inquiries about the massacre.
A few days after the Post and Times account appeared, Assistant Secretary of State Thomas O. Enders told Congress, "There is no evidence to confirm that government forces systematically massacred civilians in the operations zone."
One of the major discrepancies in the accounts of the massacre centered on the number of people killed. Villagers told Bonner 733 had died in El Mozote and the surrounding hamlets and that there were 482 deaths in El Mozote alone. Ms. Amaya estimated El Mozote's population at 500.
International Committee of the Red Cross officials later told Bonner there were at least 1,000 people in El Mozote at the time.
U.S. Embassy officials found all of these figures highly exaggerated. The actual number of dead, they said, did not "even remotely approach" the totals cited in the media.
To the extent that there were civilian deaths, the embassy cable blamed the guerrillas who "did nothing to remove them (the civilians) from the path of battle which they were aware was coming and had prepared for."
The embassy cable projected an air of certainty about the events at El Mozote. But one of the embassy officers who was intimately involved in the issue now acknowledges that a one-day visit to an area away from the scene of the massacre was not an adequate basis for definitive conclusions.
"The elusiveness of the truth is what bothers me," said the official, asking not to be identified. Another official, who worked at the embassy during that period, agreed that the cable's conclusions probably were overdrawn but he also had serious doubts about the accuracy of Bonner's story. Americas Watch, a U.S. human rights group, charged in a recent report that the massacre "was never fully investigated by the U.S. Embassy when it occurred, much less by the Salvadoran government."
Abrams, who now works at a private research group here, says he no longer has a clear recollection of the events of that period. Stephen Bosworth, a top Central America hand at the State Department during 1981-82, declined comment for the same reason.
Bonner, then 38, an ex-Marine who had spent a year in Vietnam, was a favorite target of conservatives. Two weeks after his story appeared, Bonner was accused by a Wall Street Journal editorial of being "overly credulous" in the face of what was clearly a guerrilla "propaganda exercise." The U.S. Ambassador to El Salvador, Deane Hinton, reportedly called Bonner an "advocacy journalist."
These and other attacks on the credibility of The Times and The Post accounts had an impact, and the story faded. The foreign press corps in San Salvador turned their attention to the upcoming national elections, which were held in March 1982. No other reporters were dispatched to El Mozote, though hundreds showed up to cover the elections.
James LeMoyne, who covered Central America for Newsweek and The Times, said administration officials campaigned aggressively to discredit Bonner and Guillermoprieto. "They did everything they could to cover up El Mozote and they went after everybody who reported it," said LeMoyne.
Bonner later gave ammunition to his enemies by writing a book highly critical of administration policy in El Salvador. Today, he feels his reporting has been vindicated, especially with the publication of the Tutela Legal report.
Ironically, the day after the reports on the massacre appeared in The Times and The Post, Reagan certified to Congress that the Salvadoran government was "making a concerted effort to comply with internationally recognized human rights." In the absence of such a certification, the law required that U.S. assistance to El Salvador be suspended.
Efforts by 55 House members to have the certification overturned were unsuccessful. With an assist from the administration, the Atlacatl Battalion paid no price for its brutality.
Last December, a number of Salvadorans from Morazan province returned to El Mozote, after sitting out the war at refugee camps in Honduras. And there, on the 10th anniversary of the massacre, amid the thick growth of weeds that now dominate the abandoned community, they celebrated a memorial Mass to the hundreds of friends, relatives and neighbors who were slaughtered there.

 

End of Document
