

Medical School Guards Kill the Poor to Sell Their Cadavers
The Associated Press
March 31, 1992, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 716 words
Byline: By STEVEN GUTKIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BARRANQUILLA, Colombia
Body




Even Colombians jaded by years of drug violence were horrified to hear Oscar Hernandez's tale of escape from a medical school morgue where guards tried to kill him so his cadaver could be sold for cash.
The 24-year-old garbage dump scavenger said university watchmen lured him onto campus late the night of Feb. 29 while most people in this steamy Caribbean port were busy celebrating the city's annual carnival.
After attacking him with clubs, the guards left him amidst a row of blood-stained metal tables, each containing a body, Hernandez said.
"I was spread out on the floor. I realized that if I wanted to save myself I would have to pretend I was dead," Hernandez told reporters.
Instead, he fled and returned with police to the university morgue that had been turned into a slaughter house for the trafficking of cadavers.
Amid the bodies, police found another badly beaten man who was still alive.
They also discovered 11 bodies and the parts of 22 others. Most of the victims were garbage collectors like Hernandez.
The massacre in this city of 1 million people awakened an outcry over the killing of the poor, many by death squads financed by drug traffickers. This time the killers were employees of one of Colombia's oldest and most prestigious learning institutions, the privately run Free University.
Maria del Carmen Arias, a Barranquilla garbage recycler, was among those appalled. She and thousands like her spend their days sifting through garbage heaps for glass, metal, cardboard, plastic and other recyclable material. Some Colombians refer to them as "Los Desechables" - the disposable ones.
Authorities said each cadaver sold for $ 200, and that the checks came from the university.
The investigation will likely end the careers of several powerful politicians associated with the university.
Defense lawyers say policemen were running the body trade, not university guards.
"Policemen were collecting unidentified bodies off the street and selling them. … No one was killed at the school," said attorney Ernesto de la Espriella. He is defending five of the seven security guards who were arrested.
The prosecution is relying on the testimony of the survivors. It also cites a police report that said university guard guns and clubs were used in the murders.
The investigation has turned violent itself: judges and lawyers have received death threats, and police deactivated a bomb last week outside a Barranquilla courthouse where investigators worked.
The case has given Colombia's street people a rare opportunity to be heard.
Thousands of them marched in downtown Bogota, the capital. For many, the Barranquilla case suggested they were worth more dead than alive.
The people who collect garbage in Barranquilla live on the outskirts of the dumps in shacks made of scraps of wood, tarpaper, tires and other discarded materials.
The dumps are breeding grounds for polio, amoebic dysentery and gastroenteritis. Almost all the children suffer from malnutrition.
Milk, meat, hot baths, education and medical care are not part of their lives.
"With the feelings we have, the love, the affection, the desire to live, how can anyone call us disposable," said Rodrigo Ramirez, vice-president of the National Recyclers' Association, a loose-knit union based in Bogota.
The garbage people work long hours every day for very little pay. Society has placed them at the lowest end of its class scale.
On a desolate hill outside Barranquilla, scores of dirt-covered men and women trudge through the trash as vultures circle overhead and trucks roll in to dump more waste.
It took the university massacre to move the city's elite to help these people.
Police here began giving food and shelter to the homeless, and the Santodomingo Group, one of Colombia's richest companies, said it would set up a garbage collectors' cooperative to increase payments to trash workers and provide basic living needs.
The government meanwhile has closed the medical school indefinitely.
Scores of professors quit, and students have demanded the resignation of the university president, Jose Navarro, who is also a federal senator.
A report from the government's Institute of Higher Education denounced the Free University for administrative chaos and said there had been no bureaucratic control over the acquisition of cadavers.

 

End of Document
