

Metzenbaum: Doggedly Bearing the Liberal Standard
The Associated Press
September 19, 1991, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 761 words
Byline: By KATHERINE RIZZO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Sen. Howard Metzenbaum was much in evidence this week. He was in the center rings of the two biggest shows in town - berating Supreme Court nominee Clarence Thomas for refusing to discuss abortion and laying into Robert Gates for being a "see-no-evil" nominee to head the CIA.
No matter that both nominees were expected to win Senate confirmation handily; the liberal Ohio Democrat worked through a list of questions as though pivotal votes hung on every one.
"I believe to do less than what I'm doing would be irresponsible," he said during a break in the Gates hearing.
Metzenbaum's style is to dive at the nominees' Achilles' heels, clamping down and refusing to let go.
He went one-on-one with Gates for more than three hours, calling him a "see-no-evil, hear-no-evil, speak-no-evil" nominee whose "willful ignorance is inexcusable."
In the Thomas confirmation hearing, he ripped the federal appeals court judge for his non-position on abortion and for his performance as head of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
It was typical Metzenbaum: brash, persistent, with liberal indignation quivering in every question.
To Thomas he evoked the ugliest possible images as he tried nearly a dozen ways to get the nominee on the record on abortion, saying:
"Frankly, I'm terrified that if we turn the clock back on legal abortion services, women will once again be forced to resort to brutal and illegal abortions. The kinds of abortions where coat hangers substitute for surgical instruments."
He was even tougher on Gates, who was No. 2 at the CIA during the illegal diversion of Iran arms sale proceeds to the Contra rebels in Nicaragua.
"It's just impossible to believe that this man was so close to what was going on (in Iran-Contra) and he didn't know. It's just not credible," Metzenbaum told fellow members of the Intelligence Committee.
With Thomas, it's what the nominee has said and done, plus what he won't say.
Thomas dodged every attempt to make him discuss abortion before the Senate Judiciary Committee, although he did tell Metzenbaum he "wouldn't want to see people subjected to torture" such as the back-alley abortion the senator described.
Metzenbaum let up on abortion only to tear into Thomas' record as head of the EEOC, which took six years to protect working women of childbearing age from being barred by their employers from certain hazardous jobs.
"The women who filed these charges (with the EEOC) had rights, but their rights became meaningless in the absence of enforcement," Metzenbaum charged. "For these women, justice delayed was justice denied."
That elicited an explanation that fetal protection "was one of the more difficult areas" with which Thomas' commission had to deal.
This was business as usual for Metzenbaum, a 74-year-old Cleveland millionaire who loves being labeled a liberal and doesn't mind charging ahead of other Democrats.
He was exactly that tenacious during Robert Bork's 1987 Supreme Court confirmation hearings, and that persistent when pushing for a waiting period to purchase handguns or his bitterly contested bill requiring companies to give workers 60 days' notice before closing their plants.
Thomas L. Jipping, who has followed the Thomas hearings for a variety of conservative organizations, found Metzenbaum's questions unenlightening.
"Senator Metzenbaum has served no useful purpose," said Jipping, who is with the Coalitions for America. Metzenbaum "has revealed more about his hostility to a fair and independent judiciary than he's helped us understand this nominee."
The view from the left:
"America needs him," said Pamela Gilbert, legislative director of Public Citizen's Congress Watch. "We all say 'Thank God for Howard Metzenbaum' before we go home every night.
"He's tough and he's independent. He'll be the one standing up and saying 'the emperor has no clothes."'
With Metzenbaum out front, other Democrats can hang back and appear more judicious and open-minded, even if they've already made up their minds, said American University Professor James Thurber, a longtime Congress-watcher.
"I think he's taking the lead for the Democratic Party," Thurber said.
Metzenbaum believes he made accomplishments in both hearings.
"I learned that there's nothing he wants to tell me about himself - that was a totally blank wall," Metzenbaum said of Thomas.
"That in and of itself is a point: that a Supreme Court nominee was unwilling to tell us anything and walked away from a record established over many years.
"I think it hasn't been lost on my colleagues and it hasn't been lost on the people watching it on TV."
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto WX6

 

End of Document
