

Mexican Rebels Led By Experienced Revolutionaries From the 1970s
The Associated Press
January 9, 1994, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 727 words
Byline: AP Photo SCC101,104, By ANITA SNOW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN CRISTOBAL DE LAS CASAS, Mexico
Body




Who were those uniformed rebels with the red bandanas and the wool ski masks?
Before they seized town halls throughout this impoverished southern state and declared war on the government on New Year's Day, virtually no one had ever heard of the Zapatista National Liberation Army.
They have since vanished back into the rugged mountains and jungles near the Guatemalan border. But through government reports, rebel publications and statements made by individual rebels, a profile of the group is emerging: It is made up of well-organized and well-trained Indian soldiers headed by seasoned leaders who fought in earlier uprisings in Mexico and Central America.
Among the dozen people formally charged in connection with the uprising, one is a Guatemalan citizen.
The rebels, named after the early 20th century Mexican revolutionary Emiliano Zapata, say they are fighting for poor Mayan peasants and socialism and against Mexico's elite.
"We will not stop fighting until our basic demands are met, forming a free and democratic government," they said in a statement faxed to news agencies.
It is not clear how big the group is. Some estimates say it numbers about 1,200, but neither the government nor the rebels will confirm that.
The group has operated since last year in Ocosingo, Las Margaritas, Comitan, Altamirano and Chanal, according to a government report.
The rebel leaders appear well-educated. Judging from the December edition of the group's newsletter, "El Despertador Mexicano" (The Mexican Awakening), they know Mexican history, military tactics and revolutionary theory.
During the uprising, their first communique came by fax in Spanish and nearly flawless English. Their newsletter was distributed in San Cristobal during the uprising.
The government claims many of the leaders are Central Americans - meaning Guatemalans and Salvadorans, who fought their own wars in the 1980s - and Mexican revolutionaries who fought in uprisings during the 1970s.
It calls them "experts in combat, highly trained and educated," and makes much of the fact that the top rebel leader, who goes by the name Comandante Marcos, had European, not Indian, features.
"This is not an indigenous movement nor is it a peasant action," according to the 28-page Interior Ministry report. "It is the work of professionals manipulating the dispossessed."
The government also blames "catechists," or Roman Catholic lay people who practice liberation theology, for helping the rebels.
But anthropologists and observers in the region say the uprising is home grown.They say the government has blamed foreigners in order to shift attention from the region's long-standing problems: desperate poverty and discrimination against the Indian majority.
"The church raises the consciousness of people," said Monsignor Samuel Ruiz, the bishop of San Cristobal and a long-time defender of indigenous rights. "Then, if someone makes an historic decision, that's their option."
In his Sunday homily, the bishop deplored the loss of life during the uprising among the army, civilians and "our brethren insurgents."
The rank-and-file of the group appears to be made up of impoverished peasants recruited from mountain villages throughout the highlands of Chiapas, one of Mexico's poorest and most violent states. Rebels seen at roadblocks along the major southbound road had Mayan Indian features under their masks.
The rebel newsletter, which details the group's revolutionary aims, says members of communities involved in the uprising must provide the guerrillas with food or guides, or become rebels themselves.
According to the Interior Ministry report, the rebels often force the Indians to join by holding children hostage. "There is no doubt that they have pressured entire families to become members of their violent cause," it said.
One rebel, who lay wounded for several days before reporters found him following fierce fighting in Ocosingo, complained he had been forced to join.
According to manuals and other documents the government says it has seized, it says experienced trainers teach recruits how to use weapons, communications equipment and military tactics. It says most of the rebels' arms are new, often purchased with money obtained by selling their belongings or farm animals.
But reporters saw many older weapons, fake guns made of black-painted wood, machetes, crude spears and even sticks.
 Load-Date: January 9, 1994

 

End of Document
