

Migration, Forced and Voluntary, Rising Around the World
The Associated Press
June 13, 1994, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 604 words
Byline: By DAVID BRISCOE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Tens of millions of people, believing they can't prosper or perhaps even survive in their native countries, are migrating to other lands in record numbers.
In what population experts say is one of the surest signs of increased global stress, a rising number of people worldwide are fleeing oppression, being forced out by war, looking for better jobs, or just moving to be with relatives.
The number of refugees has been climbing since the 1960s, from barely 1.3 million to more than 19 million. But most of the world's foreigners are legal immigrants, rather than displaced people. The total number of people living as foreigners throughout the world is estimated at nearly 125 million.
"It's a sign of the neglect of our developing countries," said Joseph Speidel, president of Population Action International, which chronicled world migration in a report released Sunday.
The report covers refugees, who are forced from their homelands for various reasons, as well as voluntary migrants, who usually enter new lands to seek a better life. The line between the two can be thin, because both may be moving for reasons rooted in economics.
The report depicts a world in motion, with the biggest flow from East and Southeast Asia, Latin America and Eastern Europe to North America.
The report also shows significant migration into Western Europe and to Australia and New Zealand.
Some of the smallest migrations are from sub-Saharan Africa, where people are so impoverished they can't afford to leave.
The most striking statistics, featured in the study and in a recent World Watch magazine report, come from the U.N. High Commission for Refugees.
The top 10 countries hosting refugees, based on estimates for 1992, were Iran with 4.2 million; the former Yugoslavia with upwards of 2 million; Pakistan with 1.6 million; Malawi with 1.1 million; Jordan with 1 million; Germany with 827,100; Sudan with 725,600; Canada with 568,200; the Gaza Strip with 560,200; and Guinea with 478,500.
The United States was 11th with 473,000.
"If the Cold War was dominated by ideological conflict, the fear is widespread that the 1990s mark the beginning of a new era of ethnic violence that will uproot additional millions of people from their homes," said Kathleen Newland, senior associate at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, in the World Watch report.
Newland said the world needs to relieve conditions that cause people to leave their homelands - whether it's political upheaval, military abuse, economic failure or environmental collapse - rather than erect barriers to migration or treat immigrants badly when they settle in new lands.
She criticized Pakistan's closing of its border to Afghan refugees, the United States' intercepting of fleeing Haitians and Britain's requiring Bosnians to have visas when it doesn't have a consulate in Bosnia where they could get them.
The report by Population Action, which is a private group pushing for universal access to family planning and world population stabilization, said long-term migration from poor to rich countries has quadrupled since the 1960s.
Population growth increases pressure on people to move to other lands, but the report notes that the regions with the biggest population growth - Africa and South Asia - are not the main source of migrants.
The report also points to some benefits countries experience from migration - they fill labor needs and send money back to their homelands.
Funds sent back to the native countries of foreign workers totaled $ 37 billion in 1990, equal to about 70 percent of the $ 54 billion in official aid given to poorer countries for the year.
 Load-Date: June 13, 1994

 

End of Document
