

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
January 12, 1992, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 515 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: DAKAR, Senegal
Body




FIFA chief Joao Havelange claims no bias toward Europe and South America in awarding host rights to World Cup soccer finals.
Havelange's denial came Saturday night in this West African nation shortly after canvassing by Morocco for support in its bid to host the 1998 finals. Senegal is hosting the African Cup of Nations finals beginning Sunday.
Havelange said Morocco, one of three countries seeking the rights to host the 1998 World Cup finals, would be given an equal chance along with France and Switzerland. The president of soccer's world governing body said the choice, to be announced July 2, would be made solely on a country's ability to host.
Havelange issued the denial when asked about Moroccan charges of bias.
"Putting the world back in the World Cup," is Morocco's slogan for its second bid to host the finals. The United States will host the 1994 finals.
 
 ---
OCEAN TOWNSHIP, N.J. (AP) - It's a safe bet that John Amabile Jr. is the only optometrist who will pilot a bobsled in the Winter Olympics.
Add that he's wearing the colors of the less-than-frigid island commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and the combination becomes stranger.
But Amabile, who earned his residency requirements by attending graduate school at Inter-American University in Puerto Rico, isn't dissuaded.
He doesn't expect a medal at the Olympics, but it excited about competing against other countries not known for their bobsledding prowess.
"There's so many warm weather countries in it now. It's becoming more commonplace," said Amabile, who as a javelin thrower competed in the 1984 U.S. Olympics trials in track and field. "We're getting less and less stares."
 
 ---
DALLAS (AP) - During a school funding crisis some educators have labeled the worst in history, at least 50 Texas high schools have spent up to $ 27,000 for fancy video equipment for their athletic teams.
The schools, many of which benefited from a redistribution of state funds, bought the equipment because coaches say they need to edit film like TV stations, allowing players to view only plays that pertain to them.
They claim the systems cut costs by eliminating film processing. But critics say the expense raises questions about priorities of school districts.
"You've got to put academics first," said Bob Aiken, vice chairman of the State Board of Education.
 
 ---
CHARLOTTE, N.C. (AP) - Former Tar Heels team manager David Daly wanted to celebrate the 10th anniversary of North Carolina's 1982 national basketball championship with a big reunion.
His task was formidable - bring together a cast that included Michael Jordan, Dean Smith, James Worthy and Sam Perkins.
"The guys were spread out from Australia to Mount Olive, so I created my own reunion in a (120-page) book," said Daly, the author of "One To Remember - The 1982 North Carolina Tar Heels NCAA Championship Team, Then and Now."
Jordan, then a freshman, sank the winning basket from the left corner with 17 seconds left, giving North Carolina to a 63-62 victory over Geortgetown.
"Ever since I made that shot, everything has just fallen into place for me," Jordan says in the book."

 

End of Document
