

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
January 3, 1995, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 609 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: TEMPE, Ariz.
Body




Rick Neuheisel spent his first day as Colorado's new head football coach on a recruiting trip and thinking about assembling a coaching staff.
"It's pretty hectic," Neuheisel said Tuesday. "This the first day of the rest of my life, as somebody said. It's the first day of a new beginning at Colorado, and I'm anxious to get started."
Neuheisel, who coached Colorado's quarterbacks and receivers last season was appointed to succeed Bill McCartney on Nov. 28. He said a top priority will be to determine the status of offensive coordinator Elliot Uzelac.
Uzelac has waffled on his intentions, saying he has options at other schools but also that he would consider staying at CU.
Noting that Uzelac tends to be run-oriented and Neuheisel pass-oriented, the incoming head coach said of the possible combination, "A little bit country, a little bit rock 'n roll? There's no question that Elliot and I bring two different aspects of the game to the table. Hopefully, we can reach an accord to the point where we can continue to do so."
---
PARIS (AP) - Although in trouble with the courts back in Argentina, Diego Maradona found time to be in Paris on Tuesday to be honored for his soccer career.
The weekly soccer magazine France Football gave Maradona a special "Golden Ball" award for his lifetime achievements.
The publication annually awards the Golden Ball to the top European player, and decided to give the Argentine player a special distinction because of his play for European clubs.
Maradona, who came to France via Cuba, was under a court order not to leave Argentina without judicial approval. He had a four-year prison sentence reduced to a fine with the requirement that he notify the judge of any travel.
---
PARMA, Italy (AP) - As police in Colombia investigated whether Faustino Asprilla illegally fired a gun in a New Year's street party, the Parma soccer star returned to Italy on Tuesday.
When asked by reporters about the incident, Asprilla said, "I only had a water pistol," the ANSA news agency reported, saying the player was joking.
He denied he had a weapon and said, "I passed a quiet New Year's Eve with my family and friends."
Asprilla has not been arrested or charged with any offense. He was among a group stopped by police Sunday after shots were fired in the air during celebrations in Tulua, 185 miles west of Bogota. No one was injured.
Last year, he injured his foot after kicking a bus in a dispute after an auto accident.
---
DIDCOT, England (AP) - The Williams Formula One team selected David Coulthard as its No. 2 driver Tuesday, placing in doubt the racing future of former world champion Nigel Mansell.
Coulthard, 23, is regarded as one of the sport's brightest prospects, while the 41-year-old Mansell is a champion in both Formula One and Indy-car racing.
Damon Hill, runner-up to Michael Schumacher for last season's Formula One title, already signed as Williams' No. 1 driver for 1995.
"I am pleased that the Williams team has made a decision regarding its driver lineup for 1995 and delighted for David that he has been given this fantastic opportunity," Mansell said in a statement released through his press agent. "With regard to my future, it is too early to comment further at this time."
---
COLUMBUS, Ohio (AP) - John Campbell was selected as the best driver on harness racing's 1994 Grand Circuit on Tuesday, the fifth time he has won the honor in the past six years. Campbell had 27 Grand Circuit victories, tops in the statistics compiled by United States Trotting Association.
Roger Hammer, who finished one point behind Campbell in the driver standings, won the circuit's trainer of the year honors. Max Hempt the best owner.
 Load-Date: January 3, 1995

 

End of Document
