

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
May 3, 1991, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 667 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: TORONTO
Body




Ben Johnson and Carl Lewis could race each other in France on July 1 in their first meeting since the ill-fated 1988 Olympics 100-meter race.
"We have been invited to participate but we haven't finalized it yet," said Ed Futerman, Johnson's lawyer. "There's a definite possibility there will be a race."
Futerman said Johnson would run against a full field, not just Lewis.
A spokesman for the French Athletics Federation, which is responsible for the grand prix in Villeneuve d'Ascq, said Friday that Johnson and Lewis have been contacted.
He said more details should be announced May 14.
---
NAPLES, Italy (AP) - Diego Maradona, the world's best known and highest paid soccer star who is facing drug related charges in Argentina, has new concerns in Italy.
A report on wiretaps of Maradona's telephone was handed over Friday to a Naples judge investigating a case involving drug trafficking and prostitution.
Judge Nicola Quatrano refused to disclose details of the wiretaps, but said the public prosecutor will decide next week whether Maradona can be charged in the case.
Maradona, who is sitting out a 15-month suspension for flunking a drug tgest, was fined $$11,500 Friday by the Italian League disciplinary commission for criticizing a referee decision's in an Italian Cup semifinal. Maradona is still captain of the Napoli team.
---
MANHATTAN, Kan. (AP) - Two basketball coaches who had a combined 557 victories at Kansas State are among nine newly named members of the school's Sports Hall of Fame.
Jack Hartman, who retired in 1986 after 16 seasons with the Wildcats, and Tex Winter, who coached from 1954 to 1968, will be inducted with the others Sept. 20.
Hartman had a 295-169 record at Kansas State, leading the Wildcats to three Big Eight championships and nine postseason tournaments. His teams won 20 or more games seven times.
Winter was 262-117 in his 15 seasons at Kansas State. His teams won eight Big Eight titles, including four in a row from 1958-61. The 1959 team was unbeaten in the conference and ranked No. 1 in the country. He took the Wildcats to the NCAA Final Four in 1958 and 1964.
Winter also coahed at Marquette, Washington, Northwestern and Long Beach State. He is an assistant coach with the NBA's Chicago Bulls.
---
ST. LOUIS (AP) - Rick Meagher of the St. Louis Blues, one of the oldest players in the NHL, is retiring.
The 37-year-old defensive specialist, who missed much of this past season with a knee injury, said the Blues had added several top checkers to the roster and he's no longer needed.
"I'm ready for it," the 12-year NHL veteran said Thursday. "I had a good career. I had fun. I can reflect back and come up with a lot of good memories."
Meagher had been the senior Blue in length of service. He spent six seasons in St. Louis and played 413 games for the Blues after being acquired in a trade with New Jersey for Perry Anderson on Aug. 29, 1985.
Before New Jersey, he played for Montreal and Hartford.
In his 12 seasons, he has played 691 games, with 144 goals and 165 assists for 309 points. He was the winner of the Frank J. Selke Trophy as the NHL's best defensive forward in the 1989-90 season.
---
ST. PAUL, Minn. (AP) - Greg Norsten says his daughters, who like to skate fast and score goals, could expect to play high school hockey if they were boys. But there is no team ice sport equivalent to hockey for girls and that's unfair, he says.
"Girls and young women are entitled to the same educational opportunities our young men are," Norsten said Thursday. "We're asking for equity."
Norsten and a group of parents from five school districts in suburbs of St. Paul have filed a sex discrimination complaint with the state Department of Education.
They're also threatening further legal action if their schools don't come up with a plan to put ice ringette - a game like hockey that is played with a rubber ring instead of a puck - into the schools for the 1991-92 school year. They met with state and local school officials Thursday to start working on a resolution.

 

End of Document
