

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
March 16, 1992, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 828 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: BERLIN
Body




The tabloid Bild claims to have Katarina Witt's secret police files, and they portray a star who made many demands on her Communist state and had most of them fulfilled.
Among the favors the two-time Olympic figure skating champion requested from the now-defunct East German state, Bild listed: cars for herself and her family, an apartment and a vacation home, travel permissions for her parents, and repairs of her television set.
Witt paid for everything herself, Germany's largest-circulation newspaper said Monday.
"I am not surprised that such files were kept," she was quoted as saying by Bild. "I always knew that everything was being registered."
Witt enjoyed a standard of living ordinary East Germans did not.
She drove a West German-made Golf and a Soviet-made Lada jeep, and her parents obtained an East German-made Wartburg, Bild said. It said her parents also were allowed to travel to the United States, something few East Germans could do.
Bild quoted her father Manfred as saying Witt paid for everything she got from the state. Witt, 25, now is retired from competition.
 
HARRISBURG, Pa. (AP) - The Clown Prince of Baseball, Max Patkin, brought his show to the state Capitol Monday, mugging for the cameras and joking about his life on and off the field.
State senators were impressed enough to offer him a citation for bringing laughter to generations of baseball fans.
Patkin's life as a clown started in 1946, when he was hired to do a comedy routine during an exhibition game at Harrisburg.
His antics have entertained fans throughout the country, and his notoriety brought him in contact with the likes of Babe Ruth, Mel Ott and Ty Cobb.
"Even George Bush was my straight man four years ago," Patkin said, showing a packet of pictures and a letter from the president. "He used to watch me when he was a kid."
 
LONDON (AP) - American trainer Angelo Dundee will help prepare heavyweight British Derek Williams for his April 30 fight against European champion Lennox Lewis.
Williams, the Commonwealth champion, will fight Lewis, the British and European titleholder, at Royal Albert Hall.
Dundee trained Muhammad Ali and Sugar Ray Leonard, and will try to help the underdog Williams against Lewis, who won a 1988 Olympic gold medal while boxing for Canada.
"Angelo's services don't come cheap, but we regard this as a sound investment in Derek's future," manager Frank Warren said Monday.
Williams will enter the fight with no pressure, because "no one expects me to win," he said.
 
ROME (AP) - Paolo Cane's inclusion on Italy's Davis Cup team, which was announced Monday, may cause a row with the Italian television network and prevent telecast in Italy of the quarterfinal matches against Brazil.
Cane is running for parliament on the Socialist ticket and can't appear on television at the time of the electoral campaign.
Italy's general elections are scheduled April 5 and Italy's state-controlled television network RAI recently ruled that mentioning an athletes' name during a sports broadcast would be tantamount to giving him electoral publicity.
Recently RAI scrubbed live broadcasts of a boxing match of Francesco Damiani and of a marathon featuring Olympic champion Gelindo Bordin because the athletes are candidate in next month's elections.
 
MILAN, Italy (AP) - Ruud Gullit, a star forward of league leader AC Milan and the Dutch national team, may need surgery for his injured left knee, club doctors reported Monday.
Gullit, whose injured his right knee in 1989, will undergo further examination at a Belgian clinic to determine the extent of the injury, the club said. He will be examined by Dr. Marc Martens, who operated on Gullit's right knee in 1989.
Another operation would sideline Gullit for at least several weeks.
 
LONDON (AP) - Tottenham has been fined $ 4,250 for sloppy distribution of tickets for last May's English Football Association Cup final against Nottingham Forest.
The FA investigation into black market ticket sales found the Hotspurs failed to list ticket numbers issued to players and club officials, or the names of people to whom they gave the tickets.
The FA also said Monday that players from seven clubs, officials from another three clubs and former English national goalie Gordon Banks were punished for infractions involving the sale of FA Cup tickets. The punishments ranged from fines to a ban on receiving tickets in the future.
 
LONDON (AP) - Two of Britain's leading thoroughbreds will miss the rest of the season with injuries.
Royal Gait, winner of the Champion Hurdle at Cheltenham last Tuesday, aggravated a leg injury during the race.
The injury to Carvill's Hill is more serious and could end his career, owner Paul Green said. Carvill's Hill was the favorite in last Thursday's Cheltenham Gold Cup but pulled up near the end and walked across the finish line in last place.
"He is injured and will not race again this season, next season, and possibly never again," Green said, without disclosing details of the injury.

 

End of Document
