

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
March 31, 1992, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 834 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: PHOENIX
Body




Oakland Athletics' outfielder Jose Canseco, known for losing his temper off the field, kept his cool when a driver of a rented Ford Escort backed into his Lamborghini Diablo in a hotel parking lot.
The fender-bender did about $ 20,000 worth of damage Sunday to Canseco's sports car, said Detective Leo Speliopoulos, spokesman for the Phoenix Police department.
The driver, identified only as a winter visitor by other officers, swapped insurance information with the slugger, he said.
But that wasn't the only exchange. According to a witness, Canseco signed a baseball for the driver's son.
"He was extremely nice and cool-headed," said Lorri Caulfield, a supervisor at the Doubletree Suites. "He even joked about it."
The 27-year-old Canseco has been in the news for his off-field behavior, most recently on Feb. 13, when he rammed a Porsche into a BMW owned by his estranged wife, Esther, after a dispute in Miami.
The police spokesman didn't know how much damage was done to the Escort.
---
Eds: Also moved in some news lines.
INDIANAPOLIS (AP) - Indiana Gov. Evan Bayh has challenged North Carolina Gov. James Martin to a wager on the Duke-Indiana NCAA semifinal. Bayh said he's willing to wager a limestone sculpture of a Blue Devil, the Duke mascot.
"We are confident that IU will prevail on Saturday," wrote Bayh, an Indiana alumnus. "In the spirit of competition, I am challenging you to go on record in support of Duke and to back your support with an appropriate item symbolic of your state."
Bayh said that "in the unlikely event that IU loses to Duke," the Indiana limestone industry has agreed to sculpt a statue of a Blue Devil and deliver it to the North Carolina statehouse.
Martin accepted the wager Tuesday, although he had not decided upon a counter offer.
---
MILAN, Italy (AP) - With three months remaining on his cocaine suspension, Diego Maradona was quoted as saying he will never play in Italy again.
"It's a closed issue. I won't return to Italy," the 31-year-old forward of Napoli was quoted as saying in Tuesday's editions of Gazzetta dello Sport.
Maradona, whose contract with his Italian club expires in 1993, is serving a 15-month suspension handed down following a positive drug test.
Napoli has offered to retain the Argentine captain, but Maradona's manager, Marco Franchi, emphasized Maradona doesn't want to play in Italy.
"Perhaps he can return to Italy on vacation, but will never play again in a country where he would be faced with a lot of pressure," Franchi said. "There are many other countries in the world. … An agreement with Napoli can be negotiated."
---
MELBOURNE, Australia (AP) - Homesick Tony Ronaldson said Tuesday that he would leave Arizona State's basketball team and play semi-professionally with a Melbourne team.
Ronaldson, a member of the Australian team at last year's world junior championships, will join the South-East Melbourne Magic, expected to be a title contender in the Australian National League.
The 19-year-old freshman played 31 game this season, averaging 7.7 points and 2.7 rebounds.
"I was missing home a lot and also there were a lot of opportunities for me with the national team this year if I came home," Ronaldson said.
---
BERLIN (AP) - Former West Germany coach Franz Beckenbauer will assist the preparation of the U.S. team for the 1994 World Cup, a magazine reported Tuesday.
Beckenbauer, who led West Germany to the 1974 World Cup and then starred for the New York Cosmos, already had agreed to assist the organizing committee in its promotion of the tournament, scheduled for June 17-July 17, 1994.
"Yes, I will go there and help them before the world championships. But only for a couple of weeks a year," he was quoted as saying.
The magazine gave no other details, nor did it say how much Beckenbauer, whose coaching skills are highly coveted, would be paid.
---
SYDNEY, Australia (AP) - Former world 500cc motorcycling champion Wayne Gardner is considering retirement after breaking his right leg during last Sunday's Japanese Grand Prix.
Gardner said Tuesday that he expected to make a decision on his future within a month.
The 1987 world champion broke his right leg in five places midway between the knee and ankle when he lost control of his Rothmans Honda on a wet track at Suzuka. He slid across the track and slammed feet first into a trackside barrier, sliding under the protective pads and into the fencing.
The Australian broke his left leg during the United States Grand Prix at Laguna Seca, Calif., in 1989.
---
DURHAM, N.C. (AP) - Christian Laettner, the Duke center who became the NCAA tournament's career scorer leader last weekend, has received the Eastman Award as the college basketball player of the year.
The award is voted on by the National Association of Basketball Coaches.
Laettner, who will be going to his fourth Final Four this weekend, is the first Duke player to win the award. He is the latest Atlantic Coast Conference player to win it since North Carolina State's David Thompson captured the initial award in 1975.

 

End of Document
