

Names in the News
The Associated Press
December 29, 1992, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 532 words
Byline: AP Photos NY14, Mother Teresa, Rogers
Dateline: NEW DELHI, India
Body




Mother Teresa has been honored by Russia for her efforts to care for destitute children.
The 82-year-old Nobel Peace laureate received the 1992 Leo Tolstoy International Award on Monday at her mission in Calcutta. The gold medal and citation were presented by Russia's consul general.
The Roman Catholic nun said she hoped to open five more centers to care for poor and sick children in Russia, where her order already operates two homes.
"I and my sisters will hold prayers for the well-being of the Russian children," she said.
Mother Teresa's order serves the downtrodden in hospitals, leper colonies, orphanages and schools in 87 countries. About 3,000 nuns are affiliated with the order. The Yugoslav-born Albanian won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1979.
---
MIAMI (AP) - The Clucker's fast-food chain says it was cheated out of its menu, recipe and layout by country music star Kenny Rogers, former Kentucky Gov. John Y. Brown Jr. and another chicken maker.
Clucker's Wood Roasted Chicken Inc. is seeking $ 10 million in punitive damages in a federal lawsuit against Roasters Inc., which developed the Kenny Rogers Roasters Wood Roasted Chicken chain.
Roasters is "essentially a knockoff of Clucker's," Clucker's attorney Eric Isicoff said Monday. He claimed that everything from menu items to rotisserie apparatus and counter locations are the same.
Roasters attorney Ace Blackburn denied the allegations.
Miami-based Clucker's has four restaurants, and Fort Lauderdale-based Roasters has 35.
---
CHETUMAL, Mexico (AP) - Nobel laureate Rigoberta Menchu of Guatemala arrived in this Yucatan town hoping to speed the return to Guatemala of 5,000 people - mostly Indians - who fled to Mexico to escape civil war.
She said Monday that as the 1992 Peace Prize winner, she would lobby world leaders for safeguards of the human rights of Indians in Latin America.
"I believe the indigenous peoples all have a common face, the face of misery," said the Indian activist, who was forced into exile in the 1980s.
Guatemala's Indians, who are in majority in the Central American country, have been the main victims in the army's war with rebels. Several members of Menchu's family were tortured and killed.
In September, the Guatemalan government signed an agreement for the return of the refugees by year's end. That date was later pushed back to Jan. 13.
---
FRANKFURT, Germany (AP) - Novelist and playwright Guenter Grass resigned from the opposition Social Democratic Party in protest after it agreed to work with the government to curb the flow of refugees into Germany.
In an interview with German television Monday, Grass said the party had broken with decades of tradition by agreeing to restrict the asylum law.
Grass, a leftist and spokesman for liberal causes, became a member of the center-left Social Democrats 10 years ago.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's government needs the support of the Social Democrats to change the constitution, which includes some of the world's most liberal asylum provisions.
The government blames a rise in right-wing violence on the record number of people seeking asylum in Germany.
Grass's works include "The Tin Drum," a 1962 novel critical of Germans' attitudes during the rise of Nazism.

 

End of Document
