

Names In The Game
 The Associated Press
September 9, 1995, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 659 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: OMAHA, Neb.
Body




Nebraska mascot Herbie Husker is back.
Herbie was on the sidelines when No. 2 Nebraska beat Michigan State in East Lansing on Saturday.
Nebraska athletic director Bill Byrne announced in August that Herbie, a cowboy-hatted mascot with an aw-shucks grin, was being retired after 21 years. The image, Byrne said at the time, did not market well elsewhere in the country.
That sparked an outcry from Herbie loyalists.
"We had so many letters and calls about this that it became a distraction," Byrne told radio station KFAB. "We decided just to put him back out there."
Allowing Herbie to roam the sidelines will allow the school "to concentrate on the season and put all our energy into providing support for all our athletic teams," Byrne said.
Byrne said a final decision on whether Herbie will be on hand past this season will be made later.
The decision does mean that Herbie will be on hand for Saturday's home opener against Arizona State, Byrne said. The mascot missed the season opener at Oklahoma State on Aug. 31.
"This is so great, this is America … democracy at work … the people from across Nebraska have spoken," said Ken Kramer of Omaha, president of the Save Herbie Foundation. "It's been a down-in-the-dirt, bloody war. Herbie was a part of the team, a part of the family."
Kramer presented Byrne with petitions two weeks ago demanding Herbie's reinstatement.
---
WAYNE, Neb. (AP) - Speedskater Bonnie Blair promises that her comeback won't by anything like Michael Jordan's. She just wants to coach a little.
Blair, a five-time Olympic gold medalist, said she plans to coach skaters near her hometown of Champaign, Ill., this winter. Since she retired earlier this year, Blair no longer trains - just exercises.
"There's a big difference there," she said Saturday. Blair was in town to walk in a fund raiser for women's athletics at Wayne State College.
Blair, the Associated Press Female Athlete of the Year in 1994 said she will be at the next Olympics as a spectator.
 
 PORTLAND, Ore. (AP) - It was only fitting that Jenny Lidback's first major victory on the LPGA Tour was in Canada, the du Maurier Classic.
Lidback is the most international of the women golfers.
She was born in Lima, Peru, and holds dual citizenship in both Peru and Sweden because of her Swedish father.
She is fluent in four languages: English, Spanish, Portuguese and Italian.
---
FAYETTEVILLE, Ark. (AP) - In one week, Robert Reed jumped from the Arkansas football team to the basketball team. Then, he made his last leap. He withdrew from the university.
Reed quit the football team Monday. The next day, he said he would stay and play basketball.
The 6-foot-2 Reed started at quarterback for the Razorbacks last Saturday against Southern Methodist University. He played two series and then was lifted in favor of senior Barry Lunney Jr., who had started 28 straight games. Lunney played the rest of the way, but fumbled on the 1-yard line in the final minute of the 17-14 loss.
Reed joined the basketball team in late November of 1994, played in 18 games last year and averaged less than two points per game.
Arkansas basketball coach Nolan Richardson said earlier this week, "The door is open for Robert to play basketball now just like it's always been. I told him, 'I have no concerns about what you have done (in football). What concerns me is what you do in my program.'
"Let me say this: Robert Reed is one of the best athletes on this campus, whether it's football or basketball. And I think whatever he undertakes, if he concentrates in that area, he's going to be very good at it because of his athletic ability."
Arkansas football coach Danny Ford had said he wouldn't revoke Reed's football scholarship before the end of the semester. Richardson had a scholarship available because junior college transfer Marcus Saxon is academically ineligible.
Reed could have that scholarship if he stayed with the basketball team and was dropped from football scholarship, the school said.
 Load-Date: September 9, 1995

 

End of Document
