

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
August 10, 1995, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 641 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: GREELEY, Colo.
Body




Three weeks into his 13th NFL training camp, Denver Broncos quarterback John Elway is still trying to adjust to the offensive scheme of new head coach Mike Shanahan.
"I'm frustrated," Elway said. "I'm mad, but not discouraged."
Elway said he is having trouble switching from the "West Coast" offense employed by former head coach Wade Phillips last season to Shanahan's version.
Between Wednesday's two practices at the University of Northern Colorado campus, he said much of the problem is the basic operational mechanics of the offense. It is primarily a read-and-react process.
"Right now I'm thinking more than reacting," Elway said. "Oh yeah, I'm frustrated. There are many days I've been frustrated."
"It is more of a timing-rhythm-type offense," he said. "It is just a matter of getting a feel for it."
Getting a feel for the offense has come slowly for Elway. He has completed 11-of-22 passes for 181 yards and a touchdown, but has been badly off-target in camp drills and two preseason games against San Francisco.
"Most of the frustration comes from wanting to be perfect," Elway said. "I would get worried if I wasn't frustrated. When I lose that, I go."
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Pele, the retired "king" of soccer, has won a lawsuit against the Brazilian Soccer Confederation and a publishing house for using his name in a 1988 sports album without his authorization.
Rio's 2nd district court ruled Wednesday that the confederation and the Abril company incorrectly exploited the former soccer star's fame for "Three-Time Heroes," an album on Brazil's 1970 World Cup championship team.
The court, however, said it would again study the amount of compensation Pele would receive and announce its decision at a later date.
Pele has demanded $ 3 million in compensation. The confederation and the publishing firm say that amount is exaggerated.
"I think what they did showed a lack of respect," Pele said in a televised interview. "Football confederations exist to administrate, to coordinate, but not to get rich."
---
MANHATTAN BEACH, Calif. (AP) - Lisa Raymond said she got a "rude awakening" when she left the University of Florida two years ago to pursue a professional tennis career.
The 22-year-old from Wayne, Pa., said breezing past the college competition didn't prepare her for "losing as much as I was" on the professional circuit.
But now the 1992 Tennis Magazine Collegiate Player of the Year is only looking ahead.
Right now, Raymond, ranked 17th in the world, is looking to the Pathmark Classic, beginning Aug. 21 in Mahwah, N.J., to continue her progress.
"Even though it is an exhibition, players go into it wanting to win," Raymond said. "It would be a huge boost for me to win right before the (U.S.) Open. All the players take it very seriously. Winning would definitely be a feather in my cap."
Last year she was a finalist in the Pathmark tournament, losing a three-set thriller to Steffi Graf.
Raymond, who reached the finals in last weekend's Toshiba Tournament in San Diego before losing to Conchita Martinez, said she is trying to get over the last-match hurdle. She also lost in the finals of last year's Lucerne Tournament to her frequent doubles partner, Lindsay Davenport.
"Once you step on the court in a final, you feel you have to raise your game an extra level," Raymond said. "Hopefully, getting out there more and playing in those finals will help. I think it will take one win."
She said the major difference between college and professional tennis is the mental aspect.
"I can be up there and can win these matches," she said. "They (the competition) go out there and feel they shouldn't lose."
Raymond said she is looking to the Pathmark Tournament to help her get seeded in the U.S. Open.
"I have to do well. To get seeded in the Open is a goal of mine," Raymond said. "Hopefully I can do just as well as last year."
 Load-Date: August 10, 1995

 

End of Document
