

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
June 21, 1995, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 627 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: EASTBOURNE, England
Body




Martina Navratilova said she had fleeting thoughts of coming out of retirement to play singles at the Eastbourne championships after top-seeded Jana Novotna withdrew with a virus.
But, she said she thought better of the idea because she did not want to face the media fuss it would have created. She said she was also not looking forward to her July 29 exhibition match with Monica Seles for the same reason.
"It will be nice to be part of her playing again, but I'm not particularly looking forward to all the attention," she said after teamming with Lisa Raymond against Nicole Bradtke and Kristine Radford to lose a second-round doubles match.
Navrilova will team with Steffi Graf to play doubles at Wimbledon, and she is still looking for a mixed doubles partner after her original partner, John McEnroe, had to pass up the event because of TV commitments.
Even though she is cautious about attracting attention, Navratilova will be part of the media at Wimbledon, also working as a TV commentator.
"I'm excited about the opportunity of doing TV. I love new experiences and I'm looking forward to this one. I was listening to Chris (Evert) at the French Open and thinking about what I would say if I were her."
---
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - Batman was hired to coach women's tennis at Villanova - Bob Batman, that is, the school announced Wednesday. He will continue to coach the men, a job he has had for two years.
"I am looking forward to the challenge of running both programs," Batman said.
---
Another version of the following moved on general news wires
MANILA, Philippines (AP) - A golf tournament named in honor of Pope John Paul II will played in the presidential place compound and be sponsored by the nation's president.
President Fidel Ramos said the inaugural tournament will begin Sunday with 30 leaders of the diplomatic corps, government and business participating. The tournament is to be a yearly affair.
The JP II Classic was an attempt to offset criticism of Ramos' suggestion that a crescent moon be added to the Philippine flag to acknowledge the country's Muslims. The country is 85 percenn Catholic.
The pope visited the Philippines last January. Ramos said the tournament will launched with the blessing of a marker at a portion of the golf course, where a helicopter took off on Jan. 15 to bring the Pope to the site of a papal mass.
---
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) - Diego Maradona, fighting to get back in shape in time for a comeback in September, says he had plastic surgery over the weekend to remove a double chin.
"I had my double chin done because after losing so much weight from dieting and training, that part wasn't very aesthetic and looked inflamed," the 34-year-old soccer star said.
The former Argentine captain, undergoing a rigorous training program, said his wife urged him to have the operation. "I wanted to look good for her," he said.
Maradona, serving a 15-month playing ban after failing a drug test at the 1994 World Cup finals, is planning a comeback next season with his old club Boca Juniors.
---
SALT LAKE CITY (AP) - Starting center Ben Melmeth has been ordered to miss Utah's first three basketball games next season because of an NCAA academic violation, said Chris Hill, athletic director.
Melmeth dropped a class last March. That left him registered for 10 academic hours, two less than the NCAA minimum.
He then started in all three of Utah's Western Athletic Conference Tournament games, which the Utes won.
No sanctions were taken against the team.
Because he illegally participated in five practices, Melmeth will sit out five practices in addition to the three regular season games next season, Hill said Tuesday.
Melmeth was not aware his actions were a violation.
Hill said the NCAA had approved Utah's suggested penalty.
 Load-Date: June 21, 1995

 

End of Document
