

Names in the News
 The Associated Press
December 14, 1995, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 702 words
Dateline: WEST ORANGE, N.J.
Body




Christopher Reeve is looking forward to spending the holidays at home after being released from a rehabilitation center.
The "Superman" star, paralyzed from the neck down in a May fall from a horse, left the Kessler Institute in West Orange on Wednesday after nearly seven months of rehabilitation.
"As I leave Kessler Institute, I experience many profound feelings," Reeve said in a statement. "Most of all, happiness to be going home with my wife and children."
Reeve's doctors said he is able to breathe for 15 minutes at a time without a respirator. He uses a wheelchair he operates with his mouth.
Reeve, 42, thanked "hundreds of thousands of people from around the world who have called, sent letters, cards and gifts of inspiration."
"You will never know how much your concern for my well-being has helped me," he said.
 
 BEVERLY HILLS, Calif. (AP) - A former "Price Is Right" game show model says she'll sue show host Bob Barker for firing her because she gained weight.
Holly Hallstrom, 43, said she was responding to a libel suit filed Dec. 7 by Barker and the show's producer. Barker has claimed Hallstrom libeled him in a press release by contending weight gain was the reason she lost her job.
At a news conference Wednesday, Hallstrom said she will claim age, sex and medical discrimination and wrongful termination.
Barker said Wednesday that the show's production company offered Hallstrom a retirement package as a cost-cutting move, not because of her appearance.
Hallstrom left the CBS game show July 26 after nearly 19 years on the job.
 
 NEW YORK (AP) - Former New York Mayor David N. Dinkins is bouncing back after triple bypass surgery - and he's bringing his racquet.
Dinkins returned to the tennis court Wednesday for the first time since he collapsed playing in August in Hilton Head, S.C.
Dinkins, 68, volleyed for about an hour with Skip Hartman, president of the New York Junior Tennis League. The group is one of Dinkins' favorites and he serves on its board.
"I'm feeling stronger every day," Dinkins said after his outing.
Dinkins said he wants to be back on his old playing schedule - five times a week - by the end of January.
 
 GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP) - The Drifters have become The Stranded.
The singing group - a reconfigured version of the 1950s original that sang the hits "Up on the Roof" and "Under the Boardwalk" - was supposed to return to the United States from Guyana on Wednesday.
Instead, the organizers of the group's tour have scheduled three additional shows for next weekend in an effort to raise the $ 22,500 they promised the group under a tour contract, according to Drifter Charlie Thomas.
Four of the seven shows the group already has given have flopped badly.
"I just want my money so that I can go back home and have a merry Christmas," said Thomas, the only original Drifter still with the group.
"I want this nightmare of Guyana to end."
 
 HOUSTON (AP) - Juliette Lewis can start calling Shirley MacLaine grandma.
MacLaine probably won't mind, given that it's all part of a new movie in which the two are co-starring.
Lewis plays the granddaughter of MacLaine's character in "Evening Star," a movie based on Larry McMurtry's sequel to "Terms of Endearment," the Oscar-winning 1983 film that starred Jack Nicholson, MacLaine and Debra Winger.
"Evening Star" is set in New York in wintertime, but is being shot in Houston, complete with artificial snow.
 
 NEW YORK (AP) - The Rev. Billy Graham fractured a rib and severely bruised his right shoulder after falling in the shower in his hotel room.
The 77-year-old evangelist fell on Tuesday in New York, where he was to receive the American Bible Society Award, the Billy Graham Evangelistic Association said.
Doctors said the fall was not related to Graham's Parkinson's disease, and they expect him to fully recover.
Graham has been confined to limited activity and will remain in New York to rest for several days, officials said.
In June, Graham suffered a bleeding colon and four days in the hospital in the midst of a long-planned crusade in Canada. A month later, he suffered a debilitating back injury while vacationing in France.
Graham still plans crusades in Minneapolis-St. Paul in June, and in Charlotte, N.C., in September.
 Load-Date: December 14, 1995

 

End of Document
