

Names in the News
 The Associated Press
December 22, 1995, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 453 words
Dateline: GEORGETOWN, Guyana
Body




The Drifters want to go home. The tax man wants them to stay.
The singers have been stranded in Guyana for a week, barred from leaving the country until they pay nearly $ 4,000 in entertainment taxes on several shows performed here since Nov. 25.
The group - a reconfigured version of the one that had hits in the 1950s with "Up on the Roof" and "Under the Boardwalk" - walked the streets Wednesday asking passersby for money.
Four of the group's first seven shows here were flops, and attempts to stage additional shows failed.
Guyana takes 25 percent of the earnings of international artists who perform here. It wasn't clear how much the group had earned.
 
 NEW YORK (AP) - Mary Tyler Moore says she's ready to give up on having another TV series after the demise of "New York News."
"It would have to be a very strong project to lure me back," Moore is quoted as saying in the Dec. 30 issue of TV Guide. "Too much of your total artistic contribution is left in other people's hands."
Moore, who played the dragon lady editor of a New York tabloid, says CBS signed the show's "death warrant" by putting it in the suicide slot opposite NBC's "Seinfeld" on Thursdays. The network canceled the show early this month.
Moore also complained about the show's writing.
"I felt my character was becoming a caricature," she said.
But the actress hasn't abandoned the small screen completely. She stars in the movie "Stolen Memories: Secrets from the Rose Garden" Jan. 7 on The Family Channel.
 
 CINCINNATI (AP) - Former pro football player Mike Reid competes in another arena these days: He's written a one-act opera that's New York-bound.
"Different Fields" is the tale of a wide receiver who runs into gambling problems, Reid was quoted as saying in Thursday's editions of The Cincinnati Enquirer.
"I got a wide receiver singing high A-flat," joked Reid, whose songs have been recorded by the Judds and Bonnie Raitt.
The work, co-written with Sarah Schlesinger, was commissioned by the Metropolitan Opera Guild and Opera Memphis.
It is scheduled to premiere Feb. 7 in New York.
 
 SYDNEY, Australia (AP) - Jacques Cousteau has won his fight to amend the name of a Fiji resort that bears the family name.
The ecologically inclined resort is to be called the "Jean-Michael Cousteau Fiji Islands Resort," a federal judge in California ruled Wednesday.
The famed oceanographer had gone to court seeking either to have the Cousteau name dropped entirely from the resort or to add the son's name. His son, Jean-Michael, is affiliated with the resort.
The elder Cousteau, 85, and the nonprofit Cousteau Society of Chesapeake, Va., sued over the name both in California and Fiji courts several months after the Cousteau Fiji Islands Resort opened in May.
 Load-Date: December 22, 1995

 

End of Document
