

Names in the News
The Associated Press
February 11, 1995, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 725 words
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Argentina
Body




President Carlos Menem prefers the tango to the Rolling Stones - but still couldn't resist a photograph with the band.
Menem is rarely camera-shy with visiting celebrities. Among others, he's greeted Michael Jordan, Michael Jackson, Julio Iglesias, Claudia Schiffer and Sophia Loren.
The Stones visited Menem at his official residence Friday, a day after performing the first of five concerts here. Menem doesn't plan to attend any of them.
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Faster than you can say "The Quick and the Dead," Sharon Stone won a battle to kill a love scene from the movie.
Stone, who is famous for steamy scenes in such movies as "Sliver" and "Basic Instinct," said she hopes her fans don't expect nudity and sex in all her movies.
"I'd like to think that my audience has a sophistication that lends itself to move beyond the simple Pavlovian response," Stone said. "And I'd like to feel that I have more to give them than an imitation of a thing that they've already seen before."
In "The Quick and the Dead," Stone plays a woman bent on revenge against the man who killed members of her family.
 
 LOS ANGELES (AP) - Shame on Snoop Doggy Dogg: He was late to court.
The rapper, who is charged with murder, arrived nearly two hours late for a pretrial hearing Friday and was scolded by Superior Court Judge Paul G. Flynn.
Flynn said he would issue an arrest warrant if it happened again.
Attorney David Kenner said his client, whose real name is Calvin Broadus, doesn't have a habit of showing up late.
Broadus, McKinley Lee and Sean Abrams are accused of the 1993 shooting death of 20-year-old Phillip Woldermariam. Broadus and Lee remain free on $ 1 million bail; Abrams posted a $ 200,000 bond.
Flynn denied a motion to dismiss the charges against the three and scheduled another pretrial hearing for March 24. He also ordered Broadus to turn over his passport and seek court approval before leaving the country.
 
 INDIANAPOLIS (AP) - Dan Quayle says he's staying out of the 1996 presidential race so that he can stay home.
"My decision will make me a better husband and a better father and perhaps someday, a better president," the former vice president said Friday. "I'm 48 years old, I have a lot of good years left."
He said he believed he could raise the money necessary to win, but didn't want to put his family through the rigors of a campaign.
He wouldn't rule out a run for governor, though.
"You guys will have to let me sort things out," Quayle told reporters. "Today, I didn't come to open options or close options."
 
 NEW YORK (AP) - Fran Drescher, star of "The Nanny," bears the emotional scars from a rape 10 years ago.
"No one leaves this planet unscathed," said Drescher, 37. "I often think of myself as a mirror that cracked in a million pieces. Slowly, you start to build yourself back together."
Drescher reveals details of the violent crime in this Sunday's USA Weekend.
She and her husband were at home with a friend when "two guys with guns broke in." Her husband was tied up while the men raped Drescher and the friend. The attackers were caught and are in prison.
"It was a nasty scene, and it took us really a year to feel like we were even close to being emotionally ourselves again," Drescher said.
 
 LAWRENCE, Kan. (AP) - Ellen Goodman says she'd like to be a juror in the O.J. Simpson trial - so she could be sequestered from the trial coverage.
The Boston Globe's Pulitzer Prize-winning columnist quipped Friday that she's become "O.J. adversive: can't listen to it, can't read about it, can't even drink it."
Goodman made her remarks after a speech accepting the 1995 William Allen White Foundation national citation for her "consistently fresh and insightful" work.
 
 BEVERLY HILLS, Calif. (AP) - It was love at first sight when Isabella Hofmann met Daniel Baldwin, her co-star on "Homicide: Life on the Street."
"I've had friends who have said, 'Oh, I knew the minute that I met him, I knew the minute that we started speaking,"' she said. "I can now say that. Talk to me 10 years from now. I will still be with him."
Hofmann, who plays a shift commander at the Baltimore Police Department's homicide division, said the the pressure of working together on TV hasn't interfered with the real relationship.
"I hate to sound really, you know, schmaltzy about the whole thing," she said, "but we work together, we live together and it's all great."
 Load-Date: February 11, 1995

 

End of Document
