

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
February 26, 1994, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 628 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Fred Lebow, director of the New York City Marathon, was released from a hospital on Saturday after a first-round of treatment for a recurrence of lymphoma of the brain.
Lebow, first diagonosed with that form of cancer four years ago, will go back to Memorial Sloan-Kettering every two weeks until he completes four more chemotherapy treatments.
Lebow said he may show up Sunday at his New York Road Runners Clubs' Bagel Run, a 10 kilometer race that ends with breakfast.
"I'm asking my staff to put a few bagels aside for me, just in case." Lebow said.
---
FAIRFAX, Va. (AP) - When Barrington Campbell transferred to George Mason from Central Arizona Junior College in 1991, a routine physical exam changed his life.
Until a heart murmur found during the physical turned out to be the result of a defective aortic valve, the 23-year-old runner had no idea he had a potentially life-threatening condition.
Now, 25 months after surgery to replace the valve, Campbell will compete again. He will run the leadoff leg for George Mason in the NCAA Indoor Track and Field Championships March 11-12 at Indianapolis.
"It's absolutely stunning, there's no other way to describe his condition," said Dr. Frank Pettrone, the chief consulting physician for the university's athletic department. "To our knowledge, no one has ever come back from this kind of surgery to compete at such a high level of competition."
"I've seen only one other case like this in 10 years of practice," said Dr. John Johnson, an internal medicine specialist familiar with Campbell's condition, who also is a consultant to the university's athletic department.
There are constant reminders of the surgery: A foot-long scar runs down the middle of his chest; Campbell has to take a blood-thinner daily, which keeps him from playing contact sports, and his blood is tested every six weeks.
A deeply religious person, Campbell credits his faith for pulling him through.
"I'm not afraid of dying," he said. "If it's time for me to go, then so be it. I believe in God and feel that there's a reason for everything that happens."
---
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) - Jorge Solari of Argentina will coach Saudi Arabia's national soccer team for the World Cup in what amounts to a royal command performance.
"By request of Saudi King Fahd Bin Abdulazis Bin Al Saud to President Carlos Menem, he (Menem) proposed Solari, who is already organizing his coaching team," a government statement said.
Solari was coach of Newell's Old Boys and acquired Diego Maradona for the team last year. Both resigned in December when Newell fell to the bottom of the standings.
Saudi Arabia is in the same World Cup group as Belgium, Morocco and Netherlands.
---
PITTSBURGH (AP) - The Pittsburgh Steelers, worried that fullback Merril Hoge will jump to the Chicago Bears, want to talk with Dallas Cowboys fullback Daryl Johnston.
The Steelers invited Johnston to town for a visit, although no date has been scheduled.
Cowboys receiver Alvin Harper met with Steelers coaches last week.
Johnston, like Hoge, is an unrestricted free agent, requiring no compensation to the teams they leave.
The Cowboys drafted Johnston on the second round of the 1989 draft and used him as a blocker for Emmitt Smith and as a pass receiver.
He caught 50 passes for 372 yards last season, but rushed only 24 times for 74 yards. The Steelers used Hoge in a similar manner.
The Steelers offered Hoge a contract worth about $ 750,000, but expect the Bears to top that.
Johnston, meanwhile, will demand about $ 1 million annually.
"Hoge is a good player, but Daryl is the best," said Johnston's agent, John Maloney. "He's kind of picking and choosing where he wants to visit, where he can fit in and feel comfortable."
The Raiders, Redskins and Cowboys also are interested in Johnston.
 Load-Date: February 26, 1994

 

End of Document
