

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
September 29, 1992, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 492 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: EDINBURGH, Scotland
Body




Alice Miller will replace Kathy Whitworth as captain of the U.S. team competing this weekend in the Solheim Cup women's golf tournament following the death of Whitworth's mother.
Whitworth learned Tuesday that her mother had died of cancer and was scheduled to leave for home on Wednesday.
Miller, incoming president of the Ladies Professional Golf Association, will be in daily contact with Whitworth, and Whitworth will retain the final say in the pairings for the three-day competition.
"The team virtually runs itself anyway," said Whitworth, who led the United States to an 11 -4 victory in the first match in Florida two years ago.
The Solheim Cup, the women's equivalent to the Ryder Cup, is a team competition between American and European golfers.
---
FRANKFURT, Germany (AP) - Soccer superstar Diego Maradona got rave reviews from German writers who covered his return to competition after 18 months on the sidelines because of a drug suspension.
The Argentine captain, who was suspended for 15 months and then spent three months arguing with his former club, Napoli, over a transfer, helped set up two goals Monday evening as his new club, Seville of Spain, beat Bayern Munich 2-1.
"Diego showed us what we have been missing for 554 days," the Bild newspaper said. "These direct passes - a feast for the eyes. His touch - unparalleled. His free kicks - extremely dangerous.
"What a comeback!"
---
PARIS (AP) - French soccer great Michel Platini and former national soccer federation president Fernand Sastre were named Tuesday as co-presidents of France's 1998 World Cup organizing committee.
Platini starred for the French national team for almost 10 years and led them to two World Cup semifinals and the 1984 European Nation's championship.
He was the national coach from 1988 until last summer, when he quit amid criticism that the team played too conservatively.
Sastre was the president of the French soccer federation from 1973 until 1984. He oversaw the 1984 European competition, which was held in France, and was a vice president of the French Olympic Committee.
---
ATLANTA (AP) - If nothing else, the Atlanta Knights of the International Hockey League will boast two of the biggest drawing cards in minor league hockey when they begin play this season.
Brent Gretzky, younger brother of the NHL's all-time scoring leader Wayne Gretzky, and goaltender Manon Rheaume, who became the first woman to play in an NHL game when she tended goal for the expansion Tampa Bay Lightning last week, will both play for the Knights this season.
"He's built just like his brother," coach Gene Ubriaco said of Gretzky, one of 27 candidates for a roster spot this season. "He has a lot of the same instincts. It's just a matter of him having time to hone his skills."
Rheaume, who stopped seven of nine shots against the St. Louis Blues last week, will doubtlessly help the Knights' attract a female audience while she continues working to become the NHL's first female.

 

End of Document
