

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
June 14, 1995, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 660 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: MIAMI
Body




Rony Seikaly, who became a millionaire playing basketball, also has a golden touch with real estate.
Seikaly, a former Miami Heat center who now plays for the Golden State Warriors, sold his mansion on Star Island to a South American businessman for a little more than $ 7 million.
Seikaly bought the 20,000-square-foot bachelor pad in 1991 for $ 2.5 million.
The home overlooking Biscayne Bay includes racquetball, tennis and basketball courts, seven bedrooms, 10 baths and a pool with a waterfall. Taxes cost $ 152,758 a year.
---
TORONTO (AP) - Ted Lindsay was one of the leaders of the move to unionize NHL players in 1950s.
CBC is making a movie about it, "Net Worth, and Lindsay is a consultant.
"I was led by a feeling of fairness," the former star said. "All of us who were involved in trying to establish the players' association weren't the ones who needed it. It was for the fringe players that were the worst off.
"When I got caught up in this, I was so grateful to the game for all it had done for me. But it was a dictatorship on the part of the owners, who didn't realize any of us had a brain.
"There we were sitting there in 1956, these dumb hockey players, and we were going to ruin their game."
Lindsay, 69, still works in the same business he established during his career, selling plastics for the automotive industry.
The old loyalties still run strong in Lindsay.
"It didn't matter that they traded me (to Chicago)," he said. "I have a Red Wing on my forehead and on my behind and on my heart. That will never change."
---
MILAN, Italy (AP) - Italy's tires and cables giant Pirelli said Wednesday that it will invest about $ 7.5 million over three years to sponsor Italian first-division soccer team Internazionale.
It's a rare venture into soccer by Pirelli, whose calendars and advertising campaigns featuring Carl Lewis and Sharon Stone have earned the Italian group international attention.
Under the deal, announced by Pirelli vice president Marco Tronchetti Provera, Inter players will wear a Pirelli label on their jerseys in league and Cup matches beginning next season.
---
STOCKHOLM, Sweden (AP) - Soccer's all-time star Pele on Wednesday revisited the scene where he scored two goals in the 1958 World Cup final.
"Here was my lucky start," Pele said at Rasunda stadium, where, as a 17-year old, he led Brazil to a 5-2 victory over host Sweden.
The 1958 World Cup finals was Pele's breakthrough, and the first of Brazil's four World Cup triumphs.
"I'll never forget Brazil winning the World Cup and shaking the king's hand," Pele said. "Outside the field, I remember all the girls came to touch my hair."
In response to a question, Pele said Diego Maradona of Argentina was "no doubt an excellent player, but he doesn't kick well with his right foot and was not good in the air."
---
KNOXVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - Tennessee defensive tackle Shane Burton will have three misdemeanor charges held in abeyance while he performs 75 hours of public service, according to a court agreement.
Burton, a 21-year-old senior, will be expected to complete his service and avoid new criminal charges. He returns to court Sept. 5 to show he has complied.
Burton was charged with resisting arrest, public intoxication and disorderly conduct after a disturbance at a bar on April 30.
The 6-foot-6 Burton butted his head against a window at the Last Lap, popping the window out of place.
"I very much regret the embarrassment that I have caused my family and Tennessee due to my behavior on April 30, 1995," Burton said in a statement released by his attorney. "My actions were inexcusable, and I take full responsibility for my conduct."
---
WAYNE, Neb. (AP) - One of the fastest skaters ever to lace up a pair of high-tops, Bonnie Blair, will slow her pace to help raise funds for Wayne State College women athletics.
Blair will be the celebrity walker Sept. 9 in the Wayne State College Women Helping Women Fun Walk.
The walk annually raises money to help finance women's athletics.
 Load-Date: June 14, 1995

 

End of Document
