

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
October 19, 1993, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 660 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: BRISBANE, Australia
Body




Milwaukee Brewers catcher David Nilsson has forgone his off-season vacation to help boost the popularity of baseball in his homeland.
Nilsson, 24, will spend the winter playing for the Brisbane Bandits in the Australian Baseball League. The Bandits are the Brewers' Australian affiliate.
"If I go out to win every game then it won't be hard to lift myself," Nilsson said. "Compared to the majors, the ABL is about three levels lower, but the Bandits are employing me to play baseball. That's my job."
Nilsson batted .257 with seven homers and 40 RBIs in his second season with the Brewers and hopes his stint playing down under will enable him to improve his stats in 1994.
"I want to give it my best shot this year so I can give myself a chance of having my best season with the Brewers," Nilsson said.
The Bandits are one of eight teams in the Australian League, each of which is affiliated with a major league team. Nilsson is one of five Australians to have played in the majors during 1993.
Each Australian club is allowed up to four non-Australian players.
---
RIO de JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Pele, the king of soccer, told the press Monday that the World Cup to be played for the first time in the United States in 1994 is like playing at home in Brazil for him.
Pele was in Brazil to begin sale of 4,900 world cup tickets rationed to Brazil for what he called "my world cup." Pele lives both in the Brazilian port city of Santos and New York.
Pele told press that the Brazilian squad, currently ranked No. 1 by FIFA, has the best talent and with the right organization can capture the country's fourth world championship. Pele starred on the championship teams of 1958, 1962, and 1970.
Pele denied rumors he was seeking to run for political office in his native country.
---
MIAMI (AP) - In the Olympic record book, longest is oldest.
On Monday, Bob Beamon observed the 25th anniversary of his astonishing long jump at Mexico City in 1968. Every other individual Olympic track and field record has been broken since, but Beamon's still stands.
His jump of 29 feet, 2 inches lasted as the world record until Aug. 30, 1991, when Mike Powell long-jumped 29-4 at the World Championships in Tokyo.
"I'm just glad I've still got the Olympic record," said the 47-year-old Beamon, who works for the Dade County Parks and Recreation Department.
"I wish nothing was broken. But there's nothing you can do about it. Records were made to be broken."
Beamon's long jump at Mexico City bettered the existing world record by more than a foot.
"He completely bypassed the 28-foot barrier," said Pete Cava, USA Track and Field information director. "That stunned a lot of people. He made it appear to be such an impossible barrier.
"Of course, Mike Powell thinks differently now. But back then, it was just the greatest athletic achievement of all time."
---
PITTSBURGH (AP) - Mario Lemieux, still recuperating from back surgery, skated and shot pucks with his Pittsburgh Penguins' teammates Monday for the first time since the NHL season started.
The only question was who is more eager for the four-time NHL scoring champion to return: Lemieux or his teammates?
"I know he can't wait to get back, he's chomping at the bit to get back," center Bryan Trottier said. "We hope he's back in a couple of weeks."
Lemieux snapped off a few shots and skated briskly, but wouldn't say when he might return. In fact, he wasn't saying much at all, under instructions from general manager Craig Patrick.
"Boss's orders," said Lemieux, who politely declined to talk.
The Penguins plan a press conference Wednesday, apparently to detail when Lemieux will return.
His teammates were content with seeing Lemieux back in practice. Lemieux resumed skating on his own only 2 weeks ago, following his second back operation in four years. Arthroscopic surgery in July cleaned out scar tissue remaining after a 1990 operation to repair a damaged disc.
"It's great to see him out there again," defenseman Ulf Samuelsson said.
 Load-Date: October 19, 1993

 

End of Document
