

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
April 27, 1995, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 573 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: MADRID, Spain
Body




Atletico Madrid president Jesus Gil y Gil blasted black Colombian forward Adolfo Valencia in what Spanish soccer officials termed "the most serious example of verbal violence in Spanish sports in recent years."
"Nobody makes a fool of me - I'll cut that black guy's head off," Gil said after Atletico's scoreless tie with Logrones on Sunday.
"Let him go back to Colombia and see if they really kill him," he added, seeming to allude to the July 1 murder last year of Colombia's Andres Escobar following a 2-1 upset loss to the United States in the World Cup.
Maria Emma Mejia de Caballero, Colombia's ambassador to Spain, said the remarks "were inappropriate and xenophobic." Rafael Cortes Elvira, Spain's secretary of state for sport, called them "facist statements" and suggested Gil should be sanctioned.
The Spanish League's anti-violence commission said Gil's remarks were "clearly anti-foreigner and racist."
League officials said the matter would be reviewed by a disciplinary board.
---
SAN DIEGO (AP) - The Famous Chicken returned to Jack Murphy Stadium for the San Diego Padres' opener with the Houston Astros on Wednesday night.
Ostracized by previous Padres ownership, Ted Giannoulas made his first official appearance since 1991 at the stadium where honed his act 21 years ago.
Dressed in an orange and yellow suit, the Famous Chicken appeared from left-center field in the middle of the second inning of the Padres' 10-2 loss.
Greeted by an ovation, he danced across the outfield to hug Graig Nettles, a former Padres third baseman in his first season as third-base coach.
Then it was on to put a "whammy" on the Astros, lift his leg in the direction of the dugout and catcher Scott Servais, and salute umpire Bill Rosenberry.
---
CHARLESTON, W.Va. (AP) - A trainer's job is done when Kentucky Derby day arrives.
"You can't get in the locker room and say, 'Guys, this is the moment of my life, my mother's watching this, don't be fooling around out there,"' said Richard Mandella, who trains Derby contender Afternoon Deelites.
Mandella isn't worried that the crowd and pomp accompanying the May 6 race in Louisville, Ky., will distract his horse, bred near Charles Town in West Virginia's Eastern Panhandle.
"The derby, as big as it is on people, is really just another good race for a horse," Mandella said.
---
ATLANTA (AP) - The Coca-Cola Co. is prepared to begin work on what it envisions as the "town central" of the 1996 Olympic Games.
Olympic City, a $ 20 million project designed to provide a hands-on experience for visitors and local residents is to open in downtown Atlanta by Memorial Day 1996. Coca-Cola was to unveil its plans today for a site adjacent to the proposed Centennial Olympic Park.
"This could be City Hall, town central during the Olympics," Coca-Cola president Douglas Ivester said. "It'll be a must-see. I think people will walk away from this saying, 'I've been to the Olympics."'
---
LAS VEGAS (AP) - Tennis star Andre Agassi appeared in his hometown Wednesday to announce a benefit concert for his youth foundation.
The "Grand Slam for Children" will be held Sept. 30 at the MGM Grand Garden with Grammy-winning artist Elton John, Michael Bolton, Kenny G and Oleta Adams among the scheduled performers. The event will be produced by David Foster, a 12-time Grammy Award winner.
Agassi, ranked No. 1 in the world, founded the Andre Agassi Foundation, which develops and supports motivational and educational programs.
 Load-Date: April 27, 1995

 

End of Document
