

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
August 6, 1994, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 690 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: CINCINNATI
Body




Deion Sanders is following through on his pledge.
When he was traded to the Reds this spring, the outfielder said he wanted to work with inner city youth, as he did when he was with the Atlanta Braves.
On Friday, Sanders visited a housing project to reward youngsters who volunteer with Cincinnati Recreation Commission programs. They received T-shirts, game tickets and a chance to meet the baseball and football player.
"I never saw a professional game until I played in my first one," Sanders told his audience. "But I was blessed with a good mother. She made me believe in myself, so I believe now that people should help each other."
In Atlanta, Sanders often paid for inner-city children to attend games.
In his hometown of Fort Meyers, Fla., he supports sports programs at his old high school.
"I won't get through to all of these kids. But maybe I'll reach one of them," he said.
---
CHARLESTON, W.Va. (AP) - Nervous about getting engaged, former West Virginia University baseball star Mark Landers decided to propose where he feels most comfortable: on the playing field.
The Charleston native, who plays first base for the Toronto Blue Jays rookie team in Medicine Hat, Alberta, invited his longtime girlfriend to watch him play.
With the help of team officials, Landers arranged a contest July 21 to pick the "fan who traveled the farthest to the game." Not surprisingly, his girlfriend, Brandi Titus of Charleston, was the winner.
As she stepped onto the field to receive her award, Landers came out of the dugout.
"Mark's usually real shy," said Brandi, a junior at West Virginia State. "But he took the microphone and told the crowd we had dated for five years and he wanted us to be together very much.
"Then he got down on one knee and proposed. My prize was an engagement ring. I think the whole town knew what was going to happen - everyone but me."
He said they hope to get married in November, although he may want to think about moving up the date.
After Titus left, Landers went into a slump and his batting average dropped from .300 to .280.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - The celebration of Phil Rizzuto's induction into baseball's Hall of Fame will continue Tuesday at Yankee Stadium.
Rizzuto will be presented with a painting by sports artist LeRoy Nieman showing Rizzuto in a favorite pose - bunting.
Fans attending the game against the Baltimore Orioles will get posters of the painting, which was paid for by Chemical Bank.
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Romario may wish he had gone back to Spain as his Barcelona team demanded.
The star of Brazil's World Cup champion team was punched in the face and booed during an exhibition game in Espirito Santo, about 300 miles from Rio, the O Globo newspaper reported Saturday.
Romario is on vacation in Brazil, in defiance of orders from his Barcelona club to report to training camp.
The incidents occurred Thursday night during a game between a squad of "Friends of Romario" and a old timers team.
Mauro, a fullback from the veterans' team, tried to greet Romario before the game, claiming the two knew each other from Rio.
According to O Globo, Romario ordered him thrown out of the locker room, and Mauro reached over and punched him in the face.
Romario, who received $ 50,000 to play, delayed the start of the game and left before it was over. The crowd of only 824 booed.
But he left his mark with a penalty kick for his team's only score in a 1-1 tie.
Romario has said he expects to stay in Brazil for another two weeks and will pay a fine for reporting late to Barcelonoa.
---
CALLICOON, N.Y. (AP) - James "Buddy" McGirt is expected to win for the second time in five weeks Sunday. Should he be upset, he'll find out talk is cheap.
McGirt goes into his 10-round bout against Patrick Coleman of Chicago at the Villa Roma Country Club with a verbal agreement for an October rematch with WBC welterweight champion Pernell Whitaker.
It will be McGirt's fifth fight since he had surgery on his left shoulder following his title loss to Whitaker on points March 6, 1993.
McGirt, also a former IBF junior welterweight champion, has 63-3-1 record, with 44 knockouts. Coleman's record is 19-2, with 13 knockouts.
 Load-Date: August 6, 1994

 

End of Document
