

Names in the News
The Associated Press
July 3, 1993, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 591 words
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




Roger Clinton's acting career is taking off, but can he possibly be doing his presidential brother proud with parts like Mayor Bubba in a low-budget horror flick?
Clinton has landed a part in "Pumpkinhead II: Blood Wings," a sequel to "Pumpkinhead," the Motion Picture Corp. of America, an independent producer, said Friday. It's due for release on Halloween.
"Roger has a very honest, electable look," said producer Brad Krevoy. "He's a natural born politician."
Clinton has already been cast in the comedy film "National Lampoon's Last Resort" as a "none-too-bright hulk of a brute with a soft spot."
---
VATICAN CITY (AP) - Pope John Paul II got a clean bill of health after undergoing a CAT scan to check for any new growths following last year's surgery to remove a benign tumor from his intestine.
The sophisticated radiological exam was performed Friday "to be on the safe side," said papal spokesman Joaquin Navarro.
"From the clinical point of view, the Holy Father is a healthy person," Navarro said.
Since his operation last July, there have been periodic news reports questioning the 73-year-old pontiff's health.
Navarro said the CAT scan had been planned since the surgery as part of followup checkups and that the checkups would continue.
"We're in the area of preventative medicine," he said.
---
THE HAGUE, Netherlands (AP) - Queen Beatrix may have the common touch, but the government isn't keen on a new television commercial that portrays her as just another shopper at one of the nation's 850 tradition markets.
The government has demanded that the Central Board of Merchants pull an ad that shows the queen, flowers in hand, walking along the stalls of one of the markets, which sell everything from fresh produce to used clothing.
As she appears a background voice says: "Hey isn't that … ?"
The Central Board's Frans Zappey said the ad won't be pulled.
"It's not an ad for a trademark, it's to let people see that the market is for everyone," he said. "It's part of our culture."
Government spokesman Hans van der Voet refused to say what action the government would take in light of the board's refusal.
The national commercial code forbids advertisements showing real people, or actors mimicking them, as opposed to fictional characters.
---
MADRID, Spain (AP) - The cabinet approved a royal decree granting Spanish citizenship to Peruvian author Mario Vargas Llosa.
Vargas Llosa, 57, is Peru's best-known writer and social critic. In a rare foray into politics, he lost a presidential bid in 1990 to President Alberto Fujimori.
There was no immediate word as to whether Vargas Llosa had requested Spanish citizenship or why he might have wanted it.
Vargas Llosa, who has lived in England, the United States, Spain and France, will formally become a dual Spanish-Peruvian citizen when King Juan Carlos signs the decree approved by the cabinet on Friday, the Justice Ministry said.
---
FRANKFORT, Ind. (AP) - Add Kentucky basketball coach Rick Pitino to the cast of "Blue Chips," a basketball movie starring Nick Nolte and featuring some of the top players and coaches in the country.
Pitino will portray the coach of the fictional Western Texas University in a game against Nolte's Western University. Nolte spent much of last spring at Indiana to research his role as a college coach.
Indiana's Bob Knight will coach two games during filming this month. George Raveling, the coach at Southern California, will be the opposing coach in one.
Players who plan to participate include NBA rookie of the year Shaquille O'Neal and a host of college stars.

 

End of Document
