

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
March 26, 1991, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 701 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




General Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, will throw out the first ball for the New York Yankees' home opener.
Powell grew up in the South Bronx, not too far from Yankee Stadium.
Robert Nederlander, managing general partner of the Yankees, said Powell will be joined in the ceremony before the April 15 game with the Chicago White Sox by the family of Marine captain Manuel Rivera, the first Bronx resident to lose his life in Operation Desert Storm.
---
ATLANTA (AP) - The Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games is about to scale back the sale of merchandise associated with the 1996 Games to avoid conflicting with the marketing of the 1992 Games in Barcelona.
Items bearing the star-and-circle logo of the '96 Games have been a huge success in the six months since Atlanta was awarded those Games in a marketing effort limited to Georgia and neighboring states.
For example, T-shirt and sweatshirt sales have each surpassed 300,000 items, said Bob Hollander, ACOG director of merchandising.
But International Olympic Committee policy stipulates that, beginning in April, Atlanta will have to suspend - or at least greatly restrict - its merchandising campaign until after the 1992 Games.
Atlanta officials are talking with Barcelona about a possible compromise. Possible alternatives include selling Atlanta merchandise alongside Barcelona goods or selling Atlanta items only locally.
"We're not going to offend our friends in Barcelona," ACOG President Billy Payne said.
---
NAPLES, Italy (AP) - Argentine soccer star Diego Maradona got as far as the airport and turned back.
Maradona planned to fight to Buenos Aires Monday night to play for Argentina in an exhibition game against Brazil, but his Naples club refused him permission to play.
Maradona's contract with Napoli runs through 1993. But he has had serious problems with the club, leaving a team practice and a Cup of Italy game. Naples prosecutors have said they have questioned Maradona in connection with drug investigations.
Napoli, though eliminated from the Champions Cup and trailing in the league, still has a shot at the Italian Cup final.
Maradona is likely to be miss the next round Saturday because he drew two warnings from the referee in recent games.
---
TACOMA, Wash. (AP) - The Nevada State Athletic Commission says it has about had it with three-time world boxing champion Greg Haugen.
The commission fined Haugen $$25,000 and ordered other penalties when the junior welterweight champion tested positive for marijuana after beating Hector Camacho on Feb. 23. Now, commission executive director Chuck Minker says, Haugen is one step away from suspension.
Haugen was to have met with Minker, commissioner Bruce Layne and a United Way representative last Wednesday but he never showed.
"We've just about run out of patience with Mr. Haugen," Minker said. "If he's not going to do what he's supposed to do, then he will be called before the commission again. And it won't be to ask how his career is going."
Haugen's excuse was that he overslept. Haugen told The Morning News Tribune of Tacoma in a story published today.
"Layne has been after me," Haugen said. "He wanted me suspended in the first place. He told me I wasn't serious. They fined me $$25 G's. They act like that's not enough. They act like I did something really bad."
The commission originally sought 200 hours of service to the Clark County, Nev., School District, where Haugen's two daughters attend school. But Minker said, "The school district is very wary of Mr. Haugen.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Fred Lebow founder of the New York Road Runners Club and the New York City Marathon, went for a 30-minute walk in Central Park Tuesday and turned a few heads doing it. That's because last Friday, he underwent surgery for a cancerous tumor in his thyroid.
"I had to get out," Lebow said. "It wasn't a brisk walk. It was a brisk stroll."
Lebow was released from the hospital Monday and said doctors were optimistic about a complete recovery. "They are awaiting the results," he said. "They said it looks good and that I'm in good shape. I'm feeling much better."
Doctors said the growth on the thyroid was unrelated to a brain tumor for which Lebow was operated on last year.

 

End of Document
