

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
November 28, 1992, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 780 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: PITTSBURGH
Body




Pittsburgh Pirates infielder John Wehner has faced pitchers with cannon arms, but the weapons he saw during a coup attempt in Venezuela were the real thing.
Wehner, Pirates bullpen coach Terry Collins and outfield prospect William Pennyfeather are in Caracas, where rebels on Friday tried to overthrow President Carlos Andres Perez.
"You could see the bombers circling around and you could actually see the bombs falling out of the planes," Wehner said in a telephone interview from his hotel room with Pittsburgh television station WTAE.
"The smoke would come up from where it was hitting," Wehner said. "That was probably no more than a mile or two miles from here. They were low enough to make the windows shake at one point. It was pretty scary."
Wehner said he planned to stay inside his hotel room with his fiancee. He said they played cards most of Friday.
"Right now, there is some kind of curfew," Wehner said. "In fact, I was told they have a right to shoot you. It's almost morbid how quiet it is. It's eerie."
Wehner split the 1992 season between Triple-A Buffalo and the Pirates. He played in 55 games for the Pirates, batting .179 with six doubles.
---
VILLANOVA, Pa. (AP) - Andy Talley does more than just coach Villanova football. He also sells the program.
"You have to be all things to all people," says Talley, whose 9-2 team plays at Youngstown State in the opening round Saturday of the NCAA Division 1-AA playoffs.
"I think football's passed a lot of guys by because some guys are still X and O guys, and they're still hanging on the Xs and Os when all the other things are out there."
Talley, who has ambitions to coach in Division 1-A, lobbies hard in selling Villanova and its program, often leaving much of the actual football work to his assistants.
Villanova football isn't the only thing that benefits from his promoting. Last year, on campus, he led a bone marrow donation drive that attracted more than 900 people for blood tests to determine if they had potential to be marrow donors.
Villanova, ranked 10th nationally in 1-AA and the best in the East, play No. 7 Youngstown (8-2-1) in Ohio for the second year in a row.
"The biggest thing is the players really want to prove that they belong at this level," Talley said.
"At times, I think we've doubted ourselves quite a bit and lacked continuity. I think this team is where it has to be, going after the big prize.
"We understand the situation. Most important, we know we have to ability to beat them."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Dixie Brass, one of the outstanding 3-year-old colts in the nation, reportedly will be retired after breaking down in a race on Thursday.
The New York Times reported that Dixie Brass, winner of $ 631,653 in 15 races, will undergo surgery next week. The horse ran just a half-mile in the Sport Page Handicap at Aqueduct on Thanksgiving Day, then jockey Julio Pezua pulled him up.
The horse sustained two fractured ankle bones in the right foreleg, the Times reported.
"He has a brace on the leg," trainer Dennis Brida said. "We're doing all we can for him. It's a tragedy for us. Dixie Brass was the lifeline of the stable."
Dixie Brass won two major New York races, the Withers and Metropolitan. He had six victories in two years, but had lost his last five starts.
---
STE. GENEVIEVE, Mo. (AP) - While shopping malls around the country braced for their biggest day of the year Friday, the stores in tiny Ste. Genevieve were almost bare.
The historic city about 50 miles south of St. Louis was making a new kind of history. Both of the town's high school football teams were playing for - and winning - state football championships.
"Everyone was either glued to their radio at home or on hand to cheer on one of the football teams," said Carol Phillips, a waitress at the Big Brick, Ste. Genevieve's most popular restaurant. "We're usually pretty busy at lunchtime, but we sure don't have much business here. The locals are hard to find here today."
"I'd say we resembled a ghost town," said her boss, Judy Schwartz.
The Ste. Genevieve Valle Warriors, the city's Catholic school, whipped Hardin-Central, 44-16, at Springfield to win their fifth consecutive state Class 1A championship, while the Ste. Genevieve Dragons trimmed Bolivar, 22-15, at Columbia for the 3A championship.
And the residents who were left in town erupted, cheering wildly and honking their car horns.
"And just wait until everyone gets back," said police dispatcher Robin Schenk.
Friday's unique experience pulled the city together.
"Everyone was pulling for everyone else," Schwartz said. "It didn't matter if you were a Valle or a Ste. Gen fan. You just wanted both to win.
"I went to Ste. Gen and today just gave me goose bumps."

 

End of Document
