

Names In The Game
 The Associated Press
October 21, 1995, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 548 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




Brazilian soccer star Juninho's biggest obstacle to playing his best in England has been overcome.
The Ministry of Agriculture guaranteed that rice and beans from "back home" will pass through British customs, the daily O Estado de Sao Paulo reported Saturday.
"We'll inspect Juninho's rice and beans and stamp them with a government seal," the vegetable inspection director of the Ministry of Agriculture, Jose Tadeu de Faria, said.
Juninho's mother, Lucia, was worried that British customs would not permit the rice and beans, Brazilian staple foods, to enter England because of tough restrictions, but Faria assured her that the food would pass and that she will not have any restrictions in preparing Juninho's meals.
Juninho's mother, father, and sister are moving to England so Juninho can feel "at home" in England.
The 21-year-old midfielder signed a reported $ 7.98 million contract to play for Middlesbrough.
---
BRISBANE, Australia (AP) - Lori Forsythe remembers when beach volleyball was played on the beach. For fun.
Nowadays the sport is big business, played in arenas around the world. The top players can earn a more than respectable living from their skills and can aim at Olympic gold medals.
Men's and women's beach volleyball will be contested for the first time at next year's Atlanta Olympic Games, a decision that helped to lift the sport's credibility.
Women's beach volleyball has been criticized for using sex to sell the sport. The players are skimpily dressed and promotional material highlights that aspect.
Forsythe, a 36-year-old Encinitas, Calif., says the criticism doesn't worry the players.
"I don't think anyone can come to watch us in action and not realize we are incredible athletes," she said. "If the fact we play in two-piece costumes gets them in - come on in.
"We train for up to five hours a day on soft sand and the spectators quickly recognize the skill and fitness levels of the players. We have to be physically fit and mentally tough."
Don Gordon, an official in the sport, said the glamorous "Baywatch" image of women's beach volleyball is a double-edged sword.
"We are often accused of selling bodies, not volleyball," he said. "But these women are good athletes, full-time professionals."
 
 LOUISVILLE, Ky. (AP) - A brass band played "Take Me Out to the Ball Game" and cranes hoisted a 100-foot tall baseball bat into place Saturday at the headquarters of the company that makes the Louisville Slugger.
The giant bat was brought lengthwise on tandem trucks 12 miles - including a stretch on Interstate 65 - from Caldwell Tanks, the water storage tower manufacturer that made the hollow metal display. Crowds cheered as the bat negotiated the final turn and made its way down Main Street to the new Hillerich & Bradsby headquarters.
The bat was painted with simulated wood-grain and the Hillerich & Brasby Louisville Slugger logo, and the signature of company founder J.A. "Bud" Hillerich, who made his first bat in 1884.
The giant bat is modeled after the bat the company made for Babe Ruth.
Hillerich & Bradsby moved its factory from Louisville across the Ohio River to southern Indiana in 1973. But the bat factory will be back in Louisville in January, at the same site as the new headquarters. A baseball museum is scheduled to open at the site in July.
 Load-Date: October 21, 1995

 

End of Document
