

Names in the News
The Associated Press
February 5, 1991, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 604 words
Dateline: PHILADELPHIA
Body




A Quaker organization has nominated former President Carter for the Nobel Peace Prize, praising him for his devotion to "public service on a global scale" since leaving office.
The American Friends Service Committee, as a 1947 Peace Prize co-winner with its British counterpart, can offer a nominee every year.
In the letter to the Norwegian Nobel Committee, AFSC Executive Secretary Asia A. Bennett praised Carter's mediation efforts in Ethiopia, the Middle East, Sri Lanka and Somalia as well as his work on the Nicaraguan, Haitian and Panamanian elections.
Bennett also said the 66-year-old former peanut farmer is a board member and volunteer for Habitat for Humanity, spending one week each year helping build homes for homeless people.
The AFSC said Carter's presidency from 1977 to 1981 was "deeply flawed by his intensification of the arms race and by other Cold War policies," but stated there were "indications of the concerns that would be the focus of his work as a private citizen later."
The AFSC cited Carter's concern for human rights, the Panama Canal treaty and the Camp David accords negotiated with Israel and Egypt.
Only two presidents, Woodrow Wilson and Theodore Roosevelt, have won Nobel Peace Prizes. Both were in office at the time.
 
 BEVERLY HILLS, Calif. (AP) - Debbie Reynolds, who had no formal dance training before her debut in the classic film musical "Singin' in the Rain," has received the fifth annual Gypsy Award for excellence in dance.
Reynolds, 58, beamed as she was handed the sculpted glass plaque Sunday by her daughter, writer-actress Carrie Fisher, at a lunch at the Beverly Hilton Hotel.
Reynolds' other films include "The Unsinkable Molly Brown," "Tammy and the Bachelor" and "The Singing Nun."
The Professional Dancers Society has previously honored Sammy Davis, Jr., "Singin' in the Rain" co-star Donald O'Connor and choreographers Hermes Pan and Louis DaPron.
 
 LOS ANGELES (AP) - Actress Isabel Sanford, who played Louise Jefferson for 11 years on the CBS-TV series "The Jeffersons," is in good condition after undergoing quadruple heart bypass surgery last week.
"She's doing great and looking forward to going home at the end of the week," Brad Lemack, spokesman for the 68-year-old actress, said Monday.
Miss Sanford underwent surgery last Thursday at a Los Angeles hospital Lemack declined to name to ensure the actor's privacy.
"The Jeffersons" debuted in 1975 as a spinoff of "All in the Family" and had an 11-year run. Miss Sanford won an Emmy Award for her portrayal of the wise and tolerant Louise Jefferson.
She was also in the films "Stand Up and Be Counted," "The New Centurions," "Love at First Bite" and "Guess Who's Coming to Dinner?"
 
 BOSTON (AP) - Stephen Smith was a Kennedy clan member by marriage and an important adviser to the political family. And in honor of Smith, who died last August, the family has named a wing in his memory at the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library.
"He was the cornerstone to our family as he was the cornerstone to our campaigns and our lives," Sen. Edward M. Kennedy, D-Mass., said Monday at the ribbon-cutting ceremony opening the Stephen E. Smith Center.
Smith was John F. Kennedy's campaign manager in 1960. He also directed Rober F. Kennedy's presidential campaigns, which ended with his assassination in 1968, and Edward Kennedy's failed quest for the presidential nomination in 1980.
Smith was married to the former Jean Kennedy for 34 years. He died at age 62 in New York after a long illness.
Also attending Monday's ceremony were Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, Jean Kennedy Smith, actress Lauren Bacall and historian Arthur Schlesinger.
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto NY14

 

End of Document
