

Names in the News
The Associated Press
November 25, 1993, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 617 words
Dateline: MADISON, Wis.
Body




Julia Roberts didn't skinny-dip for the cameras despite rumors that sent tabloid photographers into a feeding frenzy, a state official says.
The actress filmed "I Love Trouble," also starring Nick Nolte, this summer and fall in Wisconsin.
One scene shot in early October at Devils Lake State Park might have led to rumors of nudity because the stars "allude to (Roberts) not having any clothes on," said Mary Idso, assistant to the state Tourism Division administrator.
But, Idso said, "At no time was either Julia or her stand-in nude."
The actors wore unobtrusive wet suits to keep them warm, said Idso, who helped the filmmakers with production details.
That was skinny enough for five tabloid photographers, who tried to get permission to shoot in the park on the same day as the filming. None got to the shooting area.
"Control was tight. … We worked with park rangers to not let them in," said Stanley Solheim, director of the state film office.
---
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) - Jose Carreras, Luciano Pavarotti and Placido Domingo will team up again at the World Cup soccer finals, coached as before by Zubin Mehta.
The tenors will perform July 16 in Los Angeles the night before the World Cup soccer final, Carreras said Wednesday. Mehta will conduct, probably leading the Los Angeles Philharmonic Orchestra, Carreras said.
The World Cup final will be played at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, near Los Angeles.
The four performed together at the ancient Caracalla baths outside Rome after the 1990 World Cup, in a concert televised worldwide.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Charles Manson: cult leader, mass murderer - songwriter?
The man who masterminded the 1971 killings of actress Sharon Tate and six others stands to earn "more money than he ever has in his life" for a song on the latest album by Guns N' Roses, a friend of the band said Wednesday.
The song, "Look at Your Game, Girl," is the 13th and final track on "The Spaghetti Incident?" album, which was released this week.
Only the first 12 songs are listed on the album jacket, although the name "Charlie" appears on the credits list.
Richard Lemmons, a friend of the band, said he gave the band a tape of the song about three months ago. Leader Axl Rose "went nuts over it," he said.
"It's like Charlie's baby, the best thing he ever wrote, and he's really proud of it," Lemmons said.
Tip Kindel, spokesman for the state Department of Corrections, said his office was asked Tuesday to forward a royalty agreement to Manson, 59.
Kindel said he didn't know terms of the agreement, but "anecdotally, I've heard they are high." He said there was nothing to stop Manson, imprisoned for life, from earning royalties.
Guns N' Roses' management referred calls to the band's label, Geffen Records. A Geffen spokeswoman declined to comment.
---
HEMPSTEAD, N.Y. (AP) - Joey Buttafuoco, minus some swagger and his snakeskin boots, has taken one last lick from the courts.
Buttafuoco pleaded guilty Wednesday to one of six counts of harassment for threatening a half-dozen teenagers who repeatedly drove past his house last June.
He was sentenced to 15 days in jail. The term starts once he's done serving six months for sleeping with Amy Fisher.
Buttafuoco appeared in court handcuffed, glum, pale and minus his trademark boots. He has served 10 days of his sentence for the statutory rape of Fisher, the underaged paramour who later shot his wife.
"He looks so sad," said his brother, Bobby Buttafuoco. "The sparkle is out of his eyes."
According to police, Buttafuoco chased the teens with a baseball bat on the street of his home in Massapequa. The attorney for the youths, Jonathan Shebar, said Buttafuoco menaced the teens with a gun and threatened "to blow their brains out."
 Load-Date: November 25, 1993

 

End of Document
