

Names In The Game
 The Associated Press
October 22, 1995, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 644 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: CLEVELAND
Body




The Cleveland Indians have won the backing of Miss World Series 1954, now a retired grandmother living in Crystal Lake, Ill.
"The Indians are going to win for sure," Lois Ayers Johnson told The Plain Dealer in an interview published Sunday.
The Indians were to play in Game 2 of the World Series on Sunday after a 3-2 loss on Saturday to the Atlanta Braves.
Lois Ayers was a 24-year-old department store model when she won the Miss World Series 1954 title in a pageant the now-defunct Cleveland Press sponsored. She also was a college homecoming queen, Miss Cuyahoga County Fair and two-time runner-up for Miss Cleveland.
Her crown entitled her to various hand-waving appearances at drugstores and car dealerships, two seats to Game 3 at Cleveland Stadium and the honor of kissing Cleveland manager Al Lopez.
After the Indians lost Games 1 and 2 at the Polo Grounds in New York, they took a train back to Cleveland for Game 3. The Indians eventually lost to the Giants in four straight games.
 
 ---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Soccer great Pele, who turns 55 Monday, says marriage is the key to staying in good shape.
Pele, now Brazil's sports minister, told the Rio daily Jornal do Brasil that the security of his marriage to Assyria has compensated the sedentary habits of bureaucratic tasks and frequent travels as the country's most popular cabinet member.
"I've taken better care of myself since I married two years ago," Pele said.
TV networks, newspapers, and magazines have made special mention of the birthday of "the God of all soccer stadiums."
Pele still weighs 172 pounds, his playing weight when he led Brazil to its third World Cup conquest in 1970. He was only 17 when he first played for the the Brazilian squad in 1958: the first World Cup championship.
"My breath may not be the same, but I do everything I can to maintain my form," Pele said.
 
 ---
PORTLAND, Maine (AP) - Orel Hershiser always wanted to make it back to the World Series after his stellar performance in the 1988 series, "but he didn't think he would," says the brother of the Cleveland Indians' ace.
But Orel Hershiser was back this weekend, even though he was outdueled by the Atlanta Braves' Greg Maddux 3-2 Saturday night.
Maine television sports reporter Gordie Hershiser has had to bite his tongue more than a few times when going on the air with stories mentioning his brother.
The Channel 13 weekend sports anchor does not mention that Orel Hershiser is his older brother, and treats him as he would any other sports figure.
That included a game in which Mo Vaughn of the Boston Red Sox hit a towering home run off Orel that landed 20 rows into the seats. Gordie commented that the pitcher "should win the neck brace award" after watching the ball sail so far.
"I guess it would be easy for me to say, 'My brother, my brother,' but I just don't," said Hershiser, himself a former minor-league pitcher.
 
 ---
FORT COLLINS, Colo. (AP) - New Mexico cornerback Art Celestine and his teammates simply laughed at the conditions in the locker room following the Lobos' 22-14 win over Colorado State.
"I don't care if we stink all the way to Albuquerque," Celestine said Saturday, after a power outage on the CSU campus forced players to take their postgame showers with the aid of flashlights.
It proved a trivial inconvenience for the 5-foot-9, 192-pound senior, who finished with seven tackles, a forced fumble, a fumble recovery and two sacks.
The Lobos' defense had been maligned most of the season, giving up an average of 30 points in its first four games against Division I-A opponents.
But behind the leadership of Celestine - who has been invited to the Hula Bowl and the Senior Bowl all-star games - the Lobos have turned things around.
New Mexico (4-3, 2-3 Western Athletic Conference) has allowed a respectable 290 yards per game in its wins over CSU and a 24-10 victory over Hawaii on Oct. 14.
 Load-Date: October 22, 1995

 

End of Document
