

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
April 16, 1991, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 879 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: LINCOLN, Neb.
Body




Lou Saban may be up for another coaching job. He has had at least 17 in 40 years.
The 69-year-old Saban acknowledged that he has talked with Peru State officials about the school's vacant coaching job, but he would not elaborate.
"I've been approached about it and I went down there for a visit last week," Saban said in a phone interview with The Lincoln Star from his home at Apollo Beach, Fla. "It was more like an unofficial visit than an official visit."
Saban's motto could be "no job too big or small." He has been head coach of three NFL teams, but recent years, he has been a high school coach in South Carolina and coach of the Middle Georgia Heat Wave, a minor league team.
Peru State officials want to have a coach on campus before May 1. Saban said the job interests him.
"I was impressed by what I saw while I was there," Saban said. "They certainly have a good football program there, and I know that they're committed to continue that strong program."
---
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - Mitch Williams has regained the number he has worn his entire major league career, thanks to a trade with John Kruk.
When the reliever reported to the Philadelphia Phillies after being dealt to the club by the Chicago Cubs, he found his favorite uniform number, 28, belonged to Kruk.
Williams and Kruk made their deal Monday night. Kruk gave Williams his No. 28 for Williams' No. 29 - and two cases of beer.
Of Kruk's conditions, Williams said, "I knew it would be beer or Ding Dongs, I just wasn't sure which."
 
 LANSING, Mich. (AP) - Chris Sabo has struck out in the Michigan Court of Appeals.
The $$1.25 million-a-year Cincinnati Reds third baseman must pay 10 percent of his salary, or $$125,000, as alimony to ex-wife Catherine Sabo, the court ruled in a decision released Monday.
"Given the personal sacrifices she made for his now-successful major league baseball career, and the noticeable discrepancy between their earning potentials, the amount of alimony is fair and equitable," the three-judge panel unanimously ruled.
The Sabos met at the University of Michigan, where he played baseball and studied history while she was an education major. They were married in 1983, the year he dropped out of school after being drafted into the Reds' minor league system.
The couple separated six weeks after the 1988 season began, when Sabo filed for divorce. Circuit Judge Ronald Taylor ordered him to turn over 10 percent of his salary as alimony for five years, beginning in 1989.
On appeal, Sabo argued that his ex-wife was not entitled to alimony based on the short duration of their marriage and her own professional skills and college degree.
"If Chris Sabo were injured and lost his baseball job, his only other job skill would be 'flipping burgers,"' his legal papers said.
---
BRISBANE, Australia (AP) - World track and field record holders Sergei Bubka of the Soviet Union and Steve Backley of Britain, plus American swimmers Matt Biondi and Tom Jager are among those getting early invitations to the Brisbane International Games.
The games, being held for the first time, are being arranged in conjunction with the first Asia Pacific Oceania Sports Assembly Festival October 4-20.
Backley is the world javelin record holder, and Bubka holds the pole vault record.
Freestyle sprinters Jager and Biondi will swim a match-race event.
The Brisbane International Games will feature selected sports, including track and field, amateur boxing, cycling, diving, swimming, gymnastic and volleyball.
Track and field events will include the men's and women's high jump, discus, long jump, 100, 200 and 400 meters, 100 and 110 meters hurdles and a men's mile.
---
PARIS (AP) - More than 400 European coaches were in attendance as the NBA opened its second season of world clinics Tuesday.
Former players Bill Walton and Calvin Murphy and ex-coaches Hubie Brown and Jack Ramsay are taking part in the three-day presentation.
The Paris clinic, being held in conjunction with the European Final Four tournament, is the first of eight such seminars over the next four months.
The others clinics will be in Germany, Italy, Spain, England and Brazil, and for the first time, Yugoslavia, where a clinic will be held July 12-14.
"We think the world of basketball is getting very small and in collaborative efforts like this, it is getting even smaller," NBA commissioner David Stern said.
---
SYDNEY, Australia (AP) - Australian track and field officials conceded Tuesday they had no idea what to do about a male athlete who has allegedly undergone a sex change operation and is competing in women's long distance events.
Athletics Australia, the sport's domestic governing body, has asked the International Amateur Athletic Federation to make a ruling on the eligibility of the athlete, who has not been identified by officials.
The transsexual, in her late 20s, competed in the New South Wales state championship in February, according to media reports.
Alan Batchelor, general manager of the New South Wales state body, said his organization was expecting a protest from rival athletes the next time the transsexual competed.
"It has to be sorted out quickly because we don't want a lot of sniggering and finger pointing," Batchelor said.
Batchelor said the athlete involved was ranked among the top 20 competitors nationally.

 

End of Document
