

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
April 5, 1994, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 838 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: HOUSTON
Body




The fans are not booing Houston Astros rookie James Mouton. They are mooing him.
It started when he was introduced Monday as he was about to make his major league debut. Fans started calling out "Moo, Moo," and they did it whenever he came to plate or made a play in rightfield.
"We didn't pass out a script or anything, it just happened," said Mouton. "After awhile, it got me pumped."
Mouton, with only three pro seasons behind him, said he'd heard moos in the minors "but never by a whole crowd, especially a crowd of 43,000."
---
BEIJING (AP) - Chinese sports officials are warning its athletes that anyone caught using banned drugs will be severely punished.
"We cannot afford to remain passive in merely detecting and penalizing them," said Yuan Weimin, vice minister of the State Sports Commission and head of the anti-doping drive.
The official Xinhua News Agency, which quoted Yuan's remarks Tuesday before an anti-doping seminar for sports officials, said 33 Chinese athletes have tested positive for performance-enhancing substances, mainly anabolic steroids, since 1987.
However, previous official news reports said 24 athletes were found to be using drugs last year alone. Only a few of the violators' names have been made public, although Chinese sports officials say they have reported them to international athletic organizations.
Rumors have circulated in recent years that the Chinese, owners of one of the world's few remaining sports machines, may be making drug use an integral part of their training programs as the East Germans did. Recent successes by Chinese women swimmers and long-distance runners have fueled such rumors.
However, Chinese officials have said such reports are based on jealousy. The world record-breaking women runners, including Wang Junxia and Qu Yunxia, have all passed drug tests.
---
FRESNO, Calif. (AP) - Former pro bowler Arthur Trask has been placed in an adult offender work program for a bookmaking conviction.
Trask, 45, was sentenced to 45 days in the program on Monday, ordered to do 250 hours community service and fined nearly $ 790. He had pleaded no contest to one count of felony bookmaking in a plea bargain under which five other bookmaking counts were dismissed.
Trask told Fresno County Superior Court Judge Gene Gomes he became a sports bookie last year because he didn't have a job. Police said ledgers indicated Trask was taking between $ 245,000 and $ 340,000 in bets a week.
"I got involved to pay rent and put food on the table for my family," Trask said. "I was out of money and out of patience. I did not know what else to do."
Trask retired from the Professional Bowlers Association tour in 1991 after two decades.
 
 BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) - Diego Maradona, who hinted last week that he would retire from soccer, said Tuesday he would probably play in this year's World Cup.
Maradona, 33, said that on a one-to-10 scale, the probability that he will continue on Argentina's national team is a seven.
"Though a little old, maybe I'll be bold and play the World Cup," he told reporters.
---
OSLO, Norway (AP) - Even though he is the only skier left in a race to the North Pole, Norwegian Borge Ousland is not home free. He still faces hungry polar bears, deadly cold, thin ice and 263 miles of desolate Arctic.
Since the informal race began over a month ago, two men have been rescued and the third was forced to accept outside supplies after nearly freezing to death at 40 below zero.
Four men, each pulling up to 290-pound sleds, hoped to be the first to make the trek to the North Pole alone and unaided. Others have made the trip solo, but always with assistance such as sled-dogs or outside supplies.
"I would be surprised if he didn't make it by May 1," Ousland's spokesman, Hans Christian Erlandsen, said Tuesday. "He made 27 kilometers (16.8 miles) today."
Erlandsen said the Norwegian could still face ice ridges or open stretches of water.
"He hasn't had problems with polar bears. I hope he doesn't," said Erlandsen.
---
LONDON (AP) - Former world heavyweight champion James "Bonecrusher" Smith Tuesday threatened to sue British boxing officials for barring him from fighting in England.
"I may not be allowed to take on a boxer in a British boxing ring, but I can assure you that if it is necessary to fight for my rights in an English court, then I am ready, willing and able to do so," Smith said in a statement released by his lawyers.
Smith, 41, was denied a license on medical grounds last Friday, forcing him to pull out of Tuesday's bout against European champion Henry Akinwande.
The British Boxing Board of Control said it was not satisfied with the results from an MRI scan and other tests conducted on Smith, who held the WBA title briefly in the mid-1980s.
Smith said a copy of the scan taken by the British board's medical officer "indicates there is absolutely no evidence of any abnormality to my brain whatsoever."
Smith said he sparred with two fighters in London last week and that everyone who watched, "will testify to the fact that I am 100 percent fit."
 Load-Date: April 5, 1994

 

End of Document
