

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
May 7, 1995, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 685 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: EDEN PRAIRIE, Minn.
Body




What has Warren Moon learned from his work as a television reporter covering the NBA playoffs? Dealing with professional athletes sometimes can be exasperating.
Moon says he has enjoyed his work as a sideline reporter for TNT. But he doesn't like having to wait when he needs an interview.
"When you're on the other side you have to get used to waiting for them to do an interview, if they even want to do it," Moon said at the Minnesota Vikings' minicamp. "That's the biggest thing to get used to, the waiting around."
Moon, usually accomodating to reporters, has had far fewer interviews to do during his second minicamp in Minnesota. Last year's three-day session was his first official work with the Vikings after his trade from Houston. He feels much more comfortable this time.
"Now I know the guys and I understand about the makeup of the guys and the organization," he said. "This year I really think we have a good chance of being a special football team."
 
 ---
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina, (AP) - Argentine soccer star Diego Armando Maradona announced Saturday night his resignation as coach of Racing Club, due to the electoral defeat of the club president that had appointed him.
In elections held Saturday, Racing's members ousted Juan De Stefano, president since 1988, and elected his opponent Osvaldo Otero.
"I am loyal to De Stefano, who appointed me as coach, so I will resign. Otero must have someone of his personal confidence to replace me ", said maradona to the press. Otero had asked him to remain as coach.
Maradona, currently serving a suspension as professional player, also said he will not play in Racing after the suspension expires in September. He was sanctioned by the world soccer Federation, when he failed to pass a test during the '94 U.S. World Soccer Cup.
"I had hoped to play in Racing only if De Stefano remained as president", said Maradona.
 
 ---
NEW YORK (AP) - Armond Hill, who played eight years in the NBA, is already having an impact as the new coach at Columbia.
Hill, who played at Princeton and later was an assistant coach there, has been using his background as a native New Yorker to recruit in a city where Columbia has had trouble getting players who meet its academic standards.
"Being at Princeton, he knows the quality of student athlete they need at Columbia,"says Tom Murray, head coach at Cardinal Hayes High School, which produced Jamal Mashburn, now of the Dallas Mavericks.
One possible recruit is Dwayne Edwards, a 6-4 forward, who has moved Columbia to the head of his list.
"I think a lot of New York City players will begin to give Columbia consideration," Edwards says.
 
 ---
GLASGOW, Scotland (AP) - Manager Walter Smith of the Rangers said Sunday he has reached agreement with Italian club Lazio on a transfer fee for star English midfielder Paul Gascoigne.
The agreement, reportedly worth about $ 7.2 million, makes the Scottish champions the overwhelming favorite to land the 27-year-old star should he decide to return to Britain.
A host of English clubs have also sought Gascoigne, expected to leave Italy after two unproductive, injury-riddled years in Rome. Lazio president Dino Zoff visited Britain last week to discuss prospective deals.
"I like him as a player and he is available," Smith said. "Lazio made it clear to several British clubs that he was for sale. We do not know when we will meet his advisors. Once that is sorted out the lad can make up his mind. But we've taken the first steps."
Because of his injury woes, Gascoigne was expected to fetch only half of the $ 8.8 million he cost Lazio to purchaaw from Tottenham three years ago.
Gascoigne's business advisor Len Lazarus said Saturday that his client would not make up his mind on whether to leave Lazio until the end of the season. Gascoigne reportedly is unhappy that Lazio's structured offense leaves him little room for creativity.
Gascoigne recently made his first appearance for his Italian club after spending a year on the sidelines with a broken leg. He was also out a year months after inuring a knee in Tottenham's 1991 Football Association Cup final victory over Nottingham Forest.
 Load-Date: May 7, 1995

 

End of Document
