

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
July 15, 1992, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 570 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: SAN DIEGO
Body




The San Diego Port Commission has agreed to examine a proposal by a group of bayfront leaseholders to create an America's Cup Village in a commercial area of San Diego Bay.
The commission on Tuesday agreed to study the proposal, although a financial commitment wasn't made. The project, proposed by the Commercial Basin Tenants Association, is intended to make the international sailing event more accessible to the public and to revitalize the silt-filled Commercial Basin, the historical home of the city's commercial fishing fleet.
The $ 17.7 million project would include $ 9.3 million in public projects and $ 8.3 million in improvements of direct benefit to the leaseholders, who include sportfishing concessions, boat yard and marina operators, restaurants and shops.
The project would allow the public to more closely view the America's Cup crews and their yachts. The America's Cup was held in San Diego earlier this year, and many who attended the races complained they did not have any contact with the contestants. The America's Cup event will be held in the city again in 1995.
 
 ---
CHICAGO (AP) - The youngest member of the U.S. Olympic cycling team almost didn't make it to the games this year.
Chris Coletta, 19, of west suburban Addison, raced on the national champion team pursuit squad in 1991 and 1992 and on the Pan Am Games silver-medal team in 1991. But his Olympic hopes took a hit when he contracted a virus after a rainy race in Belgium in April.
The virus weakened his body so much he couldn't finish workouts, and as the Olympic Trials approached it began attacking his confidence.
"I almost quit cycling," said Coletta. "It was actually June 2, and I had to think about whether I was going to go through with this. I was afraid I was going to embarrass myself."
With three weeks to go before trials June 21-28 in Minnesota, Coletta avoided overtraining by pushing his body to what he estimated was 80 percent. The strategy paid off when he shaved 13 seconds off his best time in the individual pursuit and helped his four-man pursuit team win an Olympic berth.
 
 ---
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) - Diego Maradona's manager flew to Spain on Wednesday to talk with club officials in Seville about hiring the troubled soccer star, newspapers reported.
Meanwhile, Maradona told a judge he plans to resume his career following the July 1 end of his 15-month suspension for cocaine use.
"I came to tell the judge I'm going to play soccer again," Maradona told reporters Tuesday. "I feel great."
Maradona, 31, refuses to fulfill the final year of his contract with Napoli in the Italian League. Maradona stated several times during his suspension that he might not return to soccer at all.
But the most valuable player at the 1986 World Cup - won by Argentina - seems now to be concerned about where he'll play, not whether.
 
 ---
TOKYO (AP) - Led by American Orestes Destrade, the Pacific League's front-running Seibu Lions rapped out a record 13 hits in one inning and trounced the Fukuoka Daiei Hawks 17-3 Wednesday in Japanese baseball.
The previous Japanese record for hits in an inning was 12 by the Hanshin Tigers of the Central League in 1946 and 1969.
Lions batters had eight consecutive hits in the fifth inning, and then five more after Koji Akiyama lined out. Seibu scored 11 runs in the inning.
In all, the Lions had 23 hits, including a two-run homer Orestes Destrade. He has 25 homers to lead the league.

 

End of Document
