

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
February 10, 1994, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 773 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Liz McColgan, whose three-year contract with the London Marathon is one of the biggest in British running history, pulled out of this year's race.
McColgan said she wasn't in shape for the April 17 run. She also will miss next month's World Cross Country Championships at Budapest, Hungary.
"After last year's injury problems, it's been great to get back into full training, but time is against me," said McColgan, training in Gainesville, Fla. "I'm disappointed at missing the race but, at the moment, I can't do myself or the race justice.
McColgan, who has not run competitively since last May, has suffered a series of big-race disappointments, illnesses and injuries since winning the 10,000 meters at the world championships in 1991.
McColgan's absence from the marathon will be a major blow for the organizers, who signed her last year to a record $ 750,000, three-year contract.
McColgan, who finished third in last year's race, can still run in 1995 and 1996 to fulfill her part of the deal.
---
SOUTH HACKENSACK, N.J. (AP) - Bob Cousy has made a bold prediction - Shaquille O'Neal is "going to dwarf Michael Jordan."
"Shaquille in the next five years is going to be the most recognizable athlete in the world," Cousy said.
"With Magic and Michael and Bird gone, the NBA and the companies Shaquille represents basically have him to promote. He's going to make Michael Jordan, in terms of image, 0 that 39 of the country's top-paid soccer players have evaded $ 6 million in taxes, a newspaper reported Thursday.
Jornal do Brasil said the players include several members of Brazil's World Cup team.
The son of an Internal Revenue Service auditor showed his dad an album with decals of the country's top-paid 40 players. The auditor ran a computer check and discovered that only one declared his real salary.
The players will be asked to pay taxes based on their real salaries, Jornal do Brasil reported.
---
MONTREAL (AP) - Cammi Granato isn't used to seeing herself on a hockey card.
"Actually, it's kinda weird," she said. "I mean, I collect hockey cards myself and suddenly when you see yourself, well, it feels funny. If I see myself in a pack, I just flip past it."
Granato, a local favorite since she joined the Concordia University Stingers last month, is one of three female players featured on a hockey card.
The 22-year-old from of Downers Grove, Ill., appears in two editions of Classic cards produced by Atlanta-based Classic Games, Inc.
Granato is a forward like her brother, Tony, of the NHL's Los Angeles Kings.
"I signed a contract with Classic to do cards last summer," Granato said. "At first, the idea was for me and Tony on the front in a 'blood-line edition.'
"That idea got changed with just me on the front and me and Rob (another brother who plays at the University of Wisconsin) on the back."
Granato is rated as one of the top female players in the world. She spent four seasons at Providence College in Massachusetts, getting 135 goals and 110 assists in 93 games.
Granato has 18 goals and 24 assists in 12 games so far with Concordia and was named MVP of the annual Theresa Humes Invitational tournament last weekend.
Granato will attend her first card-signing show Sunday in Taunton, Mass.
"I attended a card show earlier this year where Tony was signing, so I know a little bit of what goes on," she said.
---
LONDON (AP) - The way Antonio Pettigrew was running, no one would mistake him for a world champion.
"Last year was hurting for me," said Pettigrew, winner of the 400-meter title at the 1991 World Championships.
This year, Pettigrew has a new mental approach and is working with weights.
"I figured if I'm going to be in the top 10, I'm going to have to take these steps," he said. "I want to be No. 1, not seven or eight.
"I started training in October instead of November. I did more with the weights. I never lifted weights before."
Still, it was the mental game that had been giving him as much of a problem as the physical.
"I'd be looking over at Michael Johnson, over at (Britons David Grindley and Roger Black, looking at my competitors, saying, 'I've got to knock off this person to be in the top 10,' " he said. "I've got to learn to concentrate on Antonio Pettigrew's race and nobody else's."
The results, so far, are mixed. Pettigrew finished third in the 400 at last Friday's Millrose Games at New York and fourth Sunday at the Mobil Invitational at Fairfax, Va.
Pettigrew's next race will be at the Britain-United States meet at Glasgow, Scotland, Saturday. With many big U.S. names skipping the meet, Pettigrew is his team's top attraction. And with Grindley out with an injury, Pettigrew is favored in the 400.
 Load-Date: February 10, 1994

 

End of Document
