

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
August 6, 1992, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 568 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: BEREA, Ohio
Body




Browns quarterback Bernie Kosar has established a scholarship fund for Cleveland public school students who attend Cleveland State University.
"I was able to attend college on a scholarship, and now it is particularly rewarding to assist young people reaching for the same opportunity," said Kosar of the two $ 2,500 scholarships.
Cleveland mayor Michael White said Kosar has a "big heart" for putting his name on the scholarship program.
Funds are raised through the Nestle Bernie Kosar Charity Classic, the golf tournament Kosar started last year.
The one-year awards will go toward tuition, fees and books for full-time students at Cleveland State. Kosar said that as the Kosar Classic grows, there will be more scholarships and larger awards.
---
BOGOTA, Colombia (AP) - From the custom-made prison he recently fled, drug chief Pablo Escobar approved the trade of a Colombian soccer star to an Italian club, Colombia's attorney general said.
In testimony before a congressional committee, Gustavo de Greiff said investigators discovered a document in which Escobar gave the go-ahead for the trade of Faustino Asprilla.
Rights to Asprilla, who played for the Atletico Nacional club of Medillin, Colombia, where Escobar's powerful cocaine trafficking cartel is based, were sold in May to Parma for an estimated $ 2 million.
De Greiff said the document was found in the Envigado prison from which Escobar and nine others fled June 22.
Escobar is a big soccer fan and is said to control the rights to several of Colombia's top players through front-men. Last year, Atletico Nacional goalkeeper Rene Higuita reportedly visited him at the prison without authorization, prompting the government to fire an army officer in charge of security at the facility.
---
ITHACA, N.Y. (AP) - Ithaca College will rename its football field for Jim Butterfield, who has coached the Bombers to three NCAA Division III championships.
South Hill Field will be rededicated as Jim Butterfield Stadium when the Bombers open their home schedule Sept. 19 against Montclair State.
Butterfield, entering his 26th year at Ithaca, has an overall record of 191-65-1 and guided the Bombers to Division III championships in 1979, 1988 and 1991.
---
LONDON (AP) - England's Arsenal soccer club has 8,000 new supporters guaranteed never to cause a riot, jeer their own team, or complain about anything.
Painted on a giant 35-foot high, 140-foot long mural, the fake fans, complete with amplified cheering and crowd noise, will hide an ugly building site at the northern end of the Gunners' Highbury ground.
The club was forced by British government safety regulations to demolish the old North Bank stand, where fans stood throughout the game, to build a new section with seats.
The $ 42 million redevelopment won't be ready for months, so rather than start the season next week with an empty building site at one end, club management hit on the mural idea.
The mural shows the new section when finished, complete with crowd. Noise from other sections will be amplified from the mural to complete the atmosphere.
---
LUBBOCK, Texas (AP) - Teresa McMillan, a member of Texas Tech's Southwest Conference championship women's team, is heading for Brazil to play basketball.
McMillan, who averaged 10.4 points and 6.0 rebounds a game last season, made the SWC all-tournament team as both a junior and senior.
McMillan signed with Esports Clube Santo Andre of Sao Paulo.

 

End of Document
