

Names in the News
The Associated Press
July 17, 1993, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 735 words
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




Burt Reynolds says fans shouldn't worry about the details of his divorce from Loni Anderson.
"I've been around long enough to know, thank God, that next month or next week my story will be on the bottom of the bird cage," Reynolds said Friday.
The star of CBS-TV's "Evening Shade" said millions of people get divorced or separated every day, but "when two well-known people do the same thing they are headline news.
"Like everyone else we are all human with human frailties," Reynolds said.
Reynolds, 57, and Anderson, 47, married in 1988 and have a 4-year-old adopted son, Quinton. They announced their plan to divorce two weeks ago.
---
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) - Guns 'N' Roses got into some trouble before their concert here, but everything was cleared up just before they hit the stage.
Members of the rock group were charged with cocaine possession and indecent exposure Friday, but the charges were dropped an hour before they performed.
A former state intelligence agency officer, Juan Imbesi, filed the charges, saying band members bought 50 grams of cocaine from dealers in their hotel.
Federal Judge Nerio Bonifatti ordered the band's hotel rooms searched for drugs, but nothing was found, radio station Rivadavia reported.
Imbesi also accused the group's guitarist, Slash, of indecent exposure, saying he posed nude Thursday in front of a 12th-floor hotel window in view of hundreds of teen-age fans in the street below.
The judge had Slash to agree in writing not to expose himself, Rivadavia said.
The group later performed before some 70,000 people at River Plate Stadium.
---
ST. LOUIS (AP) - Ben Chavis, director of the NAACP, told delegates of the United Church of Christ and the Christian Church gathered for a convention here that they should unite for a brighter future.
Chavis, who was executive director of the UCC before taking the helm of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored people this year, said Thursday that unity was crucial for the improvement of the two churches.
"Be together in action and motion and then we can come together to make the world a better place," he said. "Either we can go forward or backward, I want to go forward."
About 12,000 members of the two predominately black denominations are meeting through Tuesday to worship and study together, and to consider several resolutions on human rights.
---
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - St. Louis country music fans were in for some music tonight from the duo Brooks & Dunn, and some victims of flooding in the region were in for some money.
The duo was to charge $ 5 per autograph before the concert, then match the total amount collected for flood relief, spokeswoman Nancy Russell said Friday. Proceeds were to go to a relief fund in St. Louis.
Brooks & Dunn are known for their No. 1 hits "Boot Scootin' Boogie," "Brand New Man" and "Neon Moon."
---
MONTE RIO, Calif. (AP) - George Bush and Ronald Reagan may not run the country anymore, but they're still memebers of a secretive, all-male club that's retreating into the woods today for its yearly pow-wow.
Some of the richest and most powerful men in the United States are expected to attend the 121-year old Bohemian Club's annual Bohemian Grove encampment among the redwoods north of San Francisco.
Local officials say they've been alerted to expect many government officials, including members of the Reagan and Bush cabinets. Many industry and media leaders also belong to the club.
The annual two-week retreat usually draws protests against government policies and the club's exclusion of women. This year, however, no organized protest is planned because of President Clinton's election, said Mary Moore, an organizer of past protests.
Clinton's new White House counselor David Gergen - a former advisor to presidents Nixon and Reagan - resigned from the club earlier this year.
---
CLAREMORE, Okla. (AP) - Larry Gatlin hasn't said he's hanging up the saddle and ropes he uses in "The Will Rogers Follies," but the director of the Will Rogers Memorial is flying to New York to pick the originals.
Joe Carter, director of the museum in Claremore, said the saddle, ropes and other Rogers memorabilia are no longer needed because the Broadway show closes Sunday.
"The Will Rogers Follies" got won seven Tony awards in 1991, including best musical.
A saddle, ropes, chaps, a hat and other artifacts have been on display at the Palace Theater since the show opened in April 1991.

 

End of Document
