

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
May 10, 1995, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 675 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: BOSTON
Body




Julius Erving talked basketball with Gov. William F. Weld on Wednesday.
Dr. J., in town on personal business, met the governor as Weld arrived at the Park Plaza Hotel and Towers for a prayer breakfast.
Erving immediately launched into a discussion about basketball and the success of his alma mater, Massachusetts. Erving, who played for the Minutemen in the early 1970s, retains the school's highest scoring average, 26.3 points per game.
"I'm pretty proud of UMass," said Erving, now a businessman and commentator for NBC Sports. "If they had had Michael Williams and (Edgar) Padilla, they would have done pretty well."
Williams, a guard, was suspended from the team toward the end of the season, while Padilla, also a guard, hurt his ankle during the NCAA tournament.
Weld, apparently caught off-guard by Erving's level of detail, said he had confidence the Minutemen would go farther in the tournament next year. This year they lost in the fourth round to Oklahoma State University.
"Coach Cal is in full control," Weld told Erving, referring to Coach John Calipari.
---
DENVER (AP) - If Michael Jordan can do it, so can Andres Galarraga, at least, Galarraga's agent thinks so.
Galarraga is launching his own line of shoes and sportswear to be sold in Denver and Venezuela, Galarraga's native country.
"How big is Michael Jordan in America?" said agent Fernando Cuza. "Well, that's how big Andres is in Venezuela. Surveys show he's the most popular person in that country."
Galarraga, the Colorado Rockies first baseman known as the Big Cat, introduced his signature line of shoes and sportswear Tuesday.
Big Cat includes 11 styles of adult and children's footwear from baseball cleats to hiking boots along with a variety of active wear such as T-shirts, baseball caps and warm-ups.
Denver will serve as a test market for the merchandise company, whose primary U.S. target is Hispanic shoppers in major markets, Cuza said. If Big Cat stuff is well received, they could be sold in other U.S. regions, primarily those with large Hispanic populations.
Although many of his Rockies teammates are under contract to wear baseball spikes made by Nike, Reebok and other established manufacturers, Galarraga said he'd be happy to have them wear his brand.
---
JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) - South African rugby fans are being asked to learn Zulu for the cause - the national team's new anthem is a traditional African work song.
When team manager Morne du Plessis announced the choice Tuesday, he called on fans, most of whom are white, to learn "Shosholoza", a song that black South Africans have sung for decades at mines and factories, as well as soccer games and anti-apartheid rallies.
The song opens with a shout of "shosholoza", meant to mimic the sound of a steam train. The lyrics, sung to a slow, driving tune, extoll the virtues of group effort.
Rugby here is trying to shake its image as a white sport, with training programs in black areas; a publicity campaign featuring Chester Williams, the only non-white player on the national squad; and now "Shosholoza" as South African rugby's first official fight song.
Later this month, South Africa will host 15 other teams in the 1995 Rugby World Cup. The tournament was seen as a milestone in the country's return to international sports after years of isolation because of apartheid, which ended last year with an historic all-race vote.
---
GLASGOW, Scotland (AP) - Everton forward Duncan Ferguson was found guilty Wednesday of assaulting an opposing player with a head-butt in a Scottish league game 13 months ago.
After a two-day trial at Glasgow Sheriff Court that included videotape of the incident and testimony from officials and both players, sheriff Alexander Eccles ruled that Ferguson deliberately attacked Raith Rovers defender John McStay while playing for Rangers in April 1994.
"I would take the view on the evidence that the action by the accused was not accidental but it was deliberate," Eccles said.
Sentencing was deferred until May 25. Ferguson could get up to three months in jail or a $ 8,000 fine.
 Load-Date: May 10, 1995

 

End of Document
