

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
May 21, 1991, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 552 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: ST. LOUIS
Body




Cris Carpenter is no overnight sensation with his 4-1 record and 2.89 earned-run average in 16 relief appearances for the St. Louis Cardinals.
Since 1988, Carpenter has bounced between starting and relieving and between the Cardinals and the minors. A year ago, after being sent to Triple-A Louisville as a starter, he lost seven straight games before finishing 10-8.
"My arm was done. I pitched the last half of the season throwing about 80 miles an hour," he said.
Carpenter credits Cardinals pitching coach Joe Coleman with the turnabout by teaching him the split-fingered fastball, or forkball.
"Hopefully, that pitch and the acquisition of Joe Coleman as pitching coach is going to turn my career around," the former Georgia All American said.
The way Carpenter learned the new pitch impressed manager Joe Torre.
"All of a sudden, things started falling into place," Torre said.
---
TOKYO (AP) - Former major league baseball players are not the only athletes finding new careers in Japan.
Retired Brazilian star Zico, at age 38, signed with the Sumitomo Metal Industries soccer team on Tuesday.
A report in Rio de Janeiro said the three-year deal was worth $$3.3 million, but Japan's Kyodo News Service put its value at $$1.5 million.
Zico said he would start playing for the Japanese team in August.
"I am so happy Sumitomo has given me a chance to play soccer again. I will try my best for Sumitomo as I did on several other teams in South America and Europe in the past," said Zico, whose real name is Arthur Antunes Coimbra.
Zico started playing soccer at age 14. He has played in World Cups in 1978, 1982 and 1986 and has scored 66 goals for Brazilian national teams, second only to Pele. He retired in 1989 and became his country's sports minister. Zico quit that job last month.
----
AUBURN, Ala. (AP) - Pat Dye said he is not worried about the surgery he faces Friday, and that he wants it done so he can coach Auburn football for another decade.
He will undergo an elective procedure called "distal splenorenal shunt," an operation to relieve pressure in the vein leading to the liver. Doctors will reroute the vein, which carries blood from the spleen to the renal vein, which leads to the kidneys and eventually the heart.
A series of tests last December showed that Dye has a liver disease caused by too much iron.
He decided on the surgery, he said, "because I wanted to take care of the problem and get on back to work."
Dye, 51, said he is "completely comfortable and confident" about the surgery, to be performed at Emory Hospital in Atlanta.
"I don't really know how I'm supposed to feel," he said, "because I've never had an operation in my life. I know anytime they lay you down and open you up, you've got a chance of not waking up.
Dye said he decided on the surgery because he wants to coach at Auburn "for as long as they'll have me."
In his 10 years at Auburn, his teams have won 89 games and four Southeastern Conference championships and have played in nine straight bowls.
---
MEMPHIS, Tenn. (AP) - In a switch on a familiar happening, an Italian basketball player has signed with an American team. Claudio Coldebella, a 23-year-old guard with Knorr Bologna, signed with the Dayton Wings of the World Basketball League. The 6-foot-4 Coldebella averaged 11.7 points a game this season in the Italian League.

 

End of Document
