

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
January 4, 1995, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 599 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: BRASILIA, Brazil
Body




Soccer legend Pele has his sights set on the 2004 Olympics and the 2006 World Cup.
Pele - or rather, Special Secretary of Sports Edson Arantes do Nascimento - said Tuesday he would do "everything in my reach" to bring the Olympics to Rio de Janeiro and the World Cup to Brazil.
"I want to remind everyone that although I have no government experience, I didn't arrive yesterday in the world of sports," Pele said.
Pele, 54, a surprise in the cabinet of new President Fernando Henrique Cardoso, stole the limelight from other ministers when he took office Tuesday.
"I feel like I did when I defended the 1958 Brazilian team: apprehensive and nervous … beside monsters like Didi, Zito, Nilton Santos and 'Mane' Garrincha," Pele said. "That's how I feel now, inexperienced as a minister but surrounded by stars."
---
HARRISBURG, Pa. (AP) - Gov.-elect Tom Ridge said he doesn't put much stock in polls after Penn State finished second behind Nebraska in the final Associated Press and USA Today-CNN college football rankings.
"So the polls say the Nittany Lions are No. 2. I've been No. 2 in a few polls myself and can tell you firsthand they are not always right," said Ridge, a Republican congressman from Erie who came from obscurity to beat Lt. Gov. Mark Singel in November.
Ridge, who will be inaugurated Jan. 17, offered to rewrite the results for Lions coach Joe Paterno.
"I will issue an official proclamation declaring The Associated Press and Cable News Network football polls to be null and void within the borders of Pennsylvania," Ridge told Paterno in a letter. "In Pennsylvania, at least, the Nittany Lions will be No. 1."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Gil McDougald, a star third baseman for the New York Yankees who gradually went deaf after being hit by a line drive during batting practice in 1955, has regained some hearing with an electronic ear implant.
McDougald, 66, underwent an operation in November in which he received a cochlear implant. The device was tested Tuesday and deemed a success.
McDougald's reaction was recounted today in The New York Times.
"I'm going to count to five," audiologist Betsy Bromberg said after the device was turned on. "Do you hear me?"
"Oh yeah. Wow, this is exciting," McDougal responded.
Tears formed in McDougald's eyes as he realized he was hearing voices.
"I have a problem," he said. "My voice, gee, it sounds terrible.'
---
STOUGHTON, Mass. (AP) - Virginia's Mike Fisher and Indiana teammates Todd Yeagley and Brian Maissoneuve were picked Tuesday as finalists for the Hermann Trophy, awarded to the top U.S. college soccer player.
Tisha Venturini of North Carolina, Tiffeny Millbrett of Portland and Cindy Daws of Notre Dame are the finalists for the women's award. The winners will be announced Jan. 12 in Washington.
Fisher, a sophomore midfielder, scored 13 goals as the Cavaliers won their fourth consecutive NCAA title. Venturini, a finalist for last year's award, scored 21 goals, including eight in the NCAA tournament as the Tar Heels won their ninth consecutive title and 12th in 13 years.
---
SYRACUSE, N.Y. (AP) - When Syracuse Crunch rookie Yuri Kuznetsov won the AHL Player of the Week Award, he found out that the honor carried with it a donation of $ 500 in sticks in his name to a youth hockey organization.
Usually, the sticks go to a local group. Kuznetsov, however, chose to have them sent long distance, selecting "OB" Novosibirsk, the last team he played for in his native Siberia before turning pro. A case of pucks and a supply of Crunch souvenirs will accompany the sticks.
Kuznetsev has five goals and 11 assists in his first season in the AHL.
 Load-Date: January 4, 1995

 

End of Document
