

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
July 6, 1993, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 689 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: COLORADO SPRINGS, Colo.
Body




Middle distance runner Annette Peters and freestyle wrestler Bruce Baumgartner have been named the U.S. Olympic Committee's June sportswoman and sportsman of the month.
Peters, a 1992 Olympian, won the 3,000 and 1,500 meters at the USA/Mobil Championships in Eugene, Ore. The former University of Oregon runner won the 3,000 meters in 8:48.59 and then beat Alisa Hill and Suzy Hamilton in the 1,500 meters in a time of 4:11.53.
Baumgartner qualified for the U.S. wrestling team for a record 12th time in the 286-pound division by beating Tom Erickson 6-0 and 12-0. He will compete in the world championships Aug. 25-28 in Toronto. He also won the U.S. Open Grand Prix in Jersey City, N.J., in June.
He is the only American to win three Olympic medals - gold in 1984 and 1992 and silver in 1988. He has won a record 12 U.S. national titles, including 11 consecutively, and has not been beaten by an American wrestler since 1982.
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Former soccer star Socrates has joined the leftist Workers Party and is considering running for mayor, the Rio newspaper Jornal do Brasil said Tuesday.
Socrates, known for his outspoken political views in his days as a star for Corinthians and the Brazilian national team, reportedly signed with the party last Sunday.
The paper said Socrates is considering a bid for mayor of the small interior city of Ribeirao Preto, where he began his career in the 1970s with the local Botafogo club.
With Sao Paulo's Corinthians club in the 1980s, Socrates became one of Brazil's top players. His trademark was a behind-the back-pass with his heel that bewildered opponents.
---
MELBOURNE, Australia (AP) - Wimbledon doubles champions Mark Woodforde and Todd Woodbridge were named Tuesday to the Australian Davis Cup team for its quarterfinal match against Italy on July 16-18.
Woodforde also won the Wimbledon mixed doubles title with Martina Navratilova.
The other two eam members are Davis Cup veteran Wally Masur and clay court specialist Richard Fromberg.
Fromberg won the final spot ahead of Jason Stoltenberg, who was on the squad but did not play in a first-round victory over the defending champion United States.
Italy goes into the contest, to be played in Florence, without singles player Omar Camporese, who will have shoulder surgery.
The winner meets either France or India in the semifinals.
---
EDEN PRAIRIE, Minn. (AP) - Minnesota Vikings offensive tackle Gary Zimmerman says he's planning to retire as a result of his contract dispute with the team.
"I'm sick and tired of dragging my family through these long negotiations," he said Monday.
"I guess I could change my mind, but under National Football League rules, they could fine me big bucks if I came back," he said.
Zimmerman signed a two-year contract after last season for $ 950,000 a year, but became disenchanted after several top offensive linemen signed multi-million-dollar free agent contracts around the league.
The top five offensive linemen now make an average of $ 2.1 million per season.
---
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - Billy McCaffrey never stops working on his basketball game.
McCaffrey, who led Vanderbilt to its best season ever at 28-6 and the NCAA tournament's round of 16, just returned from a stint with the USA team. Now he's involved in a summer camp with games twice a week.
"This is what it's all about," McCaffrey said Monday at the start of the Southern Sports Medicine Summer Basketball League. "It's a good way to work on my individual game, keep it intact and stay in shape."
Vanderbilt teammate Ronnie McMahan is also at the camp.
---
IOWA CITY, Iowa (AP) - Iowa women's basketball coach Vivian Stringer, who guided the Hawkeyes to their first Final Four appearance this year, has signed a new five-year contract.
Stringer has a 237-60 record in 10 years at Iowa, including a 27-4 mark in the 1992-93 season. The new contract will pay her $ 117,872 a year, the university said Tuesday.
Iowa tied Ohio State for the Big Ten Conference championship this past season and reached the Final Four by winning the Mideast Regional. The Hawkeyes lost to Ohio State 73-72 in overtime in the national semifinals in Atlanta.

 

End of Document
