

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
May 6, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 476 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




General Norman Schwarzkopf is the recipient of the National Football Foundation's Gold Medal award for this year.
Announcement that the now retired general, commander of Operation Desert Storm, was selected for the award was made Thursday by foundation chairman Bill Pearce.
Previous winners included seven U.S. presidents: Hoover, Eisenhower, Kennedy, Nixon, Ford, Regan and Bush.
Schwarzkopf will receive the gold medal at the foundation's awards dinner Dec.7 in New York when the College Football Hall of Fame inducts its new members.
---
NICOSIA, Cyprus (AP) - Former heavyweight champion Muhammad Ali visited the shrine of the late Iranian leader Aytollah Ruhollah Khomeini near Tehran on Thursday, Iran's news agency said.
Ali, on a weeklong visit, laid a wreath at Khomeini's tomb on the southern outskirts of the Iranian capital "and prayed for the soul of the man who led the Islamic revolution to victory in 1979," according to the Islamic Republic News Agency.
The agency, which is monitored in Nicosia, said Ali was warmly received by Iranians at the shrine.
---
MADRID, Spain (AP) - Diego Maradona says the conditioning drills are getting too much for him and he may just pack in big-time soccer.
"I am leaving Seville… I'm not up to all those training sessions that a big club like Seville requires, " Maradona told Spain's Radio Cope in an early-morning program Thursday.
"Big-time competition is more and more an uphill struggle for me, I can't take it anymore."
The star from Argentina refused to return to Italy's Napoli team last fall after ending a 15-month suspension using cocaine.
After tough negotiations, Maradonna finally signed a contract estimated $ 8 million, one-season contract for Seville.
Maradona has scored just six goals in 33 games and Seville is in seventh place.
---
LONDON (AP) - Wimbledon, home of the world's only grass-court Grand Slam tennis tournament, is after more grass. Some local residents say their land has been trampled on enough.
The All England Club is anxious to take over a 71-acre golf course across the road, following Wednesday's decision by the local municipality to put the land up for sale.
"We are certainly interested in acquiring more land, especially land that is so close," said Chris Gorringe, chief executive of the All England Club.
That might be good news for tennis fans. But local residents who have campaigned for years about the crowds and traffic problems caused by the two-week tournament are furious.
They don't see why what what should be a large space of open parkland could become part of an expanding Wimbledon.
"The All England Club has so much financial muscle," said golf club chairman Trevor Orpwood. "They shout in Wimbledon and everyone else comes to attention.
"They sit there on the hill like a chameleon, flicking out their tongues and sucking in a bit of land when it becomes available."

 

End of Document
