

Names in the News
The Associated Press
July 1, 1993, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 714 words
Byline: AP Photos NY14, Bianca Jagger, Schwarzkopf
Dateline: GULFPORT, Miss.
Body




Twenty-three years after stepping on a mine in Vietnam, Robert H. Stewart learned the man who saved him was no ordinary hero - it was H. Norman Schwarzkopf.
Stewart was told by CBS reporters that Schwarzkopf, now a retired general, attended to Stewart's wounds in 1969. Stewart appeared on Wednesday night's CBS special, "Schwarzkopf in Vietnam; A Soldier Returns."
"Mines were going off everywhere," Stewart said, recalling the day his platoon was bringing medical supplies to a mortar unit that had wandered into a mine field. Schwartzkopf was hit in the face and chest when one exploded.
"I looked back at him and could see blood on him," said Stewart, now a jewelry repairman in Gulfport. "I was on the ground hollering for help. Schwarzkopf came to my rescue."
Schwarzkopf, then a lieutenant-colonel, calmed Stewart down, gave him morphine for the pain and ordered splints for his injured leg.
---
WASHINGTON (AP) - That was Rep. Robert Torricelli of New Jersey squiring a chic Bianca Jagger to the Democrats' annual fund-raising dinner.
But his office isn't making much of Monday night's date.
Spokesman Rob Henken said Wednesday that he tries to stay out of his boss's personal life.
The 41-year-old Englewood, N.J., congressman is chairman of the House Foreign Affairs subcommittee with jurisdiction over Central American affairs. He has been acquainted with Jagger, a Nicaraguan native, since she stopped by his office to discuss saving her country's rain forests.
Jagger, ex-wife of Mick Jagger, in the past has been seen on the arm of Sen. Christopher Dodd, D-Conn.
---
INDIANAPOLIS (AP) - The newsworthiness of photos of Julia Roberts and Lyle Lovett outweigh the couple's desire for privacy, a judge ruled.
Film of the two on their wedding day was confiscated from a People magazine photographer. U.S. District Judge Sarah Evans Barker ruled Tuesday that the photographer can have the film back.
"They were people who had inserted themselves into the public light," Barker said of Lovett and Roberts, who were married Sunday in Marion, Ind.
Steve Kagan said he photographed the couple on stage during Lovett's concert that night in Noblesville. Seven rolls were confiscated by security guards.
Kagan and the magazine sued. Lovett's attorney, Max W. Hittle Jr., said the film belonged to the singer because Lovett has the right to control the use of his image.
---
ATLANTA (AP) - Coretta Scott King says the policy banning homosexuals from the military is similar to the one that once kept blacks segregated in the armed forces.
Mrs. King said Wednesday she is "counting on the president to honor his pledge" to lift the ban.
"The arguments that have been raised in favor of the ban are the same arguments that were so often raised against racial integration," Mrs. King said in a news conference at her husband's grave site.
"I don't believe you can stand up for freedom for one group of people and deny it to others," she said.
President Clinton said during his campaign that the military should not exclude anyone, including homosexuals. He recently has backed away from the idea of unilaterally lifting the ban.
---
DETROIT (AP) - A book written and autographed by Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. has been returned to civil rights pioneer Rosa Parks.
Parks discovered her copy of "Strength to Love" was missing in July 1992, when Atlanta businessmen Perry Spell and William Brock asked her for $ 2,500 to return it.
Spell said he found the book in Atlanta office building. He gave it back to Parks on Wednesday.
The book, written in 1963, contains a handwritten inscription, "To Rosa Parks for all that you have done for your fellow Negroes and for all America, Martin Luther King Jr."
Parks' refusal in 1955 to give up her bus seat to a white man sparked the Montgomery, Ala., bus boycott, a pivotal event in the civil rights movement.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Rod Stewart will kick off his North American tour, called "Unplugged … and Much More," on July 28 in Seattle.
From there, Stewart will lead a 12-piece band, an 18-piece orchestra and singers through nine states, Canada and Europe before heading back to the United States for shows in major cities, his spokesman Paul Freundlich said Wednesday.
Stewart's latest album, "Unplugged … and Seated," has sold more than 1.3 million copies in the United States.

 

End of Document
