

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
March 1, 1995, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 718 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: BICESTER, England
Body




Going fast is how Formula One racing driver Damon Hill makes his living.
On Wednesday, going fast cost Hill a seven-day suspension of his driving license and a $ 250 fine.
Hill was sentenced by magistrates after pleading guilty to driving his Renault company car at 102 mph on a highway north of Oxford on Dec. 5. The speed limit is 70 mph.
Hill said he was on his way to a TV interview when he was stopped.
Hill is the No. 1 driver for the Williams-Renault Grand Prix team. He finished second to Michael Schumacher in the world championship standings last season.
Hill's lawyers said the ban could affect the driver's eligibility for the opening Grand Prix race of the season in Brazil on March 26. However, officials indicated Hill was under no real threat of missing the opening race.
Hill will be able to apply to the Royal Automobile Club (RAC) for an International A license when his suspension ends finishes next Wednesday. That licence can be issued in a few hours for the payment of an additional fee.
Hill would then have to apply to motor racing's world governing body, FIA, for a super licence.
It was not the first time Hill had been stopped for speeding.
Last year, while traveling to Silverstone for the British Grand Prix, Hill was stopped going 120 mph. When he told police who he was and where he was going, he was let off with a caution.
---
TOKYO (AP) - Chad Rowan of Hawaii, a sumo wrestling grand champion, plans to apply for Japanese citizenship, a sports newspaper reported Wednesday.
Rowan, 25, is the first non-Japanese wrestler to attain sumo's highest rank.
Nikkan Sports quoted Rowan, known by his sumo name of Akebono, as saying, "I told my mother about the citizenship when I returned to Hawaii in February and she did not oppose it."
Akebono could not be reached Wednesday for comment.
Former junior champion Takamiyama, or Jesse Kuhaulua of Hawaii, was the first American sumo wrestler to become a Japanese citizen.
Another Hawaiian wrestler, Fiamalu Penitani, has applied for Japanese citizenship, and last February, Konishiki, or Salevaa Fuauli, also from Hawaii, was granted Japanese citizenship.
---
SENLIS, France (AP) - Five top jockeys, including the son of France's all-time leading rider, went on trial Wednesday along with 19 other people charged with the use or sale of cocaine and heroin.
Four of the riders admitted using drugs, saying it eased pressure on them and helped them lose weight.
But Eric Saint-Martin, 29, the son of French racing legend Yves Saint-Martin, has denied ever using or selling drugs.
According to investigators, a supplier named Eric Fontaine began providing drugs obtained in the Netherlands to one of the five jockeys, Dominique Boeuf.
Boeuf allegedly provided heroin and cocaine to fellow rider William Mongil. Meanwhile, Fontaine allegedly began supplying two other jockeys, Olivier Doleuze and Pascal Marion.
The four conceded they were addicted to drugs, but said they have broken the habit since their arrest last year.
Fontaine told police he also had sold cocaine to Saint-Martin, who denied this in testimony Wednesday.
---
LAS VEGAS (AP) - UNLV wants basketball coach Tim Grgurich, sidelined since early January, to make some decisions about his future.
Interim president Kenny Guinn said he plans to meet with Grgurich Thursday and come to an agreement on the coach's future.
Grgurich coached only six games after being hired to take over from Rollie Massimino before being hospitalized with what was said to be symptoms relating to exhaustion.
He has since come back to lead some practices, but has been away from the sidelines during Runnin' Rebel games.
Guinn said he wants Grgurich to remain as the head coach, and said he hoped Grgurich would tell him that he wants to return to the court.
"We need to bring closure to some of the uncertainties," Guinn said. "Tim's our coach and we want him to remain our coach."
The meeting comes amid widespread speculation that Grgurich's problems are more emotional than physical. Grgurich was hospitalized for a week after coaching his final game Jan. 5, and has since been treated by a California doctor.
Grgurich was a longtime assistant to former coach Jerry Tarkanian, and was involved in the bitter dispute between former administrators and the basketball program that led to Tarkanian's ouster three years ago.
 Load-Date: March 1, 1995

 

End of Document
