

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
March 14, 1994, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 889 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Queen Elizabeth II handed a silver baton to three athletes Monday to launch the relay for this summer's Commonwealth Games in Canada.
The hand-carved Queen's Baton, similar to the torch used for the Olympics, contains the message Elizabeth will read when she opens the Games at Victoria, British Columbia, Aug. 18.
London Marathon champion Eamonn Martin, world 200-meter freestyle swimming champion Karen Pickering and Canadian decathlete Michael Smith ran the first symbolic leg of the relay.
They ran a few hundred yards from Buckingham Palace to Marlborough House, where they presented the baton to Chief Emeka Anyauku, secretary general of the Commonwealth Secretariat.
The baton will travel to the five regions of the Commonwealth, where symbolic relays will be held before reaching Ottawa April 11.
 
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) - Troubled soccer star Diego Maradona might play in a March 23 exhibition match against Brazil and will "do everything possible" to play in this year's World Cup.
Maradona was one of 19 Argentine players selected Sunday by national team coach Alfio Basile for the game at Recife, Brazil, between the two World Cup favorites.
"I won't be in good shape, but I could join the bench and play some minutes," Maradona said.
Maradona has not played since leaving the Argentine league team Newell's Old Boys six weeks ago, citing nagging leg injuries.
He practiced with the national team for the first time in four months Monday. "I felt very good, taking into account that it's been a while since I've done anything," he said, after running for 45 minutes. "At the end … I was tired."
On Feb. 2, the day after he and Newell's announced their separation, Maradona shot at journalists outside his home with a compressed-air rifle. Five journalists were slightly injured. Five days later, Maradona scuffled with a journalist in a restaurant.
Since then, he has remained out of the public eye, but apparently has made little effort to stay in playing condition.
"For the World Cup, I'll have the time necessary to put myself physically right," he said Sunday.
Maradona starred for the Italian club Napoli until testing positive for cocaine use after a 1991 game. After serving a 15-month suspension from international soccer, he played a year with the Spanish team Sevilla, then signed with Newell's.
 
HELTONVILLE, Ind. (AP) - People in Heltonville won't talk to anyone about favorite son Damon Bailey.
A red, white and blue sign on the outskirts of the small town in Lawrence County signals that this is "The Home of Damon Bailey." The Heltonville Elementary School has a new "Wall of Fame" featuring the Indiana star.
A favorite pastime among school children is to debate which of them is related to Bailey and which is not, going to great lengths to search their family trees for even the remotest connections.
But along with the town's pride is a responsibility to provide Bailey with a place to escape, where he can just relax.
"The community is very protective," Doug Martin, principal at the elementary school, said. "It's part of the community rules that if someone comes to town asking where Damon lives, you don't say anything."
Whenever an outsider asks about Bailey, the community's 500 residents refer all questions to the most official place in town, Martin's office.
 
HIGH POINT, N.C. (AP) - NASCAR driver Bobby Labonte and his wife were forced to crash-land in an airplane Sunday night at an airport in Winston-Salem. No one was hurt.
The Labontes and the pilot were returning to their Thomasville home from the Atlanta Motor Speedway, where Bobby Labonte participated in a NASCAR race Sunday.
The pilot radioed to officials at the Z. Smith Reynolds Airport that he was having difficulty opening the landing gear, Labonte told WSJS.
"We worked on it and worked on it and just never could get it down," Labonte said. "So we knew what we had to do and we talked it over with the pilot … and we said, 'well, everything will be OK."
The pilot brought the aircraft down on its belly, the High Point Enterprise and WSJS said.
"After they decided to land, it just sat down and skidded to a stop," Labonte's brother, Terry said.. "There were hardly any sparks, but they stopped real quick."
 
SPRINGFIELD, Mass. (AP) - In 1901, Indian Motocycle Co. built its first motorcycle here, and Americans fell in love with two-wheeled power.
Today, original Indian bikes are collectors' items and at least five parties are fighting for the right to revive one of the best-known names in motorcycle history and put a modern Indian on the road.
"I don't think any of us realized what we had when we went into this," attorney William Sweeney, of Hartford, Conn., said. "The mystique is incredible."
Sweeney represents a state receiver trying to untangle the finances of North Carolina promoter Philip Zanghi.
Zanghi claimed the trademark in 1990, but his finances collapsed and he wound up in bankruptcy court in Massachusetts and Connecticut. The Indian trademark was supposed to be auctioned last week, but an Australian creditor blocked the auction by filing a motion that Zanghi's case be moved to North Carolina.
Maurits Haytim-Langridge has offered $ 600,000 for the bankruptcy court's interests. Even before the auction was scheduled, a Japanese company offered $ 500,000 for the rights to the Indian name, bankruptcy trustee David Noonan said.
 Load-Date: March 14, 1994

 

End of Document
