

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
January 8, 1995, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 482 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: STATE COLLEGE, Pa.
Body




Although Penn State's two top players probably will opt for the NFL next season, most of those who led the second-ranked Nittany Lions to a 12-0 season and a Big Ten title will be back.
Quarterback Kerry Collins and Heisman runner-up Ki-Jana Carter received much of the credit for Penn State leading the nation in total offense and scoring.
But they say their jobs were made easier because of an experienced offensive line. Four starters on the line, including All-American Jeff Hartings, will be back.
The only other offensive starters leaving are center Bucky Greeley and tight end Kyle Brady.
Some players think the Nittany Lions can continue the nation's longest winning streak, 17 games, and compete for the national title that barely eluded them this season.
 
 ---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Pele, the nation's new minister of sports, says he won't be intimidated by the Brazilian power structure.
"I won't be a pawn in the hands of business or government. I'm vaccinated and immune to corruption," the man generally considered the greatest soccer player ever said in an interview with Rio daily Jornal do Brasil.
Pele recalled that in 1972 the military government wanted to use his image in a soccer tournament to gain popular support for the regime.
"I wasn't a pawn then, and I won't be one now," Pele said.
Pele also said in a page-long interview published Sunday that he has no great political aspirations.
"I accepted the job to work with President Fernando Henrique Cardoso, and he's the coach," Pele said. "I don't want his post."
 
 ---
HYANNIS, Neb. (AP) - For Janet Shepherd, waiting in line to talk to a member of the national champion Nebraska Cornhuskers was no big deal.
After all, the retired rancher's wife has known defensive tackle Terry Connealy all his life and followed his athletic career through high school and college.
"He's always been a hard-working kid," she said. "He's one of our whole town's family."
Shepherd was among 500 people who turned out to greet Connealy, the Huskers' senior defensive captain, and fellow Hyannis native Chris Brown, who wears the Herbie Husker costume at Nebraska sporting events.
 
 ---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - World Cup soccer star Romario says he will be on a mission when he returns to his native Brazil from Spain.
Romario de Souza Farias, 29, chosen as the top athlete of 1994 by the French sports daily L'Equipe, apparently is about to join the Flamengo club.
He wants to help the country's street children. Romario was born in a shantytown, and fame has not erased his memory.
The newly-elected president of Flamengo, Kleber Leite, told the Rio daily O Globo, "Romario is more than a player, he's a message to our fans."
Leite said Romario, who has been playing in Barcelona, is the team's centennial birthday present to its fans. Flamengo reportedly will give the Spanish club $ 4 million, and Romario a salary of $ 1.5 million for 1995.
 Load-Date: January 8, 1995

 

End of Document
