

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
October 8, 1992, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 572 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Phil Rizzuto, a former New York Yankees shortstop and American League MVP, won the first S. Rae Hickok Belt in 1950, and former Oakland Raiders quarterback Ken Stabler won the last in 1976.
In between, stars like running back Jim Brown, golfer Ben Hogan and heavyweight champions Rocky Marciano and Muhammad Ali all took a turn wearing the belt, which honors the Professional Athlete of the Year.
Now, the likes of basketball star Michael Jordan, pitcher Roger Clemens and heavyweight champion Evander Holyfield will get a chance to win the belt.
National voting by sports writers and sportscasters is scheduled to begin in January, with the 1993 winner to be honored in January 1994 at the annual Touchdown Club dinner in Washington.
The Hickok Company was acquired in the early 1970s by Tandy-Brands Corporation.
---
DURHAM, N.C. (AP) - A new course at Duke offers fans an inside look at the sport that has made the Research Triangle area famous - college basketball.
The course, offered in Duke's continuing education curriculum, is called "Insights Into College Basketball." It offers no credits or grades, but is already filled and has a waiting list of 100, The News & Observer of Raleigh reported.
The five-week course will be taught by Peter Gaudet, a member of Duke coach Mike Krzyzewski's national championship staff. Gaudet will emphasize the technical points of the game, but he'll also include plenty of anecdotal and historical tidbits.
The course will review scouting and recruiting techniques, offer quick facts about Duke players and include a tour of the Blue Devils locker room. And, for rabid Blue Devils' fans, Gaudet will explain how coaches deal with success and how they expect the team to fare this season.
---
ARMONK, N.Y. (AP) - Even after what he considered to be a mediocre season, New York Yankees first baseman Don Mattingly proved to be a most valuable asset to two Westchester groups working to help the disabled and mentally retarded.
Because of Mattingly's 184 hits and 86 RBIs this season, two companies contributed $ 35,600 to the Westchester Association for Retarded Citizens and the Westchester-Putnam Special Olympics, according to the Municipal Bond Investors Assurance Corp., one of the two companies.
Company spokesman Michael Ballinger said that MBIA and its holding company, Capital Re, pledged $ 100 per hit by Mattingly and $ 200 per RBI to the two charities. After a slow start, Mattingly finished with a .288 batting average.
This was the seventh season MBIA donated $ 100 for each Mattingly hit, bringing the total raised since 1986 to $ 134,500. For the fourth consecutive year, Capital Re pegged its donation on Mattingly's run production, and that has raised an additional $ 42,800.
---
ROME (AP) - Argentine President Carlos Menem said Thursday he hopes soccer superstar Diego Maradona will rejoin the national team and play for Argentina in the 1994 World Cup in the United States.
Maradona, one of the most well-known players in the world, began playing with Seville of Spain a few weeks ago after almost 18 months away from the international soccer scene because of a 15-month suspension for cocaine use.
"Maradona is an important figure for Argentina and it would be significant for all of us if he can rejoin the Argentine national team for the 1994 World Cup," Menem said of the player that led Argentina to the World Cup title in 1986 and to a second place finish behind West Germany in 1990.

 

End of Document
