

Names in the News
The Associated Press
April 30, 1994, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 694 words
Byline: AP Photo NY14 Kennedy, Bolton
Dateline: WALTHAM, Mass.
Body




Brandeis University offered Jeanne Kirpatrick an honorary degree, but teachers say some of her international policies were anything but honorable.
"We oppose the degree because she was the intellectual architect of Reagan administration policies that supported some of the Latin American regimes with the most repressive records," said Silvia Arrom, director of Latin American studies.
Faculty members voted 23-5 at a meeting to demand that Brandeis President Samuel O. Thier rescind the offer to the former U.S. ambassador to the United Nations. Thier refused.
At least 30 more of the school's 400 faculty members added their signatures to a petition opposing the degree. A Brandeis spokesman said it wasn't clear how many of the rest object.
Kirkpatrick is one of six people scheduled to receive honorary degrees on May 22. A telephone call Friday to her Georgetown University office went unanswered.
---
BOSTON (AP) - A Republican hoping to wrest the long-held Senate seat from Ted Kennedy says the Democrat won't win female voters by borrowing Hollywood machismo from Alec Baldwin.
"This draws women in, gets them to listen. Alec sure is a hunky movie star, but I don't know what he knows about health care or welfare reform," Janet Jeghelian said Friday.
Baldwin, star of such movies as "Malice" and "Prelude to a Kiss" was to be the main draw at a series of weekend Kennedy rallies at colleges, including the all-female Smith and Mount Holyoke.
Some thought Jeghelian's move might backfire.
"It's very condescending, because I know people here have their own political opinions and one movie star is not going to change those opinions," said Bethany Slingerland, 19, head of the Smith College Democrats.
Jeghelian is running unopposed for the GOP Senate nomination next fall.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - No more teardrops for The Isley Brothers. They'll enjoy a big chunk of profits from Michael Bolton's 1991 hit "Love Is a Wonderful Thing," a jury decided.
A federal jury Friday determined the song was worth 28 percent of the sales of the pop singer's album - "Time, Love and Tenderness." The hit song helped sell more than 10 million copies of the album.
"That's big time, that's big time," said John McNicholas, lawyer for Ronald, Rudolph and O'Kelly Isley. The exact amount will be figured later.
The Isleys sued Bolton in February, claiming the singer plagiarized their 1966 tune of the same name.
On Monday, the same panel decided Bolton borrowed significant elements of the earlier song. Bolton claimed he and his co-writer had never heard it.
Calls to Bolton's lawyer rang unanswered Friday.
The Isley Brothers had a string of hits in the 1960s, including "Twist and Shout" and "Lonely Teardrops."
---
CHARLESTON, W.Va. (AP) - Forget Oprah, Geraldo and Donahue. The Rev. Billy Graham says Americans would be better off tuning in to God.
"Many people are watching talk shows, and many of them talk about anything you can think of," Graham said Friday. "Many people get their advice and counsel not from a psychiatrist or psychologist or minister, they get it from those talk shows.
"That bothers me because they're having a great impact on a lot of people."
Television can't give people the answers they seek, he said.
"The polls we're seeing indicate there's a tremendous hunger for spiritual things and for a new day, and moral principles and moral stamina in this country because we have seen a lowering of our morals," Graham said.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - The state is taking another look at Rick James' assault case.
The "Super Freak" singer was found guilty in September of assaulting and imprisoning a woman at a hotel in 1992. He later pleaded guilty to assaulting another woman at his Hollywood Hills home the previous year.
State officials are investigating allegations a district attorney's investigator supplied heroin to a jailed witness who testified against James.
Shortly after the allegations surfaced, James made a deal with prosecutors to stay his 5-year prison sentence. A judge ordered him sent to a drug rehabilitation program instead.
The investigator resigned in February. The attorney general's office would not say whether it may file criminal charges against him.
 Load-Date: April 30, 1994

 

End of Document
