

Names In The Game
 The Associated Press
November 15, 1995, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 518 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Julie Krone rode her 3,000th career winner when she guided Dustin's Dream to a one-half length victory in Aqueduct's fourth race on Wednesday.
It was the latest milestone for the 32-year-old Krone, who by far is the winningest female jockey.
Patricia Ann Cooksey is next with 1,903 victories.
Krone is also the only woman to ride a winner in a Triple Crown race, bringing Colonial Affair home first in the 1993 Belmont Stakes.
---
GOLD COAST, Australia (AP) - With a little help from some Australian promoters, Swedish star Annika Sorenstam hopes to be in New York on Monday to accept the LPGA tour's Rolex Player of the Year Award.
After she finishes play Sunday in the Australian Ladies Masters, tournament officials have arranged for a helicopter to whisk the U.S. Women's Open winner from the course to an airport where she will board a private jet to fly her to Sydney in time to make her connection to New York.
Sorenstam, 24, led the LPGA tour money list with $ 666,533 and also topped the European tour with $ 205,912. In addition to her U.S. Open victory, she won the LPGA tour's GHP Heartland Classic and the World Championship of Women's Golf and the European tour's OVB Damen Open and Hennessy Cup.
She also will receive the Vare Trophy for her tour-best 71.0 scoring average during the awards luncheon at the Essex House.
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Pele, soccer's retired superstar, is urging black Brazilians to vote for black politicians as a way of improving their social status and combating racism.
Pele, the government's Minister of Sports, was quoted Wednesday in the Rio daily Jornal do Brasil as saying that black Brazilians would not move up socially if they didn't change the racial makeup of Congress.
"If the black man wants to improve his social level, he must put our people in Congress - people who will defend our race and resolve our problems," said Pele.
But he also spoke of a brightside to the situation.
"The lack of black congressmen has a good side in that today, politicians have a bad reputation of being corrupt. At least blacks don't carry that burden," he said.
About half of this country's 150 million people are black or of mixed race.
Brazilian blacks are prominent in music, entertainment and sports but are almost totally absent from high government and military posts.
---
ASPEN, Colo. (AP) - A county court judge rejected a request from Indy car driver Danny Sullivan, asking the judge to impose a restraining order on his ex-girlfriend because he claims she is harassing him.
Sullivan, winner of the 1985 Indianapolis 500, was arrested Sept. 17 on suspicion of grabbing the throat of his girlfriend, Julie Nini. The two have a 5-year-old son. The driver goes to trial on third-degree assault and domestic violence charges March 7.
Sullivan's lawyer asked Judge Tam Scott to impose a restraining order on Nini. Sullivan says he has not been able to answer his phone since September because Nini won't stop calling him.
Scott said he didn't have the authority to issue a restraining order in the case, but said even if he did have the authority, he didn't think it was necessary.
 Load-Date: November 15, 1995

 

End of Document
