

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
May 16, 1995, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 538 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: HOOVER, Ala.
Body




Rob Dibble is back in the major leagues.
The reliever was called up Sunday by the Chicago White Sox from Double-A Birmingham, where he was 0-1 with one save and a 7.86 ERA in eight games.
"That's what it's all about," said Dibble, who signed with the White Sox in February after missing most of last season with Cincinnati following arthroscopic surgery on his right shoulder. "My objective was to get myself ready to pitch in the major leagues. I've done that."
Dibble, 31, a former all-star with the Reds, had 13 strikeouts and allowed just one run and three hits in his final 6 2-3 innings at Birmingham.
"I wish I could have been up there the first two weeks of the season, but it might have been better for me down here, all things considered," Dibble said. "My velocity is not as great as it was when I was younger, but I'm hitting 97, 95 mph every time out. My fastball has good movement."
---
SAO PAULO, Brazil (AP) - Pele wants Diego Maradona to play in Brazil.
The pair met during the weekend in Rio de Janeiro and agreed that Pele Sports and Marketing would buy Maradona's rights.
"He told me he would like to play for Santos," Pele told Sao Paulo's TV Cultura on Monday.
Pele, Brazil's special minister for sports, is Santos' director of international affairs and his son Edinho is the team's starting goalie.
"I have it from the most reliable source possible that Maradona approached Pele asking for his help to get transferred to Brazil," Edinho said.
"It is definitely an appetizing possibility which we will carefully study," said Jose Paulo Fernandes, Santos' director. "The outcome of negotiations, which have just gotten under way, will depend on what kind of return we, or some other club, will get on our investment."
Maradona's world-wide suspension for testing positive to stimulants ends in September. He resigned two weeks ago as coach of the Racing Club of the Argentine first division.
---
PARKSVILLE, British Columbia (AP) - Los Angeles Kings goalie Grant Fuhr shot a 9-over-par 81 in the opening round of the Canadian Tour's spring qualifying tournament Monday.
Fuhr, making his fourth straight appearance in the event, was 2-over after 14 holes, but dropped seven strokes on the final four holes on the Moriningstar International course to drop into a tie for 117th place in the 155-man field.
Lionel Kunka of Kelowna shot a 5-under 67 to take a one-stroke lead in the 72-hole tournament. The field will be cut to the low 90 and ties after today's second round with the low 35 and ties earning cards for the 11-event tour.
---
KAMLOOPS, British Columbia (AP) - David Ling, a Quebec draft choice who had 135 points for the Ontario Hockey League's Kingston Frontenacs, was selected the Canadian Hockey League's player of the year Monday.
Ling, 20, selected 179th overall by the Nordiques in the 1993 draft, had 61 goals and 74 assists with 136 penalty minutes in 62 games.
Detroit defenseman Bryan Berard was the only double winner, taking rookie of the year honors and the top draft prospect award.
Former NHL player Craig Hartsburg was selected coach of the year after leading Guelph to the OHL's best record, while Kamloops' Nolan Baumgartner was honored as the top defenseman and Beauport's Martin Biron as the top goalie.
 Load-Date: May 16, 1995

 

End of Document
