

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
June 12, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 666 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: ALVIN, Texas
Body




Nolan Ryan will be looking down on his hometown from a vantage point near city hall.
The life-sized statue, which will show Ryan winding up to pitch, will be erected in downtown Alvin by early next year.
The council recently voted 6-1 to approve the funds, not to exceed $$52,000. Baseball approval is needed because because one of the teams for which Ryan has played is depicted on the statue.
Ryan, now with the Texas Rangers, also has played for the Houston Astros, California Angels and New York Mets.
The pitcher has given his approval for the statue, Mayor Allen Gray said.
A native of Alvin, Ryan still resides here with his family. He is regarded as the hometown hero in this city of 15,000 about 30 miles south of Houston.
"I think it'll draw tourists to Alvin," Gray told The Houston Chronicle. "He put Alvin on the map. We want to show respect for what he has done."
The council plans to pay for the statue with money from the city's hotel-motel tax.
---
NAPLES, Italy (AP) - When Diego Maradona is finished serving his 15-month suspension for using drug, he will be welcomed back by his Napoli team in the Italian soccer league.
"We hold Maradona in high esteem," club president Corradio Ferlaino said. "We hope that Maradona can play again with us. He still is an idol for Naples fans."
Maradona, the world's best known and highest paid soccer player, was suspended through June 30, 1992 after testing positive for cocaine use after a match in March.
On his return to Argentina, where he is captain of the national team, Maradona was arrested during a drug raid.
"We hope Diego can solve his problems soon and that he can resume action. We would be glad to have him with us," Ferlaino said.
---
ATLANTA (AP) - When San Diego's Tony Gwynn received the National League player of the week award last week, an error by the Atlanta Braves public relations department may have helped.
Gwynn hit .500 with four RBIs for the week. Jeff Blauser of the Braves also hit .500, but had three home runs and 13 RBIs.
Each team's public relations department is responsible for nominating its candidate before 2 p.m. EDT on Sunday to the league office in New York, which makes the selection. The Braves public relations department missed the deadline.
When it realized its error at 4:30 p.m. Sunday, a call was made to the league office but Katy Feeney, a NL spokeswoman, said that Gwynn already had been told he was the winner.
---
DENVER (AP) - The Denver Nuggets say any season ticket holders unhappy with the club's opening night performance next November, will be able to get their money back.
The pledge came during a raucous open forum Tuesday night when majority owner Robert Wussler and managing general partner Peter Bynoe were heavily criticized and accused of being "carpetbaggers" who led the franchise to a "catastrophic fall from respectability and credibility."
Wussler apologized for the Nuggets' 20-62 record and front-office turmoil.
At one point, he became exasperated. "What do you want us to do?" he asked. "Would you like us to sell the team? Would you like us to give the franchise away?"
Without pause, Kevin Nobles replied: "In a perfect dream world, yes. I would love it."
---
EASTON, Pa. (AP) - Former heavyweight champion Larry Holmes plans to auction some of his area business holdings next month, including a New Jersey hotel he has been trying to sell for three years.
Besides the Larry Holmes Commodore Inn in Alpha, N.J., Holmes said three Northampton Street properties in downtown Easton and one of his two gymnasiums will be sold to the highest bidder.
The three Northampton Street holdings include the Round One disco, John Henry's Restaurant and a parking lot across the street from the two businesses.
"I thought it would be nice to own the hotel, I'm getting tired of it. I'm tired of the nightclub and the bar business." Holmes said. "I'm just tired of owning things that put me to work. I don't want to work.
"I like to train. I like to fish. Those other things take the energy out of me."

 

End of Document
