

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
April 21, 1995, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 741 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: OKLAHOMA CITY
Body




Dallas Cowboys quarterback Troy Aikman, who grew up in Henryetta and spent his first two college years at Oklahoma, has given $ 10,000 to help victims of the car-bomb explosion.
Aikman donated $ 10,000 to the Oklahoma City chapter of Feed the Children, - half of it from the Troy Aikman Foundation, and the rest a personal donation.
"He was one of the first to donate," said George Mamo, a Feed the Children administrator. "He wanted Oklahomans to know his thoughts and prayers were with them."
In 1991, Aikman established the Troy Aikman Foundation to support the needs of dependent children.
---
LONDON (AP) - The feud between two leading Formula One drivers has escalated, with Ferrari's Gerhard Berger calling world champion Michael Schumacher a "liar" and a "clown."
The war of words heated up earlier this week when Schumacher criticized Berger for celebrating after being awarded first place, temporarily, in last month's Brazilian Grand Prix.
Schumacher finished first in his Benetton Williams, but was disqualified along with second-place finisher David Coulthard, for fuel irregularities. Berger, who finished third, was moved up to first.
However, on appeal last week, the world governing body reinstated the original placings.
"I cannot understand anyone celebrating a victory he achieved when he was one lap behind," Schumacher was quoted as saying this week in German newspapers. "If Berger would show as much talent as a driver as he does in public relations, he would win more races."
Berger responded by criticizing the way the German driver celebrated his victory at last year's San Marino Grand Prix after Ayrton Senna had been killed in the race.
About the celebration in Brazil, Berger asked, "What were we supposed to do, cry?
"He doesn't understand our celebrations, I understand even less his behavior at Imola last year when he jumped up and down like a clown after Senna's death."
---
BOWIE, Md. (AP) - The rent may be going up at the Washington Bullets practice court.
For 10 years the NBA team has paid Bowie State about $ 9,000 a year to practice at an old campus gym. But school administrators want president Nathanael Pollard Jr. to increase the price.
Steve Lienhard, Bowie State's director of procurement, said the school would have to charge $ 105,160 a year to cover fuel, utility and maintenance costs alone. The university also has spent at least $ 138,000 for repairs and renovations to the gym since 1987, Lienhard said.
"A $ 9,000 rental fee for a full facility? That's unfair," said John Organ, the school's coordinator for physical education. "If you rent a one-bedroom apartment, you pay more than that."
A school spokesman defended the deal but said the university plans to review the terms of the contract as officials get ready to negotiate a lease with the Bullets for next year.
"As good community citizens, we felt the need to work with the Bullets as partners," university spokesman Milree Williams Jr. said. "The lease we negotiated probably wasn't the best business deal."
Under the contract that expires in July, the Landover-based team gets exclusive rights to the 16,000-square-foot gym. In exchange the team pays a $ 9,000 rental fee and $ 1,800 for 30 parking spaces.
Bullets spokeswoman Maureen Lewis said the NBA team is happy with the deal as it stands.
---
AUSTIN, Texas (AP) - The Legends of Golf, the tournament credited with helping start the popular Senior PGA Tour, is being held outside of Austin for the first time since the competition was established.
The tournament that began as a reunion of pro Jimmy Demaret's old buddies, showing off the skills of such players as Sam Snead, Gene Sarazen and Tommy Bolt, is being played this weekend on the Stadium Course at PGA West in La Quinta, Calif.
Not everyone is impressed with the new venue.
"It's unfair in some places. I don't mind a fair test of golf, but this is unfair," Bob Toski, 67, told the Austin American-Statesman in a story published Friday.
The Legends began at Austin's Onion Creek Club in 1978, offering the long-retired players a new chance to compete.
That first field included Snead, winner of 81 PGA Tour titles; Sarazen, then 75 and the first man to win all of professional golf's majors - the U.S. Open, Masters, PGA and British Open; Paul Runyon, winner of the 1934 and 1938 PGA championships; Ralph Guldahl, who'd won the U.S. Open in 1937 and 1938 and the 1939 Masters, and Roberto DeVicenzo, who had more than 200 worldwide victories.
 Load-Date: April 21, 1995

 

End of Document
