

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
May 2, 1991, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 700 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: DENVER
Body




Confident his injured back will be healed for training camp this summer, Denver Broncos backup quarterback Gary Kubiak scoffs at suggestions his career may be over.
Kubiak, who underwent surgery nearly two weeks ago for a herniated disc, said he wakes up each morning "with the thought that I'm going to be fine sometime in July and be able to get back out there. That's all I can really ask for."
As of now, Kubiak can comb his hair, button his shirt and walk without pain. Just don't ask him to tie his shoes.
"I'm not quite down there yet," he said, laughing. "I just kind of wear them untied right now. But I seem to be getting better each day, so that's encouraging."
---
TURKU, Finland (AP) - Nicklas Lidstrom, a hard-shooting defenseman with good playmaking skills, might be the next Swedish export to the NHL.
Lidstrom is this year's rookie sensation on the Swedish national team. He scored twice Thursday against Team USA.
Lidstrom, who celebrated his 21st birthday Sunday, has the chance to join the Detroit Red Wings, but he said, first, he wants to accomplish a few more things for the Swedish team.
"There are tournaments I'd like to be a part of next season - the Canada Cup, the Olympic Games and the World Championships," Lidstrom said.
He said he would make his decision about joining the Red Wings "after these World Championships."
---
WOODBRIDGE, N.J. (AP) - Mickey Crowley, who officiated at the most recent NCAA and NIT championship games, is turning in his whistle to become supervisor of officials for the Atlantic 10 Conference.
"We are very pleased to hire someone with Mickey's experience and knowledge," Commissioner Ron Bertovich said Thursday.
Crowley, 56, worked 19 NCAA Tournaments and was assigned the national finals twice. He also worked 19 NITs, handling the championship game 10 times.
In addition to collegiate experience, Crowley has officiated in the Pan American Games, the Central American Games, the United States Olympic Festival, the European Championships and the Special Olympics.
He also served as supervisor of women's officials for the Big East Conference.
Crowley succeeds Lou Bonda, who died Jan. 2.
---
SYDNEY, Australia (AP) - Turning 150 years old next year will help promote Sydney's bid to get the Olympic Games in 2000, in the opinion of Mayor Jeremy Bingham.
Bingham said Thursday that Australia's largest city would come alive at the same time it was trying to impress Olympic delegates with its worthiness to act as Games host.
Melbourne was host to the Olympics in 1956, the only time the Olympics have been held in the southern hemisphere. Brisbane failed in a bid for the 1992 Games, and Melbourne was an unsuccessful candidate for the 1996 Olympics.
Members of various international Olympic federations will meet in Sydney next October.
"We'll have an opportunity to show off Sydney to a lot of very important people," Bingham said.
"We have to convince the members of the International Olympic Committee that they should vote for Sydney in '93."
IOC delegates will decide the host city for the 2000 Games in 1993.
Events marking Sydney's 150th year as a city will include the city's first international jazz festival, a production of a new Sydney opera called Damascus and the 60th anniversary of the construction of the Sydney Harbor Bridge.
"Sydney is a very well-kept secret," Bingham said. "Most people in the world don't know about Sydney, so we want to promote it so they will know about it."
---
OMAHA, Neb. (AP) - The billboards at Rosenblatt Stadium will be covered at this year's College World Series to prevent the kind of mistake that happened last year.
In the CWS last year, a television replay showed a Georgia Southern drive hit on the white portion of a billboard 18 inches beyond the fence in left-center field. However, the ball bounced back onto the field and was ruled a double, blunting a Georgia Southern scoring opportunity in a 5-4, 10-inning loss to Stanford.
Omaha public events manager Terry Forsberg said Wednesday at a CWS luncheon that the sign struck by the drive has been removed.
In addition, he all advertising except the beer sign on the scoreboard will be covered during the College World Series "in compliance with NCAA policy."

 

End of Document
