

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
June 29, 1993, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 705 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: MADRID, Spain
Body




Seve Ballesteros and Jose Maria Olazabal, Spain's best known golfers, will face Americans Tom Watson and Payne Stewart in a one-day team event July 19. Organizers are billing it as a warmup for this year's Ryder Cup competition.
"The idea is to make this an annual event with Spain playing against another nation every year," said Elena Gordon, a spokeswoman for Amen Corner, part of Ballesteros' golfing group. "It's not really connected to the Ryder, it just falls that way this time and serves as a kind of warm up."
The 18-hole, alternate-shot event will be played at Real Golf de Pedrena, the course in the northern Spanish city of Santander where Ballesteros learned the game.
Ballesteros and Olazabal, unbeaten as a team in previous Ryder Cup play, are almost certain to be members of the European team for this year's event Sept. 24-26 at the Belfry near Birmingham, England.
Ballesteros is likely to be added to the squad by captain Bernard Gallacher and Olazabal will probably qualify on points.
Watson, who will not play in the Ryder Cup, will captain the U.S. team and Stewart is assured of being on the squad.
Each winning player will receive $ 100,000, Gordon said.
The Ryder Cup, played every two years, pits the top Americans against their European counterparts.
---
MORGANTOWN, W.Va. (AP) - Former North Carolina State guard Dereck Whittenburg signed as an assistant coach at West Virginia, officials said.
Whittenburg, whose last-second airball was converted by Lorenzo Charles in the North Carolina State's stunning 54-52 victory over Houston in the 1983 NCAA championship game, served as an assistant at Colorado for three years.
Prior to that, he was an assistant at North Carolina State, Long Beach State and George Mason.
Whittenburg, who led North Carolina State in scoring as a senior, played one year of professional basketball in Europe.
---
MILAN, Italy (AP) - The Italian ski team, including Olympic champion Alberto Tomba, will train for in Chile for the next World Cup competition and the 1994 Winter Olympic Games.
The Italian ski Federation said Tuesday that Tomba and his teammates will get ready at Nevado Valley between Aug. 8 to Sept. 5.
Tomba, known as La Bomba (The Bomb), will be shooting for its fourth Olympic gold at Lillehammer, Norway, next February.
He is the only skier to win Olympic titles in consecutive Games, at Calgary in 1988 and at Albertville in 1992.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - The Giants and the Jets have moved to Jersey, but New York state has figured out a new way to make a few bucks off the two NFL teams.
State officials said Tuesday that New York fans can now get license plates that have the logo of their favorite football, baseball, basketball or hockey team - at least the ones with a New York connection.
"Pro Picture Plates will generate non-tax revenue for the state, promote tourism and spur interest in professional sports," governor Mario Cuomo said.
Cuomo spokeswoman Juanita Scarlett said the sports plate program would raise about $ 5.5 million a year. About $ 86,000 of that would go to the various sports leagues for donations to their favorite charities.
The license plate program was announced at a news conference.
Under the plan, baseball fans can get plates with the Yankees or Mets logos. Football fans can have Giants, Jets or Bills logos. Basketball fans have the Knicks and hockey fans can choose from the Rangers, the Islanders or the Sabres.
The Giants and Jets play in Giants Stadium in New Jersey's Meadowlands sports complex, about a 20-minute drive across the Hudson River from Manhattan.
---
BIDDEFORD, Maine (AP) - Golfers wait a lifetime for that perfect shot - the hole in one.
Peggy Wilson didn't have much of a wait.
The Biddeford Middle School teacher, golfing for about four years, recently had two aces in five days.
Wilson's first ace came June 22 on the 12th hole at Natanis Golf Club in Vassalboro. Then on Sunday, she hit another one on the 8th hole at Biddeford-Saco Country Club.
"I felt a little guilty getting the second one," she said. "I already had one, so I was flabbergasted to get two in five days."
Wilson is humble about her feat.
"I had gotten it on the green before, and that takes skill. But to get it right in the hole, that's pure luck," she said.

 

End of Document
