

New Suspect in Jack the Ripper Murders: American Doctor
The Associated Press
July 17, 1995, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 551 words
Byline: By AUDREY WOODS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




An American doctor has emerged from the fog of 19th century London as the latest suspect in the crimes of Jack the Ripper, who slashed five prostitutes to death and terrorized the streets in 1888.
But he faces strong competition from a string of other candidates ranging from Queen Victoria's grandson to Impressionist painter Walter Sickert.
A new book by two Suffolk, England, policemen says American surgeon Francis Tumblety was a prime suspect in at least four of the murders. He was arrested soon after the last murder, but fled to the United States when he was released on bail.
The London murders then stopped, but several Ripper-style murders occurred in Nicaragua and Jamaica soon afterward, says the book "The Lodger" by policemen Paul Gainey and Stewart Evans.
Their theory is based on a previously unpublished letter written in 1913 by Chief Inspector John Littlechild, then head of Scotland Yard's special branch.
Century Publishing, which will publish the book Aug. 3, says author Gainey discovered that Tumblety, who had hoped to set up a practice in England, hated women after discovering that his wife was working in a brothel.
Gainey also says Tumblety had a collection of wombs in a glass jar. Four of the Ripper's victims were disemboweled.
The publishers have not yet said where in the United States Tumblety was from or where he fled.
Tumblety was arrested soon after the last murder when his landlady found blood on his shirt. He was charged with sexual offenses and granted bail. After he fled, police failed to find him.
The book says Littlechild's letter was addressed to a journalist. It spent 40 years in the attic of an antiquarian bookseller before being sold to a London bookseller, who contacted Evans because he is a collector of crime memorabilia.
The story of the Ripper's horrible deeds, redolent of perversion, Victorian repression and the gaslit streets of London's poor Whitechapel district, has fascinated mystery buffs for a hundred years, and theories about the killer's identity abound.
One says the Ripper was the Duke of Clarence, grandson of Queen Victoria. The duke has been described as a frequenter of high-class brothels. He died at age 28 in 1892, reportedly of influenza, but theorizers suggest syphilis might have been the cause.
The Walter Sickert theory suggests the prostitutes were killed to keep them from revealing that the duke had secretly married an artist's model, Annie Crook, and fathered a child.
Sickert is supposed to have given art lessons to the duke at his studio and asked Mary Kelly, who was to become a Ripper victim, to look after the child.
Supposedly the government got wind of the affair, and Annie was whisked away and certified insane by the queen's physician.
But Mary Kelly told three streetwalkers the story and they tried to blackmail the authorities, according to the theory. Sickert and the duke's coachman are supposed to have tracked the women down and lured them into a coach where they were poisoned and stabbed.
Another suspect was Montague Druitt, a failed medical student and drunkard found dead in the River Thames soon after the last Ripper murder.
Dr. Neill Cream was a blackmailer, abortionist and murderer who was hanged in 1892 and is supposed to have declared, "I am Jack the ..." as the trap door opened and he gasped his last.
 Load-Date: July 17, 1995

 

End of Document
