

New President at Home in the Barrio, the Boardroom
The Associated Press
May 9, 1994, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 508 words
Byline: By ANITA SNOW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PANAMA CITY, Panama
Body




Ernest Perez Balladares is equally comfortable in Panama's poorest neighborhoods and its boardrooms and country clubs.
Known as "Toro," or "Bull," for his burly frame, Perez Balladares also seems comfortable with his future role as head of state of this Central American nation.
Yet despite all his campaign talk of economics, family values and the future, his ties to Panama's militaristic past cannot be denied.
Just five years ago, Perez Balladares ran the presidential campaign of Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega's handpicked candidate. Noriega annulled the elections when it became clear his candidate was headed for defeat.
The United States invaded seven months later.
Now, Perez Balladares - who says he opposes a return to militarism - is set to succeed the winner of the 1989 presidential contest, who by law was limited to one five-year term.
As soon as just over half the vote had been counted Sunday night, showing he was winning with 33 percent, Perez Balladares was declaring victory.
"Now we begin to construct, united regardless of differing political groups, the future of the nation," he said.
Perez Balladares, 47, is a cross between an old-time Panamanian populist promising a better life for the poor and a new-fashioned economist-technocrat who talks of a strong role for private business in his nation's economic future.
In the well-tailored suits and bright-red power ties he wears on formal occasions, Perez Balladares looks like the millionaire businessman he is.
On the campaign trail, Perez Balladares also seemed at home in jeans and striped polo shirts, shaking hands with the poor in the capital's barrios and far-flung rural areas.
He and his family grow coffee on the huge tracts of land they own in western Panama, and he controls a number of other enterprises, including a television station. In the early 1970s, he was a Citibank manager, overseeing corporate credit for Panama and the rest of Central America.
Perez Balladares was trained in the United States as an economist and business administrator and holds bachelor's and master's degrees from Notre Dame University and a second master's degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
Because of his wealth and his somewhat fair coloring in a country which has a strong African influence, Perez Balladares is considered a "rabiblanco" - or "white tail" - a derogatory term used to describe members of the nation's ruling oligarchy.
During his campaign, Perez Balladares played down his ties to Noriega. Panama was ruled by the military for more than two decades before the U.S. invasion in December 1989.
Instead, he played up his links to Panama's late populist dictator, Gen. Omar Torrijos, who is still beloved by many for his far-reaching social programs including schools, roads and government jobs for the nation's poor. Torrijos was killed in an air crash in 1981.
Perez Balladares held several ministries during Torrijos' administration, including treasury and economic policy and planning. He also was co-founder of the Democratic Revolutionary Party with Torrijos in 1979.
 Load-Date: May 9, 1994

 

End of Document
