

News from the Home Front
The Associated Press
January 19, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 784 words
Dateline: CINCINNATI
Body




An electronic chain letter urging people to pray for peace is appearing on facsimile machines around the country.
"If you fax this to five people in the next 25 minutes and they pray for peace and fax this on, 625 people will be praying for peace within the hour," the letter said.
The origin of the letter is unknown, but many people have wasted no time in responding.
"I'm not one for chain letters, but I just had to send it on," said Duane Rahe, who received the message on his facsimile machine Friday morning.
Rahe said the peace chain letter provides a way to help those on the front in the Middle East.
"It doesn't have to be a prayer - just a remembrance. Just stop and think about the troops," he said.
 
 DETROIT (AP) - Mayor Coleman Young has asked Gov. John Engler to assign Michigan National Guard troops to help protect the city, which is concerned for the safety of its 45,000 Arab-Americans.
Dozens of Arab-Americans have reported bomb threats and other harassment since U.S.-led forces invaded Iraq on Wednesday, Young said Friday.
Young asked that Guardsmen provide security on the U.S. side of the Canadian border and at City Airport, mayoral spokesman Bob Berg said. The mayor did not specify how many troops he needed or when they would have to be assigned to Detroit, Berg said.
"This was strictly precautionary," Berg said.
Lt. Col. Brian Downey, a Guard spokesman, said Engler would base his decision on a recommendation from state police.
"One thing we have to be very wary of is protecting from creating a panic in a situation like this," said state police Capt. Timothy Yungfer, commander of the emergency management division.
 
 PORTLAND, Ore. (AP) - An anti-war organizer whose brother was killed by U.S.-backed Contra rebels in Nicaragua is both exhilarated and saddened by the success of protests in the Portland area.
"The tears come from a very real thing. My brother's death brought death closer to me than anything that's ever occurred. It makes it real," said John Linder, whose brother Ben was killed three years while helping build a small hydroelectric project in Nicaragua.
"Once you know it's real, and you can imagine it multiplied by thousands of times, it simply seems insane, intolerable," he said Friday as several hundred high school students rallied against the war.
John Linder, 35, is now a leader of the Coalition Against U.S. Military Intervention in the Middle East. The anti-war coalition twice drew 10,000 or more people to downtown Portland.
"I found myself on Saturday when we had 15,000 people here before the war had begun sort of alternately in tears and quite excited about the turnout," Linder said.
"My brother's example is a constant inspiration to me."
 
 SALT LAKE CITY (AP) - When Iraqi missiles began to rock Tel Aviv, 27 Americans at Brigham Young University's Jerusalem Center donned gas masks and huddled in a bomb shelter.
However, a day later, the staff was on the eighth floor of the building watching the movie, "A Miracle on 34th Street," the center's director, George Horton, said Friday.
The center staff members and their families said they have no intention of leaving Jerusalem even though the sounds of war echo just 40 miles to the northwest of them, he said.
"I personally feel a great responsibility to stay here and see that the Jerusalem Center is preserved," Horton told The Salt Lake Tribune in a telephone interview Friday from Jerusalem.
The center, which is located between a Palestinian neighborhood and a Hebrew university, specializes in Middle Eastern studies.
 
 LOS ANGELES (AP) - The success of weapons battle-tested for the first time in the Persian Gulf was welcome news for defense contractors who have been hit by layoffs and shrinking defense budgets.
Among the new systems praised by U.S. officials were the F-117A stealth fighter-bomber, built by Lockheed Corp. at its secret "Skunk Works" in Burbank, and the Tomahawk cruise missile, produced in San Diego by General Dynamics Corp.'s Convair subsidiary.
"The systems were extremely effective. As far as we at GD are concerned there's certainly a sense of pride and satisfaction," General Dynamics spokesman Jack Isabel said Friday.
It was a welcome turnaround for General Dynamics and Lockheed, which had suffered the cancellation of large aircraft programs.
General Dynamics co-produced the Navy A-12 attack jet, which the Pentagon canceled after spending $$3.1 billion. Lockheed's P-7A Navy patrol plane likewise was abandoned after $$300 million was spent.
"That does nothing but get the adrenalin flowing," Isabel said of the success of the Tomahawk cruise missile. "There's always that sense of euphoria, although we would have preferred the hostilities had not taken place."

 

End of Document
