

News Reports of War are Merely Snapshots; the Truth is Found in History
The Associated Press
January 18, 1991, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 519 words
Byline: By STEVEN KOMAROW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




History suggests that the American public will get a distorted picture of war in the Persian Gulf because of Pentagon news management, shortcomings in news reporting and the chaos of war.
"The first casualty when war comes is truth," Sen. Hiram Johnson said in 1917. That was during World War I, when press exaggeration, strict censorship and government disinformation combined to distort reality.
Much has changed, but not the basics. Truth still gets lost.
"That's what happens in a combat situation. All hell breaks loose," said Murray Fromson, a former combat reporter and now director of the Center for International Journalism at the University of Southern California.
Thursday, for example, Iraq claimed to have shot down as many as 76 allied planes in the first 24 hours of war, while allied officials said only three, and perhaps four, were lost: one American, one or possibly two British and one Kuwaiti. Clearly, both versions could not be true.
For the "big picture" of the war, the press is almost totally dependent on government authorities. History shows that in Korea and Vietnam, the U.S. military deliberately distorted information to hide failure or controversy from the public, and the record wasn't corrected for years.
The tradition continued in Panama, on a small scale.
For example, the Pentagon told how new Stealth fighters bombed Panama's Rio Hato army base. What emerged later, however, was that the jets missed their targets and U.S. paratroopers were forced to jump into an intense firefight against Panamanian forces.
Panama also was an example of how the Pentagon has, since Vietnam, clamped down severely on the ability of news reporters to cover battles.
In Grenada the military detained reporters trying to cover the story, making its version of events the only one available. In Panama, it barred the press from battle areas until fighting ended and never let reporters see American dead or wounded, fostering the impression that it was a bloodless victory.
The White House has promised not to lie about the gulf war. "Rather, we simply will not divulge information or not comment" if disclosure would jeopardize the lives of American troops, said presidential spokesman Marlin Fitzwater.
But the administration already is manipulating coverage both in the gulf and domestically.
In the Middle East, as in Panama, the Pentagon has organized the press into pools that can travel only where the military says, and their reports must be cleared by military censors.
So while new technology makes possible live broadcasts from the battlefield, cameras on Thursday were sending back mostly pictures of warplanes taking off from Saudi airfields or rockets being launched from ships, far from the business end of those flights.
At home, the Pentagon canceled formal ceremonies at Dover Air Force Base, Del., for the dead returned from a military air crash prior to the U.S. attack on Iraq, and that indicated the de-emphasis on casualties may continue.
"They learned that lesson from Vietnam," Fromson said. "Those pictures of body bags started coming back. … That changed the whole (public) attitude."

 

End of Document
