

News Briefs From Around The World
The Associated Press
March 31, 1993, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 575 words
Dateline: BEIJING
Body




China carried out its threat today and approved a committee that will prepare for Beijing to take over Hong Kong in 1997 without input from the British.
The committee could be the seed of a "shadow government" that would rival British rule there during Hong Kong's last four years as a British colony.
It was approved by China's legislature, the National People's Congress, with 2,828 delegates voting in favor and just 43 against or abstaining.
By creating the body, China hopes to increase pressure on Hong Kong Gov. Chris Patten to drop a proposal to expand popular participation in local legislative elections.
China insists that Patten's proposal violates past Chinese-British agreements and makes it impossible for the two sides to work together in arranging a smooth transfer of power.
The exact role of the new committee remains vague. At a minimum, it is expected to prepare for elections in 1997. It may also begin drafting new laws to take effect after the turnover.
 
 ---
HAMBURG, Germany (AP) - Bolivia signed an agreement with commercial banks to erase the country's entire $ 169 million in commercial debt.
Tuesday's agreement allows the Bolivian government to buy back debt instruments - such as promissory notes - from the banks for 16 percent of their face value.
The signing took place at the end of the four-day annual meeting of the Inter-American Development Bank in this northern port city.
Maria Euveia, a delegate to the debt talks, said the amount involved in the agreement was equal to $ 169 million and that it was signed by Citibank and several other commercial banks that she declined to identify.
 
 ---
SEOUL, South Korea (AP) - A major U.S. business organization accused the South Korean government today of maintaining high barriers to foreign products, and demanded that Washington retaliate.
In its annual report on South Korea-U.S. trade issues, the American Chamber of Commerce in Seoul urged the U.S. government to revive a law that provides for retaliation against trade practices deemed unfair. The Clinton administration has reportedly been considering such action.
The group said the United States runs an annual trade deficit of more than $ 2 billion with South Korea, and blamed trade barriers.
According to the Korean Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy, however, South Korea ran a trade deficit of $ 200 million with the United States last year. The ministry said the two nations have different ways of calculating the trade balance.
Jang Ji-jong, a ministry official, said his government has consistently pursued a policy of opening its market wider to imports.
 
 ---
BRUSSELS, Belgium (AP) - King Baudouin has rejected the resignation of Belgium's center-left government and asked Prime Minister Jean-Luc Dehaene to stay in office.
The monarch's decision on Tuesday defuses a weeklong crisis that cast doubt on Belgian's place in a planned European monetary union and raised fears of renewed linguistic discord in this French- and Dutch-speaking nation.
Dehaene offered the Cabinet's resignation a week ago after the governing coalition split over an austerity package aimed at slashing $ 3.3 billion from the budget deficit.
Leaders of the four coalition parties agreed on how to make the cuts Tuesday, a day after the king asked Dehaene to try again to resolve the dispute.
The budget quarrel had pitted Dehaene's Dutch-speaking Christian Democrats against their main coalition partners - the French-speaking Socialists.

 

End of Document
