

Not Even The President Was Told Until Rebel Chief Was Snared
The Associated Press
September 15, 1992, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 800 words
Byline: By KEVIN GALVIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LIMA, Peru
Body




A block from the last refuge of Abimael Guzman, legendary leader of the rebel Shining Path, lives a police lieutenant who decided to have a barbecue on Saturday. Of course, this was no ordinary barbecue.
At least three months ago, a special team within Peru's anti-subversion police began surveillance of a newly rented two-story home in Lima's middle-class Surco neighborhood next to a convenience store.
The team was following up on leads from previous arrests of Shining Path members. But no one is saying how officers determined that Guzman, a fugitive for 12 years, was inside on Saturday.
In the past, attempts to capture Guzman had been foiled by inter-agency squabbling. This time, not even the president, defense and interior ministers were informed until the 57-year-old rebel leader was securely in custody.
The secrecy that led to the arrest of the man who founded the hemisphere's most dangerous guerrilla movement held tight on Monday, but a sketch of the operation that yielded his capture could be drawn from conversations with neighbors, police and diplomats close to Peru's security forces.
Guzman often moved from house to house had arrived at his last safe house just two weeks ago, said diplomats and police, speaking on condition of anonymity.
That's when neighbors noticed an increase in the number of utility workers and street sweepers passing down their block, not realizing that they were undercover police detectives.
The officers staged a barbecue Saturday in the home of a police lieutenant who happened to live a block from Guzman's hiding place, eating, dancing and playing loud music until the early evening.
Two officers - a man and a woman - sat in a car in front of the convenience store, sipping a beer and chatting, until a young woman came out of the safe house to buy a pack of cigarettes.
When she returned to the house and opened the door, she was subdued by the man and woman from the car and about 50 officers stormed out of the barbecue and into Guzman's home, shooting in the air.
Guzman and seven associates offered no resistance. After 12 years of political violence that has cost more than 25,000 lives and ravaged the economy, Guzman was in custody.
Proof of the operation's secrecy lay in the police team's decision to not follow the chain of command.
Former Interior Ministry officials and diplomats say that an opportunity to capture Guzman in the late 1980s was lost due to bureaucratic bungling. A surveillence team spotted him but was told to hold its position while Guzman drove away, they say.
Residents across the capital were pleased with the capture, but wary of the rebels' response. None were as edgy as those who live near Guzman's last home. One neighbor ran door to door asking who owned a strange car on the corner, fearing it was a car bomb.
"I'm sorry. I'm very nervous. Please, I can't tell you anything," said the owner of the convenience store, hiding her face behind a shelf of cookies.
Police on Sunday filled pickup trucks with boxes, books and computers found inside the house, even taking the curtains that covered two front windows.
Guzman was being held Monday in a fortress-like downtown police station that was guarded by four armored vehicles and two dozen soldiers and police with automatic weapons.
Among those captured with him were Elena Albertina Iparraguirre, his companion, who has at times been identified as Shining Path's second-in-command, and Laura Zembrano, a leader of the party's Lima organization.
Guzman, a former philosophy professor, has so dominated the Shining Path that it is considered unlikely that even a chosen successor could inspire the same devotion among followers.
Subversion experts differ on whether his capture is a fatal blow to the Maoist-inspired Shining Path, which has exploited the wide disparity of wealth in Peru that generally divides the indigenous population from an elite comprised of descendants of Spanish conquerors and other immigrants.
Experts do agree, however, that violence is likely to continue in the short term. The rebels have as many as 10,000 armed fighters and are believed to have more than twice as many active supporters.
Some authorities believe Shining Path attacks could intensify. On Monday, guerrillas shot a policeman to death and set off a bomb along a highway that wounded eight commuters.
Gustavo Gorriti, author of a book on the rebels, says Guzman's followers might fear, however, that an upsurge in violence could prompt President Alberto Fujimori to impose the death penalty on Guzman, whom they consider a philosopher-king.
Fujimori has made sweeping changes in the legal system since he dissolved Congress and suspended the constitution in April.
In a press conference on Monday, he said he would consider public sentiment in reviewing the death penalty for Guzman.

 

End of Document
