

Oil Strike: Is It The Beginning of End for Brazil's Strongest Union?
The Associated Press
May 27, 1995, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 484 words
Byline: By STAN LEHMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAO PAULO, Brazil
Body




The 24-day nationwide strike by oil workers could be the beginning of the end of Brazil's largest and most powerful trade union movement, some analysts say.
The strike began on May 3 with demands for more pay, but it became clear that what was really at stake was the government's campaign to do away with state-led development - and the breakup of the state oil monopoly.
As time went by, the stoppage turned into an arm-wrestling match between the government and the Central Workers Union, an umbrella federation known as CUT that claims to represent more than 2,000 unions.
Jose Ibrahim of Union Power, a smaller labor federation, said the wage demands were "an excuse to launch a movement against the privatizations and constitutional reforms needed to modernize the country's economy."
"CUT and its supporters in the Workers' Party seem to have forgotten that they lost the 1994 elections, and that most Brazilians voted for Cardoso because they wanted reforms and privatization,"' he added.
President Fernando Henrique Cardoso ran for office last year promising privatization and other economic reforms to stop high inflation and trounced Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva of the leftist Workers Party. Da Silva supported state-led development.
In recent weeks, Congress has approved amendments to let private companies to distribute natural gas and invest in telecommunications, and to end special treatment for national firms over foreign companies.
Next week, Congress will consider an amendment to allow private investment in the petroleum industry.
The unions may have started digging their graves by taking on Cardoso's government with little popular support, said Leoncio Martins Rodrigues, a political scientist at the University of Campinas.
A poll this week by the Folha de Sao Paulo newspaper showed 60 percent of 1,080 people queried opposed the walkout, and 68 percent had been hurt by it.
"By trying to get public opinion to go against the reforms and privatizations, the strikers and CUT managed to shoot themselves in the foot or, you could say, in the head," said David Fleischer, a political scientist at the University of Brasilia.
Two rulings against the strike by the federal labor court haven't helped. On May 9, the Supreme Labor Tribunal ruled the workers abused their right to strike and ordered them back to the job. But they didn't return, and shortages worsened.
The government sent soldiers to occupy four refineries and fired 59 strikers and union leaders.
With the heat on, the union decided to go back to the court to find an honorable way out of the stalemate. But the tribunal upheld its ruling, and slapped the union with $ 110,000 daily fines.
The strike can only help Cardoso's efforts to get Congress to pass reforms, said Alexandre Barros, a political analyst.
"People who are waiting in lines to buy gas are saying that the government should get rid of the monopolies," Barros said.
 Load-Date: May 27, 1995

 

End of Document
