

On the Run? Come to Sunny Brazil
The Associated Press
April 27, 1994, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 937 words
Byline: By TODD LEWAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




In the old days, you took the money, ran to Rio and lived it up. Even if the cops traced you, Brazil probably didn't have an extradition agreement with wherever you came from.
Nazis threw parties on Hitler's birthday. Italian mafiosi turned up in the top cabarets. Grinning Argentine guerrillas posed for pictures on Copacabana beach.
Then, in the 1980s, Brazil had a try at stopping it. Congress ordered a crackdown on illegal aliens. The government signed numerous extradition treaties. The army increased patrols on remote jungle borders.
But the crooks keep on coming. They are popping up in Brazil like never before, taking advantage of a murky network of corrupt immigration officials and weak laws loosely enforced by underpaid, poorly equipped police.
It is a Who's Who of the most wanted, among them Luis Garcia Meza, the former Bolivian dictator; Tokyo mobster Hitoshi Tanabe, and Vicenzo Buondonno of southern Italy's notorious Camorra, who was arrested in March.
Gen. Alfredo Stroessner, deposed in 1989 after 35 years as the unbenevolent dictator of Paraguay, lives quietly and comfortably in Brasilia, the capital.
Pablo Escobar, the Colombian drug lord killed by Colombian soldiers last year, holed up in 1992 at Angra dos Reis, a seaside resort 90 miles south of Rio, to get away from assassins hired by rivals.
"This country has a knack for drawing the best of the worst," said Guaracy Mingardi, a social scientist at the University of Sao Paulo. "It might be funny if it wasn't so shameful."
Brazil's reputation as a haven bloomed in the 1950s, when Nazis flocked in to avoid being tried for war crimes.
Dr. Josef Mengele, the Auschwitz "Angel of Death," died in Sao Paulo in 1979.
Franz Stangl, commander of the Treblinka death camp in Poland, was discovered in 1967 working under his own name as a low-level manager for Volkswagen in Sao Paulo. He was extradited to West Germany.
Gustav Franz Wagner, a former SS officer, lived in southern Brazil for years and was arrested only after he publicly denied attending a Hitler birthday party held by Nazi sympathizers. He later committed suicide.
American financial buccaneers joined the parade: Ben Jack Cage, Lowell Birrell and Earl "The Pittsburg Whiz Kid" Belle set up new scams in Rio before being sent back to the United States.
Later, those looking for a place to hide included Mafia kingpins Tommaso Buscetta and Francesco Toscanino; Argentine guerrilla leader Mario Firmenich, and Albert Pierre, a Haitian colonel accused of torture and murder.
Ronald Biggs, one of the Great Train Robbers, broke out of Wandsworth Prison in Britain, eluded Scotland Yard detectives in a chase over three continents and turned up in Rio in 1970.
"There's no better place on Earth for a crook who wants to get away from it all," said Biggs, who has spent much of the last 24 years in a colonial house with a swimming pool on a hilltop overlooking Rio.
It appeared the situation might change when a civilian government took over in 1985, after 21 years of military rule.
In 1986, Congress ordered the re-registration of foreigners and repealed a law allowing visitors to exchange tourist visas for permanent ones overnight.
The government paid up its arrears to rejoin Interpol, the international police organization, and signed extradition treaties with 16 countries. About 300 fugitives were returned to the United States and Europe between 1985 and 1991.
But old habits are not easy to break. Immigration officials still sell phony visas and arrange false passports, especially in the southern states of Rio Grande do Sul and Parana on the borders with Argentina, Uruguay and Paraguay.
Border guards often don't even ask to see documents. Every day, thousands of people are waved across the Bridge of Friendship between Ciudad de Leste, a contraband capital in Paraguay, and Foz do Iguacu.
Buondonno of the Camorro, wanted in Italy for cocaine trafficking since 1991, drove into Brazil from Argentina last year and opened an Italian restaurant several months ago in the beachside Ipanema district of Rio.
"He used his real name," said Edson de Oliveira, the federal police chief. "I suppose he figured, why bother lying?"
Police arrested Buondonno on March 15 at the door of his Copacabana apartment when he got home from a night on the town with friends.
Another attraction for fugitives is Brazil's sheer size. It is larger than the contiguous United States and borders on 10 nations. Its frontier stretches 9,750 miles, much of it through dense rain forest, wetlands or uninhabited scrub land.
"It's not easy to get caught," said Romeu Tuma Jr., a Brazilian Interpol detective. "You can walk through the jungle, paddle up a river or use a small plane and leapfrog illegal airstrips cut in the forest."
Once inside, foreigners can get lost in the crowd. Colonization, the slave trade and waves of immigration have made Brazil a racial and ethnic stew of native Indian, African, European, Middle Eastern and Asian.
The penal code also makes catching crooks difficult. Police agents cannot legally offer immunity from prosecution in exchange for information. Wiretaps and sting operations are illegal.
Money-laundering and phantom bank accounts are common. Banks are not required to ask clients the origins of large sums, which makes it easy for bandits to hide their loot. Stores and restaurants can be established easily as fronts to launder illicit gains.
Jorge and Jeannette de Pombo, wanted for embezzling $ 100 million from a Colombian finance company, ran a profitable swimwear boutique for two years at the luxury beach resort of Buzios near Rio. Police caught and deported them in 1990.
 Load-Date: April 27, 1994

 

End of Document
