

One War Over, but the World Is Hardly at Peace
The Associated Press
March 4, 1991, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 878 words
Byline: By HARRY F. ROSENTHAL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The end of the Gulf War hardly means the world is at peace. Depending on how and what you count, there are more than two dozen conflicts going on, from Afghanistan to Mozambique to the luckless Kurds still fighting for a country of their own in the Middle East.
Groups of people on four continents are still trying to kill each other - or arguing vehemently - over religious and ethnic differences, for political one-upmanship or territory, or simply because, after years of it, war has become a way of life.
The Gulf War tended to obscure such problems as conflicts involving Palestinian Arabs in the Middle East, the Kurdish quest for autonomy in Iraq and Iran, Lebanese unhappiness with occupying Syrian forces in their nation, unresolved divisions of the Mediterranean island of Cyprus between Greek and Turkish communities, and the tragic struggle in Northern Ireland.
And now, in the war's aftermath, the State Department has received disturbing reports that the restored Kuwaiti rulers are taking reprisals against Palestinians in Kuwait who sided with Iraq's invasion forces.
Conflicts come in varying degrees, ranging from the Soviet republics' secessionist efforts to all-out confrontations such as the U.S.-led coalition's attack against Iraq after that nation's invasion of Kuwait.
The conflicts, by region, include: Africa - Angola, Chad, Ethiopia, Morocco-Western Sahara, Mozambique, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Uganda. In Central and South America - Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Peru. In Asia - Cambodia, North and South Korea, Afghanistan, Kashmir at the India-Pakistan border, Punjab in India, Myanmar (formerly Burma), Sri Lanka (Tamil areas). In Europe: Romania, Northern Ireland, Soviet Union, Yugoslavia, Albania.
A major armed conflict is defined by the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, which keeps track of such things, as "a prolonged combat between the military forces of two or more governments or of one government and organized armed opposition forces, involving the use of manufactured weapons and incurring battle-related deaths of at least 1,000 persons.
The Soviet Union, more at peace with the capitalist world than ever before, is embroiled in ethnic conflicts that have cost hundreds of lives in the southern and central Asian republics of Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia and Uzbekistan. There has been violence, too, as the Kremlin cracked down on separatist movements in Lithuania and Latvia.
Another conflict of ethnic origin involves the Kurds, a stateless people who have been fighting for a independent status in areas of Iraq, Iran and Turkey for decades. In 1988, Saddam Hussein of Iraq was accused of using poison gas against his own Kurdish population on suspicion that they had supported Iran in the Iran-Iraq war which was ended that year.
In Afghanistan, where U.S.-supplied rebels are warring against the Soviet-supplied government, the superpowers have agreed in principle to stop the flow of weapons. The country has had 12 years of war, a million deaths, and the devastation has made five million homeless.
In Angola, the fighting is between the U.S.-backed UNITA rebels and a leftist government. Talks to end the 16-year civil war are at an impasse.
El Salvador's civil war, now 12 years old, has seen tentative steps toward settlement. On Sunday voters will choose 84 legislators for the single-chamber parliament and mayors for the 262 municipalities. Unlike previous elections, rebel leaders have not called for a boycott and the United States is trying to enlist Soviet support to stop arming the rebels.
In Sudan, one of the world's poorest nations, widespread famine is aggravated by a civil war between north and south.
There remains the unsettled situation in South Africa, with the question now whether the white minority government can negotiate a comprehensive settlement with the leadership of the black majority.
As always, the Korean peninsula crackles with problems. Last month, North Korea ordered its armed forces to remain on full combat alert during joint U.S.-South Korean military exercises, which it said created the danger of a new Korean war. And yet, North and South Korea agreed to form a single soccer team for an international meet.
War, hunger and disease have driven about 150,000 Cambodians from their villages, west to guerrilla camps or east to government areas. Four factions are trying to reach agreement on ending a 10-year civil war.
In Northern Ireland, the Irish Republican Army struggle to end British rule continues, with the familiar tactics of terrorist bombings. Since it began in 1969, more than 2,800 people have died in clashes and terrorism.
The tragedy of Lebanon, wracked by civil war, appears unending.
The Bush administration has said that the end of the gulf conflict could present new opportunities for settling the Arab-Israeli dispute over the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. Secretary of State James Baker III is going to the area this week and one of his stops will be Israel.
Yugoslavia is wracked with internal strife and there is strong doubt that it can maintain itself as the federated state it has been in the past 45 years. Slovenia is printing its own money.
There has been instability in Thailand, culminating in a military takeover in late February.

 

End of Document
