

One Man's War: The Lonely Fight Against Dictatorship
The Associated Press
April 19, 1991, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 773 words
Byline: By JOHN WRIGHT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




"One Man's War" recounts the intense struggle against Alfredo Stroessner's dictatorship in Paraguay by a man whose son was tortured and killed.
The made-for-cable movie, premiering Saturday on HBO, echoes the film "Missing," which depicted a wife and father searching for a missing man after Chile's coup, only to discover that he had been killed by the military government.
The outcome of "One Man's War" is equally tragic, telling how the family of 17-year-old Joelito seeks justice after his slaying.
Joelito was abducted, beaten and tortured by police on March 29, 1976. Although the official inquest blamed a jealous husband, his father, Dr. Joel Filartiga, medically documented the tortures of his son's final hours.
Few opposition voices braved the harsh political climate in Stroessner's Paraguay; news media rarely criticized the general, who ruled for 34 years until his overthrow in 1988. Today, he lives in exile in neighboring Brazil.
The tone is set from the opening scene, when soldiers drive up to a remote hut, drag a man outside and shoot him. Haunting flute music typical of Paraguay's plains plays in the background.
Filartiga, played by Anthony Hopkins, treats the wounded man at a rural clinic for peasants that has been forgotten by Paraguay's government. Threats against the doctor build steadily until Joelito is killed.
After that, the mystery boils down to whether the real killer will be caught. The viewer is not led to expect justice.
What "One Man's War" does most effectively is show the pain of the Filartiga family, in particular his father and mother, played by Argentine actress Norma Aleandro ("The Official Story").
The Filartigas don't fight only the dictatorship; they quarrel among themselves about how to carry on in the face of continued threats as they investigate Joelito's death.
Everyone suffers. Filartiga's daughter Dolly, played by Brazilian actress Fernanda Torres, is ejected from medical school, and Filartiga's lawyer, played by Panamanian singer-actor Ruben Blades, is disbarred.
"One Man's War" becomes Filartiga's lone battle when even his family is divided. And, as the family becomes unraveled, Filartiga's wife tells him, "You run this family like they run this country."
Filartiga said in an interview that the pain continues, despite all the years since Joelito's death. "Even today, we are trying to put the puzzle back together, but a piece is missing," he said.
Filartiga still practices medicine in Paraguay. But his daughter, after her truncated education, now lives and works in New York City.
In the United States, she pressed civil charges against the man her family believes was responsible for her brother's death.
Even though Stroessner fell from power in 1989, the new Paraguayan government has not prosecuted any member of the security forces for Joelito's death. "It's tied up in the Supreme Court," Filartiga said.
He said the film shows the brutality of dictatorship. Were he the director, he said, "I would have shown how high officials of the government, including the president's son, participated directly in the torture."
During filming last year in Mexico, Director Sergio Toledo said viewers will be able to identify with the personal tragedy even if they haven't lived under a repressive regime.
"Every time you go deep into the heart of the characters, I think you can achieve a kind of universalization. What I hope is that we can create an empathy between audience and characters," he said.
"One Man's War" is most effective when it mines the emotions that result from such intense human tragedy.
And the war is not over. Filartiga says he continues to protest abuses of President Andres Rodriguez's government.
"The movie just covers one phase of that struggle," he said. "The fight goes on every day, from morning to night."
 
 Elsewhere in television …
HBO TO RETELECAST 'THE INVESTIGATION' - On Tuesday, HBO will rebroadcast its stunning docudrama "The Investigation: Inside a Terrorist Bombing," about the arrest, trial and imprisonment of The Birmingham Six.
The movie was about a 1985 Grenada Television probe of the police investigation of two 1974 pub bombings that killed 21 people - the deadliest IRA attack on Britain - and led to the arrest, trial and conviction of six men. The reporters ultimately concluded that the bombing suspects had been severely beaten after their arrests, that IRA members actually responsible for the bombing had not been caught, and that police had perpetrated a cover-up.
The HBO movie will include new footage about the six, who were freed after 16 years in British prison last month after a British court overturned their convictions.

 

End of Document
