

OUT FRONT: Shopping Lists and Standby Deals in the Shadow of War
The Associated Press
August 3, 1995, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 954 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Body




At his chalet high above Lake Geneva, a blue-chip weapons dealer is enjoying the alpine air this summer and standing by for the go-ahead to pour 10,000 newly minted Kalashnikovs into the Yugoslav fray.
Over in the more workaday world of rush-hour London, another broker is trying to make his own big break, one ear on the car phone, the other on the news from Washington.
"I'd like to get in there and do a little business myself," he assures a reporter.
As much as anyone, the world's arms merchants are closely watching the U.S. debate over lifting the weapons embargo on Bosnia. Contracts are in the offing.
But the embargo's future may hinge less on what eventually is decided in Washington than on what happened two weeks ago in Switzerland, when representatives of 52 Islamic countries simply declared the U.N. boycott invalid. Iran and others are already openly planning arms supplies for Bosnia's Muslim-led government, leaving the 1991 embargo resolution in shreds.
"It doesn't help," acknowledged Emilio J. Cardenas, Argentina's U.N. ambassador and head of the U.N. sanctions committee.
"If suddenly individual actions explode all over the place, it will simply add more fuel to the conflict."
"Individual actions" have been going on for some time, as free-lance or government-sponsored smugglers have evaded the embargo - or tried to. Recent examples:
-Czech authorities intercepted a shipment of Semtex, a plastic explosive, certified for shipment to Africa but found to be headed instead to one of the embargoed governments of former Yugoslavia, a knowledgeable source in Prague told The Associated Press.
-Iran has smuggled Chinese-made Red Arrow anti-tank missiles to the Bosnian government forces, a U.S. intelligence source reported.
-The Croatian military somehow obtained Russian-made Mi-14 twin-turbine amphibious helicopters in violation of the embargo, Cardenas said in a New York interview.
He said the U.N. committee is investigating more than a dozen cases of alleged arms embargo-busting involving Bosnia, where an alliance of the Bosnian government and Croats is fighting rebel Bosnian Serbs.
In a new report on the war, a well-placed U.S. Army intelligence analyst says the arms smuggling routes to Bosnian government forces, via Croatia, are becoming well-established.
Much war materiel is offloaded at the Croatian ports of Split and Ploce, often from small boats that evade NATO's Adriatic Sea blockade, and sent over new road links to the Bosnian-held city of Mostar, writes Lt. Col. John E. Sray, who was intelligence chief for U.N. peacekeepers in Bosnia until late 1994.
Other weapons are flown into Croatia's capital, Zagreb, for more difficult overland delivery to the Bosnian Muslin heartland, he reports.
Bosnia's ambassador in Washington, Sven Alkalaj, is open about the clandestine resupply operation.
"There's no problem acquiring arms," he said. "There are lots of arms sellers in the world who have access to any kind of weaponry you wish to buy."
But still the embargo hurts. "It makes prices three or four times higher than they would be. Money has to be a consideration."
If the U.S. and other governments officially disregard the embargo, Alkalaj has a shopping list ready, topped by long-range artillery and anti-tank weapons to counter the Serb advantage in siege guns and armor.
The London broker has just the thing: the classic U.S.-made M-19 grenade launcher, an anti-personnel weapon that doubles for anti-tank duty.
"It was used effectively in the Gulf War," he said, speaking by car phone from a crowded London motorway.
But this dealer, who asked not to be named, is not sure the breaks will fall his way.
"Competition will be tough. The Bosnians and others already have proven routes and proven people who have broken the embargo for them."
Sam Cummings, relaxing in the Bernese Alps, sounds less worried.
One of the world's most successful arms brokers, founder of the U.S.- and British-based InterArms Inc., the amiable American has been a reliable vendor for many of the wars of the post-World War II period. And he's been put on call for this one - which he says he has sat out because of the embargo.
"Some weeks ago, we were approached by a key NATO country," he said by telephone from his Swiss home. "They asked if they could take our 10,000-plus Kalashnikovs if and when the embargo is lifted, and we answered yes, subject to license."
The guns are new Chinese-made AKM assault rifles, stored at InterArms' British warehouse. Although the United States is the only "key NATO country" moving toward lifting the embargo, Cummings would not say who approached him. Nor did he discuss the value of the deal - probably $ 1 million or more.
While standby deals take shape, Muslim governments are taking action.
Iran's foreign minister, Ali Akbar Velayati, paid a whirlwind visit to Croatian and Bosnian leaders in Split and Mostar on Monday, and later said "no obstacles exist" for shipping arms to Bosnia via Croatia.
Malaysian officials, meanwhile, announced a crash program to organize arms supplies to Bosnia. Islamic countries that do not ship arms directly may at least help finance Bosnian purchases.
Sray, the intelligence analyst, believes all the rearming will do the Bosnian army little good.
It is too unprofessional and ill-disciplined to recover much land from the better-trained Serb forces, he writes, but Bosnian commanders "cling to the unrealistic perception that the military balance continues to move slowly in their favor."
However the war turns out, Cummings in his alpine perch can see far down the road to a time when old business ties are rebuilt.
"We represented the Serbs and their arms factories in Serbia for 25 years," he said. "We hope to represent them again someday."
 Load-Date: August 3, 1995

 

End of Document
