

Pan Am Says It Got the Next Best Thing to A Merger Partner
The Associated Press
August 13, 1991, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 694 words
Byline: By DIRK BEVERIDGE, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




After years of defying death predictions and searching in vain for a merger partner or a buyer, Pan Am Corp. got much of what it wanted in a $ 1.39 billion deal with Delta Air Lines.
Delta, in turn, stands to join the ranks of rival "mega-carriers," American Airlines and United Airlines, though the Pan Am purchase will not move it out of third place in terms of size.
U.S. Bankruptcy Judge Cornelius Blackshear, who is overseeing Pan Am's Chapter 11 case, approved their deal Monday, after Atlanta-based Delta outbid a $ 1.3 billion offer from three competitors, United, American and Trans World Airlines.
Pan Am had opened the door to what could have become a liquidation, inviting bidders on all of its pieces in late June after Delta rejected the idea of a complete buyout.
But to get Pan Am's creditors on its side, Delta had to sweeten an original offer of $ 260 million for Pan Am's routes across the Atlantic and beyond; the Pan Am Shuttle, which operates between New York, Boston and Washington; and various planes and parts.
Pan Am creditors agreed to the package in the early hours Monday after seeing their share of the deal grow from $ 158 million to $ 720 million, setting the stage for Pan Am to stay alive as a small carrier that will be a far-cry from the globe-circling airline that used to be the unofficial U.S. flagship carrier.
Pan Am plans to move its headquarters from New York to Miami and concentrate on the Latin American routes that gave it a humble beginning on a Florida-Cuba mail run in 1927. Delta will own 45 percent of the new Pan Am, while its creditors will have the other 55 percent.
Shareholders in the old Pan Am will not own any of the new Pan Am, however, so at best they will lose most of their investment, according to an airline official familiar with the deal.
Asked how close Pan Am had come to its goal of being completely bought out, Chairman Thomas G. Plaskett grinned and held his thumb and forefinger about an inch apart.
"About this close," Plaskett said. "It's as close as you can get."
Delta Chairman Ronald W. Allen said his carrier had gotten many choice assets of Pan Am without taking on all the liabilities.
"There was some risk in taking on the whole thing," Allen said. "This eliminates the risk."
TWA Chairman Carl Icahn acknowledged "the best bid won." United and American declined comment.
The international route transfers contained in the deal still must be approved by the Department of Transportation, which has said interested parties can object through Aug. 23.
Northwest Airlines indicated it would argue that it should get Pan Am's Detroit-London route, although Delta considers it an integral part of the package. Northwest told the judge on Monday that it should be allowed to have the route, saying its hub in Detroit would let it better serve the flying public.
The transition of assets from Pan Am to Delta, perhaps the largest such deal in aviation history, is otherwise expected to proceed smoothly with no disruptions to travelers. Delta said it will honor Pan Am's frequent flier miles.
Thousands of Pan Am workers will lose their jobs, however. The company's payroll stood at 22,000 in late July, before a round of 5,000 layoffs, but Delta and the reorganized Pan Am expect to employ just 13,500 of the remaining workers.
Securities analysts said it was too soon to make a detailed judgment on Delta's purchase, but their gut reaction is it was probably a good deal. Delta is traditionally the most conservative of the major airlines.
Delta has a vast domestic route structure for feeding the international routes it stands to acquire. The lack of a strong domestic operation had gotten Pan Am into trouble after airlines were deregulated in 1978 and leaner rivals began expanding overseas.
"The key thing is not the revenues that are currently generated from the system, but the potential for the system," said Raymond E. Neidl, an analyst with Dillon Read & Co. Inc. "Pan Am just didn't have the muscle to develop these routes, whereas Delta will."
It remains unclear whether Plaskett will remain with the reorganized Pan Am. Both Plaskett and Allen said that will be up to the board of the new company.

 

End of Document
