

PART I: The American Connection; U.S. a Mother Lode of Firepower for World of Conflict and Crime
The Associated Press
March 26, 1994, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1427 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The finely crafted 9 millimeter, in menacing black steel, was fit for a king.
Serial No. U369694, a Sig-Sauer Model 226, the pistol began its journey in 1989, handed across the countertop at a Florida gun dealership. It ended it last December on a red-tile rooftop in Medellin, Colombia, clutched in the hand of a fatally wounded Pablo Escobar.
The king of cocaine is now dead. But the story of his gun and tens of thousands like it goes on.
For Colombian drug lords and Irish gunrunners, for the bosses of Japanese crime and the embargo-busters of Croatia, the United States, home to 280,000 licensed gun dealers, has become a convenience store of pistols, assault rifles and other tools of their deadly trades.
Like Escobar's Model 226, untold numbers of weapons are smuggled out of the United States every day, to countries with tougher gun control. Just this week, one was used to assassinate Mexico's leading presidential candidate. Sometimes dealers join in the schemes.
But the deception can reach beyond common smuggling and into the computers of regulators here in Washington.
The Associated Press has learned, for example, that a half-million firearms were licensed by the federal government recently for supposed export to Argentina, a country with little use for them. Authorities are investigating whether traders diverted the guns elsewhere.
Congressional auditors, meanwhile, report finding continuing lapses in the way arms exports are licensed.
The American connection is just part of a global picture that has emerged from an in-depth AP look at the international arms bazaar, a secretive commerce that fuels dozens of small wars in the post-Cold War era and equips a criminal underworld.
The AP inquiry found that controls at all levels are often ineffective - from monitoring of local gun dealers, to national governments' export licensing, to the weakness of U.N. embargoes on arms shipments.
The bazaar may finally be driving the world to action. The United Nations, for the first time, takes up the issue of arms trafficking when its Disarmament Commission meets April 18.
Those who advocate reining in the small-arms trade point out that almost all of the 15 million or more people killed in war since 1945 were victims of machine guns, mines, mortars - not of warplanes or nuclear arms.
"I think we're past due right now on some sort of action," said Sen. David Pryor, D-Ark., a longtime critic of the U.S. licensing system. "And the United States should be a leader in that action."
But others dismiss the notion of tougher international controls on small arms.
"To dream about that is fine," Mikhail T. Kalashnikov, Russia's pre-eminent gun designer, told the AP. "But it isn't practical. It isn't going to happen."
Here in Washington, the focus falls on Defense Trade Controls, a State Department office that licenses U.S. companies' munitions exports, from F-16 fighters down to 9 mm ammunition.
Beginning in the late 1980s, Pryor and others hammered away at what they regarded as the understaffed office's failure to keep close tabs on exporters and foreign purchasers.
Defense Trade Controls was not consulting other government departments' blacklists for questionable operators, they complained. It was not asking U.S. embassies to check out foreign buyers. In short, it was a rubber stamp.
Since then, the licensing office has more than doubled its staff, to more than 60, and computerized its operation. "Bad guy" lists are being checked. In 1993, it says, embassies were asked to conduct 600 checks on "end users."
But General Accounting Office auditors, currently reviewing the operation, report still finding lapses in verification, a congressional source told the AP. One example cited: The State Department blacklist does not incorporate the Justice Department's list of people prosecuted for violating export controls.
The Rexon Technology case may typify a chronic problem.
The New Jersey company was indicted in December for allegedly conspiring to ship fuses for 155 mm artillery shells to Iraq by fraudulently obtaining a State Department license to export to neighboring Jordan.
On a classified list of Jordan licenses, obtained by the AP, the $ 3.7 million worth of fuses stands out starkly among licenses for $ 5,000 worth of cartridges and $ 2,500 worth of handguns. Any analysis by a licensing officer should have raised questions, since the fuses were for 300,000 shells, and Jordan's army had a mere 180 pieces of 155 mm artillery.
State Department officials and prosecutors, citing the pending trial, declined to discuss whether an end-user check was done on the Rexon application.
The "Argentina" exports raise further questions.
A federal law enforcement source disclosed that agents spot-checking U.S. firearms exports discovered that approximately 500,000 guns were licensed in 1991-92 for export to Argentina, which has strict civilian gun control and an 83,000-member military.
The Argentine government reports only 10,663 firearms of types licensed by the State Department were imported in 1991-92.
"The half-million number was stunning," said the enforcement official, who spoke on condition he not be identified.
A possible explanation: midshipment diversion to other destinations. The State Department, citing commercial confidentiality, would not supply data on Argentina licenses to the AP. The source said an investigation was under way.
The critics of Defense Trade Controls include the department's own inspector-general, who last September described its foreign end-use checks as "haphazard and often ineffective."
Officials at Defense Trade Controls, which handles more than 50,000 license applications a year, say they are following through on the inspector-general's recommendations and looking for other ways to, as one said, "reinforce our ability to monitor and enforce."
Across town, another monitoring problem troubles the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms: ATF inspectors cannot keep up with the huge number of licensed retail gun dealers. The Clinton administration proposes boosting the license fee to $ 600 a year from $ 10 to force down the number of dealers.
A Texas case illustrates the problem:
After U.S. agents traced a Mexican drug gang's guns back to a licensed dealership in Brownsville, they discovered it was partly owned by one of the gang's leaders, who bought guns wholesale and smuggled them to Mexico. Mexican law all but bans gun sales; U.S. law prohibits unlicensed export of weapons.
With dealer connivance or not, a river of illicit weapons flows south from Texas. An ATF spot check of dealers and purchasers determined that 90 percent of the firearms bought in the Laredo area were illegally going to Mexico.
"The traffic has probably doubled the past few years," said Don Carter, ATF chief in Houston. "We catch only a small percentage."
Philippine gun smugglers also have set themselves up as licensed U.S. dealers. A Smith & Wesson handgun bought for $ 275 in the United States can be sold for $ 1,250 on the Philippine black market. Other licensed dealers have aided smugglers for Irish guerrillas and Croatian nationalists.
The gunrunners are enterprising: Weapons have been smuggled out in shipments of washing machines, scuba tanks, even stuffed animals. Sometimes they are simply packed into checked airline luggage, which is seldom X-rayed. Crates of guns are loaded onto marijuana freighters returning to Colombia.
The drug cartels and paramilitary bands that terrorize the Colombian countryside favor assault rifles smuggled from the United States.
In one case, the massacre of 18 people in a Colombian village, ATF traced the firearms to a California dealership where five local Colombians were routinely dropping in to buy AR-15 and AK-47 assault rifles.
A similar trace was done on Pablo Escobar's personal arsenal, including the 9 mm he wielded for his last stand, when the drug lord got off 13 rounds before being felled by police. The German-made gun was found to be one of 19 bought at a Hialeah, Fla., dealership by one man in one week.
Such U.S. shopping sprees prompted the Colombian government to campaign for putting arms trafficking on the United Nations agenda this spring. "For us, this proliferation of weapons, of the weapons trade, is very dangerous and destabilizing," said Colombian U.N. diplomat Patti Londono.
The multilateral approach may come just in time. The arms black market appears to be expanding, in part because of huge new surpluses of weapons in the old East bloc, particularly in crime-ridden, cash-short Russia.
 
 NEXT: Part II - The Russian Connection
 Load-Date: March 26, 1994

 

End of Document
