

PBS Documentary Explores 'Last Days of the Revolution' in Cuba
The Associated Press
November 9, 1994, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 783 words
Byline: By BILL KACZOR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PENSACOLA, Fla.
Body




When Churchill Roberts visited Cuba in January 1993 on an educational exchange, he noticed life had gotten much worse since his visit six months earlier.
Food was rationed, and people were waiting in long lines to get what was available. Power blackouts occurred more often and lasted longer. Traffic had come almost to a halt because fuel was in short supply. Prostitutes, rarely seen before, were common outside tourist hotels.
Roberts, chairman of the University of West Florida's Communication Arts Department, had been to Cuba several times on academic missions and to work on a PBS documentary. When he returned to the Pensacola campus, he began planning another documentary, this one on Cuba's collapsing economy.
"I said, 'I think one of these days this thing is going to collapse and there's going to be hell down here,' " Roberts recalled.
It took 11 months of negotiating, a trip to Havana without cameras and one to Washington before Cuba permitted Roberts to return with a film crew.
PBS will broadcast the result of the documentary crew's visits in December and March at 10 p.m. EST tonight.
The hour-long documentary, called "Last Days of the Revolution," is narrated by Jose de Cordoba, a Wall Street Journal writer.
It is an inside look at what has happened to Cuba since communism's fall in Eastern Europe and the dismantling of the Soviet Union, which no longer is subsidizing the island nation.
"About the time we are finishing this documentary, the situation in Cuba exploded," Roberts said. "Normally, PBS requires documentaries to be there two months ahead of air date, but they've let us keep this one so we could keep it right up to the minute."
West Florida faculty and students interviewed desperate citizens, worried dissidents and high government officials about the failing economy.
The situation has created fears of possible civil war and, this summer, prompted thousands to flee across the Straits of Florida in boats and rafts.
The exodus created an international crisis and put an end to the U.S. government's 28-year policy of welcoming Cuban refugees with open arms and paroling them into this country.
The film also looks at the U.S. embargo against Cuba. Politicians who support it say the embargo is the only way to bring down Cuban President Fidel Castro. Critics, including the Rev. Jesse Jackson, say it is a Cold War relic that hurts the Cuban people more than Castro.
In his narration, Cordoba notes that Castro has used the embargo as a propaganda tool, blaming it for what he euphemistically calls "Cuba's special period."
"Last Days of the Revolution" is the fourth Latin-American documentary produced by West Florida, but the first produced under the university's new Documentary Institute and the first principally funded by the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, through a $ 34,600 grant.
West Florida drew more attention than it bargained for when its "Campaign for Cuba" documentary aired on PBS two years ago. The six-member video crew was put under house arrest at a Havana hotel for refusing to turn over taped interviews of dissidents.
Cuban officials let the crew leave with its tapes after 24 hours, apparently unwilling to force matters just before Cuba was to host the Pan American Games.
That broadcast focused on the influence of the Cuban American National Foundation, a Miami-based exile group, on U.S. policy toward Cuba. The organization threatened to sue for slander in an unsuccessful attempt to block the documentary from airing.
"Last Days of the Revolution" has been comparatively free of controversy, and the video crew was given unexpected freedom in Cuba, Roberts said.
"It wasn't until the very last day that we had a problem," he said.
The video team's contact at the Foreign Ministry was upset over interviews with relatives of Orestes Lorenzo, the Cuban pilot who is reviled as a traitor in Cuba after he defected to the United States in his MiG fighter and then daringly flew back in a light plane to rescue his family.
"This time there were no Pan American Games," Roberts said. "I was clearly nervous. But we got out OK."
---
Elsewhere in television …
WORLD WAR II'S GETTYSBURG: PBS's documentary series "The American Experience" tonight presents "The Battle of the Bulge," a 90-minute film on the single biggest and bloodiest battle ever fought by Americans. "The Battle of the Bulge" chronicles the Dec. 16, 1944, German counterattack in which 250,000 troops roared across an 85-mile front from southern Belgium to central Luxembourg, poking a 50-mile salient - the "bulge" - into Allied lines. By the time it was over, Germany's offensive war capability was virtually ended, but 80,000 Americans had been killed, wounded or taken prisoner.
 Load-Date: November 9, 1994

 

End of Document
