

People in the News
The Associated Press
October 10, 1991, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 849 words
Dateline: JOHNSON CITY, Tenn.
Body




Comedian Dennis Miller promises to put his journalism degree to good use when he interviews guests on his new talk show.
Miller, who presented the "news" on "Saturday Night Live," has a journalism degree from Point Park College in his native Pittsburgh.
"Thinking about pursuing a career in journalism is really what drove me to comedy," Miller said. "Because I laughed when they told me I'd probably make only 2 cents for each word I wrote."
But Miller told an audience Wednesday at East Tennessee State University that he was embarrassed by the controversy surrounding freedom of speech these days.
"With all the horrific happenings coming into our living rooms on our television screens every night, this shouldn't have been such a big issue," Miller said.
"The Dennis Miller Show," a syndicated talk show, is scheduled to air beginning in January.
 
 BOCA RATON, Fla. (AP) - Cable News Network's Peter Arnett, who dodged bombs while reporting from Baghdad, says he continues to dodge barbs back on the homefront.
"Fortunately in Baghdad I missed all my mail calls," Arnett told a Nova University luncheon at the Boca Raton Polo Club on Wednesday. "I'm glad I missed this one … addressed to Peter Benedict Arnett."
At the start of the Persian Gulf War, Arnett stayed in the Iraqi capital when other Western journalists were ordered out. Some Americans viewed his reporting as traitorous as Benedict Arnold's dealings with the British during the American Revolution.
Arnett, 56, dismisses the criticism as unfounded.
"Constitutionally, we were fully justified in being there," said the newsman, who won a Pulitzer Prize in 1966 while covering the Vietnam War for The Associated Press.
Arnett is on leave from CNN to write a book.
 
 NEW YORK (AP) - Vice President Dan Quayle says he's stung by jokes about him, but wishes "Tonight" show hosts Jay Leno and Johnny Carson would pay him a percentage for their comedy.
"I'd like to have a little of the money that they've made off of me. I think they ought to share," Quayle told Barbara Walters in an interview for ABC-TV's "20-20." The interview is scheduled to air Friday.
"I am sure that, knowing their political philosophy, as I think they do, that they ought to share a little bit of it, starting with their targets," he said.
When he toured Latin America, one joke made at his expense was that he supposedly said he wished that he spoke Latin.
"That started out as a joke on the Johnny Carson show, according to my information. It started out as a joke and all of a sudden, people said, 'Oh, this is true,"' Quayle said.
"But, you know what, Barbara, I have no doubt whatsoever in my mind I have been strengthened by what I've gone through."
 
 HARARE, Zimbabwe (AP) - Britain's Queen Elizabeth II arrived Thursday to a tumultuous tribal welcome and a local row over whether squatters' shacks were bulldozed because of her visit.
The 65-year-old monarch, on the second leg of a three-nation tour of Africa, arrived from Namibia with her husband, Prince Philip.
Elizabeth was greeted at Harare International Airport by thousands of people, including tribal drummers and dancers clad in animal skins. Before leaving the tarmac, she inspected the guard of honor and received a 21-gun salute.
In the week before her arrival, the City Council demolished hundreds of shanties and evicted thousands of squatters 15 miles away, part of a face-lift for the capital.
Town Clerk Edward Kanengoni raised protests from church leaders, civil rights groups and resident royalists for saying the squatters' presence would be "an embarrassment" during the royal tour.
President Robert Mugabe, seeking to defuse the controversy, said Wednesday that Kanengoni's statement was "unfortunate." He said the squatters were moved because they trespassed, posed health hazards and disrupted social service planning.
 
 VIENNA, Austria (AP) - Claudio Abbado resigned as music director of the Vienna State Opera Thursday for what he termed health reasons.
He did not specify the nature of the problems in his letter of resignation to opera Director Eberhard Waechter.
There have been rumors of disagreements between Waechter and Abbado, and some people familiar with the workings of the orchestra suggested that might have contributed to the resignation.
 
 CHADRON, Neb. (AP) - Ugly pickup trucks have won discount store tycoon Sam Walton and televison talkshow host David Letterman a place in the International Ugly Pickup Association Hall of Fame.
Neither could attend Wednesday's ceremony, but sent letters acknowledging their honor, said Les Mann, publisher of the Chadron Record.
The ugly pickup hall is located in the newspaper's coffee room.
Walton, head of the Wal-Mart discount store chain, was picked because he owns an old red and white pickup, Mann said.
Letterman was tabbed because "he has been kidded by Johnny Carson on his 'Tonight Show' about owning a pickup," Mann said. "We don't know how old the pickup is but it's enough that it gets him in."
The fourth annual ugly pickup parade is set for Oct. 25. Pickups must be at least 10 years old and travel under their own power, Mann said.
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto NY44, Miller, Arnett

 

End of Document
