

People in the News
The Associated Press
July 4, 1991, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 699 words
Dateline: SALEM, Mass.
Body




Arthur Miller, author of "The Crucible," a play about the Salem witch trials, will join the city in its 300th anniversary observation of the witchcraft hysteria.
Miller will attend the Nov. 14 unveiling of the winning design for a memorial to those executed during the 1692 trials, city officials said.
The memorial conveys how tolerance eventually prevailed over fear and ignorance.
Miller's "The Crucible," written in 1952, draws parallels between the trials and the anti-communist McCarthy hearings.
"The Crucible focuses on the theme of intolerance, which is a primary issue in Salem's commemoration of the 1692 witch trials," said Ira Schlosser, vice president of the Essex Institute in Salem, where Miller did research.
The city's Witch Trials Tercentenary committee is seeking $$100,000 for construction of the memorial, to be dedicated June 10, 1992, beside the Charter Street cemetery.
 
 PALM BEACH, Fla. (AP) - Tennis star Monica Seles, whose quick exit from Wimbledon caught the attention of tournament watchers, was spotted shopping here.
Seles, 17, who abruptly withdrew from the tournament outside London, bought an outfit in Bloomingdale's on Saturday at The Gardens mall in Palm Beach Gardens, the Palm Beach Post reported Thursday.
"I'm not going to tell you a thing," said the clerk who sold Seles an exclusive Donna Karan label outfit. "She deserves her privacy."
Seles was also seen Sunday at a Palm Beach grocery store with her parents.
"I certainly didn't expect her to be in the Palm Beach Publix," WPBF-TV health reporter Karen Curtis said. "I talked myself out of believing it was her. I wish I had been more astute."
 
 PHILADELPHIA (AP) - Former Costa Rican President Oscar Arias Sanchez and a French medical aid organization are being awarded the Liberty Medal honoring those who fight oppression.
Arias and Doctors Without Borders will split the $$100,000 prize, which was being awarded during the city's Fourth of July celebration, said Martin Meyerson, chairman of the selection committee.
Arias, winner of the 1987 Nobel Peace Prize, was cited as peacemaker in Central America. Doctors Without Borders, an independent emergency medical aid association, was honored for aiding the civilian refugees and victims in the aftermath of the Gulf War.
The medal was set up by the city's Constitution Bicentennial Commission to honor "an individual or an organization that demonstrates leadership and vision in the pursuit of liberty of conscience or freedom from oppression, ignorance or deprivation."
Previous winners include Lech Walesa and former President Carter.
 
 COBLESKILL, N.Y. (AP) - Emily Davis Mobley, who gained national attention this spring when she was rescued from a New Mexico cave where her leg had been broken, said she can't wait to return to the caverns.
"Since the accident, I've only been in Howe Caverns - which is a show cave - and one little, tiny cave about 30 feet long," Mobley said during an interview Tuesday at the National Speleological Society's annual convention. The meeting is being held at the State University of New York through Friday.
Mobley walks with the aid of a heavy, wooden cane and has a scar down her left leg from mid-thigh to below the knee. The 41-year-old spelunker has about 97 percent mobility but was told by doctors she must wait about eight months before she can cave again.
"I want to wait until it's right the way he wants it," said Mobley, who wore flowered shorts and a red T-shirt with three pins depicting bats, unofficial mascot of cavers.
Mobley's tibia was broken by a falling rock March 31 about two miles into Lechuguilla Cave in southeastern New Mexico.
It took four days for rescuers using ropes and pulleys to maneuver Mobley through passages, up slopes, over chasms and finally out of the 1,565-foot-deep-cave.
A surgeon at Guadalupe Medical Center in Carlsbad, N.M., performed a bone graft and placed two screws and a bolt in Mobley's leg to fix the break.
Mobley has coordinated search parties for missing cavers and runs a mail-order business called "Speleobooks" from a barn behind her home in Schoharie, a rural community about 30 miles west of Albany.
"Caving is my livelihood and all my friends are cavers," she said.
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto NY44

 

End of Document
