

People in the News
The Associated Press
August 9, 1991, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 894 words
Dateline: SAN FRANCISCO
Body




Gabriel Garcia Marquez did not break a contract when negotiations failed over movie rights to his best-selling novel "Love in the Time of Cholera," a federal appeals court ruled.
Marquez was sued by California movie producer Richard Roth, who claimed the author reneged on an agreement over movie rights. But the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals ruled Thursday that no binding agreement existed because Marquez had never signed a contract.
Marquez, who lives in Mexico, won the 1982 Nobel Prize in literature. His novels include "One Hundred Years of Solitude" and "Chronicle of a Death Foretold."
During negotiations for film rights to "Love in the Time of Cholera," Marquez's agent set a sale price of $ 5 million and Marquez specified that the film would have to be shot in Colombia with a Latin American director.
However, a final agreement sent to Marquez's agent in Barcelona in February 1989 did not contain clauses discussing the director or filming location.
Despite continued negotiations, no final agreement was ever made and Roth sued. The court ruled that Marquez's signature was necessary to make the agreement binding.
 
 LOS ANGELES (AP) - Comedian Martin Short is not surprised his eclectic style hasn't exactly turned Hollywood on its ear.
"This is a very cautious town and Hollywood people don't hand stardom over to you for no good business," Short said in a recent interview to promote his new film, "Pure Luck."
"They're businessmen and this is a business," he said.
When Short came to Hollywood five years ago from television's "Saturday Night Live," he had dreams of quick success. The first script he was sent was "Hot to Trot," a film about a talking horse.
"I thought they couldn't possibly be serious about this, but eventually I realized that this was Hollywood's idea of a hot script, particularly in a world of talking babies," he said.
"At that point, I knew that stardom, if it ever did come, wouldn't come fast. I would have to be patient and do the scripts that interested me."
Short's first film role was in "Three Amigos," co-starring Chevy Chase and Steve Martin. He followed with "Innerspace," "Cross My Heart," "Three Fugitives" and "The Big Picture."
In "Pure Luck," he stars as an accountant enlisted to help find his boss' missing daughter.
 
 BURBANK, Calif. (AP) - Linda Ronstadt has recorded two songs in Spanish for the film "The Mambo Kings," a story about two Cubans who find fame in America during the 1950s.
Actor Armand Assante stars in the movie, which will include performances by singers Tito Puente and Celia Cruz. Miss Ronstadt's songs are titled "Perfidia" and "Quiereme Mucho."
"I've always loved this music and this era," Miss Ronstadt said. "Certainly Latin music and the Latin roots of popular American music have held an enduring fascination for me, and I've recorded many sounds reflecting that.
"I'm glad I was asked to participate in the soundtrack for 'The Mambo Kings,' which tells a story characteristic of so many talented Hispanic musicians and artists who came to this country."
The film, due for Christmas release, was adapted from Oscar Hijuelos' Pulitzer Prize-winning novel, "The Mambo Kings Play Songs of Love."
 
 KHARTOUM, Sudan (AP) - Mother Teresa has offered her help to Sudanese children affected by war and drought, the Sudan News Agency reported.
The Nobel Peace Prize-winning nun met Thursday with Brig. Dominic Kassiano, member of the ruling Revolutionary Command Council, and offered the services of her India-based missionary organization to help young victims of war and drought, the news agency said.
A civil war has ravaged southern Sudan since 1983, displacing millions of civilians, and a drought in most of the Africa's largest nation has exacerbated a famine that has affected millions more.
 
 NEW YORK (AP) - His name is an acronym for Ladies Love Cool James, but there's one woman who doesn't share those feelings for rapper LL Cool J.
Simone Johnson is suing the rap star - real name James Smith - for palimony, claiming they lived together for the past four years, said her attorney, Raoul Felder. She wants half of the rapper's earnings since 1987.
Smith has acknowledged paternity of Johnson's two children, and at a Family Court hearing Wednesday, he agreed to pay $ 1,650 a month in support.
Felder, who filed the lawsuit Wednesday, also had Smith served with an order of protection, forcing the rapper to stay away from her.
"He had a very busy day," Felder said of the rap star, whose hits include "Going Back to Cali" and "Momma Said Knock You Out."
 
 PANAREA, Italy (AP) - Prince Charles and Princess Diana lunched with renowned Italian fashion designer Valentino aboard his yacht during their Mediterranean cruise.
The British royal couple's 50-meter yacht, Alexandra, dropped anchor near the tiny island of Panarea in the Eolie archipelago north of Sicily. The couple did not visit the island, but transferred to Valentino's yacht for lunch Thursday, the Italian news agency AGI reported.
The agency said the royal yacht was immediately surrounded by a cluster of boats full of vacationers trying to catch a glimpse of the heir to the British throne and his wife.
Italian and British newspapers have speculated the couple will retrace the stops of their original honeymoon along the southern Italian coast, Sicily and Greece. Buckingham Palace in London has declined to reveal the itinerary.
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto NY44, Marquez, Short

 

End of Document
