

People in the News
The Associated Press
November 12, 1993, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 745 words
Dateline: BARCELONA, Spain
Body




If Mario Vargas Llosa could rewrite his life, he'd cut out the part where he got involved in politics.
"A writer can contribute more to politics if he dedicates himself to what he really knows how to do - write," the Peruvian author told the Spanish news agency EFE in a story Friday.
The 57-year-old Vargas Llosa was granted Spanish citizenship in July. He hasn't been to Peru since 1991, a year after he lost a presidential runoff to Alberto Fujimori.
He was in Barcelona to promote his latest novel, "Lituma in The Andes." The book recently won the Planeta Prize, a top award in Spain. Vargas Llosa said his next book will be about the French-Peruvian feminist Flora Tristan.
 
 NEW DELHI, India (AP) - Artists and activists who consider Michael Jackson vulgar said Friday they will protest his "Dangerous" tour when it comes to India next month.
Ten organizations formed a coalition, saying they will block Jackson's route from the airport, encircle his hotel and picket the sports stadium where he's to perform.
"Michael Jackson symbolizes vulgarity which is explicit when he is on the stage doing things which are obscene and repulsive," said Swami Agnivesh, a social worker who heads the coalition, dubbed the Indian Culture Movement.
Jackson's gyrations and dance routines were popularized here by MTV long before the tour.
"This is demonic culture propagated by the sellers of a new dream of individualistic consumerism," said another protest organizer, Rajiv Vohra.
Sponsors scheduled a second Jackson concert in New Delhi when tickets were bought up, but the dates of the shows repeatedly have been changed.
 
 NEW YORK (AP) - A construction worker found a loaded gun hidden in a bathroom at the Ed Sullivan Theater, home to David Letterman's "Late Show."
Someone apparently stashed the .38-caliber semiautomatic in the drop ceiling, police spokesman Scott Bloch said. The gun fell out Thursday night when the worker began removing the ceiling in the continuing renovation of the theater.
Police didn't know who owns the gun, Bloch said.
Rosemary Keenan, a Letterman spokeswoman, said he had no comment.
 
 PIGEON FORGE, Tenn. (AP) - Dolly Parton, who certainly likes wearing makeup, is starting a new line of cosmetics.
"Next to music, makeup is my first love. If I hadn't been a musician, I would've been a beautician," she said Thursday.
She calls her 12-item line for Revlon the Dolly Parton's Beauty Confidence Collection. It goes on sale in January, when an infomercial will be broadcast and people can call to buy the set for $ 100.
"It makes me feel better about myself and that's why I call it Dolly Parton Confidence," the big-haired, glitter queen of country music said at a makeup party she had at her theme park, Dollywood.
 
 VATICAN CITY (AP) - Pope John Paul II returned to the Vatican on Friday after an overnight hospital stay for a shoulder fracture he suffered in a fall on some steps.
The 73-year-old pontiff will need six weeks to fully recover and months before swimming and skiing again. He will resume most activities, but canceled audiences Friday and Saturday as well as a visit to a Rome parish on Sunday.
John Paul tripped and fell down four steps during a Vatican audience Thursday. He was treated for a dislocated and fractured right shoulder.
He has to eat with his left hand but can sign documents with his right.
"He has already tried it and managed to move the (right) hand enough to sign," said Dr. Luigi Candia, medical chief at Gemelli Polyclinic. "(But) he can't lift the fork to his mouth."
The pope's orthopedist, Dr. Gianfranco Fineschi, said his arm must remain bandaged and immobile for four weeks, followed by two weeks of physical therapy.
Vatican spokesman Joaquin Navarro said John Paul was feeling well, was out of pain and slept peacefully at the hospital Thursday night. He will make his first public appearance from his window overlooking St. Peter's Square on Sunday for his usual blessing.
 
 LOS ANGELES (AP) - Life behind the camera is more rewarding than acting for Liv Ullmann.
"Acting is something I'm happy to say goodbye to," said the 54-year-old actress, whose films include "Persona," "Cries and Whispers" and "Autumn Sonata." "I'd really like to replace it professionally with writing and directing."
"Sofie," her directorial debut, opened recently and received favorable reviews. The film, based on a novel, chronicles the life of a Jewish woman in 19th century Copenhagen.
Besides directing, Miss Ullmann wrote the screenplay.
 Load-Date: November 12, 1993

 

End of Document
