

People in the News
The Associated Press
November 20, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 869 words
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




Zsa Zsa Gabor says her new autobiography is full of kiss-and-tell, and readers will finally learn the truth about her age - sort of.
"They will be able to figure it out," the 70-something actress said.
The book, "One Lifetime is Not Enough," includes details about Miss Gabor's nine husbands and her sexual encounters with the rich and famous. It includes tantalizing stories about Frank Sinatra, stepson Nicky Hilton and Richard Burton.
When asked for details, she said, "You have to read the book. There are lots of shocks."
Miss Gabor and her ninth husband, Frederic von Anhalt, gave a party Tuesday night to discuss the book. Among those on hand at Miss Gabor's $ 15 million Bel-Air mansion were Beatrice Arthur, Anne Sterling, Lou Ferrigno, Rod McKuen and Phyllis Diller.
"I want people to know my background," the former Hungarian beauty queen said. "I want America to know who I am."
 
 SAN DIEGO (AP) - The collapse of communism in the Soviet Union has removed the main target of CIA snooping, but hasn't eliminated the need for the agency itself, former Director William Colby said.
The CIA will shift to gathering information on terrorists, drug lords and rogue countries, Colby said in a speech Tuesday at San Diego State University.
Colby, who was CIA director during the Nixon and Ford administrations, said the appointment of former CIA analyst Robert Gates as the agency's new director indicates the increasing importance of analysis in CIA activities.
"Gates (is from) the analytical community, while his predecessors all came out of the operation side," Colby said. "With his appointment we have made a very symbolic step in the right direction."
CIA analysts in the past have studied world oil markets and Latin American debt when those issues became critical to U.S. interests. Analysis will now focus on international industrial espionage and issues like AIDS and drug use that threaten American society, he said.
 
 NEW YORK (AP) - Cosby kid Keisha Knight Pulliam, rapper D-Nice and Broadway star Susan Anton were among the famous faces Wednesday at a countdown for the Great American Smokeout.
"I'm just here to say smoking is no good for you," said Pulliam, who promised to deliver a fruit basket to TV personality Maury Povich to help him kick the habit.
D-Nice told smokers to put out their cigarettes on Thursday "and set a good example for the kids."
Also attending an American Cancer Society news conference were actors Sylvia Miles and Vincent Gardenia; Steven Schnetzer of the soap "Another World"; Maureen Garrett, Jeff Phillips, Tina Sloan and Michael Zaslow of "Guiding Light"; Audrey Landers, formerly of TV's "Dallas"; and wrestling announcer Mean Gene Okerlund.
The performers sang, clowned and pleaded. But they were overshadowed by Janet Sackman, a former Miss Chesterfield and Lucky Strikes model, who has throat and lung cancer.
"I should have never smoked. But now, it's too late," she said.
 
 CHARLOTTE, N.C. (AP) - Former President Reagan was reunited with the soap box - but he autographed it instead of standing on it.
Larry Norton said he spent the past year trying to get Reagan to sign a box of Borateen 20-mule team Borax soap - the product Reagan endorsed when he hosted "Death Valley Days" on television in the 1960s.
Norton didn't buy a ticket to Tuesday's $ 300-a-plate dinner, organized by the Charlotte Foreign Policy Forum. Instead, he snuck in amid 350 other guests.
"I said, 'Mr. President, do you remember this?"' Norton said. "He said, 'I sure do. I sold a lot of 'em."'
Outside the country club, Norton let out several "whoops."
"This is one of the happiest moments of my life," he said.
The forum was founded in 1989 to serve as a soap box for conservative speakers.
 
 NEW YORK (AP) - Tony Randall, who founded the National Actors Theatre, stepped in to save the show when an actor became ill before the start of the company's first performance.
Randall, the artistic director, replaced Fritz Weaver in the pivotal role of Deputy Gov. Danforth in a revival of "The Crucible," the 1953 Arthur Miller drama.
Weaver came down with a sore throat and his understudy had only been hired Monday, said Gary Springer, the company's spokesman. At the urging of Weaver's co-stars, Martin Sheen and Michael York, Randall, with script in hand, took over the role.
Weaver is expected back Thursday.
"The Crucible" officially opens Dec. 10. It is the first production of the National Actors Theatre, an attempt to bring classic theater back to Broadway.
---
 
 Eds: A version also moving on sports wire
SAN ANTONIO (AP) - San Antonio Spurs forward Terry Cummings, known for his skills on the basketball court and in the recording studio, is launching an acting career.
The 6-foot-9 Cummings portrays a bodyguard in the movie "Shadow Force." The film, about police officers who act as hitmen for mobsters, stars Dirk Benedict, Lance LeGault, Bob Hastings and Glenn Corbett.
Cummings said he felt an excitement before his first scenes were filmed Tuesday. "It's like a big game," he said.
Asked whether he enjoyed playing a bodyguard, Cummings, referring to his banging basketball style, quipped: "I do this for a living."
Cummings also will write and produce music for the film, scheduled for release in March.
 Graphic



 
LaserPhotos NY44, Cummings, Gabor

 

End of Document
