

People in the News
The Associated Press
April 12, 1991, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 905 words
Dateline: OVIEDO, Spain
Body




Placido Domingo, Jose Carreras and five other top Spanish opera singers shared the 1991 Prince of Asturias Art Prize.
The other winners announced Friday: Alfredo Kraus, Monserrat Caballe, Victoria de los Angeles, Teresa Berganza and Pilar Lorengar.
The prize - about $$50,000 and a sculpture by Spanish artist Joan Miro - is given annually to the person, group or institution of Spain or Latin America whose works in their field constitute a significant contribution to Spanish culture.
"The prize winners have universally promoted the name of Spain and created an enormous love for music in the whole society," said Antonio Pedro Rius, the award jury's president.
The prize is given annually by the Prince of Asturias Foundation, named for the traditional title of the heir to the Spanish throne, now 22-year-old Prince Felipe de Borbon, King Juan Carlos' only son.
The prince is to personally present the award in October at a ceremony in this northern city.
 
 BOISE, Idaho (AP) - Sen. Steve Symms and a former aide, Loretta Fuller, are engaged. No wedding date has been set.
"We're just enjoying each other right now," Fuller said. "I'm looking forward to being married to Steve, whom I love very much."
She worked for the Idaho Republican from 1978 to 1987 and now is an executive assistant to Senate Sergeant at Arms Martha Pope.
Symms, first elected to the Senate in 1980, proposed over the Christmas holidays but said Thursday that he decided against announcing the engagement out of concern for his family. Both Symms and Fuller are divorced after long marriages.
"I'd like to kind of low-key those things because I do have a former wife and three grandchildren and a son that live in Idaho, and I just don't like to flaunt it in the newspaper," Symms said. "That's why I haven't put out a formal statement; I'm not hiding anything."
Symms, 52, was divorced Feb. 12, 1990, from his wife of 30 years, Fran.
Fuller, also 52, is a native of Sumas, Wash. She and ex-husband Gary Fuller, a retired Army colonel, have three children and two grandchildren. They were divorced in 1980 after 25 years.
 
 MEMPHIS, Tenn. (AP) - Blues guitarist B.B. King and author Shelby Foote are among the Southerners scheduled to entertain and educate passengers on a weeklong steamboat ride down the Mississippi River.
The 144 passengers of the Delta Queen paid $$2,000 to $$3,500 for the journey, which was scheduled to begin Friday night.
Lecturers include musician Mose Allison and authors Alex Haley and Dr. Bill Ferris, director of the University of Mississippi's Center for the Study of Southern Culture and co-author of "The Encyclopedia of Southern Culture."
Two crews from the Mississippi Educational Television Network will film a one-hour documentary that will be offered to public TV stations nationwide this fall.
 
 NEW YORK (AP) - Kitty Kelley has downgraded her planned promotional tour for her sizzling biography about former first lady Nancy Reagan to a series of satellite interviews, her publisher said Friday.
Kelley, who canceled interviews with Larry King and two New York television stations Thursday, also scratched her Friday schedule to promote "Nancy Reagan, the Unauthorized Biography," said Victoria Meyer, spokeswoman for Simon & Schuster.
"I can't imagine she isn't exhausted," said Meyer. "She has remarkable resilience and energy, but anybody would be exhausted and stunned by what has happened."
The satellite interviews will be conducted in 30 cities, said Meyer. It was not immediately known if they would be open to all media or just to television. The exact date was not set.
Meyer said there was no truth to suggestions by Sheila Tate, the former first lady's press secretary, that this week's interviews and the tour were canceled because Kelley feared a backlash.
Meanwhile, the Reagans' daughter Patti Davis is cashing in on the excitement caused by Kelley's book by pushing up the publication date of her new tome.
Davis was set to publish her third novel, "A House of Secrets" in 1992. But the Carol Publishing Group announced Friday it will come out this summer "in response to the astounding interest being generated" by Kelley's tell-all book.
"This book is part of my progression in coming to terms with my childhood and my life," Davis said.
She describes her new book as the story of a girl who is "deeply affected by a psychologically domineering mother."
"The girl's mother does everything in her power to desexualize her daughter," Davis said.
Davis' other books were "Home Front" and "Deadfall."
 
 LOS ANGELES (AP) - Comic Sid Caesar postponed his "Together Again" stage show with Imogene Coca because of leg cramps and will undergo surgery designed to relieve pressure on nerves, his manager said Friday.
Caesar, 69, has had difficulty walking because pressure on nerves causes numbness in his legs. The surgery is intended to relieve pressure and correct the condition.
"He can be fine and walking around and then suddenly his leg will fall asleep," said Larry Spellman, his manager.
Doctors at UCLA Medical Center will perform the surgery Wednesday.
"The recuperative time is four to six weeks," said Spellman, who added the surgery "certainly isn't life threatening."
In "Together Again," Caesar and Miss Coca re-create their routines from their 1950s television program "Your Show of Shows."
The "Together Again" shows at the Westwood Playhouse, which were to run April 17 to May 12, have been rescheduled to begin Sept. 25.
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto NY44

 

End of Document
