

People in the News
The Associated Press
January 12, 1992, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 719 words
Byline: AP Photos NY44, Sutherland, Jackson
Dateline: EDINBURGH, Scotland
Body




Former hostage Thomas Sutherland read a lesson Sunday at the 12th-century church he dreamed of during 6 years of captivity in Lebanon.
The Scots-born Sutherland, who attended services at the Bothkennar Church while growing up, thanked the congregation, including his two brothers and three sisters, for their prayers.
"I felt great solace thinking about this church. I had no idea of what was going on on my behalf," he said. "I heard of the Friends of Terry Waite and of the Friends of John McCarthy but somehow no one said anything on the air, on the radio, about Tom Sutherland."
Sutherland, a naturalized U.S. citizen who lives in Fort Collins, Colo., was dean of agriculture at the American University in Beirut when he was kidnapped June 9, 1985. He was released Nov. 18.
On Saturday, he was given a hero's welcome by 40,000 soccer fans at a Glasgow Rangers match. The 60-year-old Sutherland played for the team as a young man.
 
 MEXICO CITY (AP) - Michael Jackson, proving music knows no borders, topped the Cuban hit parade for the second consecutive week with his "Black or White" single from the album "Dangerous."
Jackson and two other American singers were in the Top 10 in the weekly music poll done by the government-run Radio Progreso. The Cuban news agency, Prensa Latina, carried the results Saturday.
Michael Bolton was No. 8 with "When a Man Loves a Woman," and Mariah Carey's "Emotions" No. 9. The list also included groups from other Caribbean and Central American nations.
 
 PUTNAM VALLEY, N.Y. (AP) - The son of talk-show host Sally Jessy Raphael underwent surgery Sunday for injuries suffered in a car accident, authorities said.
Her son, 19-year-old Jason Soderlund, apparently lost control of the car, which left the road and crashed into a tree Saturday night, said William G. Carlos, police chief in Putnam Valley, a suburb north of New York City.
Two passengers in Soderlund's car, Michelle Kramer, 19, and Jason Morales, 20, were also injured. All were listed in very serious condition Sunday at Westchester County hospitals.
No charges have been filed and the accident is still under investigation, police Officer Carl Calabrese said.
 
 BOSTON (AP) - Film director Ernest Dickerson Jr. says his urban drama "Juice," a tale about inner-city youth, is ugly because it tells the truth.
"It's becoming more and more dangerous to grow up in the city," Dickerson told the Boston Sunday Globe. "We've got a whole generation of black kids who just can't be kids."
"Juice" chronicles the lives of four buddies in New York City, each searching for a way to earn "juice," or respect. It opens Friday.
Dickerson, who shot the movie in Harlem, also served as cinematographer for filmmaker Spike Lee on the upcoming "Malcolm X."
 
 LAS VEGAS (AP) - An oddsmaker has rated Warren Beatty, Nick Nolte and Anthony Hopkins as even-money favorites for best actor winner at the Academy Awards.
Beatty's picture, "Bugsy," was tied with Oliver Stone's "JFK" as even-money favorites for best picture in Lenny Del Genio's annual Oscar nomination tip sheet Friday.
Del Genio listed Jodie Foster, Hopkins' co-star in "The Silence of the Lambs," as even-money favorite for best actress. Laura Dern of "Rambling Rose" trailed at 6-5 and Michelle Pfeiffer of "Frankie and Johnny" at 3-1.
Del Genio set best picture odds at 6-5 for "The Silence of the Lambs" and 3-1 for Nolte's "The Prince of Tides."
"I think this is the best race in at least five years," said Del Genio, race and sports book director at Bally's Las Vegas.
The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences will announce the Oscar winners at the 64th Academy Awards on March 30.
 
 LOS ANGELES (AP) - Singer Natalie Cole, whose velvety voice was added to her father's classic version of "Unforgettable," won three trophies at the 24th annual NAACP Image Awards.
Arsenio Hall and Luther Vandross each got two.
Ms. Cole received awards Saturday for best female artist, best jazz artist and best music video for "Unforgettable," which features old clips of the late Nat King Cole.
"I don't believe my father won all that many awards when he was alive, so these awards are something," Ms. Cole said. "I think he would be absolutely thrilled about them."
The annual honors by the civil rights organization recognize entertainers, shows and films that project positive images of blacks.

 

End of Document
