

People in the News
The Associated Press
September 10, 1992, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 777 words
Dateline: LOUISVILLE, Ky.
Body




Hunter S. Thompson says he expects Democrat Bill Clinton to win the White House this year. But if President Bush is re-elected, the gonzo journalist is moving to Paraguay.
Thompson, best known for his dispatches from the 1972 presidential campaign for Rolling Stone magazine, collected in the book "Fear and Loathing on the Campaign Trail," addressed a literacy group's fund-raiser Wednesday night.
He met recently with Clinton.
"I expect to win this time," said Thompson, a bottle of scotch and a garbage can filled with ice at his side.
"If we don't win, we're going to move Rolling Stone to Paraguay and have a colony down there," he said. "It's got the worst points of both (Brazil and Argentina) and none of the best. There's no place like it in the United States except maybe west Texas."
Thompson also suggested the nation's literacy rate has worsened during the Reagan-Bush years.
"It's been 12 years of the most oppressive, red neck, stupid … greedhead politicians in this country," Thompson told about 100 people at the fund-raiser in his hometown of Louisville for the Kentucky Foundation for Literacy.
 
 NEW DELHI, India (AP) - Britain's Princess Anne began a private visit Thursday to India, and plans to go to the Himalayas.
Anne began her six-day visit by opening a medical clinic in the British Embassy, visiting India's vice president, Kocheril Raman Narayanan, and stopping by the local office of the Save the Children Fund, Britain's largest international children's charity.
The princess on Friday will fly to the rugged Ladakh region in the northeastern part of Jammu-Kashmir state.
Anne will watch Tibetans practice traditional herbal medicine, tour student workshops and inspect tree nurseries. Thousands of Tibetans fled to India after China annexed Tibet in 1950.
British royalty still enjoy popularity in India, where Britain ruled until 45 years ago.
 
 CHARLOTTE, N.C. (AP) - Imprisoned televangelist Jim Bakker is asking forgiveness "for preaching a gospel emphasizing earthly prosperity."
Bakker's letter to former followers renouncing the philosophy that led him astray is the first public sign of a new Bakker, his attorney, Jim Toms, told The Charlotte Observer in an interview published Thursday. Previously, Bakker had apologized only for hurting those who trusted him, Toms said.
Toms said Bakker, who once owned Mercedes-Benz sedans, a 58-foot houseboat and vacation home in Gatlinburg, Tenn., isn't just turning over a new leaf for a hearing this fall seeking to get his sentence reduced.
"He isn't writing it to the judge," Toms said. "He's writing what's on his mind and heart."
Bakker, 52, is serving an 18-year sentence in Minnesota for bilking followers of $ 158 million. He earns 12 cents an hour helping clean his unit at the Federal Medical Center in Rochester, Minn.
"There is no way … you can equate riches or material things as a sign of God's blessing," wrote Bakker, recently divorced by his wife of 30 years, Tammy Faye.
 
 ATLANTIC CITY, N.J. (AP) - Vice President Dan Quayle has some company when it comes Murphy Brown. The chairman of the Miss America pageant says the fictional television newswoman lacks the "wholesome" image it takes to be crowned Miss America.
And he doesn't think much of Madonna, either.
"Madonna is certainly not someone we would even want to be a role model for our program," said Leonard C. Horn, chairman of the Miss America Organization, told The Associated Press on Wednesday. "I think the image she projects is definitely unwholesome.
Quayle criticized the Murphy Brown character for having a child out of wedlock. The pregnancy would also have kept her from competing in the Miss America pageant.
A contestant must be an American citizen, 26 years old or younger, single - and she must never have been pregnant.
"We're looking for wholesome young women," Horn said. "Miss America is the visualized American maiden."
Andrew Ship, of Warner Brothers Television Publicity, which handles the "Murphy Brown" television show, said he did not have an immediate response.
Madonna's spokeswoman, Liz Rosenberg of Warner Records in New York, was not available for comment.
 
 NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - Comic Howie Mandel says he now makes money doing the things he used to do for free in school.
"I was a problem (in school)," he said in an interview published Thursday in the Nashville Banner. "But everything I've been punished for, hit for, or expelled for, is what I get paid for now.
"I was just being me. Whatever I do now is what I was. And now it's considered professional."
Mandel, who performs Sunday night in Nashville, does about 150 concert dates a year. His comedy show "Howie" aired this summer on CBS-TV.

 

End of Document
