

People in the News
The Associated Press
November 15, 1994, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 881 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




What qualifications does Charles Grodin bring as host of a talk show? None, he says, but why he should be different from others?
"I have no qualifications at all, and we're very excited about that," said Grodin, who announced Tuesday he is replacing Tom Snyder as host of the CNBC talk show seen weeknights at 10 p.m. EST.
Snyder is moving to CBS as host of a 12:30 a.m. show following "Late Show With David Letterman."
Grodin, who frequently displays his deadpan wit as a guest on other talk shows, is a perfect replacement, said CNBC President Roger Ailes. Grodin "understands the talk-show genre and genuinely enjoys talking to people," Ailes said.
Grodon signed a two-year deal. The star of "Beethoven" and other movies said he won't miss the time away from films.
"I think this is the best job in television," said Grodin, who will do the show live from the cable station's Fort Lee, N.J., headquarters. "You come to work for two hours a day, you sit down, you talk to America. It's certainly better than working 14 hours a day in the movies."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Ignore those rumors that Lyle Lovett and Julia Roberts are headed for Splitsville. That was them holding hands as they walked to a restaurant after Lovett's New York City concert the other night.
Lovett didn't tell the audience Roberts was at Sunday's show. But in introducing the song "That's No Lady, That's My Wife," the country star was careful to note he wrote it before his marriage 17 months ago.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Roseanne has two dates to look forward to: one in December, when she divorces Tom Arnold, and another in February, when she marries her bodyguard, Ben Thomas.
The "Roseanne" star plans a Valentine's Day wedding, her publicist, Kevin Campbell, said Tuesday. The location hasn't been decided on.
Roseanne said last week she expects her divorce to become final in December, with the couple dividing property from their four-year marriage afterward, either by settlement or trial.
---
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) - Twelve years after he fought Argentina in the Falklands War, Britain's Prince Andrew arrived Tuesday on a fence-mending mission.
The prince, a helicopter pilot in the 10-week war that Britain won, was met by an honor guard, Foreign Minister Guido di Tella and other officials. He was to meet President Carlos Menem later.
"This will strengthen ties with Britain," Menem said. "If there is no dialogue between the two sides, then we have no chance of recovering the islands."
Argentina still claims sovereignty over the South Atlantic island chain Britain has controlled since 1833 and hopes to recover them through diplomatic channels.
Among other things, Andrew is to meet with Argentine veterans, some of whom are still angry.
"As long as we and the families of those who died recall the crimes committed by the British troops in 1982, friendship pacts are of no use," the Federation of Argentine War Veterans said Tuesday.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Sheena Easton is the proud adoptive mother of a baby boy, her first child.
"She didn't want to give out any other information. It's a private occasion, but she wanted people to know she adopted a baby," Angee Jenkins of MCA Records said Monday.
The 35-year-old singer is known for the songs "For Your Eyes Only," "Morning Train" and "Modern Girl."
---
CHARLESTON, W.Va. (AP) - The property Nick Nolte and his ex-wife once planned to turn into a housing tract called Down and Out in South Hills failed to draw a single bid at a tax auction.
The couple, who split up earlier this year, owed $ 2,161 in taxes on the house and four-acre lot, which were valued at $ 425,000. It was one of 3,000 properties put up for bid Monday at a county tax sale.
Before their divorce, the Noltes had proposed turning the property into a 10-lot subdivision, but local planners rejected the idea after neighbors complained.
The neighbors were particularly offended by the proposed development's name, a takeoff on Nolte's 1986 movie "Down and Out in Beverly Hills."
With no one buying the property, the Noltes now have 18 months to pay the back taxes.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Nine months after receiving a lifesaving liver transplant, Jim Nabors says he is ready to get back to work.
"I've already booked some things for next spring, so I'm getting the ball rolling again if anybody out there wants to hire me," the actor-singer said in an "Entertainment Tonight" interview to be broadcast Wednesday.
The 62-year-old Nabors, who starred on "Gomer Pyle, U.S.M.C." in the 1960s, has said his liver was destroyed by the hepatitis B he contracted several years ago during a visit to India.
"Now they say I'm clean as a whistle," he said. "I take a precautionary infusion of a drug once a month to be sure that I don't reinfect."
---
BAKERSFIELD, Calif. (AP) - Buck Owens, who helped popularize country music's Bakersfield Sound, is creating a museum in which to honor it - in Bakersfield, of course.
Construction on the museum and a restaurant, bar, stage and dance area should begin within a few weeks, said Owens' spokesman Jim Shaw.
Bakersfield, a farming and oil city 100 miles north of Los Angeles, has been called Nashville West because of the honky-tonk music of Owens, Merle Haggard and others.
Owens' hits include the 1988 song "The Streets of Bakersfield," recorded with Dwight Yoakam.
 Load-Date: November 15, 1994

 

End of Document
