

People in the News
The Associated Press
September 11, 1992, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 863 words
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




Filmmaker Spike Lee is being sued for alleged copyright infringement over his use of footage from the videotaped beating of motorist Rodney King in his upcoming movie "Malcolm X."
George Holliday, who videotaped police beating King on March 3, 1991, filed a lawsuit in U.S. District Court on Thursday asking that the footage be excised from the film, due for release Nov. 20.
Holliday's attorney, Ronald Grigg, said Lee bought the tape from an agent who had been fired by Holliday and had no authority to negotiate rights to it.
Holliday said he has received threatening calls and letters since the videotape was broadcast nationally on television, and that his wife had gone to Argentina to live "in peaceful obscurity."
He also is seeking $ 120,000 in damages and a statement from Lee that he had no right to use the tape, which appears in the film's opening sequence.
A telephone message left for Lee at his Forty Acres and a Mule production company in New York was not immediately returned.
Warner Bros., which is backing Lee's film, and its parent, Time Warner, also are named as defendants.
"We are not going to have a comment at this point," Charlotte Kandel, a Warner Bros. spokeswoman, said Friday. She added that the lawsuit will not delay the film's release.
 
 EAST LANSING, Mich. (AP) - Gov. John Engler donned black cowboy boots, tight jeans, a braided belt and a large white cowboy hat to meet country music superstar Garth Brooks before a concert at Michigan State University.
"It (the hat) covers places hair used to," joked Engler, described by aides as "a big fan" of Brooks.
Telephone lines were jammed for hours across Michigan the day tickets for Thursday's concert went on sale last month. Even Engler couldn't get a dial tone at his office near the Capitol in Lansing. The 14,000-seat Breslin Center sold out in a record five hours.
Brooks wouldn't model a gag gift he received from the governor: a cowboy hat with a radar scope attached to it as a warning to telephone operators the next time he's in Michigan.
 
 MEMPHIS, Tenn. (AP) - Anglican Archbishop Desmond Tutu, in Memphis to receive an award from the museum at the motel where the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. was slain, called the site "holy ground" and called for racial peace.
"When the law of an eye for an eye operates, the people will all end up being blind," Tutu said, paraphrasing King, during a speech Thursday at the National Civil Rights Museum.
The museum, which opened a year ago at The Lorraine Motel where King was murdered in 1968, awarded Tutu, a Nobel Peace Prize recipient, its "international freedom award."
Former U.S. Rep. Barbara Jordan of Texas got a similar award for her civil rights work in the United States.
Ms. Jordan, now a professor at the University of Texas at Austin, said the basic meaning of "civil rights" - life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness - has been clouded by day-to-day politics.
 
 NEW YORK (AP) - Author and humorist Erma Bombeck says she coped with breast cancer and a resulting mastectomy with humor, fear and sadness.
Bombeck was told she had a malignant lump in her breast on April 23.
"My reaction wasn't that dramatic," writes Bombeck in the October issue of Redbook magazine.
"As my doctor droned on, the humor that has been such an important part of my life kicked in automatically. I thought of the thousands of luncheons and dinners I had attended where they slapped a nametag on my left bosom. I always smiled and said, 'Now, what shall we name the other one?' That would no longer be a problem."
Bombeck, 65, said her jokes took on an edge after the surgery. Just before she went home from the hospital, the doctor asked her how she felt.
"Does the phrase 'road kill' have any meaning for you?" she replied.
Bombeck says she became obsessed with other women's cleavages and worried that her husband would pity her or be shocked when he saw her scars. But he wasn't.
"I searched his face," she writes. "Only love was there."
 
 SAN ANTONIO (AP) - Ozzy Osbourne, who urinated on the Alamo grounds in 1982, has atoned for the action with a $ 10,000 check to the Daughters of the Republic of Texas.
The check was presented Thursday to the organization, which maintains the Texas shrine.
After the incident, Osbourne was arrested for public intoxication and a city ban was instituted against the British heavy metal star.
"In keeping with Mr. Osbourne's wishes, his act of atonement will not be turned into a publicity stunt," Marjorie M. Hardy, chairwoman of the DRT Alamo Committee, said in a written statement. "We accept his donation. … We applaud Mr. Osbourne for the progress he has made in turning his life around in a new and positive direction. And we wish him well."
 
 PHILADELPHIA (AP) - Maxwell Kennedy, a law clerk in the Philadelphia district attorney's office, went beyond the call of duty when he chased down a man he spotted breaking into a car.
Kennedy, 27, son of the late U.S. Sen. Robert F. Kennedy, chased the suspect about three blocks Thursday night before pointing him out to two police officers, who caught the would-be thief.
Kennedy, a 1992 graduate of the University of Virginia law school, joined the district attorney's office this spring.

 

End of Document
