

People in the News
The Associated Press
November 6, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 718 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Dionne Warwick, Rita Marley and other performers will join Miriam Makeba at a concert in Nigeria next month to raise money for the children of Africa, organizers said Wednesday.
Ms. Makeba and Winnie Mandela appealed for sponsors for the concert at a news conference in New York where the list of performers was released.
"We are here to put the final injection to this tremendous effort that has been undertaken," said Mrs. Mandela, wife of Nelson Mandela, head of the African National Congress.
Other entertainers at the three-day concert in Lagos on Nov. 28, 29 and 30 will include Kool & the Gang, the Commodores, Barry White, Frankie Beverly and Maze, Freddie Jackson, Melba Moore, Color Me Badd, The Boys and Chubb Rock and Third World.
African performers expected include Fela, King Sunny Ade, Ladysmith Black Mambazo and Hugh Masekela.
The concert, Ms. Makeba's brainchild, will be held along with a conference bringing together scholars, United Nations officials, doctors, politicians and others concerned about the welfare of African children.
Concert organizer Tiahmo Rauf said a cable company is being sought for a pay-per-view deal. He said organizers hope the concert will raise "trillions" to improve the health, education and welfare of African children.
"We are appealing to our friends to help make this a reality," Ms. Makeba said.
 
 BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (AP) - Evangelist Billy Graham arrived here Wednesday to prepare for crusades and high-level visits next week.
Appearances at the 78,000-seat River Plate soccer stadium could draw a combined audience of more than 300,000. Several million more are expected to watch broadcasts that will be transmitted to 20 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Graham was scheduled to meet with President Carlos Menem on Monday. The soccer stadium crusades were set for Thursday through Sunday.
The 72-year-old evangelist was invited by 2,000 of Argentina's evangelical churches.
 
 INDIANAPOLIS (AP) - Mayor William Hudnut, who is leaving office, said Wednesday he has accepted a temporary position as a fellow at Harvard University's Kennedy School of Government.
Hudnut said he plans to teach a spring semester course on running a big city and to work with students on urban politics. He expects to be at the Boston-area school during the first five months of next year.
The Republican chose not to seek a fifth term as mayor of Indiana's largest city. Republican Stephen Goldsmith defeated Democrat Louis Mahern on Tuesday to replace Hudnut in January.
 
 TULSA, Okla. (AP) - The success of Operation Desert Storm was due mainly to organization and leadership, says one of the men who lead the troops, retired Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf.
Schwarzkopf told the 2,500 people attending the Tulsa Business Forum that business leaders need to set clear objectives, high standards and learn from mistakes, and he referred to the Persian Gulf War in every instance.
But when asked what he considered the main problem in America, Schwarzkopf forcefully said, "Ethics."
"People talk about a leadership crisis," he said. "It's never a competence problem. It's an ethical, moral crisis. It's a problem of character."
Schwarzkopf, who retired in August, told humorous anecdotes of the celebrity status he gained - but says he doesn't deserve - from his nine months in the Persian Gulf.
 
 SAN FRANCISCO (AP) - Pop music star George Michael is donating part of the proceeds from his upcoming single to charities including two San Francisco AIDS agencies.
The single, "Don't Let the Sun Go Down on Me," is a remake of the classic song originally recorded by Elton John.
The San Francisco AIDS Foundation and Project Open Hand will receive part of the royalties.
"We are extremely appreciative of Mr. Michael's donation to help in the cause of fighting AIDS," Pat Christen of the AIDS Foundation and Steve Burns of Project Open Hand said a statement.
The AIDS Foundation focuses on education, case management and advocacy issues surrounding AIDS. Project Open Hand delivers free hot meals and groceries to more than 2,000 people with AIDS in the San Francisco Bay area.
Michael also is donating proceeds to the Los Angeles Children's Museum, the Boys and Girls Club of Chicago, the United Negro College Fund, the Jimmy Fund in Boston and the Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto.
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto NY44, Graham, Michael

 

End of Document
