

People in the News
The Associated Press
December 6, 1994, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 708 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Tupac Shakur will have more time to recover from gunshot wounds before he faces prison for sexual assault.
State Supreme Court Justice Daniel Fitzgerald on Monday postponed a court date for the rapper to Dec. 14. Shakur's doctor said the defendant, who was shot five times in a robbery last week, should be better in about a week.
At that point, the judge will set a sentencing date and listen to arguments on whether Shakur and Charles Fuller, the rapper's co-defendant and road manager, should be allowed to remain free on $ 50,000 bail.
Shakur could get 2 to seven years in prison.
Shakur, 23, and Fuller, 24, were convicted Thursday of sexually abusing a 20-year-old woman Shakur met in a nightclub in 1993.
---
RICHMOND, Va. (AP) - Robert E. Lee, Stonewall Jackson and J.E.B. Stuart stand in bronze effigy on Monument Avenue. A former governor would like to see them joined by a different kind of hero: Arthur Ashe.
A statue of the Richmond-born tennis star and humanitarian should be placed on the avenue reserved for Virginia's Confederate heroes, said former Gov. L. Douglas Wilder.
"It will send a transcending message," just as Ashe transcended racial boundaries, Wilder said Monday during the kickoff of efforts to raise $ 400,000 for a bronze statue of Ashe.
Fund-raising leaders indicated that no decision has been made on where to place the monument to Ashe, who died of AIDS in 1993.
A 12-foot plaster proof of the statue was unveiled at the event. The final version will be 24 feet high with figures of four children surrounding Ashe, who will have books in one outstretched hand and a tennis racket in the other.
Ashe was the first black man to win the Wimbledon tennis championship and the U.S. Open. Wilder was the nation's first elected black governor.
---
BRANSON, Mo. (AP) - The Wichita Lineman is back on the job.
After calling it quits last week at the Glen Campbell Goodtime Theatre, Campbell reached a compromise with theater owners for next year's schedule, his spokesman Sanford Browkaw said Monday.
Previously, the singer had been unable to come to terms with the theater's owners.
Campbell, whose hits include "Rhinestone Cowboy" and "The Wichita Lineman," will perform his last 1994 show on Dec. 18 and open the 1995 season in April, Brokaw said. He has performed in Branson since 1991.
"Branson's been like a second home to me and I hope to stay for a good long time," Campbell said.
Campbell will work fewer weeks next year for less pay, said his manager, Stan Schneider.
---
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Writer Mario Vargas Llosa says the life of troubled Argentine soccer star Diego Maradona would make a good novel - or soap opera.
Maradona, considered one of soccer's greatest players, was kicked off the Argentine team during last summer's World Cup after failing a drug test. Earlier, he was suspended 15 months for cocaine use.
"No one yet has done a novel based on a theme as strong as soccer. The life of Maradona could make a dramatic story, or at least a pathetic one, like a TV soap opera," Llosa said in an interview in Tuesday's O Globo newspaper.
"His enormous talent was destroyed by his success," said the Peruvian author of the best seller "The War at the End of the World."
Llosa, a soccer fan who ran unsuccessfully for president of Peru, said the sport could be a model for Latin American politics.
"Soccer only works in teams; it has clear, fair and refereed rules, and provides room for individual initiative," he said.
---
LONDON (AP) - The Duchess of York's new landlord is evicting her.
Romenda Lodge, home to the former Sarah Ferguson and her two daughters, was sold this month to a businessman who wants to move his family in.
"She has to move out by the end of January and hasn't found anywhere else yet," said the duchess's spokeswoman, requesting customary anonymity.
Fergie rented the six-bedroom house near Windsor Castle, 20 miles west of London, after separating from Prince Andrew more than two years ago.
Princesses Beatrice, 6, and Eugenie, 4, go to school about five miles away from the $ 1.4 million house.
The duchess has been looking for a home near her husband's at Sunninghill Park so she could call on his security officers in an emergency, according to Press Association, the British national news agency.
 Load-Date: December 6, 1994

 

End of Document
