

People in the News
The Associated Press
March 16, 1992, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 824 words
Byline: Perkins, Witt
Dateline: BERLIN
Body




Germany's largest-circulation newspaper claims to have former East German skater Katarina Witt's secret police files, revealing a star who made plenty of demands on her Communist state and had most of them fulfilled.
Among the favors the two-time Olympic figure-skating champion requested from the now-defunct East German state, the tabloid Bild listed: cars for herself and her family, an apartment and a vacation home, travel permission for her parents, and repairs of her television set.
Ms. Witt paid for everything herself, Bild said Monday in what it claimed was the first detailed report on her privileges.
"I am not surprised that such files were kept," Ms. Witt was quoted as saying. "I always knew that everything was being registered."
Ms. Witt made her demands to the local Communist Party leadership in her native Chemnitz, then known as Karl-Marx-Stadt, which then informed the Stasi secret police, Bild said.
The 25-year-old skater is now retired from competition. She was a commentator for CBS-TV during the recent Winter Olympics.
 
 SAO PAULO, Brazil (AP) - Prince Philip, president of the World Wildlife Fund, favors controlled hunting in the Amazon rain forest of animals not in danger of extinction, a newspaper reported Monday.
The husband of Britain's Queen Elizabeth II arrived in Brazil on Sunday for a five-day visit.
The Folha de Sao Paulo newspaper quoted Philip as saying he favored establishing hunting seasons to control populations of animals not in danger of extinction - the subject of a heated debate in Brazil.
Amazonas state Gov. Gilberto Mestrinho, a pro-development spokesman and No. 1 opponent of environmentalists, has advocated a new law to allow alligator hunting in the Amazon.
From Manaus, capital of the jungle state of Amazonas, Philip left on a river boat trip to the Anavilhanas Archipelago on the Rio Negro.
The wildlife fund is sponsoring an environmental project in the world's largest river archipelago - 200 islands covering almost 900,000 acres.
On Wednesday, the prince will meet with President Fernando Collor de Mello and visit Congress in Brasilia.
 
 LONDON (AP) - David Bowie, Elton John and George Michael will headline a star-studded charity tribute to Queen singer Freddie Mercury, who died of AIDS last year, organizers said.
The April 20 concert at Wembley Stadium, already sold out, also will feature Annie Lennox, Seal, Roger Daltrey, Ian Hunter, Robert Plant, Paul Young, and U2 playing live via satellite from California.
Mercury's Queen colleagues, Brian May, John Deacon and Roger Taylor, will star in the show. Mercury died Nov. 24 at the age of 45, the day after he anounced he had AIDS.
The tribute show will raise money for AIDS research.
It is to be broadcast live on British Broadcasting Corp. television and radio. Fox Broadcasting Co. will show two hours of the show on the same day, and MTV will broadcast the entire show the following weekend.
 
 LOS ANGELES (AP) - Rock 'n' roll pioneer Carl Perkins credits his family, friends and fans with pulling him out of a depression after he was diagnosed with throat cancer last year.
"Everybody gathered around me," he said. "I got a lot of love. I got a lot of great get-well cards from all over. It was a combination of things that made me say, 'I can't leave here."'
After 37 cobalt radiation treatments, Perkins' cancer has slipped into remission, but the after-effects remain.
"My tastebuds were burned off. My saliva glands were burned," said Perkins, who turns 60 next month. "But I'm like a racehorse at the Kentucky Derby. Everyone's gate fell except mine, so I'm ready to get back out there."
Perkins, the singer-songwriter who penned the 1956 hit "Blue Suede Shoes," recently returned to the stage, performing a handful of songs at the Hard Rock Cafe in New York.
He said he hopes to do more performances, although doctors have warned him that overworking his throat could lead to permanent damage.
 
 NEW YORK (AP) - Yet another dangerous woman is haunting Michael Douglas on screen.
In "Basic Instinct," being released Friday, Douglas plays a San Francisco detective investigating the murder of a rock star. The prime suspect, played by Sharon Stone, keeps ice picks around the house, writes novels about murder and ends up in bed with Douglas.
"There does seem to be a chord here between sex, violence and death," Douglas said in Sunday's New York Times.
The last time the 47-year-old actor mixed those three elements was in "Fatal Attraction," the 1987 hit in which he played a married man who has an affair with a woman who turned out to be a psychopath.
"'Fatal Attraction' was a picture close to home for a lot of people because you could identify with those characters," Douglas said. "It was a reality tale, while 'Basic Instinct' is like a detective novel that people like to read in the privacy of their homes.
"It's almost Gothic. It's certainly more dramatic. And the real question here is, is anybody really worthy of redemption?"

 

End of Document
