

Pope, on Edge of Pantanal, Warns Against Destroying the Environment
The Associated Press
October 16, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 612 words
Byline: By DENNIS REDMONT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CUIABA, Brazil
Body




Brazilian Indians met with Pope John Paul II on Wednesday to tell him of the oppression that has nearly led to their extinction 499 years after Christopher Columbus arrived in the Americas.
They condemned next year's celebrations of the voyages of the Genoese explorer.
"The indigenous people of Brazil are against any festive commemoration," Manuel Gomes da Silva of the Kaxinowa tribe in western Acre state told the pope. "These have been 500 years of suffering and sadness."
"How can they celebrate 500 years of death and violence?," asked another Indian leader, Orlando Mel Gueiro of the Bare tribe on the northwestern Venezuelan border.
"For us it is a time to reflect on how we can survive the next 500 years."
Earlier in the day, John Paul warned Brazil to take better care of its land, equating preservation of the environment with the right to life.
A delegation of 160 Indians brought an open letter criticizing government delays in marking off reservations and denouncing 141 murders of Indians since the pope first visited Brazil in 1980.
One of the Brazilian chiefs who addressed the pope in 1980, Marcal de Sousa Tupai, a Guarani tribesman, was gunned down by three hired killers two years later. His daughter, Edna Silva de Sousa, 42, carried a letter to John Paul from 32 indigenous nations.
"Nothing has changed," she said. "The Indian people are still being decimated, not by colonialism but by multinational projects, by mining, hunger and poverty."
The Roman Catholic church has blamed the government for bringing Brazilian Indians to the verge of extinction - from 5 million in the 16th century to 220,000 today.
The pope told the delegation: "I have heard with great pain the news about violations of your rights, motivated by greed and private interests … .
"I ask God to illuminate those responsible (in the government) to find wise and responsible solutions for these shameful situations," he said.
Many in the delegation wore T-shirts with the names of murdered tribesmen and the date of their death. They held a large banner that read: "Punishment for the Murderers."
Before meeting the Indians at the halfway point of his 10-day trip to Brazil, the pope held Mass for 150,000 people in the capital of Mato Grosso state, which borders the world's largest wetland - the Pantanal. It's an area of immense rain forests ravaged by fires set by gold prospectors or land-hungry ranchers.
Brazil has tried to improve its image as it prepares to host the 1992 U.N. Conference on Environment and Development. While it has taken some measures to slow indiscriminate burnings and land invasion, it has also lashed back at international groups seeking to preserve the world's largest rain forest.
Until recently, the government has resisted "debt for nature" proposals that would forgive part of its $ 120 billion foreign debt - the largest in the developing world - in exchange for keeping tracts of the Amazon untouched.
"For Brazil, environmental protection is first and foremost the right (to) and protection of life," the pope said in a speech before an esplanade carved out of a gold-prospecting area.
The Pantanal swamplands have until recently been unspoiled, with about 650 species of birds, 230 types of fish and an array of rare mammals and reptiles. The region's delicate ecology was long protected by its remoteness but it is today endangered by exploitation, development and greed.
On Wednesday, John Paul celebrated the 13th anniversary of his ascension to the papal seat. On Oct. 16, 1980, a puff of white smoke from the Vatican announced to the world that Cardinal Karol Wojtyla of Poland had been elected pontiff.
This trip is John Paul's 53rd abroad as pontiff.

 

End of Document
