

Portrait of the Man Behind Brazil's Scandal
The Associated Press
July 13, 1992, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 739 words
Byline: By PETER MUELLO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




The man behind a scandal that has rocked the government of President Fernando Collor de Mello is a flamboyant financier who alienated many in the president's inner circle.
Paulo Cesar Farias is the target of a congressional probe into accusations of graft, tax evasion and influence peddling. The scandal has badly eroded Collor's support in Congress and in the streets.
Leftist opposition parties say they will pursue impeachment proceedings against the president. Polls show many Brazilians want him to step down, at least until the investigation is completed.
Legislators say there is enough evidence to indict Farias. Congress also has evidence that Farias controlled a massive network that skimmed millions of dollars from the public coffers - and used some of the money to pay the personal and household expenses of Collor's family.
Collor says he didn't know about the payments.
The scandal broke when Pedro Collor, the president's brother, told the magazine Veja in May that Farias, widely known as PC, ran an extortion ring and hired and fired top-level employees - right under the president's nose.
Farias, who has dropped out of sight, has called the charges ridiculous. He has said he will sue Pedro Collor.
Renan Calheiros, the government's leader in Congress until he ran afoul of Farias and was dumped, said he warned the president that Farias was "a cancer that must be extirpated."
A short man with a bristling mustache, Farias rose to power with Collor in the cutthroat rural politics of Alagoas, a poor sugar cane-growing state in the northeast.
Pedro Collor said that when Farias was the treasurer for Collor's 1989 presidential campaign, he charged campaign expenses to businessmen but wrote them off as funds spent. Money vanished.
Members of the early inner circle remember Farias bragging about staying at the posh George V Hotel whenever he was in Paris. Joao Santana, a former Minister of Infrastructure, recalled Farias with "medallions and open shirts, sort of crass."
When Collor won the election, many felt Farias was too coarse for the national stage.
"PC was provincial," Calheiros said in Veja in June. "The president ordered him to trim his sideburns, change his eyeglasses and resolve his problems … with the Central Bank."
Farias's style divided the Collor camp. Pedro Collor broke with Farias over a business deal and accused the financier of trying to destroy his marriage. He said Farias sent his own former girlfriend to seduce him, and planted notes in a society gossip column that Pedro Collor's wife was seeing another man.
Although he had no official duties or title, Farias was highly visible.
He tried to get Petrobras, Brazil's state oil giant, to approve a $ 40 million, no-interest, cash loan to help a friend buy a Brazilian government airline.
Former Petrobras president Luis Octavio da Motta Veiga, who refused the deal and later was forced to resign, said Farias called up constantly to get the latest information on contracts Petrobras planned to sign.
"I found out later that he would then call the company in question and imply he had a hand in the deal," Motta Veiga said recently on a late-night TV talk show. "What he got out of this, I can only imagine."
Farias pushed successfully to have his protege Marcelo Ribeiro named Transportation Secretary. Ribeiro, a former highway construction lobbyist, promptly proposed a $ 500 million road-building program, but without the usual taking of bids. Cabinet ministers screamed scandal, and the project was shelved.
Farias looked up old campaign backers and extorted money to pay "old debts," Pedro Collor said. Farias always implied he was speaking for the president, he said.
In his private jet, the "Morcego Negro," or Black Bat, Farias zipped around the country - and out of it. The plane's flight log showed trips to the Bahamas. There also were unexplained gaps: it would land in one city and take off from another.
He moved into a mansion in Maceio, the capital of Alagoas, and surrounded it with armed bodyguards. He bought a yacht and a second luxury home in Sao Paulo, equipped with a heliport.
Congress found Farias had not listed Maceio mansion on his tax return. His reported income is $ 1,000 a month.
Farias even tried to sack the president of the Central Bank, Brazil's equivalent of the Federal Reserve, Calheiros said.
"Imagine what that signifies," he said. "A fundamental part of economic stability … and PC wanted to fire him on a whim."

 

End of Document
