

Possibly the Most Interesting One Isn't There: Adolf Eichmann
The Associated Press
February 5, 1992, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 724 words
Byline: By ED McCULLOUGH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Argentina
Body




A Nazi expert who carefully paged through seven government files dating back decades said Wednesday he was most struck by the file that wasn't there.
"Where is the Eichmann file?" said Shimon Samuels of the Simon Wiesenthal Center for Holocaust studies. "The file that should have been the thickest of all is not there."
On Monday, President Carlos Menem ordered the National Archives to collect government data on Nazis who fled here after World War II. Agencies such as the Central Bank, the Interior Ministry and provincial governments were given 30 days to do so.
The seven Federal Police files included two each on Josef Mengele, the "Angel of Death" at the Auschwitz concentration camp, where several hundred thousand perished in gas chambers; and Martin Bormann, Adolf Hitler's top deputy.
The Mengele file showed he arrived in 1949 on a passport from the International Red Cross, and that he felt secure enough several years later to ask the German Embassy for documents in his own name that he used to apply for Argentine identity and travel cards.
Despite the fact that Mengele was wanted for war crimes, he received the documents. Samuels said that indicates high German and Argentine officials knew he was in Argentina and did nothing to apprehend him. Mengele is said to have died in Brazil in 1979.
"There's no question in my mind that there was a conspiracy by the top people who implemented policy," Samuels said.
Other files dealt with Nazis of similar notoriety: Walter Kutschmann and Edouard Roschmann, both now dead; and Josef Schwammberger, 79, who was extradited in 1990 and now is on trial in Stuttgart, Germany, for his alleged role in the deaths of several thousands Jews at labor camps in Poland.
But on the man who drew up plans to exterminate the Jews of Europe, and who was kidnapped here in 1960 by Israeli agents, tried, convicted and hanged: nothing.
"I cannot possibly accept that it's an oversight," said Samuels, who reviewed the files Tuesday. He was one of the few people granted full access before the records are made available to the public next Monday.
"The Eichmann case completely turned Argentina upside down," he said. "The kidnapping was a violation of Argentine sovereignty. … I find it absolutely impossible there is no eighth file."
The Foreign Ministry didn't have it either, Samuels said, adding he would formally request the government search for it.
The Federal Police files are a compilation of yellowed newspaper clippings, old photographs, immigration statements, police surveillance reports and other data.
Very little is new, Samuels said. The file on Bormann, who died in 1945 in Berlin, gives no indication he sought refuge here, despite the rumors. There are no clues about the supposed shipment of treasures hauled to South America by U-boats.
There is no file, so far, on former gestapo chief Helmut Mueller, "though there are plenty of rumors that he was in Argentina," Samuels said.
Nevertheless, the files provide a valuable glimpse into history that is relevant today, as extreme-right political parties, racism and anti-semitism seem on the rise in Europe.
The Nazi hierarchy was able to sneak out of Germany and thrive thousands of miles away in Argentina and neighboring South American countries partly because of conspiracy and indifference.
Kutschmann passed immigration using documents that identified him as a Carmelite priest, Samuels said. Schwammberger had a false Italian passport.
The Nazis sought refuge in Argentina for a variety of reasons.
The government of political leader and then president Juan Peron admired Hitler and Italian fascist Benito Mussolini. Most Argentines are descended from European immigrants, including many from Italy and Germany. Officials of the state religion, Roman Catholicism, put a high value on anti-communism.
The Paris-based investigator said he hopes subsequent files turn up information about secret bank accounts in Switzerland, and the whereabouts of 16 Nazis that are known to have fled here.
The important thing, he said, is that the hunt for them - and the people who financed and supported them - continue.
"What is the lesson? The lesson is you can't get away with it," he said. "We want young people to understand that… This is another jab in the arm to reinforce those antibodies of justice, to show that justice could be done, even if late."

 

End of Document
