

Presidential Contest a Battle For the Ballots of the Poor
The Associated Press
February 5, 1994, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 508 words
Byline: By BILL CORMIER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PAVAS, Costa Rica
Body




Maria Elena Villalobos, a poor mother of two, has lived her 34 years in this sprawl of flimsy homes that line a rutted gully on the outskirts of San Jose. Now she's a political prize.
In Sunday's presidential election, two moderate candidates are vying for her vote and those of other poverty-stricken Costa Ricans, who make up at least 20 percent of the 3.1 million population.
The poor, many of whom depend on state aid, could make the difference in a race too close to call. The main campaign issue is that aid, which has helped make Costa Rica Central America's stablest democracy.
Free-market economist Miguel Angel Rodriguez of the ruling Social Christian Unity party wants to slash government spending but vows not to touch the generous state services in housing, food and health.
Facing him is Jose Maria Figueres, whose revered father, the late Jose "Don Pepe" Figueres, became president in 1948 and established those services. Figueres wants to build on his father's policies.
The incumbent, President Rafael Angel Calderon, is constitutionally barred from a consecutive four-year term. The 1.7 million voters also will choose the 57-seat Legislative Assembly and thousands of town councils.
Costa Rica has been free of the wars and extreme poverty that plague its neighbors. Its stability, warm climate and tax breaks made it a popular destination for tourists and retirees.
But it was able to keep its people content by taking on $ 2.5 billion in foreign debt. Now, the IMF and other lenders have imposed austerity measures on the government as a condition for further help.
Villalobos, like other poor, said she doesn't want benefits cut. Costa Rica had 9 percent inflation last year, and unemployment, officially at 4 percent, is generally believed to be between 10-15 percent.
"Many boys from this neighborhood are growing up bad. They now steal from those who have," she complained. "We need the government assistance, the food benefits. I don't know what we would do if those were taken away."
Barefoot and wearing a T-shirt dress, Villalobos clutched her 10-year-old daughter Pamela Jimenez. Pamela and 3-year-old Jeffrey each get $ 25 worth of food assistance each month.
"It goes a long way toward buying rice and beans," said Villalobos, whose husband Edgar is a mechanic who makes $ 3,000 in a good year.
A $ 1.75 box of cornflakes is a luxury. Villalobos sells used American jeans and T-shirts to make extra money.
Figueres, 39, of the National Liberation Party, visited Villalobos' neighborhood and promised new drains. "We will not abandon you," said Figueres, a Harvard-trained former agriculture minister.
But Rodriguez too has pursued the poor.
"We will have a vigorous free market with a lot of solidarity with those people who have less," Rodriguez said Thursday aboard his bus after a four-day rural campaign trek.
Rodriguez, 54, promised more than 150,000 new homes and better health benefits. But he has said he wants to curb government spending, reduce import tariffs and open the state banking system to limited private competition.
 Load-Date: February 5, 1994

 

End of Document
