

Prince Charles: The Fairy Tale Ends, the Causes Endure
The Associated Press
December 24, 1992, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 860 words
Byline: By KARIN DAVIES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: AVONMOUTH, England
Body




A biting wind carried a whiff of sewage sludge, tumbled dry in huge drums. "My work takes me to the most interesting places," Prince Charles quipped.
It was a few weeks before the announcement that he was separating from Princess Diana, and the 44-year-old heir to the British throne was pursuing a cause close to his heart: preserving England as a green and pleasant land.
And the day after the announcement, Charles, pursued by the royal rat pack of tabloid reporters, was back at it: 20 feet underground to open a new testing lab at an East London sewage-treatment plant.
With the separation behind him, the prince's admirers say they hope his interest in serious issues will no longer be eclipsed by the media's obsession with his marriage.
"What he offers is a platform for eccentric views in a political culture that is becoming far too centralized," journalist Simon Jenkins wrote in his column in The Times.
Since his first public speech in 1968, which was devoted to caring for the land, Charles has taken on modern architects, educators and liturgical innovators. He even implicitly criticized the government by talking about inner-city poverty, homelessness and care of the elderly.
"Green" issues seem especially dear to him.
He was enthusiastic as he toured Wessex Water's new plant that processes sewage sludge into a commercial fertilizer.
"I'm thrilled because this is exactly what is required," Charles said at the plant, 115 miles west of London. "It seems to me to be more efficient to use it rather than to just waste it."
More than any royal since his great-great-great-grandfather Prince Albert, Charles has immersed himself in public causes. His blood has given him a pulpit, as well as stewardship of estates where he can practice what he preaches.
Charles once joked to a television interviewer that he talked to his plants - an image that has endured in cartoons and jokes.
But he has won respect from the public.
When the Gallup polling firm asked Britons who would make the best environment secretary, Charles was in first place. More recent polls indicate a majority still want him to become king, with or without Diana.
Charles sees himself as a one-man pressure group, "not in an arrogant way, but in a genuinely humble way, in a facilitating way," said Richard Sandbrook, director of the International Institute for Environmental Development.
For instance, Charles organized a meeting aboard the royal yacht Britannia - rigged with a biological sewage-treatment plant - off Brazil last year to help set the agenda for the U.N. Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro.
"Heritage isn't to him wearing funny clothes and driving around in fancy cars, it comes from the land. He is deeply concerned about the loss of species and the loss of landscape," said Jonathon Porritt, an environmentalist with whom the prince has consulted for years.
At times, the monarch-in-waiting could pass for just another child of the '60s slouching toward middle age. He's into organic farming, alternative medicine and health food; he frets about ocean pollution and the ozone layer and whether his two sons will inherit a liveable planet.
But Charles has applied his ideas on organic farming, promoting animal welfare and blending the traditional with the modern at Highgrove, his estate 100 miles west of London that is part of the vast Duchy of Cornwall lands he administers. Most of the 130,000 acres are leased to farmers and businesses, providing the prince an income of $ 3.2 million in 1991.
Half of the 1,000-acre Home Farm has been converted to organic cultivation, and the changeover is scheduled to be complete by 1995.
"I remain astonished at just how many other farmers still look at organic farming as some kind of drop-out option for superannuated hippies," Charles has said.
He has had limited success, however, in encouraging his tenants and other farmers to develop markets for "green" products, those grown with an eye on limiting damage to the environment from pesticides, fertilizers and the like.
His most recent project is a range of Duchy Original crackers, made from organic oats and wheat harvested on his farm and sold at premium prices in a few high-class stores.
The crackers follow the success of bread made of organic grain grown on the estate. Tesco, a major British supermarket chain, sold an estimated 70,000 loaves in a marketing test before the grain ran out last year.
Tesco, however, decided in November to quit selling lamb produced under animal-welfare guidelines promoted by the prince. Priced 15 percent higher than regular fresh lamb, the "Nature's Choice" brand simply did not sell, said a Tesco spokeswoman, Sue Spencer.
Organic farmers now contribute less than 1 percent to the total output of British farming.
David Conning, director general of the British Nutrition Foundation, says there is no evidence that "green" food is safer, tastier or more nutritious. The only possible justification would be that it is better for the land than conventional farming, he said.
That is the point, Charles argues. He tells farmers theirs is not "just another business," but rather involves "the long-term stewardship of a precious natural resource."

 

End of Document
