

Princess and The Major, A Tale of a Treason?
The Associated Press
October 4, 1994, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 541 words
Byline: By SUE LEEMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




To the establishment he's a cad. If the story of a love affair with Princess Diana is true he's also a traitor under the law and - technically at least - could face execution.
While Maj. James Hewitt ducked the verbal brickbats, sales of a book alleging a five-year affair with the princess soared Tuesday and high society wondered where traditional codes of honor have gone.
"He has gone too far and I think other officers will be disinclined to have anything to do with him," said Bob Higson, a spokesman for the prestigious Life Guards, Hewitt's former regiment.
"Princess in Love," a floridly written work by freelance journalist Anna Pasternak, shows Hewitt to be "a fully fledged cad," wrote Niall Ferguson, a fellow in modern history at Oxford University's Jesus College, in The Daily Telegraph.
It also underlines "the creeping corruption of our - supposedly - elite institutions," he wrote.
"If even the (armed) Services and the professions can no longer be depended on to instill a sense of decorum, then the legacy of the Victorians has gone forever," he added.
The book alleges Hewitt and Diana first had sex in 1986 when she invited him to dinner at Kensington Palace while her husband Prince Charles was away. The affair allegedly ended in 1991.
Charles, 45, and Diana, 33, formally separated in December 1992. In June, Prince Charles acknowledged committing adultery but he did not name the woman.
Britons have snapped up more than 100,000 copies of the book since it went on sale Monday.
The author said she wrote the book from conversations with Hewitt. Some news reports said has gone into self-imposed exile, possibly somewhere in South America. Charles was reported to be fishing in Scotland.
The Sun newspaper quoted unidentified friends of the princess as saying she was "flabbergasted and shocked" by Hewitt's betrayal. The Daily Mail and the Daily Telegraph quoted other friends - similarly unidentified - saying she denied a sexual affair.
But the princess showed no signs of tension at a public engagement Tuesday - the London launch of an Army expedition to East Africa to raise money for charity.
Dressed in a long red jacket and black skirt, she joked with soldiers of the Princess of Wales' Royal Regiment, of which she is colonel-in-chief.
A spokeswoman for the Home Office said the Treason Law of 1351, still in force, decrees death for various treacherous acts, including sex with the wife of the heir to the throne.
The gruesome penalty was hanging "but not till he be dead," followed by disembowlment "while yet alive" and slicing up into quarters. In 1870 the punishment was amended to straightforward hanging.
Although Britain has abolished the death penalty for other crimes, a person still "could still be executed for treason," the spokeswoman said anonymously.
The last people to be executed for treason were during World War II, "and that was for collaborating with the Germans," said Terry Charman, a historian at the Imperial War Museum.
Reportedly unemployed since he was laid off by the army in March, Hewitt now also may be finished socially.
In the upper-class world he frequented, "a gentleman's word is his bond," wrote romance novelist Dame Barbara Cartland, Diana's former step-grandmother, in the newspaper Today.
 Load-Date: October 4, 1994

 

End of Document
