

Producers Hope 'The Plague' Puts Argentina on Movie-Making Map
The Associated Press
October 14, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 664 words
Byline: By ED McCULLOUGH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Argentina
Body




"The Official Story" won an Oscar in 1986, but "The Plague" may be the film that puts Argentina on the movie-making map.
Oscar winners, including William Hurt and Robert Duvall, are bringing Albert Camus' novel to the screen. Luis Puenzo, who directed "The Official Story," co-wrote the script and is behind the camera. Vangelis, who wrote the score for "Chariots of Fire," is composing the music.
"This is giving us the chance to prove we can do first-class films," co-producer Oscar Kramer said during a break in shooting at a plaza in the run-down Buenos Aires neighborhood of San Telmo.
"This movie for us could be the entrance to big cinema," he said. "It's an enormous challenge."
The comparison with "The Official Story" - which won the Academy Award for Best Foreign Film - is illuminating.
Puenzo spent the proceeds from years of directing TV commercials to tell a tale about the 1976-83 military regime's heart-rending effect on one family and the nation.
"(It) was shot at Puenzo's house with a few friends and cost about $ 400,000. When he ran out of money, he called me and a few more friends and we gave him some more," Kramer said. "That's the way Argentines used to make movies."
No longer.
Even a cheap movie can cost $ 1 million, and it's almost impossible to get that back. Government subsidies have dried up, ticket prices top out at $ 5 in big cities, and more Argentines are choosing to pay half that to see a video at home.
Filmmakers in this nation that was dubbed "Hollywood South" in the 1950s tend to get foreign backing for co-productions or find another line of work. Only about 15 will be made this year.
Filming here by U.S. and European directors is not unheard of, just infrequent. Most come to take advantage of the spectacular scenery.
Iguazu waterfall on the Brazilian border was the backdrop for "The Mission" starring Robert De Niro; the lunar landscape of northwest Argentina for "Highlander 2" featuring Sean Connery and Christopher Lambert; desolate, windswept Patagonia for "Eversmile, N.J." with Daniel Day Lewis.
"The Plague" is different in that, aside from the stars, which include Raul Julia and French actors Jean-Marc Barr and Sandrine Bonnaire, most everyone else - the film crew, the rest of the cast, the costume and set designers, Puenzo, Kramer - is Argentine.
The $ 14 million budget makes it one of the most expensive movies ever filmed here. It is being shot in faded neighborhoods of cobblestone streets and drooping tenements in this once grand port city and national capital.
U.S. producer John Pepper said he chose Puenzo, who two years ago directed "Old Gringo" starring Gregory Peck and Jane Fonda, because "he is a visionary director who is capable of taking a regional theme and bringing out its universal significance."
The script generally follows Camus' 1947 novel about a plague that besets the town of Oran in North Africa.
Pepper persuaded the Nobel laureate's daughter to let him film the book by promising to be "irreverent - faithful to the novel but not yoked to it."
The movie is set in "some city in Latin America that could be any city in the world."
Hurt plays story narrator Dr. Bernard Rieux. Duvall is the handyman Joseph Grand, Julia the villain Cottard, and Ms. Bonnaire the reporter Martine Rambert, changed to a woman in Puenzo's script from the character Raymond Rambert in the novel.
The movie focuses, as does the novel, on how people react to crisis. In a timeless struggle of moral choices, ordinary people are moved to acts of heroism and wickedness.
"I never played anyone like Cottard," said Julia, who played Hurt's homosexual prison cellmate in "Kiss of the Spider Woman."
"He's very deeply disturbed," Julia said. "My goal is to play him as a human being and not as a stereotype of a disturbed man. … He does not respond well to stress, but he is a human being nevertheless."
Shooting began in early August and is scheduled to end by Nov. 9. The premiere is set for May 1992, possibly at the Cannes Film Festival.
 Graphic



 
Pursuing LaserPhoto

 

End of Document
