

REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK: President Takes To the Forest
The Associated Press
June 12, 1992, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 645 words
Byline: By RUTH SINAI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




President Bush went looking for biodiversity in a tropical rain forest Friday. What he found was a family of picnickers and a pair of lovers.
After defiantly refusing to sign the Earth Summit treaty on biological diversity - the only country not signing the agreement on protection of wildlife species - Bush went for a drive up a winding mountainside to the Tijuca National Park outside the capital.
Normally, the rain forest is alive with brilliantly colored toucans, mischievous monkeys and slithering snakes.
But the sirens of the police escort and the noise of the lengthy presidential motorcade was apparently too much for the critters, said the guide who gave Bush and his wife, Barbara, a brief tour.
Absent wildlife, Bush walked over to the family of Antonio Balloco, who was enjoying a late lunch with nine of his family. The family took the unexpected visit in stride, offering Bush some beer which he drank from a paper cup.
After getting detailed explanations - in halting English - about the family, Bush handed the boys tie clips with the presidential seal and the girls got presidential pins.
Bush then wandered toward a pair of young lovers seated at a bench. "Sorry to disturb your private time," said Bush, somewhat embarrassed when he realized his proffered handshake had interrupted the huddled couple.
---
Bush's 68th birthday didn't go unnoticed in Rio. For starters, a big "Happy Birthday" sign was posted at the entrance to the Sheraton Hotel where he was staying.
Throughout the day he was peppered with questions by reporters asking whether he would have preferred to spend the day in a warmer reception than the one received here from critics of his environmental policies.
"It's been a good birthday," he told one reporter as he sat down to lunch with conservationists from other countries.
"Don't mention it," he said later, when asked by another reporter how he was celebrating the day.
But at dusk, Bush gave himself a present. "Finally," he said as he donned shorts and a t-shirt and went jogging for 20 minutes at the track of a local military academy against the backdrop of Sugarloaf Mountain and a Rio beach.
In the stands, neighborhood kids sang "Happy Birthday" in Portuguese, and held up a Happy Birthday sign in English and Portuguese.
---
Bush had lunch with another birthday boy - oceanographer Jacques Cousteau, who turned 83 on Thursday.
Cousteau was one of about 10 environmentalists invited to lunch with the president at the Earth Summit center. The session, according to one participant, was constantly interrupted by the public address system paging delegates in the cavernous convention center, including a Mr. Taylor.
Clearly frustrated, Bush turned to one of his guests and thanked him "for an excellent presentation" about problems of developing countries.
"Now I wish Mr. Taylor would answer his damned phone," the president said, looking up at the paging loudspeaker in the room.
----
The White House didn't have much time to plan the president's participation at the Earth Summit, because he only made his final decision to go three weeks before the conference began.
That's probably the explanation for the strange spelling of the summit city printed on the White House passes identifying all members of the press traveling with Bush.
The orange credentials note "The trip of the President to Rio de Janerio, Brazil."
---
Bush didn't look very happy sitting through a conference speech by Cuban leader Fidel Castro. He was ushered into the summit plenary hall just as Castro was starting to speak.
"Many of us were worried he would walk out," said Peter Thatcher, a former U.N. official and old Yale classmate of Bush.
But Bush not only stayed, he clapped politely at the end.
Asked later how he liked Castro's speech, Bush quipped with a smile: "Good. It was seven minutes." The Cuban leader is known for speeches which have run hours-long.

 

End of Document
