

Signs of the Times: Graffiti Tells Tale of Venezuelan Discontent
The Associated Press
November 29, 1992, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 628 words
Byline: By JOSEPH B. FRAZIER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARACAS, Venezuela
Body




Freedom of speech has been officially suspended in the wake of the botched coup attempt here, but the walls of Caracas have plenty to say.
Graffiti is part and parcel of any Latin American upheaval, but the Venezuelan variety - and it's everywhere in this capital of 4 million - has a cynical flavor of its own.
"No to reform, yes to revolution," and "Shoot thugs" reflect an increasing despair in a country that rode high during the oil boom and tumbled when oil prices did. Venezuelans were getting used to the good life when it stopped.
Any economic progress made by President Carlos Andres Perez hasn't trickled down to most Venezuelans. Crime and unemployment are up and charges of government corruption fly like shrapnel across this hilly South American capital.
On Friday dissident military men with backing from leftist rebels tried a coup, the second against Perez since February. It was quashed but the dissent that led to it remains.
Caracas is still jittery. There are places where taxi drivers won't go. On Sunday the Defense Ministry announced it would be detonating dud bombs at the La Carlota military airbase, which was attacked during the coup attempt, "and it is suggested that calm be maintained."
"There is no room in the schools nor in the universities," griped a spray-painted slogan in the working class Catia neighborhood on the city's west side.
At a hole-in-the-wall eatery downtown - way downtown - a young man orders a small plate of "carnitas," bits of grilled beef. The restaurateur demands payment before he hands the meat over.
The young man pulls out a wad of bills, takes the meat and runs without paying. A half-dozen men chase him to no avail. The owner just shakes his head and returns to his handful of customers. That didn't used to happen, he said, but these days it does.
Steel doors closed quickly over most businesses at the start of the fighting. Those who were slow to close were turned inside out by looters. Rotting food, broken glass and damaged merchandise line some streets.
A few people sell bread and other groceries off of the back of pickup trucks. Never mind where it came from.
"Take the rats out of our sandwiches," read a message tucked between "We protest high bus fares" and "Perez: What happened to the 12 million?" a reference to a multi-million dollar scam Perez is alleged to have been behind.
His popularity rating is below 10 percent.
When he first took office in 1974, oil, which makes up 85 percent of Venezuela's exports, sold for more than twice what it does today.
Many Venezuelans say his return to office in 1988 was inspired in part by a hope that the good old days of his first term would come back.
They didn't. The country was on a roll it couldn't sustain. While the government puts unemployment at around 8 percent private economists say the rate, coupled with severe underemployment, is closer to 45 percent.
Many who do have jobs make the minimum wage of 9,000 bolivars, about $ 115, a month. The military doesn't fare much better, with an F-16 pilot making less than $ 300 a month.
Government sociologists say that is about a third of the cost of mimimum food needs for a family of six. On top of that, rent in the worst slum areas is at least 3,000 bolivars a month.
Rebels calling themselves the Bolivarian Revolutionary Movement 200 blame Perez for increasing the gap between rich and poor in a country awash with oil reserves. It is the second-biggest supplier to the United States after Saudi Arabia.
Col. Hugo Chavez, the jailed leader of the February coup attempt, said in a taped message that the latest effort was "to guarantee real democratic rule."'
The walls of Caracas aren't sure.
"Viva Democracia, Viva Chavez" competes openly with "Viva Democracia, Down with the Chavezization of Venezuela."

 

End of Document
