

Sisters Keep the Faith Despite Slayings Overseas
The Associated Press
November 3, 1992, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 527 words
Byline: By DAVID BRIGGS, Associated Press Writer
Body




The five American nuns killed in Liberia's civil war will be remembered as martyrs for their faith, say leaders of other U.S. religious orders that have endured similar tragedies.
They recalled slayings in El Salvador and Nicaragua, where religious orders of American women regrouped to maintain or increase their presence after their sisters were killed.
"People don't want to be stopped doing the work of the Gospel by violence. They are willing to put their lives on the line," said Sister Jean Steffes, superior general of the Sisters of St. Agnes in Fond du Lac, Wis.
The size of her order's presence in Nicaragua increased by more than a third after an American nun was killed in 1990.
In Liberia, two of the nuns from the order Adorers of the Precious Blood of Christ were slain - apparently by rebels - after leaving their convent to try to rescue a wounded child Oct. 20. Three others were gunned down in front of their convent in a Monrovia suburb.
Sister Virginia DeVinnie, assistant general superior of the Ursuline Nuns of Cleveland, said the women killed in Liberia "led martyrs' lives. They're contemporary martyrs."
At the headquarters of the Adorers of the Precious Blood of Christ in Ruma, Ill., 40 miles southeast of St. Louis, sisters said Monday they want the order to maintain ties with Liberia.
But spokeswoman Sister Frances Schumer said it is too early to decide whether the missionary work there in health care and education will continue.
"The kinds of things I hear these sisters saying are: What these sisters did giving their lives is the ultimate to what we are called to do," she said.
People in other religious orders whose members have been killed overseas remember it as an agonizing time.
Sister Maria Berlec, an Ursuline from the Cleveland area, said the hardest three weeks of her life began the day an Ursuline sister, two Maryknoll nuns and a lay missionary were murdered in El Salvador in 1980.
Berlec was the next Ursuline sister scheduled to go to El Salvador. She went home to her family to reflect on her decision; they urged her not to go. The bishop of Cleveland and her order left it up to her conscience.
She arrived in El Salvador the month after the slayings and stayed until 1985; the order continues to maintain two missionaries there.
"The fact that we continued to come down made them understand the Catholic Church isn't just there when it's easy," said Berlec, now a principal at a parochial high school in Cleveland.
The Maryknoll sisters in Baltimore now have seven members in El Salvador, up from four at the time of the 1980 killings. The order left the area a year after the slayings but returned in 1986.
"We don't go looking for death," said Sister Marie Moore, director of social concerns for the Maryknoll sisters. "We really checked with the local church before we went back."
At the community in Illinois, Schumer said community members are taking hope from Sister Alvina Schott, one of the order's first two sisters who went to Liberia in 1971.
"God will not be outdone in generosity," Sister Schott told the community. "And somehow a tremendous amount of good will come out of this. He will not let evil triumph."

 

End of Document
