

Slipping and Sliding to the Airport
The Associated Press
September 10, 1991, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 674 words
Byline: By ROBERT GLASS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARACAS, Venezuela
Body




One adventure the tourist brochures leave out is the daredevil ride into Caracas over La Mancha Negra, the Black Spot, a four-mile stretch of highway at the crest of a 3,000-foot mountain.
Warning signs with the symbol of a skidding car don't do justice to a patch of road that is perpetually glazed with motor oil and tarry debris, glowing like polished marble in the rain.
Buses and semitrailer trucks spin their wheels or get stuck on the upgrade, causing huge traffic jams. Each dip or flat stretch is like a skating rink.
"You have to downshift for brakes and go very slowly," said Jose Roa, 60, who has driven an airport bus for 12 years. "If not, you can completely lose control. People who don't know the road sometimes skid off the side."
The Black Spot covers the incoming lanes on the last section of the Caracas-Guaira Autopista, a 10-mile expressway running over Mount Avila to Caracas from La Guaira port on the northern coast. It rises steeply, then makes a brief descent into Caracas.
Every weekday, an estimated 26,000 vehicles travel the divided four-lane highway in each direction. The weekend flow is even heavier, with families bound for the popular Caribbean beaches.
Thousands of people ride into Caracas every day from Simon Bolivar International Airport, just outside La Guaira.
David Meneses, a member of La Guaira's City Council and a critic of transport authorities, claims there have been 1,850 deaths on the expressway over the past five years, an average of nearly one a day.
Francisco Barrios, head of the Transport Ministry's highway division, described the figure as impossibly high. He said the annual death toll is 3,000 for the entire 20,000 miles of roads in this nation of 17 million.
Barrios said no figures were available for deaths and injuries on the autopista, but that 1,800 accidents of all types have occurred on it in the past three years.
He said only three peopple had been killed in the past 18 months on the Black Spot, the only part of the expressway considered unsafe, and two were driving while intoxicated.
Nonetheless, Barrios described the highway as the world's "most critical" because of its heavy use and unique defects.
Venezuela has one of Latin America's most modern and extensive highway networks, paid for with oil revenue. The autopista, which has two tunnels and three scenic viaducts, cost $ 50 million to build in 1952 and was considered a model for mountain highways of the day.
In 1986, a thin surface accumulation of motor oil, asphalt, tire shreds and dust developed that made the pavement extremely slippery. Pressure hosing had no effect and repeated repavings, using more than 1 million tons of asphalt, were no help. In 1990, an uneven surface appeared in some places.
Several engineering studies and 28 test cleanings have been carried out on the Black Spot since 1987.
Theories about the problem include one that says the original contractor built the road with inferior material. Barrios insisted, however, that the materials and design used by Cotecica, the Venezuelan construction firm, met all government standards in force at that time.
In August, a government-appointed commission reported the findings of its three-month review of all previous studies on the Black Spot. It concluded the source of the problem was motor oil spilling onto the pavement.
It said heat from the oil and passing vehicles melts the asphalt, forming a slick surface layer, and constant traffic polishes the surface to a high gloss.
Barrios said the battered American cars most Venezuelans drive - 75 percent of all cars on the road are at least eight years old - leak oil as their engines overheat climbing the mountain to Caracas.
There is no problem on the Caracas-La Guaira side of the highway, which is nearly all downhill.
Since nothing can be done about the old cars or the geometry of the road, Barrios said, the autopista will have to be paved with asphalt able to withstand Sahara-like conditions.
The government plans to do that over the next few months at a cost of around $ 2 million, he said.

 

End of Document
