

Small Amazon Town at the Heart of Bloody Land War
The Associated Press
November 25, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 788 words
Byline: By KEN SILVERSTEIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO MARIA, Brazil
Body




On a hot night in late August, someone fired five bullets into a house where two priests and several land-reform activists were sleeping.
No one was hurt, the assailant slipped away and the incident hardly caused a ripple in this Amazon town gripped by land disputes between landowners and peasants.
"It was an attempt to intimidate us," said Orlando Canuto, a local leader of the Rural Workers Union. "Those people struggling for change are automatically marked to die."
Canuto's father, Joao, a founder of the union and its first president, was shot to death six years ago - 14 bullets in the back.
In April 1990, Orlando Canuto and his two brothers, Paulo and Jose, were taken from their home by four men who identified themselves as federal police agents. On a deserted road, they were forced out of the car and the "police" opened fire.
Orlando was hit twice, but escaped across a field. His two brothers were found dead the next day.
Conflicts over land are common in Brazil and 1,151 rural land-reform activists have been killed since 1980. More than 170 of the murders were committed in Para, the northern state where Rio Maria is located.
The town is typical of hundreds in the Amazon, a patchwork of dirt streets lined with wooden shacks and adobe huts.
Most of Rio Maria's peasants have no land. They scratch livings at odd jobs, or by hiring out to ranchers and plantation owners for the equivalent of about $ 1 a day.
Formation of the union in 1983 met fierce opposition from the landowners, who cling tightly to their feudal system.
"The landowners think they can force me out of here, but I'm not leaving," Canuto said in an interview at union headquarters. Photos of slain comrades cover the walls of the small, blue-painted shack.
A heavily armed federal policeman stood watch. He and fellow officers provide full-time protection for Canuto, a short, thin man of 29 with prematurely gray hair and a calm view of death.
"My father and brothers didn't betray the struggle and neither will I," he said. "People tell me everyone dies at an appointed time, but I don't believe that. Around here, a lot of good people die young and the bad ones last a long time."
In February, union President Expedito Ribeiro de Souza was shot to death on his way home from a meeting. Weeks later, a gunman opened fire on his successor, Carlos Cabral, wounding him in the leg.
Nor does the cloth provide immunity. Ricardo Resende and Henrique des Roziers, Roman Catholic priests who work with the Pastoral Land Commission in support of peasant organizers, have received death threats.
Their opponents say the priests violate the Vatican rule against involvement in politics.
Des Roziers said the commission simply works for justice: "The church must defend the rights of all men. We who believe in the Bible cannot remain silent in the face of this bloodletting."
Widespread conflicts over land began in the 1970s, when a pro-development military government built roads and promoted settlement of the Amazon. Peasants poured into the region, but wealthy landowners often forced them off their claims.
Today, fewer than 2 percent of Brazilians involved in agriculture own more than half the arable land.
"The landowners want to keep the workers quiet and prevent them from organizing," Cabral said in an interview. "The poor are the biggest force in the interior and that worries the big farmers, who control economic and political affairs."
Soon after the interview, the government canceled Cabral's police protection on grounds of expense. He fled to the city of Belo Horizonte.
Seldom is there any punishment for the killers, or for the landowners who pay them. Only eight gunman have been convicted in a decade of murders, and there has never even been a trial in Para state.
Police arrested a gunman who admitted to Souza's murder, and the landowner suspected of arranging his death. Judge Jose Candido Moraes kept the gunman in jail but ordered the landowner freed until the trial, not expected until 1992.
Paulo Cesar Pereira, a businessman, confessed to shooting Cabral and was arrested. He was released when Judge Moraes did not file the required papers in a higher court within the time stipulated.
"It's not a fair battle," Canuto said, "because the landowners fight with guns and we fight with justice, which doesn't exist here."
Land activists also blame President Fernando Collor's government for failing to implement a promised agrarian reform program.
Landowners threw a festive barbecue for Moraes when he became the Rio Maria magistrate in 1988.
Judge Moraes refused a request for an interview, but did say: "Some of these (murders) have political connotations, and have been blown out of proportion and made more serious than they really are."
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto Planned

 

End of Document
