

South America: A 'Lost Decade' and the Grip of Poverty
The Associated Press
June 14, 1993, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 999 words
Byline: By KEVIN NOBLET, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARACAS, Venezuela
Body




Experts on South America may feel its long, painful economic descent is ending, but for truck driver Jorge Mora, the run remains downhill and slippery.
"You still can't make it to the end of each month. You have to make miracles," Mora said, standing in worn sandals outside a cinder-block tenement in a grim Caracas slum, where he lives with his wife and three children.
A monthly wage of about $ 140 makes him better off than many, but life is precarious. An illness, a few missed weeks of work, he said, and "I'll wind up in a shanty, or under a bridge."
Poverty, the plague South America once dreamed of eradicating, retains a firm grip on much of the continent, dashing a generation's hopes for a better life, eroding faith in traditional institutions and breeding disease, crime and despair.
The U.N. Economic Commission for Latin America, which called the 1980s "the lost decade" because of economic decline, has found hopeful signs in the last two years: Most economies are growing faster than populations and several countries are defeating inflation.
At least one country, Chile, even seems to be making real progress in reducing the swollen ranks of the poor.
But some nations do better than others and the wealthy do best of all, wherever they live.
"The expansion has not been well distributed," said Victor Tokman, a Chilean economist. "Routes of upward mobility are narrowing. For the majority, opportunities are becoming fewer."
Just 20 to 30 years ago, South America appeared ready to move into the front economic ranks. Its economy was booming. Its people were better educated and living longer.
Then, in the 1970s, state-subsidized economies slipped out of gear. Governments ran up huge deficits and debts. Inflation soared and economic stagnation set in. Austerity measures demanded by international creditors were made even more painful by the global recession of the 1980s.
Working-class families, even the middle class, slid into poverty. Jobs, good health care and education dried up for many of South America's 297 million citizens. Those who specialize in naming categories created a new one: The Recent Poor.
"It's a phenomenon witnessed across the region, but lately it's been more marked," said Emma Zevallos, a development researcher in Lima, Peru.
Nowhere is the new economic plight more apparent than in Lima. Battered taxis driven by former white-collar workers bounce along the potholed streets. Once-stately apartment buildings of brick and granite have become slums, their windows broken and patched with cardboard.
Slum dwellers build shanties atop garbage pits and draw water from waste-filled streams. Deadly cholera has returned from an absence of decades. spreading across South America since 1991 and killing more than 6,000 people.
While hardship has aided the entrenched guerrilla movements in Peru, the society generally has not turned radical. Just the opposite, Zevallos said, "It's becoming more conservative. It favors a hard hand" against subversion and crime.
Peru was among countries that took a big democratic step forward in the 1980s, when elected governments replaced military regimes across South America. But in the 1990s it is among those stepping back, ready to trade some democracy for action on social and economic problems.
President Alberto Fujimori, an outsider elected in 1990, dissolved a congress dominated by opponents in 1992 and established virtual one-man rule with military support. He won a majority in new legislative elections and remains popular with a poor majority cheered by the capture of guerrilla leaders.
In giant Brazil, appeals are heard for a more authoritarian approach to rising crime.
"The people want the criminal shot on the street," said Sergio Adorno, a sociologist at the University of Sao Paulo center for the study of violence. "They want him to disappear."
Brazilian police appear ready to oblige. In Sao Paulo, officers killed 1,359 suspects last year, prompting an outcry by human rights groups but little more than a collective shrug from the public.
Most other South American countries have enjoyed modest growth in the 1990s, but Brazil is still in recession, crippled by triple-digit inflation.
"Everybody just survives," said Luis Muniz do Santos, 39, a janitor who has lived for 17 years in a Sao Paulo shantytown.
Gesturing toward barefoot children playing beside stinking open sewers, he said the poor are fed up with governments that "promise, promise, promise, but never deliver."
Attempts at economic reform were disrupted by the impeachment of President Fernando Collor de Mello, who is being tried on charges of receiving $ 6.5 million in graft.
President Carlos Andres Perez of Venezuela has stepped down after surviving two attempted coups, and faces similar charges. Support for the coups was high among the poor, who speak scornfully of traditional politics.
Surveys indicate the traditional parties, courts and elected officials "are totally discredited" in Venezuela, according to Heinz Sonntag, a sociologist-economist in Caracas. According to the polls, he said, "67 percent of the people want democracy, but 56 percent don't want this kind of democracy."
Poverty is less widespread and devastating in Venezuela than in most other South American countries, but has a painful poignancy in an oil-rich nation that once hoped to eliminate it.
Drug use and alcoholism are said to be rampant in the slums that cling to Caracas' hills, where heavily armed gangs fight over turf.
"They kill each other like dogs," said Josefina Gonzalez, a Mexican nun who works in one of the slums. "The situation just gets worse."
Many affluent Venezuelans are getting through the economic crisis quite well and still make shopping trips to Miami. The contrast between their comfortable lives and the suffering of others dramatizes what economists call the recovery's weakest aspect: the widening gap between the rich and poor.
"The growth in the last two years has been accompanied by a stunning lack of equality," Sonntag said.

 

End of Document
