

Stakes are High as Salvadorans Bring Negotiations to the U.N.
The Associated Press
September 15, 1991, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 509 words
Byline: By ANNIE CABRERA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN SALVADOR, El Salvador
Body




The Salvadoran president and senior guerrilla leaders will meet Monday with U.N. Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar in an effort to end the 12-year-old civil war that has taken more than 75,000 lives.
Alfredo Cristiani and leaders of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, or FMLN, do not plan a face-to-face meeting, but hope that separate talks, with Perez de Cuellar carrying messages between them, could lead to the formulation of a quick timetable for the war's end.
Because both sides have expressed a willingness to bring the war to a close, expectations for positive results are high.
"If the negotiations collapse, fighting could very likely increase," said Ruben Zamora, the vice-president of the national legislature and a longtime rebel ally. "But if they are successful, the significance is an acceleration of negotiations and the goal of peace in 1992 will be real."
Perez de Cuellar is expected to propose a one-time set of negotiations aimed at a simultaneous cease-fire and agreements concerning the future of the armed forces and the rebels' return to civilian life.
A immediate cease-fire, however, is unlikely to come out of the meetings.
"We're not in the final phase of the process .. the point is to see if we can cut the Gordian knot that currently has stalled the negotiations," said Alvaro de Soto, Perez de Cuellar's representative for the talks.
De Soto said the main problem is to establish the conditions for the FMLN to lay down its arms and become a purely political force, while its security is guaranteed.
The FMLN, de Soto said, "doesn't want to jump in the pool until they're sure there's enough water - and that the temperature is right."
But the "Gordian knot" is viewed differently from different angles.
Presidential aide Ernesto Altschul blames the guerrillas for failing to take steps to convince their combatants that it is time to quit fighting.
For Shafick Handal, one of the five top FMLN commander, the knot is the armed forces, which the government "seeks to maintain in their present form, while we propose their transformation and subordination to civil society."
Nonetheless, government and guerrilla leaders have pledged to search for openings that could lead to the war's end.
"We are going with many ideas and with open minds," said Salvador Samayoa, a member of the FMLN negotiating team, in a telephone interview from Mexico.
"We are not going to sign something and then back down," Altschul said. "It would be a political cost impossible to pay."
On the eve of the meetings, the desire of the Salvadoran people to end the war may never be higher.
More than 15,000 people marched Sunday, the country's Independence Day, to demand that Cristiani negotiate directly with rebel leaders.
Between streets lined with soldiers and skies filled with military helicopters, marchers held signs demanding an end to the war and the withdrawal of the U.S. military from the country.
"We hope that the United States and Congress are listening to our call," said the Rev. Edgar Palacios, one of the rally's organizers.

 

End of Document
