

Stamps In The News: U.N. Stamp Commemorates 'Earth Summit' Conference
The Associated Press
May 1, 1992, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 698 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




The whimsical creations of artist Peter Max are featured as the latest designs of United Nations stamps to commemorate the U.N.'s Conference on Environment and Development called "Earth Summit 1992."
There are three different designs of se-tenant (attached) blocks of four stamps. Four marginal inscriptions appear on each, two on the left and two on the right. The inscriptions consist of the United Nations emblem with the wording "United Nations" and "1992" beneath the emblem. The signature of Peter Max appears in the right hand corner of each sheet.
According to the UN Postal Administration, Earth Summit, to be held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, June 1-12, will be a critical forum for world leaders to address the grave problems facing our planet.
Also, in salute to the Earth Summit stamps, the UNPA is releasing a special philatelic souvenir of the conference in Rio. It will consist of a pack of cachets by well known artists, including Peter Max.
Included in the souvenir pack is the UNPA's first ever "Conference Card." It shows an illustration of the Rio skyline affixed with a se-tenant block of the four Earth Summit stamps.
For further information on the new UNPA issues, or on any UN stamps, you may write to the United Nations Postal Administration, PO Box 5900, Grand Central Station, New York, NY 10017. You may even phone them at 212-963-7684.
---
First Day Cover Catalog Published
First day cover collectors will be glad to know that the 1992 edition of the "Specialized Catalog of United States First Day Covers" is now available. The catalog, published by the Washington Press and edited by Leo August and Gerald H. Strauss, is a pocket-sized booklet making it easy to carry as a handy reference source.
Though produced for experienced collectors, the catalog also can be used with ease by the novice. For newcomers to the hobby, there is an introduction to first day cover collecting and other useful preliminary matter.
There are many price increases noted in the 1992 catalog. For example, in the U.S. Airmails section, a 6-cent Dec. 10, 1918, FDC is now listed at $ 16,000. A 16-cent July 11, 1918, cover is $ 20,000 and a 24-cent May 13, 1918, cover is $ 25,000.
The 1992 edition is being sold at stamp dealers throughout the country for $ 5.95. It can be ordered directly from the Washington Press, 2 Vreeland Road, Florham Park, NJ 07932. On mail orders, add 60 cents for shipping.
---
Trains and Pilgrim Fathers
The Isle of Man reaches out to America on two of its latest issues. One set of stamps honors the First Transcontinental Railroad and the other pays tribute to the Pilgrim Fathers who landed in the New World in 1620.
The reason for the Union Pacific stamps is that two Manx brothers, Jack and Dan Casement, supervised and helped build the railroad. The Casement family emigrated from the Isle of Man in the late 1820s, settling in Ontario County, N.Y., where Jack and Dan were born. The Transcontinental Railroad was completed in 1869 when the Union Pacific joined with the Central Pacific at Promontory Summit, Utah.
The 33 pence shows the "Jupiter" wood-burning locomotive used at that time. Another 33 p features the "No. 119" coal-burning locomotive originally chosen for the joining. The 39 p depicts engine "No. 844" of the Union Pacific, the last 4-8-4 steam locomotive built for the Union Pacific. Another 39 p displays the "T Challenger." The 1.50 pound souvenir sheet illustrates the famed Golden Spike ceremony at Promontory Summit.
The Isle of Man's "Europa 1992" stamps are dedicated to the "Anniversary of the Discovery of America." Although the Isle of Man has no direct link with this particular anniversary, it used this opportunity to hail the epic voyage of the Pilgrim Fathers from Europe to the New World in which Manxman Myles Standish was a leading figure.
The 18 pence value shows the Pilgrims on their way to board the ship "Speedwell" at Delfshaven, Holland, to go to England for the commencement of their voyage. The 28 p depicts the "Mayflower" and the "Speedwell" at anchor at Plymouth. The "Speedwell"developed leaks and could not make the journey. The "Mayflower" set sail alone on this momentous journey to land at Cape Cod in 1620.

 

End of Document
