

Stamps In The News: Sport of Baseball Honored By Postal Service
The Associated Press
April 24, 1992, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 596 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




The cry of "play ball" once again is echoing throughout the country as baseball achieves its prominence as the national pastime.
This year baseball attains another milestone as it becomes an official sport at the 1992 Summer Olympic Games in Barcelona, Spain. Heretofore (since 1912) baseball was just a demonstration sport at the Olympics.
To herald baseball's Olympic entry, the U.S. Postal Service has issued a new 29-cent stamp - which should please baseball fans who are also collectors.
Featured on the design is an action scene showing a baserunner attempting to evade the catcher at home plate. In the upper right corner is "USA" and "29" plus the Olympics five-ring symbol.
This design was selected following an international stamp art contest conducted by the Postal Service and other postal administrations taking part in the worldwide Olympic sponsorship. The U.S. contest was won by Anthony DeLuz of Boston.
Other nations participating in the stamp art contest were Brazil, South Korea, Mexico and New Zealand.
Here's how you can get your first-day cancellations of the baseball stamp:
The easiest way is to buy the new stamp at your local post office, affix the stamp to your envelope, address the envelope, place in a larger envelope and send to "Customer Affixed Stamps, Olympic Baseball Stamp, Postmaster, 3900 Crown Road, Atlanta, GA 30304-9991."
If you prefer to have the USPS do the affixing, send your self-addressed envelope and 29 cents per stamp in check or money order to "Olympic Baseball Stamp, Postmaster, 3900 Crown Road, Atlanta, GA 30304-9992."
Your orders must be postmarked no later than May 3.
---
And the Winner Is…
Can you name the most popular stamp sold by the USPS during 1991 - according to first day of issue sales?
The winner, says the Postal Service, was the World War II series with a total of 1,832,967. Other popular first day requests were for the space exploration set and for fishing flies.
The stamps with the least first day orders was the William Saroyan-USSR combination with just 2,477.
---
First U.S. Commemoratives Were 1893 'Columbians'
As the stamp world celebrates the 500th anniversary of Christopher Columbus' landing in the New World, the U.S. looks back to Oct. 12, 1893, when the World's Columbian Exposition was held in Chicago and the Post Office issued is first true U.S. commemorative stamps. There were 16 stamps in the set.
The famous "Columbians" depicted Columbus in sight of land, the landing of Columbus and his men, the flagship of Columbus, the three ships (Nina, Pinta and Santa Maria), Columbus soliciting aid from Queen Isabella of Spain, Columbus welcomed at Barcelona, Columbus announcing his discovery, Columbus at La Rabida, Queen Isabella pledging her jewels, Isabella and Columbus, Columbus presenting gifts to the natives, the recall of Columbus, Columbus in chains, Columbus restored to favor, Columbus describing his third voyage, and a profile portrait of Columbus.
The 16 stamps were printed for the government by the American Bank Note Co. During part of the printing run, a pressman inked the 4-cent plate showing Columbus' fleet with blue ink instead of ultramarine, thereby greatly increasing the value of the stamp.
---
More Columbiana
The U.S. Stamp Collectors Society is offering a multi-colored Columbia commemorative cover with special pictorial postmark and the official U.S. Postal Service postmark honoring the 500th anniversary for $ 4.95 each.
A free list of other Columbus commemoratives is available by sending a 29-cent stamp to the U.S. Stamp Collectors Society, PO Box 854, Van Nuys, CA 91408.

 

End of Document
