

Stamps In The News: Nation's First Public Art Museum Honored
The Associated Press
December 27, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 563 words
Body




Eds: Special Features Illustrations - Mailed print subscribers get 1 b&w photo, l col, Wadsworth Atheneum
 
 By SYD KRONISH
For AP Special Features
The Wadsworth Atheneum, the nation's first public art museum, is featured on a new U.S. 19-cent postal card. The card honors the 150th anniversary of the founding of the Atheneum in Hartford, Conn., and is the 21st in the Historic Preservation Series of stamps released by the U.S. Postal Service.
The indicium of the new card depicts a view of the entrance to the museum's original building and is reminicent of a Gothic castle with its masive stones, towers, battlements and lead windows.
The museum was mainly funded by Hartford philanthropist Daniel Wadsworth. Many world-renowned collections are currently housed in the Atheneum. Included are European paintings from the Renaisance to the 20th century; J. Pierpont Morgan's priceless legacy of European decorative arts, and American art from the time of the Pilgrims to the present.
Here's how to get first day cancellations of the 19-cent postal card.:
The easiest way is to buy the new cards from your local post office, address them and place the cards in a larger envelope. Send to "Customer-Supplied Cards, Wadsworth Atheneum Postal Card, Postmaster, 14 Weston St., Hartford, Conn, 06101-9991.
If your prefer to have the USPS do the job, send your self-addressed pressure sensitive labels and 19 cents per card (in check or money order) to Wadsworth Atheneum Postal Card, Postmaster, 141 Weston St., Hartford, Conn., 06101-9992.
All orders must by postmarked by Feb. 15.
---
Prehistoric Creatures Featured on Guyana Stamps
The South American nation of Guyana, a former British colony, has released a sheetlet of 20 stamps that combine to form a unified design image featuring prehistoric creatures that once roamed through South America during the Cenozoic era.
Some of the creatures like the Cavieronius, which is similar in appearance to the modern day elephant will look familiar to collectors.
Although the creatures may look familiar, their names may not be. For example, there is the Debidae, the Macrauchenia, the Pyrotherium and the Natalus Stramineus Bat.
Collectors who specialize in prehistoric animals and would like to acquire these Guyana stamps may write directly to the Inter-Governmental Philatelic Corp., 460 West 34th St., New York, NY 10001.
---
Vol. III of United Nations 'Our World' Available
The United Nations Postal Administration is now making available its Volume III of "Our World: International Images of Nature." As with the previous two volumes in this series, the book has been produced in cooperation with the postal administrations of Australia, Canada, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States.
Volume III contains 26 beautifully designed stamps in a book which is highlighted by magnificent color photos with appropriate text in English, French, German and Swedish.
The new book, complete with a protective folder to house the stamps, is available from the U.N. Postal Administration for $ 11.50, plus a handling charge of 50 cents per book. Send to U.N. Postal Administration, United Nations, New York, NY 10017.
The UNPA says there is a continuing need for worldwide focus to be given to environmental questions, and these volumes illustrate our heritage. Volumes I and II also are available so that you may have the complete set for your collection.

 

End of Document
