

Stamps in the News: Prehistoric and Endangered Animals Highlight New Issues
The Associated Press
September 27, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 578 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




Long-extinct creatures and modern-day animals in danger of extinction are the subjects of two recently issued stamp sets.
From Guyana comes a sheetlet of 20 $ 12.80 stamps, each of which depicts a different prehistoric creature that lived in South America. Together, the stamps form a single scene that contains all the animals. The species depicted lived during the Cenozoic Era, which began about 65 million years ago.
Uganda has issued a set of four stamps and two souvenir sheets to publicize the plight of that country's most endangered species, the African elephant. The set also salutes the World Wildlife Fund, which works to save animals threatened with extinction. The designs are based on a similar Uganda set issued in 1983.
The new stamps show African elephants in various scenes. The 100-shilling depicts them returning to the herd's traditional burial grounds. Shown on the 140-shilling is part of a herd traveling in the grasslands. The 200-shilling shows a herd bathing at a waterhole. On the 600-shilling, a pair of the animals are depicted using their trunks to dust away insects.
Giraffes are shown on one of the 1,200-shilling souvenir sheets, while the other portrays three large rhinos.
For those who were wondering, the African elephant can be distinguished from its close relative, the Indian elephant, by its flatter head and larger ears.
 

 
 Soviet Stamp Program - Da or Nyet?
Just prior to the recent failed coup in the Soviet Union, its Ministry of Communications announced that the postal ministries of the constituent republics would be permitted to have a voice in determining the subjects and designs of Soviet Union stamps to be issued next year.
According to the USSR Stamp Agency in North America, under the new program, there would be four stamps devoted to each republic, with subjects determined according to suggestions and recommendations made by each state.
In light of recent developments, though, it is now uncertain whether the program will be implemented.
 

 
 Jersey Honors Its Volunteers
Jersey, one of the Channel Islands in the English Channel, has released six new stamps dedicated to its Voluntary Aid program for underdeveloped countries in Africa. Volunteers from Jersey have helped this humanitarian effort by working in summer camps and donating their pay to the program.
The subjects and denominations are: a water drilling rig in Ethiopia, 15 pence; a construction work team in Rwanda, 20 pence; a village education program in Kenya, 26-pence; a leprosy and eye-care clinic in Tanzania, 31 pence; agricultural cultivation in Zambia, 37 pence; and a scene at the health-care and immunization clinic in Lesotho, 44 pence.
Also from Jersey comes word that its Christmas issue will consist of four stamps with drawings illustrating scenes from J.M. Barrie's "Peter Pan."
 

 
 Swiss Stamp Values Are Hardly Cheesy
It's pretty well-known among collectors that the world's first postage stamp was the Penny Black, issued by Great Britain in 1840. But did you know that the second stamp issue came three years later, from the Swiss canton of Zurich?
The Zurich issue consisted of two stamps: a 4-rappen and 6-rappen, which showed, respectively, a large "4" and "6" against a background of diagonal lines. To protect against counterfeiting, tiny red lines were added to the sheets.
These are rare and valuable stamps. The 1991 Scott catalog lists the 4-rappen at $ 13,500 mint and $ 13,000 used, and the 6-rappen at $ 5,000 mint and $ 1,500 used.

 

End of Document
