

Stamps in the News: Guyana Honors Voyages of Columbus
The Associated Press
May 29, 1992, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 521 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




The latest set of stamps honoring the voyages of Christopher Columbus has been issued by the South American nation of Guyana, situated in the Caribbean Sea. There are 12 stamps and three souvenir sheets in the set.
Depicted on the Guyana stamps are such scenes as Columbus landing on the island of Trinidad, Columbus preparing a map, his fleet being blown off course by hurricane winds, the landing on San Salvador island, a priest who accompanied Columbus during his voyages, and Columbus bowing to his patrons - Queen Isabella and King Ferdinand of Spain.
One of the interesting illustrations shows a sea monster which some of the superstitious sailors believed to be lurking in the uncharted seas ready to devour ships and men.
The first souvenir sheets bear a portrait of Columbus and a reproduction of the first map of the New World. Another sheet features Columbus and his trio of ships sailing westward. The third displays the three ships in full sail.
Denmark has hailed the 500th anniversary with a set of two stamps featuring two of the articles of food discovered by Columbus - potatoes and maize.
At the time of its introduction in Europe, the potato was met with much skepticism and superstition. However, it soon became a staple food in most European countries. The maize (corn) which Columbus brought back with him was immediately eaten and sown. Today maize is grown on all continents.
The Danish stamps are part of this year's Europa stamps whose theme is the Columbus anniversary.
Also issued by Denmark is a special stamp honoring the silver wedding anniversary of Queen Margrethe and Prince Henrik. Shown on the stamp is a dual portrait of the queen and consort. In the foreground is the painting of the royal pair today, and in the background is a view taken at their marriage. The dates 1967 and 1992 appear in the upper corners.
---
Alaska Highway Stamp Issued
The U.S. Postal Service commemorates the 50th anniversary of the completion of the Alaska Highway with the issuance of a new 29-cent commemorative stamp depicting a 1942 Department of Army photo showing a military vehicle moving along the new highway. A large mountain is seen in the background.
Construction of the 1,500-mile Alaska Highway was begun by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and was completed in the same year. The highway served as the principal route for connecting Army installations in Alaska with the U.S. during World War II. The highway runs from Dawson Creek in Canada's British Columbia through central Alaska.
First day cancellations for the new Alaska stamp are available.
The easiest way to obtain them is to purchase the stamp at your local post office, affix to your envelopes, address the envelopes and place in a larger envelope addressed to: Customer-Affixed Envelopes, Alaska Highway Stamp, Postmaster, 5400 Mail Trail, Fairbanks, AL 99709-9991.
If you prefer to have the Postal Service do the affixing, send your self-addressed envelopes, including 29 cents per stamp in check or money order, and send to: Alaska Highway Stamp, Postmaster, 5400 Mail Trail, Fairbanks, AL 99709-9992.
Your orders must be postmarked by June 29.

 

End of Document
