

Stamps In The News: Guyana Stamps Feature 'Pocahontas' Theme
The Associated Press
July 21, 1995, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 512 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




"Pocahontas," the new Disney animated film, receives a philatelic tribute by the South American nation of Guyana.
The Guyana stamp salute consists of a sheetlet of eight vertical stamps that depict major characters in the movie highlighting the romantic story of Indian Princess Pocahontas and the British explorer Capt. John Smith.
Postal officials of Guyana made special arrangements with the Walt Disney Co. of Burbank, Calif., to create the stamps.
The stamps depict Pocahontas and her pet raccoon Mesko; Capt. John Smith; Chief Powhattan, father of Pocahontas and leader of his Native American nation; Kocoum, brave warrior of Powhattan's tribe; Gov. John Ratcliffe and his pet dog Percy; Wiggins, the governor's servant; Nakoma, Pocahontas' best friend; Thomas, a young Englishman devoted to Capt. Smith.
The souvenir sheet shows, in the stamp portion, the raccoon Meeko flexing his muscles like a strong Indian warrior.
"Pocahontas" is the 33rd in a line of popular Disney animated films and is the first in which the hero is a heroine, say Guyana postal officials.
The Guyana "Pocahontas" stamps are available at your local dealer.
---
 
 Stamps Honor "Queen Mum," At 95
"Queen Mum," the beloved queen mother of Great Britain, is being honored on her 95th birthday by many countries of the Commonwealth with special stamps for the occasion.
Each of the countries is releasing a se-tenant (attached) strip of four different stamps printed in a special sheetlet of eight stamps, or two complete sets. At the bottom of each sheetlet is the inscription "The Lady of the Century."
Some of the souvenir sheets show the queen mother at various stages of her life. Included are scenes with her husband, King George VI; with her daughters (Elizabeth and Margaret) and her grandchildren.
These stamps are available at your local dealer.
---
 
 Short-Lived Stamp
Last year, the U.S. Postal Service issued a stamp which became obsolete in two days.
On Dec. 30, 1994, the Postal Service released its final stamps of the year -a 29-center hailing the Chinese New Year. The design featured a pig and commemorated "The Year of the Boar." It was the third in the "Happy New Year" series issued to coincide with the Chinese lunar new year.
The 29-cent denomination covered the current first-class letter rate until Dec. 31, when the rate rose to 32 cents. Thus, people using the boar stamp after Jan. 1, 1995, were required to affix an additional 3 cents postage.
No other U.S. stamp has been obsolete for its intended purpose in so short a time.
---
 
 Stamp Mag Debuts
A new monthly philatelic magazine soon will be on the market. "U.S. Stamp News" is scheduled for release in September with an October 1995 issue date, just in time for National Stamp Collecting Month.
Its publisher, Philatelic Communications Corp., says the new magazine is the only monthly magazine devoted exclusively to U.S. stamps, covers and postal history.
---
Those interested in obtaining a copy of the inaugural edition of "U.S. Stamp News" may write to U.S. Stamp News, Box 5050-xa, White Plains, N.Y. 10602, or phone (800) 635-3351.
 Load-Date: July 21, 1995

 

End of Document
