

Stamps In The News: Old Testament Provides Theme For Guyana Stamps
The Associated Press
August 26, 1994, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 653 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body



For AP Special Features
Stories from the Old Testament Bible are brought to life on four new unified image sheetlets of stamps by the South American nation of Guyana. These stamps are being released to commemorate the 1994 United Nations "Year Of The Family."
The four Old Testament stories are: Joseph and the Coat of Many Colors, Daniel in the Lion's Den, Parting of the Red Sea by Moses, and the story of Ruth and Naomi.
The "Joseph" sheetlet consists of six scenes as recounted in the Book of Genesis. It depicts the life of Joseph including the oft-told tale of his father giving Joseph the coat of many colors that makes his brothers jealous and thus forcing him into slavery.
The "Daniel" sheetlet features the story of the prophet Daniel who maintains his loyalty to God when he is thrown into a den of deadly lions. God sends angels to tame the lions and save Daniel.
The third sheetlet reveals Moses safely leading the Israelites through the parted waters of the Red Sea before the pursuing armies of the Egyptian Pharoah who are drowned when the waters are joined again.
The Old Testament story of Ruth and Naomi is portrayed on the fourth sheetlet. The complicated plot relates how Ruth stayed with her mother-in-law after her husband died in a famine. With Naomi's blessings, Ruth married a relative to carry on the famiy name and gave birth to a son who became the grandfather of King David.
Collectors may purchase any of these four Guyana sheetlets highlighting the Old Testament for $ 8.95 or the complete set of all four sheetlets plus free display pages for $ 22.95 from the Shield Stamp Co., 460 W. 34th St., New York, NY, 10001. Phone 212-629-7979.
---
Moon Landing Stamps In Space
The stamp world has been deluged with issuances hailing the 25th anniversary of U.S. astronauts landing on the moon. Now stamp collectors will have an opportunity to fly off into space via their mail.
According to Postmaster General Marvin Runyon, the Postal Service has agreed to fly 500,000 of the new $ 9.95 Express Mail stamps featuring the moon landing on a space shuttle mission. The USPS will use the stamps to create a limited edition commemorative souvenir cachet.
---
More Lunar Stamps
Meanwhile, two former U.S. Trust Territories in the western Pacific have joined the moon landing commemoration by issuing new sets of special stamps. The issuances comes from the Federated States of Miscronesia and the Marshall Islands.
Micronesia has released a $ 2.90 souvenir sheet featuring a reproduction of the U.S. 1969 "First Man On the Moon" 10 cents stamp. Above the stamp is the inscription "The Eagle Has Landed." Before Micronesia established its own postal service and began issuing stamps, the 1969 U.S. moon stamp was among those used in that territory.
The mint souvenir sheet is available for $ 10.95, first-day covers for $ 12.95 and both for $ 19.95 from the Space Collectors Society, PO Box 854, Van Nuys, Calif. 91408.
The Marshall Islands sends its philatelic tribute to the 25th anniversary with four new 75 cents stamps in both se-tenent (attached) blocks of four and a souvenir sheet. One stamp depicts President John F. Kennedy while the other three show scenes from the famed Apollo XI mission.
The complete mint block of four costs $ 10.95, first day covers $ 12.95 and the complete collection for $ 19.95 from the same Space Collectors Stamp Society, mentioned above.
---
Flying Dutchmen
Dutch aviation is the theme of three new stamps by the Netherlands. The new stamps mark the 75th anniversary of KLM Royal Dutch Airlines, Fokker, a Dutch aviation manufacturer, and the Netherlands National Aerospace Laboratory. Each stamp has a value of 80 cents.
The KLM stamp is black, violet and blue showing a Dutch plane in flight. Today KLM claims it is the oldest international airline in the world which still operates under its original name.
These stamps from the Netherlands are available from your local stamp dealer.
 Load-Date: August 26, 1994

 

End of Document
