

Stamps In The News: Anniversary of International Youth Year Is Commemorated
The Associated Press
May 19, 1995, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 559 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




"Youth: Our Future" is the theme of a new set of six stamps and a souvenir card of the United Nations Postal Administration to commemorate the 10th anniversary of the International Youth Year.
The horizontal sheets of 25 stamps have four marginal inscriptions, two in the left margin and two in the right margin. The inscriptions have the logo of the International Youth Year plus "United Nations" above the emblem and the year "1995" below the emblem.
The pictorial sketches designed for the set were the creations of Gottfried Kumpf of Austria.
The souvenir card depicts the six new stamps as well as three of the stamps issued in 1984 on the same theme. Also included on the card is a statement by U.N. Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
To obtain the new U.N. Youth stamps, write to: United Nations Postal Adminstration, P.O. Box 5900, Grand Central Station, New York, N.Y., 10163-9992. Or call toll free (800)-234-UNPA.
---
Hailing U.N. Charter Signing
The next UNPA issue will be in June when the United Nations releases a set of six commemorative stamps and three souvenir sheets on the theme "50th Anniversary of the United Nations." The stamps will honor the signing of the United Nations Charter in San Francisco on June 26, 1945.
Also in June, the U.S. Postal Service will issue a new stamp marking the 50th anniversary of the United Nations. Many other countries will be releasing new stamps to hail the occasion.
Israel, for example, has issued a single 1.50 shekel stamp that emphasizes the humanitarian activities of the different specialized agencies of the world body.
---
Scott Catalog Available
Volume 1A of the 1996 Scott catalog is now available to collectors.
Volume I has been split into two sections: Volume 1A contains United States, United Nations, British Commonwealth countries of North and South America, and the Caribbean. The balance of British Commonwealth countries are in Volume 1B.
Almost 2,000 new value changes since the 1995 "United States Specialized Catalogue" have been incorporated into the U.S. section of Volume 1A.
The cover price of the 1996 Volume 1A, and all subsequent 1996 volumes, is $ 34.
Volume 1B will soon be off the presses. It contains the balance of British Commonwealth countries including Great Britain, British Europe, British Africa, Australia, New Zealand and British Oceania.
The catalogs are available at your local stamp dealer.
---
Collapse of Hitler's Third Reich Featured
A special stamp set marking the end of World War II in Europe has been issued by the Maldives, a former British protectorate in the Indian Ocean. The stamps feature the collapse of Adolf Hitler's Third Reich.
Illustrated on the stamps are the following: The 203 mm gun of the Soviet army, the ruins of Hitler's residence at Berchtesgaden, Operation "Manna" as Allied forces drop food to the starving Dutch, the IL-1 of the Soviet Air Force, British troops burning the last hut at the Bergen Belsen concentration camp, the last V-1 rocket launched against London, the U.S. Third Armored Division passing through the ruins of Cologne, and the gutted Reichstag Building in Berlin as it looked on May 7, 1945, the day Germany surrendered.
In the central portion of the Maldives sheetlet of stamps is a picture of the massive Royal Air Force raid on Dresden, Germany, in February 1945.
These stamps are available at your local stamp dealer.
 Load-Date: May 19, 1995

 

End of Document
