

Stamps in the News:Stamp Collecting Month Highlights 'Wonders of the Sea'
The Associated Press
September 9, 1994, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 671 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




"Get in the swim of things - collect stamps!"
This is the theme of National Stamp Collecting Month (October) which gains momentum with the issuance of a fantasy scene of four new 29-cent U.S. stamps. The stamps are called "Wonders of the Sea."
Featured on the block of four are butterfly fish, dolphins, sea birds and divers. Circling overhead is a frigate bird and a booby, while a divers buoy, a fishing boat and a triple-masted schooner glide across the water's surface.
Swimming among the fish are four scuba divers (one on each stamp) plus a nautilus crustacean. Also seen on the ocean floor is the steering wheel from a sunken ship, a section of coral reef and an anemone.
It is interesting to note that the first day of issue ceremonies was actually held 80 feet below the surface in the waters of Hawaii's Wakiki Beach. This is the first time in the history of the Postal Service that a stamp has been canceled under water.
To obtain your first day of issue postmarks by mail, you may buy the stamps at your local post office, affix the stamps to your envelopes, and place in a larger envelope, addressed to: Customer Affixed Stamps, Wonders of the Sea, Postmaster, Honolulu, Hawaii 96820-9991.
Requests must be made by Oct. 31.
---
Cavalry vs. Navajos
The U.S. Postal Service also has released a new 19-cent postal card displaying the colorful Canyon de Chelly in the Southwest Indian country, once the ancestral stronghold of the Navajos.
In 1864, Canyon de Chelly was the scene of a military engagement between the Navajo Indians and a U.S. cavalry detachment under the command of Kit Carson. Today the Navajos play an integral part in operations of the 83,849-acre Canyon de Chelly National Monument, operated by the U.S. Park Service. Many still live in the distinctive Navajo circular houses of logs and poles called "hogans" found throughout the canyon.
The 19-cent Canyon de Chelly postal cards are available at your local post office.
---
Outer Space Sightings
People all over the world have been fascinated in recent years with purported "sightings" of aliens from outer space. Now the sightings come to life on a new set of eight 60 cordoba souvenir sheets from Nicaragua featuring illustrations of these reported appearances of alien invasions.
Each souvenir sheet highlights a different alien sighting in the U.S., Argentina and the Grand Canary Islands. The series comes in two versions - Spanish and English.
One sheet shows an alien sighting in 1965 in Argentina, another has a sighting in Texas in 1973. Others portray a sighting in 1961 in New Hampshire, a sighting in 1991 in Missouri, a sighting in 1976 in the Grand Canary Islands, a sighting in 1973 in Pennsylvania, a sighting in 1955 in Kentucky, and a view of a sighting in 1989 in Kansas.
---
If you are interested in the Nicaragua "alien sightings" stamps, you may write to the Shield Stamp Co., 460 W. 34th St., New York, N.Y. 10001. Phone 212-629-7979.
---
Classic Cars
Classic autos depicted on stamps are popular with many topical collectors. The latest issuance is a set from Papua-New Guinea which features four historical cars which have been favorites of car buffs and stamp collectors alike.
The first stamp shows a Model T Ford once owned by H.O. Newport, the director of agriculture in Rabaul, New Guinea, back in 1920. Newport's residence is in the background.
A second stamp depicts the Chevrolet 490. The number 490 was the amount the car was sold for in the early 1920s. In the background is the Papuan Hotel which opened in 1910 and was the oldest hotel in Papua-New Guinea.
The third stamp illustrates an Austin Baby, a famous English car which first appeared in 1922. The model on the stamp was photographed in 1931.
The fourth stamp portrays a Willys Jeep made famous during World War II. U.S. armed forces used this vehicle extensively on the islands and the one seen on the stamp has U.S. markings but driven by Australian soldiers.
---
These stamps are available for $ 14.95 from the Classic Car Stamp Society, P.O. Box 917, Van Nuys, Calif. 91408.
 Load-Date: September 9, 1994

 

End of Document
