

Stamps In The News: United Nations Honors World Health Organization
The Associated Press
April 23, 1993, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 717 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




Health care is more than a political topic making headlines these days. It is an ever demanding problem for countries all over the world. And the United Nations has been in the forefront of this crusade for nearly a half century.
To honor the 45th anniversary of the World Health Organization, the U.N. Postal Administration will issue a set of six commemorative stamps on the theme "Healthy Environment" May 7.
The 29 cent stamp is a graphic illustration of "Personal Environment" as it relates to the mind, our genetic heritage, noncommunicable diseases, personal hygiene and healthy lifestyles.
The 50 cent stamp features the theme of "Family Environment." The health of the family, including nutrition and balanced diets, maternal, child and adolescent health; health care of the elderly, family planning and interpersonl relations fall within this category.
The 60 franc stamp relates to "Neighborhood and Community Environment." It calls for accessible health services, cleanliness and amenities, stress reduction, occupational health, disease control as well as household wastes.
The 1 franc stamp illustrates "Urban Environment." This topic includes traffic safety, housing shelter, pollution control, medical services, water supply and waste disposal.
The 6 shilling stamp is for "Regional and National Environment." Included are disaster preparedness, food safety, health legislation, energy policy, water resources management, traditional medicine and chemical safety.
The 10 shilling stamp relates to "Continental and Global Environment." The focus is on atmospheric and marine pollution, technical cooperation among countries, emergency relief operations and exchanges of national experience.
Also issued by the U.N. is a souvenir card with the theme "Healthy Environment." The new card depicts the six new stamps and is the first souvenir card to carry a statement by U.N. Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
The vertical sheets of 50 stamps have four marginal inscriptions which consist of the WHO emblem and the years "1948-1993" below.
The stamps were designed by Milton Glaser of New York City. Special first day cancellations will be available at U.N. Headquarters in New York.
To obtain first-day cancellations and the new stamps, you may write to United Nations Postal Administration, PO Box 5900, Grand Central Station, New York, N.Y. 10163-9992. Or you may call 1-800-234-UNPA.
---
David vs. Goliath
The biblical story of David and Goliath is known to children everywhere.
This story is told and illustrated in a sheetlet of 25 stamps that combine to form a unified design image issued by Guyana, the former British colony on the northern tip of South America.
In the central portion of the sheetlet are the well-known figures from the Old Testament highlighting the dramatic moment when the giant Goliath has been fatally struck by a stone from David's slingshot. The once-fierce giant drops his spear and falls to the ground.
Above the top row of the stamps is the title "David and Goliath" plus the quotation from the Book of Samuel (chapter 17, verse 47) "And all this assembly shall know that the Lord saveth not the sword and spear; for the battle is the Lord's, and he will give you into our hands."
---
Broadway Booklet Rebooked
The U.S. Postal Service has rescheduled the release of the Broadway musicals stamp booklet until sometime in July. New York City will be the site of first-day ceremonies and cancellations.
In the "Legends of American Music" series, the four 29 cent stamps will depict scenes from such classics as "Showboat," "Porgy & Bess," "Oklahoma!" and "My Fair Lady."
---
How To Get Hinged
A word of advice to new collectors on placing stamps in your albums.
The best way is to use a hinge - a small strip of thin plastic with gum on one side. Unlike tape or glue, hinges let you peel the stamp off the page without damaging the stamp. Hinges come either folded or unfolded and they can be purchased anywhere you buy your stamps.
Here's how to use a folded hinge:
Moisten the short end of the hinge lightly. Press it to the back of the stamp, placing the fold about one-eighth-inch from the top of the stamp. Place the stamp in the album and press to secure the position. Then, using your tongs, gently lift the corners of the stamp to assure it will not be stuck to the page.

 

End of Document
