

Stamps in the News: 100th Anniversary of Babe Ruth's Birth Is Honored
The Associated Press
April 28, 1995, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 522 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




Baseball is back. And so is the Babe.
Now that the major-league baseball strike is over, there is more reason to celebrate.
This year marks the 100th anniversary of the birth of George Herman Ruth - better known as the "Babe." To honor this occasion, the South American nation of Guyana has issued a special sheetlet of 12 different $ 65 stamps and a souvenir sheet featuring portraits of Ruth, one of the first members of baseball's Hall of Fame.
Shown in the stamp and border portion of the $ 500 Guyana large stamp souvenir sheet are some of the portraits seen on the 12 stamps.
Ruth's achievements loom large in the record books. He held or shared about 60 records, 28 of which were in World Series games. The Babe, however, was more proud of his pitching performances than of his home run numbers.
He hurled twenty-nine 2-3 consecutive scoreless innings with the Boston Red Sox in the 1916 and 1918 games. That record was not broken until 1962, by Whitey Ford of the New York Yankees.
For price information on the Babe Ruth issuance, check your local stamp dealer.
---
50th Anniversary of V-E Day Hailed
To hail the 50th anniversary of World War II's V-E Day (Victory in Europe), many nations will be releasing stamps marking the occasion.
Sierra Leone in West Africa and Grenada in the West Indies are two countries issuing such commemorative stamps.
Sierra Leone highlights the war at sea. Seen on eight different 250 Le stamps are the USS Idaho, HMS Ark Royal, an unidentified destroyer, the HMS Nelson, John F. Kennedy's PT-109, USS Iowa, the German battleship Bismarck, and the German pocket battleship Graf Spee, which was scuttled outside the port of Montevideo, Uruguay.
The 1,500 Le souvenir sheet depicts the British aircraft carrier HMS Indomitable defending a convoy headed for the island of Malta in the Mediterranean Sea.
Grenada's set contains a sheetlet of eight different $ 2 horizontal stamps picturing some of the aircraft used by both sides of the conflict.
Featured are the Lavochkin LA7 of the Soviet Air Force, the Hawker Hurricane of the RAF, the US Air Force P-510 Mustang, the Messerschmitt ME 109F of the German Luftwaffe, the Bristol Beaufighter of the RAF, the ME 262 of the Luftwaffe, the P-470 of the United States and Hawker Tempest V of the RAF.
For further information, see your local stamp dealer.
---
Endangered Species
When the United Nations Postal Administration recently issued its third set of stamps in its multiyear series on "Endangered Species," it also released the "1995 Endangered Species Annual Collection Folder" of single mint stamps.
The collection is contained in a specially designed album that devotes separate pages to each of the 12 endangered species. Descriptive information is provided in English, French and German.
Each stamp is beautifully highlighted by a colorful array of photographs relative to the species. The stamps are not affixed inside the album, but spaces and mounts have been provided for this purpose.
 
 For information on acquiring the album, write to the U.N. Postal Administration, P.O. Box 5900, Grand Central Station, New York, N.Y. 10163-9992. Or phone (800) 234-UNPA.
 Load-Date: April 28, 1995

 

End of Document
