

Stamps In The News: Honoring 15th Anniversary of John Lennon's Death
 The Associated Press
December 22, 1995, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 495 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




The music of the Beatles is legendary. Recent recordings have accelerated their popularity … and John Lennon's name is mentioned in reverent tones.
To honor the 15th anniversary of Lennon's death, several nations have released special stamps featuring photos of the late singer, musician and composer.
Ghana, the former British colony once known as the Gold Coast in West Africa, has issued a sheetlet of 16 identical stamps showing a 1980 photo of Lennon.
Guyana, formerly British Guiana in South America, has released its set of 16 similar stamps featuring a 1968 photo of Lennon.
Mali, the former French protectorate of French Sudan in West Central Africa, has issued its 16 stamps illustrating a 1968 photo of Lennon (similar to the Guyana photo) plus a Lennon self-portrait drawing.
Nicaragua in Central America has issued its 16-stamp sheetlet reproducing a photograph of Lennon in 1964 when the Beatles made their historic tour of the United States.
Each sheetlet also includes information about Lennon in the border portion.
All of these stamps are available from your local dealer.
---
Palau Salutes United Nations Anniversary
The Republic of Palau, a former U.S.-administered Trust Territory in the Western Pacific, has issued a block of four 60-cent stamps to honor the 50th anniversary of the United Nations.
The first block emphasizes "Peace." The outlined frame of a soldier's helmet represents today's U.N. Peace Forces as well as the U.S. Forces that liberated Palau during World War II.
The second block depicts "Human Rights." The outlined frame of the U.N. Torch of Freedom represents the U.N. efforts in human rights around the world.
The third block features "Education." An open book frames a book about Palau, representing both the U.N. and Palau's commitment to equal education for all.
The fourth block is dedicated to "Agriculture." The stamp illustrates bananas, one of Palau's major agricultural products, framed by the outline of a tractor symbolic of U.N. efforts to assist the new nation.
The stamps of Palau are available at your local dealer.
---
Jamaica Issues Pre-Olympic Stamp
The island of Jamaica in the West Indies has issued a "Pre-Olympic" stamp salute to four past track and field champions, three of whom were from Jamaica. The next Olympic Games will be held next summer in Atlanta.
The $ 1 stamp depicts Arthur Wint of Jamaica. He won gold medals in the 1948 Olympics 400 meter run and in the 1952 Games 4-by-400-meter relay.
The $ 5 shows Donald Quarrie of Jamaica who won a gold medal in the 1976 Montreal Olympiad 200-meter run. He also won a bronze medal in the 1980 Moscow Games in the same event.
The $ 10 portrays Herb McKenley of Jamaica. He won a gold medal as part of the 1952 Helsinki Olympics 4-by-400 meter relay team that broke the then existing world record.
The $ 15 displays Jesse Owens of the United States who won four track and field gold medals in the 1936 Berlin Games.
The stamps of Jamaica can be obtained from your local dealer.
 Load-Date: December 22, 1995

 

End of Document
