

Study: Teens Around the World Sexually Active Before Age 20
The Associated Press
April 4, 1994, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 694 words
Byline: By DAVID BRISCOE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Adolescents around the world, no matter what their culture, are sexually active before age 20 - even if their parents are reluctant to admit it, a new study says.
And the age at which sexual activity begins is decreasing as overall health improves, according to the report released Sunday by Population Action International.
The non-profit family planning advocacy group said that by the year 2000, a billion teen-agers will be facing sexual challenges and desires.
While some 700 million teen-agers around the world are struggling with increasingly complex questions about sex, the report said most are not getting the help they need to find answers.
"The school systems in most countries … have largely failed to meet the sexual health education needs of youth and children," said the Population Action report, "Youth at Risk."
The report said the sexual behavior of adolescents is being affected by recent developments, including the spread of AIDS, changes in laws on abortion, and a worldwide trend to delay marriage.
In Bangladesh, the average age of marriage for women has risen from 14 to 18 since the early 1960s, and similar changes have occurred in other cultures, the report said. One obvious impact is to increase the years during which teen-agers are likely to engage in sex outside of marriage.
It cited surveys in Kenya and Uganda that youths who were sexually active had experienced their first intercourse, on average, by age 15. In the United States, one fourth of 15-year-old girls and one-third of 15-year-old boys are estimated to have had intercourse, the report said.
In nine Latin American and Caribbean countries, it said, roughly one-half to two-thirds of women reported having intercourse before age 20.
Around the world, adults are reluctant to admit that their children are having sex, but studies in several countries show that most adolescents, no matter what their culture, are sexually active before age 20, the report said.
Adolescents are less likely to use contraceptives than adults, particularly in developing countries, and many young people have little knowledge of reproductive physiology, the report found.
Approaches to sex are often affected by culture, but social forces are changing attitudes, the report said, citing the impact of urbanization, changing family structures and mass media.
"Government support for adolescent programs has been constrained by societal discomfort in acknowledging adolescent sexual activity and by the misconception that access to sexuality education or contraception promotes sexual activity among youth," the report said.
It cited World Health Organization studies in several countries to show that children with a good sex education are more likely to delay their first intercourse.
The best approach, the report concluded, is to encourage a delay in sexual activity while providing birth control counseling and contraceptives.
But the report said most family planning programs do little to reach adolescents; laws and practices often restrict youngsters' access to contraception and abortion services.
Even marriage does not resolve all the problems of teen-age sex.
In South Asia, for example, were marriages occur early, complications in pregnancy and childbirth are greater for adolescent mothers. Unsafe abortions are also a major cause of adolescent mothers' deaths, the report said.
Early childbearing, with or without marriage, often limits educational and employment opportunities for young women and contributes to rapid population growth, the report said.
WHO estimates that one in 20 teen-agers worldwide acquires a sexually transmitted disease each year. In the United States, the risk is one in eight.
And the impact of sexual diseases on young women is usually greater because detection is more difficult and the results more serious, the Population Action report said.
On the positive side, the report described successful programs for dealing with adolescent sex in Grenada, Colombia, Mexico, Nigeria, Ethiopia, Indonesia and the Philippines.
It said the most effective programs involve youth in their planning and implementation and then obtain the support of community leaders and parents.
 Load-Date: April 4, 1994

 

End of Document
