

Summit For The Environment, But Attendance List Still Unclear.
The Associated Press
June 1, 1992, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 696 words
Byline: By PETER MUELLO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




The U.N. summit on the environment opens this week billed as the largest meeting of world leaders in history. But what it will accomplish - and who exactly will attend - remains unclear.
The gathering is formally called the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, and runs from Wednesday to June 14.
The U.N. press office says 142 princes, presidents and prime ministers have promised to come. The Brazilian government says 83 leaders have confirmed.
President Bush is expected for less than 48 hours at the summit portion of the conference starting June 11.
The conference's size alone is historic. But its importance might turn out to be more.
One day historians may look back on the meeting as a momentous occasion marking the end of the Cold War and the beginning of a "green war" against the spoiling of the Earth's resources.
Or it might turn out to be a dud, a conference that tried to do too much too soon.
The agenda includes protection of the atmosphere, the oceans, forests, threatened species and fresh water, and the cleanup of toxic and hazardous wastes. As if that weren't enough, the leaders will also address poverty, population growth and the restructuring of the world's economy.
Diplomats hope to devise a way to transfer money and technology from the wealthy industrialized countries to the poor developing countries.
But world leaders have been unable to agree on who will pay for pollution cleanup, which U.N. summit coordinator Maurice Strong has estimated will cost $ 125 billion a year.
Optimists hope for a breakthrough consensus on goals or funding.
But many ecologists accuse the Bush administration of blocking progress and watering down the documents.
The meeting's ultimate outcome will depend partly on what negotiators devise as a follow-up. They are discussing the creation of new U.N. agencies to foster environmentally benign development and implement accords reached in Rio.
Meanwhile, the delegates are arriving in a spruced-up city.
A 35,000-member security force has swept Rio, which has a population of 6 million, of the beggars, urchins and vendors who normally swarm the streets. Residents have commented on the relative lack of street crime.
Conference negotiations begin Wednesday, when 700 U.N. officials and 3,500 delegates put the finishing touches on the documents to be signed, U.N. press coordinator Monique McClellan said.
The delegates will observe two minutes of silence for the Earth before President Fernando Collor de Mello opens the conference at the Riocentro convention complex, 25 miles west of downtown Rio next to an auto speedway.
Much of the work of the conference has already been done. Here is the tally after three years of negotiations:
-A treaty to curb the carbon dioxide emissions that can lead to global warming has been drafted. Under pressure from the United States, provisions to require reductions in carbon dioxide emissions were removed in favor of optional goals. The United States produces about one-fourth of the world's carbon dioxide.
"The climate control convention was supposed to be the jewel in the crown," said Joshua Karliner, Greenpeace's coordinator for the summit. "Now, it looks more like a rhinestone."
-An agreement to preserve diverse biological species and ecosystems also was reached, but its fate is uncertain. The United States announced late Friday that it wouldn't sign the treaty, which it called "fundamentally flawed." But the agreement is likely to get the support from 30 nations needed for it to go into effect.
-An effort to devise an "Earth Charter" laying out simple principles for environmentally benign development failed. Instead, the conference will produce a less ambitious "Rio Declaration," which will not be legally binding.
-Negotiators failed to devise a treaty to protect the world's forests. Instead, they will issue a "Statement on Forest Principles," which will not be legally binding.
-Finishing touches will be put on Agenda 21, a 900-page, non-binding program of action for environmentally safe growth. It addresses toxic waste, the transfer of "clean" technologies, and what money will be provided to Third World countries for non-damaging development.

 

End of Document
