

Terror in the Condos: Gang War Brings Violence to Rio's Rich
The Associated Press
May 16, 1995, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 528 words
Byline: By PETER MUELLO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




The daily violence common in Rio de Janeiro's slums has made its way to the doorstep of the rich.
Marcelo de Sa Correa went out to buy the Sunday paper, only to find some 15 gang members brandishing new AR-15 automatic rifles on the lush, forested road that leads to his hillside condominium. His affluent neighborhood, Santa Teresa, was smack in the middle of a drug traffickers' showdown.
When police arrived and the heavily armed combatants withdrew, Correa hastily threw some clothes in a suitcase.
"I got to the street and thought: 'Where will I go? I'm in the middle of a war'," the math teacher recalled.
The war is unofficial, but all too real to Rio's residents. In a recent five-day period, 12 people were killed in gang shootouts - all in Santa Teresa.
"Santa Teresa today is a neighborhood of deserted and bloody streets … Soon, all the city will be like this," the newspaper Jornal do Brasil warned.
The violence has come as a particular shock for Santa Teresa, a quaint neighborhood of artists, foreigners and old money. Its cobblestoned streets, turn-of-the-century estates and old-fashioned cablecar evoke memories of a peaceful, bygone era.
When the gang war erupted, the area's famous nightlife withered. Dusk found the streets mostly empty, except for convoys of police cars - driving with their headlights off to escape snipers.
On a one-day stopover in Rio, Portuguese tourists Joao and Cristina Mendes drove up to the hills near Santa Teresa for a scenic view of the city. Instead, they got a glimpse of horror.
At a lookout point on a forest road, the ground was spattered with bits of human brain. Bullet casings lay next to a pool of blood. Below the parapet sprawled the bodies of two young men, later identified as victims of the drug war.
"This used to be a paradise," said Getulio Damado, a sculptor and 10-year resident of the neighborhood. "Now we worry all the time. Santa Teresa is in mourning."
Few tourists come any more to buy his carved wood models of the famous cablecar, Damado said. Even longtime residents are moving out.
Police, outgunned and outmaneuvered, have been ineffective against the gangs.
Two hundred policemen blocked the entrances to the nearby Morro dos Prazeres slum. But they couldn't flush the gangs from the maze of narrow, twisting alleys. And now, when darkness comes, the police do not dare enter the slum.
After a 6-year-old girl was killed by a stray bullet, schools near the slum suspended classes. They reopened a week later - with armed police at the door and warnings for students.
"Our teachers tell the children not to play in open areas during recess," said Maria Costa, principal of Santa Teresa's Swiss-Brazilian School.
The sight of dead bodies has become commonplace.
"I've found several dead persons near my car. One person was murdered here in front of the porch," said Cardinal Eugenio Sales, the Roman Catholic archbishop of Rio. His official residence is less than half a mile from Morro dos Prazeres, which means Hill of Pleasures.
Sales recalled finding a body in a nearby vacant lot.
"I wanted to light a candle but couldn't. The body was drenched in kerosene. I was afraid it would catch fire," he said.
 Load-Date: May 16, 1995

 

End of Document
