

Text of the Islamic Jihad Statement Given to Perez de Cuellar
The Associated Press
August 12, 1991, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 2763 words
Dateline: GENEVA
Body




Here is the text of the Islamic Jihad statement that former hostage John McCarthy delivered to U.N. Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar. It was translated from the Arabic by the United Nations.
 
 In the name of God, the merciful, the compassionate. 'This is a message for mankind, that they may thereby be warned, that they may know that there is but one God, and that men of understanding may ponder it' (Holy Koran).
Mr. de Cuellar, Secretary-General of the United Nations.
We wish you every success.
You are well aware of the great importance of your role and position as secretary-general of the United Nations in the eyes of the people of the world, particularly the oppressed and downtrodden peoples who, even while we are on the verge of the 21st century, are still groaning and suffering under the yoke of tyrants, butchers and plunderers throughout the world.
You are also aware of the beneficial effect of your backing and support for the movement of the oppressed and persecuted peoples in the Islamic world, Africa and South America who are endeavoring to achieve independence, freedom and self-determination. Accordingly, your role must always be to support the struggle and jihad (holy war) of those people against the imperious and the usurpers. This is what those peoples have expected and still expect of you in order to prevent the United Nations and its secretariat from being transformed into a perjured witness through and in the name of which the most odious crimes and international conspiracies which are being hatched within its halls could be committed under spurious slogans calling for the maintenance of the security of the international community and world peace and emphasizing the need to combat terrorism, etc.
Mr. de Cuellar,
The role that the United Nations has played in our contemporary history, and primarily the approach that it has adopted towards the causes of the oppressed peoples of the world, particularly the cause of the Muslim people of Palestine, the usurpation of their land from which they have been evicted, the attempts of the Zionist enemy to exterminate them, the question of the occupied territories in Jordan, Syria and Lebanon and, subsequently, the Gulf crisis, gives us an extremely unfavorable impression of the situation of the United Nations, which has become a plaything in the hands of the superpowers, particularly America, the Great Satan, since your organization has become merely a cover to protect the interests of world imperialism and suppress the movement of the oppressed peoples yearning for the achievement of the independence. The established right of veto, which is still being exercised by the domineering superpowers, constitute a stigma of shame in the history of the United Nations, since this right of veto is worse than the law of the jungle and was introduceed in order to make sport of the destinies of the oppressed peoples of the world, as pointed out by our Great Departed Imam Khomeini (may he rest in peace). Where can we find justice, democratic principles, freedom, equality and human rights in resolutions that are dictated by the interests and ambitions of the superpowers and protected by the iniquitous right of veto?
Why has the United Nations been given an effective and important role to play in solving the crisis that arose in the gulf while it has been prevented from playing any role in helping to find a just solution to the question of the Muslim people in Palestine in spite of the fact that more than 50 years have passed since the Israeli enemy usurped the land of Palestine?
Why were the United Nations resolutions implemented immediately after their adoption during the Gulf crisis while none of the resolutions adopted in regard to the just Palestinian cause have yet been put into effect decades after their adoption?
What has the United Nations done to protect the human rights of Muslim and other oppressed peoples and to prevent the barbaric massacres that are being committed against them throughout the world?
Whenever an American, a Westerner or an Israeli is involved in a simple incident, there is an international hue and cry, all the United Nations organizations spring into action and governments throughout the world rise up in his defense under the slogan of the protection of human rights, in contrast to their attitude towards the massacres at Sabra and Shatila in which 5,000 defenseless Muslims were killed; the abductions of 3,000 Muslims in the eastern sector of Beirut, as well as four Iranian diplomats whose whereabouts are still unknown; the shooting down of a civil aircraft over the gulf, which led to the death of its 300 passengers; the barbaric massacres that were committed in the holy city of Makkah and the other equally odious massacres that have been committed against our people engaged in the intefadeh (uprising) in occupied Palestine, not to mention the savage massacres that are being committed against our people in Jabal Amil (south Lebanon), within sight and hearing of the international emergency forces, and the many other massacres that are being committed in Iraq, Afghanistan and Kashmir. This implies that the conventions that have been adopted to protect human rights have been formulated in such a way as to protect the nationals of the superpowers which, in their customary statements, attach no value to persons who do not hold their citizenship.
Where is the right to self-determination in the case of the Islamic and oppressed peoples in Palestine, Kashmir and Afghanistan? Do the United Nations conventions not make provision for the right of peoples to self-determination without tutelage or external colonialist interference and do they not regard the struggle for self-determination by various means, including force, as a legitimate and justifiable act that is in no way related to terrorism?
When oppressed peoples and societies demand freedom, independence, justice, a decent life and deliverance from those who wreak havoc with their countries, their resources, their beliefs and the future of the their children, can they be regarded as terrorist peoples and societies?
Where is the support that the United Nations should have shown for the peoples' movement throughout the world in resisting colonialist interference in the internal affairs of weak countries, as illustrated by America's actions in Nicaragua, Panama and Ethiopia, and in other countries as illustrated by the blatant daily actions of the Israeli enemy in the occupied territories and Lebanon?
Mr. de Cuellar,
This is the grim situation of the United Nations, the resolutions of which are dictated by the superpowers led by America. These resolutions cannot but be American and Western in their objective, their role and their intended result, particularly after the collapse of the Communist empire and America's attempts to monopolize the political management of the world. In this connection, we appeal to you, in your capacity as secretary-general of the United Nations, and to the world as a whole, to adopt Islam as an ideology, a code of law and a system and to follow the teachings of the Great Imam Khomeini, who expounded the principles and conventions on which peoples, movements and regimes must base their endeavors to achieve progress, to solve the problems with which they are burdened and to achieve happiness and well-being.
Islam, which we are preaching, advocating and defending and for the promotion and triumph of which we are laying down our lives, is the last of the divinely revealed monotheistic messages with which God consummated his grace upon mankind; it is intended for mankind as a whole and does not recognize the artificial national, racial, class and geographical boundaries and barriers that man has erected to keep people apart from each other. The aim of Islam is to unite people and turn them into a God-fearing society in which man can play his role as God's vice regent on earth among his worshipers. Islam is a divine message which, if heeded, assures the happiness of its followers in this world and the hereafter.
The United Nations could derive inspiration from Islam, the religion of mankind as a guideline in its endeavors:
(i) to ensure that cooperation among nations is based on righteousness and piety rather than sin and aggression;
(ii) to ensure the universal adoption of human rights instruments without discrimination or bias towards one ethnic group or nationality at the expense of another; human beings are human beings wherever they are, regardless of whether they are black or white and regardless of the nation to which they belong;
(iii) to be a constant and consistent defender and strong supporter of the peoples' movement in their struggle and jihad against the usurpers of their rights and the plunderers of their resources, and an impregnable bastion in the face of the conspiratorial schemes of the imperious;
(iv) to confront international Zionism, since Zionism is equivalent to racism and thereby poses a threat to mankind. Although this face has already been recognized, no practical step has been taken to deal with it, particuarly in regard to the question of occupied Palestine and the action that the Zionists are taking against the Islamic intefadeh there.
In its rules and conventions, the United Nations should regard Islam as a divine religion, the rights, holy places and affairs of which should take precedence over the material considerations, rights and affairs of states. The Muslims should also be regarded as a single nation, like a single body in which, if one organ is suffering, all the other organs are afflicted with fever and stand vigil over it. The Muslims are an integral part of the worldwide Islamic movement.
Islam should be applied as a firm basis for the solution of all the problems of human societies whose institutions (i.e., the United Nations) are constantly claiming to have allieviated or overcome them. However, they have obviously been unsuccessful in this endeavor, since those problems were created by the superpowers so that they could interfere in the destinies of small peoples. Moreover, in their approach to human problems, they have disregarded man's inherent spiritual dimension and his links to the transcendental world. The collapse of the Communist regimes throughout the world constitutes the most reliable indication of the inability of materialistic systems to solve those problems successfully and the capitalist societies will fare no better than Communist societies, since the problem, as defined in the Koran and explained by the late Imam in his message to (Soviet President Mikhail S.) Gorbachev, "is not a problem of ownership, economics and freedom but rather of the loss of true belief in God and lack of belief in spiritual things is the fundamental cause of the sufferings of human societies in both the East and the West."
The wars, injustices, tragedies, poverty, famines and social aberrations from which human societies are currently suffering can be solved only by Islam, the religion of social justice, which alone can ensure happiness and well-being in this world and the hereafter. Accordingly, we are calling for the formation of a commission to propagate the knowledge of the principles and precepts of Islam in the various spheres of life so that this divine lore and knowledge can be used in all the affairs and resolutions of the United Nations.
The United Nations should endeavor to put an end to the hegemony of the superpowers over its resolutions and activities and one of its first tasks should be to abolish the iniquitous right of veto, which is rightly regarded as worse than the law of the jungle.
The elimination of this hegemony is the best way to achieve the above-mentioned objectives and enable the United Nations to play an effective role in the life of human societies.
Mr. de Cuellar,
The slogan of the need to combat international terrorism, which has been raised by America and its supporters, is a spurious slogan designed to leave them with drawn swords in their hands, which they can use whenever they feel that their interests are being threatened by the actions of rebellious oppressed peoples on the pretext of putting an end to the terrorist threat to international peace and security. However, the uprising of peoples seeking to achieve self-determination, recover their stolen freedom and independence, sever their links of dependence on the imperious states and ensure that the principles of justice are put into practice is not terrorism; it is a legitimate right. If the slogan of the need to combat international terrorism is an attempt to divert us from our course of jihad in the face of international arrogance, we will continue along the difficult path that we have chosen for ourselves without giving an inch. If its purpose is to maintain the state of open warfare between us and them, we are fully prepared to pursue this confrontation until we achieve one of the two divine rewards: victory or martyrdom. If struggle, jihad and resistance against the superpowers is terrorism, we and the oppressed peoples throughout the world are proud to be terrorists combating injustice and striking terror into the hearts of the enemies of God and mankind as long as they interfere in the internal affairs of oppressed nations and peoples anywhere in the world. We are part of the worldwide Islamic movement; the causes of the Muslims are our causes and we share their sufferings and jubilations. By the grace of almighty God, we shall always remain in the vanguard of the defenders of the causes of Islam and the Muslims and, in the cause of God, we do not fear the reproaches of anyone.
Mr. de Cuellar.
The question of detainees and prisoners in the world today is one of the consequences of the confrontation between us and the forces of international arrogance led by America, the mother of iniquity throughout the world, and its offspring Israel.
Did the question of the detainees not arise after the massacres committed by the Israeli enemy during its invasion of Lebanon in 1982 within the sight and hearing and with the help of the multinational forces and with the indifference of the international emergency forces?
Did the question of the detainees not arise after the NATO forces stationed in Beirut interfered in the war which was being waged between the Muslims, on the one hand, and the agents of America and Israel, on the other, and after they had assisted the army of the Maronite political faction?
Did the question of the detainees not arise after the Israeli emeny incarcerated thousands of Lebanese and Palestinian freedom-fighters in the Ansar, Khiyam, Atlit and other detention centers and, more recently, abducted the freedom-fighter Sheikh Abdul Karim Obeid from his house, in addition to the thousands of heroic participants in the intefadeh in occupied Palestine whom they have incarcerated or deported?
Consequently, the question of the detainees was a reaction on the part of the Muslim freedom-fighters to all those practices and an endeavor to secure the release of our incarcerated fighters. The reaction will continue as long as they remain incarcerated.
In view of our belief in the need for action to secure the release of our freedom-fighters from prisons in occupied Palestine and Europe and also to solve the question of the detainees whom we are holding and the problem of their families, we call upon you to make a personal endeavor, within the framework of a comprehensive solution, to secure the release of all detainees throughout the world. In such an eventuality, we would be perfectly willing to complete the process that we began today and to release the persons whom we are detaining within 24 hours.
We are sending this letter to you today by hand of a special emissary. John McCarthy, whom we have chosen from among the persons whom we are detaining, in the hope that this matter will elicit, on your part, the earnest and responsible endeavors that it merits.
We are awaiting a practical response from you that will lead to the desired fruitful solution. We are waiting and praying that our incarcerated fellow freedom-fighters will obtain freedom with honor and that the peoples of the world will obtain the security and justice which we believe will inevitably prevail through Islam at the hands of the expected Mahdi, who will arise among the descendants ot Muhammed.
For him, we are ready to sacrifice our lives.
Peace be upon those who follow the right guidance.
The Islamic Jihad Organization
Written in the holy month of Muharram, 1412 A.H.

 

End of Document
