

The Autumn of the Former Dictator: Jaruzelski Pushes Peaceful Transition
The Associated Press
August 30, 1994, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 735 words
Byline: By SUSAN LINNEE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SANTANDER, Spain
Body




Wojciech Jaruzelski doesn't expect history to absolve him. But he does think his years as the authoritarian head of state during Poland's transition to democracy are being cast in a kinder light.
Who knows? After his death, he may even be touted as the Richard M. Nixon of Eastern Europe.
"When I was in power, when I was on the top, many people were critical in their opinion about me. Year by year, this opinion is coming to be changed. Polls confirm this," Jaruzelski said in an interview during a break in his duties as chairman of a summer university seminar on democratization in Eastern Europe and the Balkan conflict.
"I am absolutely sure that the best opinion is expressed about everyone after his death. Because I'm past 70, probably in the near future they will talk about me even better when I will be in the cemetery."
The Nixon analogy had not occurred to him before, but he liked it.
"There are some differences," he said, cracking a small grin. "Nixon did not introduce martial law in the United States, but I was not involved in the Watergate affair. When it comes to public opinion regarding Nixon and me, you can use this kind of analogy … in its more psychological than political aspects."
Since handing the presidential mantle to Solidarity leader Lech Walesa in 1990 - a year after the Communists' stunning losses in national elections - Jaruzelski has been, by his own definition, "a workaholic."
He has written two books - one about the 1981 martial law declartion that he says was necessary to prevent Soviet invasion, the other an autobiography. Neither has been published in English.
He participated with former President Jimmy Carter in a seminar in Nicaragua on the peaceful transition to democracy in Central America and says he regularly receives invitations to speak on the process of democratization in Eastern Europe.
It would be going too far to label him an "expert" on this process, he says, but points out that Mikhail Gorbachev did tell him that Poland was the laboratory for perestroika.
How would he advise Cuban President Fidel Castro to make the unavoidable move towards democracy?
A meeting with all sectors of society like the one set up in Poland in April 1989 would be helpful, but he wonders whether it might not already be too late to avoid violence.
But he also thinks the 33-year U.S. trade embargo against Cuba is counterproductive. Until the U.S. lifted trade sanctions slapped on Poland after declaration of martial law, he said it was not possible to go ahead with necessary reforms.
Alone of the former Eastern European Communist heads of state, the 71-year-old Jaruzelski appears to command respect, even from those who once saw only a stern, intractable dictator.
Erich Honecker of East Germany, Janos Kadar of Hungary, Gustav Husak of Czechoslovakia and Nicolae Ceausescu are dead and buried without glory. Ramiz Alia of Albania has been sentenced to nine years in prison after being convicted of violating the rights of Albanian citizens. Todor Zhivkov of Bulgaria was ousted in a coup in 1990 and is under house arrest, appealing a conviction of abuse of power during his 35-year tenure.
Warsaw's ambassador to Spain, Jan Kieniewicz - a dissident during the turbulent 1980s - acknowledged to seminar students the long distance Jaruzelski and Poland had traveled since the declaration of martial law.
"The old Communists, either recycled or not, can return," he said. "But it won't make any difference because we're in a new system, and there's no going back."
Throughout the conversation - interpreted from Polish into English - Jaruzelsi emphasized the burden of having to do difficult, often distasteful things, to prepare for change.
"Every politician has to calculate that not all decisions he makes can be popular. The same is true with a surgeon who works together with pain or especially a dentist who is pulling out a tooth. The patient wants sometimes to smash him and remembers the pain. But then he comes to the conclusion the pain was necessary, because without the surgery he can die or be without teeth."
Last year in Poland, more than 50 percent of those queried said they had a good opinion of Jaruzelski and understood his reason for declaring martial law.
"Only a selfish or stupid person can think he has done everything right," Jaruzelski said. "I could have done things better. We have a saying - the Polish man is smart after he makes the mistake."
 Load-Date: August 30, 1994

 

End of Document
