

The Billionaires: Fortunes Grow in Latin America, Wane in Japan
The Associated Press
July 6, 1992, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 612 words
Byline: By RICK GLADSTONE, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Latin America, once a sinkhole of Third World debt, has emerged as the world's leading breeding ground for billionaires, Forbes magazine said Monday.
A surge of private enterprise and foreign investment has nearly tripled the number of Latin American fortunes on the magazine's annual billionaires list from eight last year to 22, the magazine said.
Despite ailing economies, Japan still is home to the world's wealthiest people and the United States still has the greatest number of billionaires on the list with 101.
But the big story is Latin America, where a spree of fortunes were made in a region that only a few years ago symbolized intractable debt, deprivation and war, and the biggest single export was illicit drugs. Most of the region's population remains poor by U.S. standards.
"There is nothing sinister about all of this," Forbes said in its July 20 issue. "Economic growth requires large-scale undertakings, and the people who most successfully organize these undertakings inevitably accumulate wealth."
Mexico led the charge with eight billionaire fortunes, followed by five in Brazil, three each in Chile and Colombia, two in Argentina and one in Venezuela.
Forbes said the biggest Latin fortune is $ 3.8 billion, owned by Mexico's Garza-Sada family. It controls businesses ranging from a steel-petrochemical complex to a brewery that make Dos Equis and Tecate beer.
Illicit drugs still play an important role in Latin wealth. Two of the three Colombian entries on the Forbes list are "narco-billionaires," running their empires from prison.
Forbes said Pablo Escobar Gaviria, a founder of the Medellin drug cartel, is worth an estimated $ 2 billion, while the three Ochoa brothers, also Medellin founders, are managing $ 2 billion culled from the cocaine trade.
The only legitimate Colombian entry Forbes found was Julio Mario Santo Domingo, owner of the Bavaria SA brewery and Avianca Airlines. He's worth $ 1 billion.
The richest person on the Forbes list continued to be Japan's Taikichiro Mori, 88, a former economics professor who owns properties ranging from swank office buildings to a vacant tract near Parliament in Tokyo. Forbes said he has a portfolio worth about $ 13 billion, down from $ 15 billion last year because of plummeting property values in Japan.
Still, Taikichiro remains comfortably ahead of No. 2 Yoshiaki Tsutsumi, 58, a Japanese industrialist with interests in railroads and golf courses. His fortune is worth about $ 10 billion, down from $ 14 billion a year earlier.
In the United States, the wife and children of Sam Walton, the late founder of the Wal-Mart discount chain, share the world's largest collective fortune, $ 23.8 billion.
Forbes said the richest single American is William Gates III, the 34-year-old Harvard dropout who founded Microsoft Corp., the world's leading maker of computer software. His net worth was pegged at $ 6.4 billion.
After the United States, Germany has the most billionaire fortunes with 44, followed by Japan with 34. Counting individuals and families, Forbes tallied 291 billionaire fortunes around the world, up from 274 a year earlier.
Fortune magazine, the chief rival to Forbes, publishes its ranking of the world's billionaires in August. Both lists, which are based on estimates and differing criteria, vary widely.
The 1991 Fortune list, for example, said the world's richest person was the Sultan of Brunei, with $ 31 billion. Forbes said it excludes royalty, heads of state and political dictators from its rankings.
The Forbes billionaires list differs from its annual "Forbes 400" ranking of the richest Americans, in which many of the same names reappear. That list is published in October.

 

End of Document
