

The Attacks Begin - But Bush, Clinton Refuse To Engage On Perot
The Associated Press
June 16, 1992, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 654 words
Byline: By JILL LAWRENCE, AP Political Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Ross Perot is getting a temporary free ride from his two major-party rivals.
Both President Bush and Arkansas Gov. Bill Clinton passed up chances Monday to attack the Dallas billionaire on the verge of an independent bid for the White House.
"Please let me stay out of this until after the (Republican) convention," Bush pleaded in a CNN interview after being asked if Perot's support was a fad.
But Bush took the time from an interview he wanted devoted to foreign affairs to stress he wanted to be re-elected because "the job isn't finished, and I finish what I start out to do, whether it's serving my country in war, or whether it's in my business experience, or whether it's being president of the United States."
Clinton refused to say whether he agreed with Vice President Dan Quayle's description of Perot as a temperamental tycoon. "It's hard to know because he hasn't said much about what he believes," the Democrat said on CBS-TV's "This Morning" program.
But Republican National Chairman Richard Bond wasn't so gentle. He used a foreign-policy platform hearing to paint both Clinton and Perot as unable and unwilling to lead the world.
"They want us to shut the door on new opportunities, on new markets, and pretend the world doesn't exist," Bond said.
He said Clinton's record as Arkansas governor "doesn't qualify him to lead the nation, let alone be a global leader." Perot, he said, "opposed the Gulf War and says 'see you later' or 'I never said that' everytime someone wants to get his position on an issue."
Bond added: "When it comes to making a serious choice for the presidency, a choice that inevitably will factor in foreign policy experience, America will again choose George Bush."
Foreign policy was shunted aside during a primary season colored by anger and economic problems. But remarks by Bond and others at the GOP platform hearing suggested Bush will highlight international issues this fall to contrast his expertise with his rivals' domestic focus and relative inexperience in the world arena.
The president, who went to the Earth Summit in Brazil last week and goes to an economic summit in Munich next month, was meeting today with Russian President Boris Yeltsin.
Clinton, who has clinched the Democratic nomination, arranged a meeting with Yeltsin on Thursday. He declined to say what the two would talk about.
Clinton also refused to back off criticism of a black rap artist, Sister Souljah, who was quoted after the Los Angeles riots as saying blacks should consider killing whites for a week rather than each other.
Some blacks were offended by Clinton's remarks and the forum he chose - an appearance Saturday before Jesse Jackson's Rainbow Coalition.
"If you want to be president you've got a responsibility … to stand up for what you think is right," Clinton said Monday. He added that the singer's remarks demonstrated "how profoundly alienated and divided some of us are."
Aides said Clinton's strategy of telling various groups things they don't want to hear is meant to counter the Democratic stereotype of caving in to special-interest groups.
Democrats en masse came under attack Monday from Quayle, who told a conservative think-tank audience in New York that their city was an example of failed liberalism and entrenched bureaucracy.
"In so many ways the liberal Democrats chose the perfect site for their convention - almost as if they feel a strange compulsion to return to the scene of the crime," the vice president said.
Quayle said the same party should control both the White House and Congress to achieve the kind of change voters seem to want. But he said the answer is electing more Republicans to the Democratic-controlled Congress rather than putting a Democrat in the White House.
"I'd remind the people that the last time the Democrats had control of both was in the Carter administration," Quayle said. If that happens again, "that's precisely the kind of change you'll get."

 

End of Document
