

The Conference of the "Have" Countries: A White Male Conclave
The Associated Press
January 23, 1992, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 287 words
Byline: By GEORGE GEDDA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The conference on aiding the newly independent republics of the former Soviet Union testified to two things about the "have" countries of the world compared with the "have-nots."
All representatives were light-skinned and the people sitting in the seats of authority were almost all male.
Officials of the 47 nations and seven international organizations spent a day and a half here to coordinate assistance to the Soviet people.
Shortly before 1 p.m. Thursday, all marched crisply onto the stage of a State Department auditorium and took their assigned seats in front of 54 flags, placed in alphabetical order, behind them.
The scene before the assembled media was striking: no blacks and but two women: the representatives of France and Sweden.
The "have" countries, based on the turnout here, are overwhelmingly European. They include some allies of the former Soviet Union, some oil exporting countries and some newly industrialized countries from Asia. All three North American countries took part as did three from South America. No African or Caribbean countries were present.
Among "have" countries, English was clearly the language of choice. About a dozen participants spoke and only two used their native tongues: the German and Bulgarian representatives.
For more than an hour, Secretary of State James A. Baker III and his colleagues spoke of the need for a coordinated response to the newly independent republics of what was once the Soviet Union - the need for food, shelter, technical assistance, energy and medical supplies.
The only light moment occurred when a reporter from Bulgaria stood at a microphone and asked the representative of his government for an interview after the conference. The request was granted.

 

End of Document
