

The Wall Of Water Rose From The Sea Like Thunder
The Associated Press
September 3, 1992, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 636 words
Byline: By DOUGLAS GRANT MINE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MASACHAPA, Nicaragua
Body




The only warning the people of Masachapa had of the killer tidal wave that washed over most of Nicaragua's west coast was an eerie wail that rose in tone and volume until it was like thunder.
Then the four-story wall of ocean, caused by an earthquake in the Pacific, came crashing ashore. When the sea retreated, some 100 people were dead.
"There came from the sea a steady sound of ooooohhhhhhh," Roberto Giusto recalled. "We looked out toward the sea and saw a wall of water … It was like a dam breaking."
Giusto, an Italian immigrant of 36, and his family were saved because the little fried-fish restaurant and home he had built five years ago - the "Genova" - was of concrete and above the high-tide water.
He pointed above his head to the lines on the wall left by the churning water Tuesday evening as it coursed then receded through his concrete home. Though the floors are caked with sandy mud and most of the furniture is wrecked, the Giustos count themselves very lucky.
Most of the other buildings on the beach in Masachapa, a sweltering fishing village 30 miles southwest of Managua, were rickety structures with thatch or zinc roofs. Such buildings were reduced to tilting piles or concrete columns, their masonry or wood walls crumbled and splintered.
A few dead fish and chickens and a drowned cat lay strewn among the hodgepodge of muddy broken debris.
In Masachapa, at least 16 bodies were recovered, most of them children.
All was a shambles up and down the beachfront, a stretch of what had been poor folks' homes, open air beer joints, cheap eateries and a ramshackle brothel. The Red Cross was distributing rice and beans and corn flour to survivors. Nearby towns also donated clothing and bananas.
It was the same story in 27 communities along a 200-mile stretch of coast. The quake, some 60 miles offshore, registered 7.0 on the Richter scale.
At a news conference late Wednesday, President Violeta Chamorro and senior government officials outlined the damage.
Civil Defense chief Capt. Guillermo Guevara said the death toll "was near 100." Three hours earlier, the Health Ministry had listed 75 confirmed deaths.
Guevara said 150 people were missing and about 300 houses destroyed.
Mrs. Chamorro reiterated the plea she had made as she toured stricken areas earlier in the day. "We need international aid," she said.
The disaster struck just after dinner on a calm, clear tropical evening.
Carlos Alvarez, 30, who grows watermelons near Masachapa, said the wave 'came as a roar. It was big and black, about 13 or 14 meters high, picking up sand and a bit of everything as it advanced."
"I started running with two older men and it fell on us. All I could think about was saving my skin. I was able to make it to the surface and it pulled me far back out to sea with it," he added.
Alvarez said it took him 20 minutes to swim back to shore.
Danilo Brenes said he was walking along the beach when he saw the wall of water coming. "I yelled to my wife and we took off running. We jumped over a seabreak wall and barely made it," he said.
France, Mexico, Norway, Spain and the United States sent money and supplies. The U.S. shipment included gasoline and heavy-duty plastic sheeting for making temporary shelters, and the U.S. Embassy in Managua released $ 25,000 to provide food, water and shelter to tidal wive victims.
In Geneva, officials said the United Nations would release $ 30,000 to buy urgent supplies.
The quake was among the most damaging to hit Nicaragua since a 1972 temblor measuring 6.2 on the Richter scale devastated the capital, killing 5,000 people.
Managua felt Tuesday's quake, but no major damage was reported in the capital.
A quake of 7 is considered a "major" earthquake capable of causing widespread heavy damage. The Richter scale is a measure of ground motion as recorded on seismographs.

 

End of Document
