

The Bush Record: From Persian Gulf to Agonies of Recession
The Associated Press
March 5, 1992, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 1250 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER CONNELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




George Bush promised a kinder and gentler America, with no new taxes, an end to the drug scourge and big improvements in America's schools.
He came up short on many of those promises in his first three years in the White House.
To the dismay of conservatives, Bush reneged on his no-new-taxes vow, and presided over three years of the slowest economic growth since World War II.
Bush didn't promise that the Berlin Wall would fall or that the communist Soviet Union would disintegrate on his watch - but they did.
Incumbency has its advantages, but Bush is also the only candidate voters can judge by his on-the-job performance.
The anemic economy overshadowed Bush's foreign policy achievements and left him vulnerable to the criticism that he has ignored America's domestic needs.
A year ago, Bush was the conquering hero of the Persian Gulf War, boasting a virtually unprecedented 90 percent approval rating.
Today his ratings are barely half that high. An unrepentant Saddam Hussein still calls the shots in Baghdad, and Bush has to grope for Gulf War applause on the campaign trail.
The government has piled up its two largest deficits ever on his watch: $ 269 billion in fiscal 1991 and an estimated $ 399 billion for fiscal 1992. The national debt, which tripled to $ 2.9 trillion during the Reagan era, will stand at nearly $ 4.6 trillion at the end of Bush's first term.
Bush once confessed to school children that he enjoyed foreign affairs more than wrestling with House Ways and Means Chairman Dan Rostenkowski over taxes.
His performance as president has tracked those predilections.
He won respect for himself and for America's military in orchestrating the lightning victory that liberated Kuwait last winter.
Earlier, after being accused of indecision, he dispatched an invasion force that overthrew Panamanian dictator Manuel Noriega and restored democracy to that Latin land.
He scaled back the nuclear arms race, downsized the U.S. military and kept a steady hand on the tiller as the old communist order collapsed in Berlin, Moscow and the rest of Eastern Europe.
When the Soviet Union unravelled, Bush forged new ties with Russian President Boris Yeltsin and funneled aid to the successor states.
He fought for free trade and opening world markets, including a free trade pact with Canada and Mexico and liberalized global trading rules.
Heading into the election year, he took a tougher stance with Japan on its big trade imbalance with the United States. But Bush's "jobs, jobs, jobs" mission to Tokyo with U.S. automakers and other chief executives was widely viewed as a bust.
Candidate Bush set himself the unprecedented goal of creating "30 million jobs in the next eight years."
So far, he has moved backwards. The Labor Department says there were 5,000 fewer Americans working at the end of 1991 than when Bush took office.
He proclaimed himself "the education president" and promised to be an environmentalist, but critics say his record has not matched the rhetoric.
Bush and the governors aspired to make American students the world's best in math and science by the year 2000, but the latest international tests show U.S. pupils lagging far back in the pack.
Bush made choice - taxpayer-backed subsidies to allow parents to choose among public, private or parochial schools - a cornerstone of his education reform plan, but so far has failed to get even seed money through the Congress. But he tailored a new child care tax credit to ensure that church preschools could participate.
And he doubled the Head Start budget to $ 2.2 billion even before a proposed $ 600 million increase for 1993 to ensure a place for every eligible poor 4-year-old.
Paul Quirk, an associate professor at the University of Illinois Institute of Government and Public Affairs, believes Bush "ranks at or near the bottom of modern presidents in domestic policy achievement."
He said Bush's biggest breakthrough was passage of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990, the first major new anti-pollution legislation in more than a decade.
But Bush gets low grades from green groups on other scores.
They say he has waffled on his pledge of "no net loss of wetlands" and fault him for resisting international efforts to combat global warming with stricter standards on carbon dioxide emissions. Bush, a former oilman, also has aggravated environmentalists with his campaign to open the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge up to oil and gas development.
Bush resisted efforts to tackle the nation's health care problems, including the 35 million Americans without insurance until the issue figured prominently in Democrat Harris Wofford's upset win in the Pennsylvania Senate race last November.
Then Bush proposed patching the health safety net with new tax breaks for the poor and middle class. Democrats said his approach would do nothing to corral double-digit medical inflation.
On his quest for a kinder, gentler nation, Bush actively promoted volunteerism with his "thousand points of light" awards and relentlessly urged Americans to look after their fellow citizens.
Bush denounced the politics of ex-Ku Klux Klansman David Duke, but civil rights leaders accused Bush of fanning racial tensions with his attacks on the "quotas" in a job discrimination bill. He vetoed the civil rights bill in 1990, but put his signature to a modified version in 1991.
Bush championed the Americans with Disabilities Act that is just now forcing public buildings - including theaters, restaurants and shops - to accommodate people in wheelchairs and with other handicaps.
He filled one Supreme Court vacancy with a little known jurist from New Hampshire, David Souter, and a second with Clarence Thomas, a black conservative who weathered accusations of verbal sexual harassment.
He spoke of the need for domestic Desert Storms against a host of problems, from fighting crime to revitalizing the economy, but often found Congress dead set against his approaches.
Bush declared war on drugs, and the drug-fighting budget soared from $ 6.6 billion in 1989 to almost $ 12 billion for 1992. Bush cited surveys showing declining drug use among high school seniors as evidence the war was succeeding. Skeptics said supplies remained plentiful and hard-core drug use still bedeviled urban America.
Bush compiled a perfect 25-0 record on vetoes, and wielded veto threats on more than 100 other occasions to bend Congress to his will.
Once he vetoed a minimum wage increase over a difference of 30 cents an hour; he later signed a compromise.
Twice last summer he blocked an extension of unemployment benefits at a time when his advisers were wrongly convinced the year-long recession was over.
Bush signed a benefits extension in November after a way was found to keep the checks going without breaching the budget agreement.
He broke the most ironclad of his 1988 campaign promises - "Read my lips: no new taxes" - to strike a deficit reduction deal with Congress in fall 1990 that included $ 168 billion in tax increases. Conservatives said it made a bad economic situation worse and wound up costing the government revenues.
Stephen Hess of the Brookings Institution said, "Bush promised very little (in 1988) - and he delivered on it. It's a strange record."
"It's been a remarkably successful period in terms of the world and our place in the world. Bush is right when he says the Cold War is over and communism is dead," said Hess.
But "presidents have to keep two balls in the air at one time, foreign and domestic. Bush has trouble with that," said Hess.

 

End of Document
