

The Jacarezinho Slum: Portrait of a Breeding Ground for Cholera
The Associated Press
May 17, 1991, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 701 words
Byline: By TODD LEWAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil
Body




Scrawny, half-naked boys playfully jump from shanty roofs into sewage-choked floodwaters that run like rapids through the hillside slum of Jacarezinho.
Nearby, a girl dumps food scraps from a precarious wooden footbridge while a hobo vomits into the gray water.
Several women stand knee-deep in the filthy stream washing clothes. Others fill kitchen pots and cleaning buckets from the water.
Jacarezinho, where 150,000 people live in a jumble of shanties perched on a hill three miles north of downtown Rio, is like thousands of Brazil's urban slums. It is a sanitation nightmare and an ideal breeding ground for the deadly cholera disease now spreading across South America.
The disease, which has killed more than 1,350 people in Peru, Ecuador, Chile and Colombia since erupting in Peru in January, has largely spared Brazil. Six cases - and no deaths - have been detected, all in the Amazon border town of Tabatinga.
But government officials fear the intestinal disease, transmitted in food and water contaminated with the feces of victims, will spread across this nation of 150 million. Brazil's southeast coastal cities will be struck before September, experts predict.
"It's like waiting for a time bomb to go off," said Dr. Sonia Saldanha, head of Rio de Janeiro's state Commission for the Prevention of Cholera. "Cholera could appear at any time, and we simply are not prepared for it."
Although cholera can kill a person in 10 hours through fluid loss caused by vomiting and diarrhea, the disease is easily treated with saline solutions, intravenous fluids and antibiotics.
Yet poor health education, a crumbling health care system and dilapidated sewage networks make prevention difficult, said Ms. Saldanha.
The Health Ministry says less than 1 percent of all garbage is collected and only 30 percent of all water is purified in Brazil's slums. And many slum-dwellers cannot afford the cooking gas with which to boil their water.
Even Rio - which has South America's largest health care network with 16 hospitals and 72 clinics - is a prime target.
One water treatment plant serves this city of 10.5 million. The antiquated sewers don't reach the notorious hillside "favelas," or slums, where a quarter of the population lives.
"The poor are defenseless," said Yolanda Maria Cyranha, a local epidemiologist.
The government is trying to alert Brazilians to the disease, through TV announcements and Health Ministry lessons for community leaders on how to detect and prevent cholera.
But the message hasn't penetrated Jacarezinho.
"These people will die like rats and they won't ever know why," said Jose da Conceicao, a 51-year-old community leader, as he led Ms. Saldanha and another visitor through the slum.
Rain fell like a gray curtain, turning the main street into a river. The water inched up the shanties that rested on pilings above open sewers. Nearby, a group of teenagers splashed about in the water.
The river swelled with milky green slime that gurgled down the hill, in and out of crooked alleyways, past women and children who sat in their mud-floored huts staring blankly at the rain.
A barefoot man struggled to push a wheelbarrow of soggy lettuce, onions and tomatoes through the mud.
"Cholera?" shrugged the man, Francisco Gomes, 41, a father of 11. "Sure, I know. It makes you go blind and you get it from rats."
With the cold rain pouring down, Conceicao led his party to take refuge in a small hut where two girls washed lettuce and sardines in a pail of murky water.
"Dear, where does the water come from?" asked Conceicao.
"The street, sir," she said in a little voice.
"Did you boil it at all?"
Confused, the girl looked at Conceicao's feet, blushed up to her ears, and smoothed her dress.
"We have no gas for cooking today."
Conceicao explained that a can of cooking gas costs about $$6.65 - a considerable sum for the average slum worker, who takes home the minimum wage of $$65 a month.
A wiry, young man with sallow eyes and hollow cheeks had another explanation.
"Look, brother," said the young man. "It's no use. If it is not this cholera you tell us of, it will be something else that kills us."
The rain began to fall hard again. Conceicao patted the young man's shoulder and walked slowly away.

 

End of Document
