

The Trio And the Veep's Office: Gregg, Watson, Rodriguez
The Associated Press
September 1, 1993, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 346 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The interest level was extremely high at the CIA and the State Department over Felix Rodriguez' ties to Vice President Bush's office, according to prosecutor Lawrence Walsh's final report on the Iran-Contra scandal.
Bush's national security adviser, Donald Gregg, arranged for Rodriguez, a longtime friend from their days together at the CIA, to go to El Salvador, where Rodriguez worked with the Salvadoran air force before Oliver North recruited him to work in his clandestine Contra resupply network. Gregg and his deputy, Samuel Watson, say they didn't know Rodriguez had gone to work for North's operation.
Excerpts obtained by The Associated Press from Walsh's still-unreleased report:
-"Because of Rodriguez' ties to the White House, Gregg and other CIA officers knew that any dealings with Rodriguez could have broader political implications. Thus Rodriguez' identity and whereabouts were a topic of discussion within the CIA by early 1985."
-"During late January and early February 1986 his (Rodriguez') involvement with lethal resupply activities became an issue of concern to the CIA and Department of State officers. There is no documentary evidence however that links CIA and State Department concern about Rodriguez to Gregg or to other members of the office of the vice president."
-"The evening before the meeting with the vice president, Rodriguez met Watson for drinks at a Washington restaurant. Watson and Rodriguez did not recall what was discussed. The next day, Rodriguez went to North's office prior to his meeting with the vice president."
-"Both Gregg and his deputy Col. Samuel J. Watson III, were investigated for possible false testimony regarding their denial of knowledge of Rodriguez's involvement in North's resupply operation. OIC (Walsh's Office of Independent Counsel) obtained Watson's immunized testimony in an effort to further its investigation. Despite unresolved conflicts between documentary evidence and the testimony of the principal witnesses OIC determined that it could not prove beyond a reasonable doubt a criminal case against Gregg."

 

End of Document
