

The Bells At Long Last Toll the End of War, But Passions Die Hard
The Associated Press
December 16, 1992, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 741 words
Byline: AP News Analysis, By JOSEPH B. FRAZIER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN SALVADOR, El Salvador
Body




Amid pealing church bells and exhortations to keep the peace, El Salvador has at long last put a final stop to 12 years of civil war. But the passions will die hard.
The tolling bells concluded a ceremony to lay behind more than 75,000 war deaths. Tuesday's solemn moment, however, seemed all but incidental to a Central American nation untouched by fighting since a January truce.
The ceremony was meant to bind 12 years of wounds that bled and bled hard. But as Salvadorans were being called to forget their sufferings, it was clear the remaining challenge of national reconciliation won't come easy.
The vast gap between the very rich and the very poor, which in part caused the war, remains largely unchanged.
And memories of paramilitary death squads blamed for slaying more than 1,000 suspected leftists a month in the early 1980s will be hard to suppress.
Raucous street celebrations toasting the peace a year ago were replaced by just a few organized events and spontaneity seemed missing. Christmas lights twinkled silently across this capital of 1 million Tuesday night.
"We were happy in January when the agreement was signed," said Mida Bustemante, who took her two small children to a government-sponsored celebration at a park near a military hospital.
"But nothing has happened since then and we have had better lives. The future? Well, that's for God to tell us."
The United States painted the Salvadoran conflict for years as the crucible of a democratic struggle to prevent a Communist takeover of Latin America.
Vice President Dan Quayle, representing Washington at the main ceremony on Tuesday, promised American support for Salvadorans regardless of their past.
"The guns are still today because democracy and human rights triumphed," he said.
Quayle and President Alfredo Cristiani signed an accord forgiving three-quarters of the more than $ 614 million El Salvador owes the United States, earning the vice president one of the loudest ovations of the two-hour event.
Cristiani, who took office in 1989, began efforts early to step up the peace talks, despite opposition from members of his rightist National Republican Alliance.
In his address Tuesday, Cristiani called the conflict the result of "a series of historic deficiencies and of East-West confrontation lapsed by the end of the Cold War."
Accords signed Jan. 16 in Mexico City led to a cease-fire on Feb. 1, but a lasting peace was delayed in part by squabbling over a timetable for fulfilling terms of the accord.
U.N. Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who oversaw the final talks, exhorted former enemies to be tolerant of each other.
"The unification of Salvadoran society is not yet in sight, and there are Salvadorans who continue making war in their hearts," he cautioned.
The antagonisms were apparent at Tuesday's ceremony.
The Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, the umbrella group for the five guerrilla armies, became a legal political party on Tuesday and says it will jump into the 1994 elections with both feet.
But when guerrilla leader Shafick Handal thanked Cuba and the Nicaraguan Sandinistas for support during the war, cheers among the leftists in an audience of 3,000 were heavily mixed with jeers.
Said Handal in response: "Well, I'll repeat it so you can have a chance to shout again," and he did.
There were boos as well when he thanked El Salvador's Roman Catholic Church - considered by many rightists a rebel tool - for its substantial role in the peace process.
And now, the task of completing national reconciliation.
As a part of the peace accords the Salvadoran military is to be purged of the worst human rights violators. A three-man commission has determined who will stay and who will go, but the names have been kept secret.
"Salvadorans will put the truth behind them once the truth of the past has been brought to light," said Boutros-Ghali, in an apparent call for the list of offenders to be made public.
More than 10 months of bare-knuckle negotiating since January has since disbanded the rebel army, trimmed the military, brought judicial and electoral reforms. It also saw the dismantling of five elite American-trained battalions blamed for some of the war's worst atrocities.
As part of reconciliation, a National Police force will be brought under civilian control and made up of former fighters from both sides.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE: Joe Frazier, the AP's Mexico City news editor, has covered conflicts in Central America since 1980.

 

End of Document
