

The Escape and Quiet Death of a Nazi Mass Murderer
The Associated Press
September 25, 1994, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1256 words
Byline: By ARTHUR ALLEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: STUTTGART, Germany
Body




The little man in broken shoes who appeared on Elizabeth Schuele's doorstep in 1953 was but a pale shadow of the SS commandant she had served at the Theresienstadt concentration camp.
Anton Burger, responsible for the murder of 15,000 Jews, came to Schuele as a fugitive in need of help.
Although they quarreled, and Burger left her house shouting that he would wade in the blood of his enemies again someday, Schuele did not report the clandestine visit to police.
She regrets that now, because no one else told on Burger either. He escaped justice forever on Christmas 1991, when he died in an Essen hospital of intestinal cancer at age 80, under the alias Wilhelm Bauer.
Early this year, two Bavarian police inspectors confirmed from photographs and handwriting analysis that Burger and Bauer were the same. That closed what could be the last chapter in the prosecution of Nazis who conducted the Final Solution of the Jewish Problem.
Burger was on a list of the 10 most-wanted Nazis issued by the Simon Wiesenthal Center in 1987. One, Josef Schwammberger, was sentenced to life in prison in 1992. Wiesenthal says the others are dead or will never be found.
As a high SS officer, Burger was instructed to hide his crimes. After Hitler was smashed, he slid into a new deception.
Neither neighbors nor co-workers, not even the common-law wife who lived with Wilhelm Bauer for two decades, seem to have guessed he was anything but a cramped, unpleasant man who preferred not to talk about the war.
A "rat line" of SS comrades helped Burger, but for Wiesenthal, who hunted him for 40 years and was often hot on his trail, Burger's escape into obscurity is a tale of Cold War Germany's will to forget.
There is no sign the search ever ceased, but over the years policemen looking for Burger and other major Nazis often were shifted to hunting terrorists or communist spies. "The only winners of the Cold War were the Nazis," Wiesenthal said.
"Germany was the perfect hiding place for a Nazi murderer," says Karla Mueller-Tupath, who reconstructs Burger's life in the just published "Verschollen in Deutschland" (Vanished in Germany). "It was better than South America. There are so many old Nazis here."
Two fellow Austrians figure prominently in Burger's life: Adolf Eichmann, his boss in Department IV B 4 (Jewish Affairs) of the SS Main Security Office, and Wiesenthal, whose center in Vienna has helped convict 6,000 Nazis.
In 1945, only months after the Americans liberated Mauthausen, the concentration camp where he had been an inmate, Wiesenthal got one of the first tips in his long career as a Nazi-hunter. Eichmann and his lieutenants were in the mountain village of Bad Aussee.
Whether by error or design, Austrian police raided the wrong house in Bad Aussee. They got Burger, not Eichmann.
Fifteen years later, Israeli agents kidnapped Eichmann from Argentina and took him to Jerusalem. He was executed in 1962 after being exposed in court as shabbiest of mass murderers, an unimaginative civil servant who epitomized what Hannah Arendt called "the banality of evil."
Austrian police delivered Burger to a U.S. Army detention camp. He escaped through a fence in 1947. The Austrians arrested him again four years later, but he escaped again and disappeared.
By all accounts, Burger had been an especially avid member of Eichmann's staff, which moved into each conquered capital and systematically plundered the Jews before sending them to concentration camps.
"When I gave (Burger) an order, it was as good as carried out," Eichmann said at his trial.
From July 1943 to February 1944, Burger oversaw the transfer of 10,067 Jews from Theresienstadt to Auschwitz. Later, based in Athens, he deported more than 5,000 Jews from Greece.
Numbers don't tell the stories: the 20 sick children beaten to death with shovels; the Jew on Lefkadia island Burger shot for taking a piece of bread; the 300 Theresienstadt inmates who died of exposure when Burger forced the whole camp to stand at attention in the rain from dawn to midnight.
"When I think of Theresienstadt, the first thing that comes to me is the horrible smell," said Schuele, who was a telephone operator there for 16 months. "People died like flies, and the ground water was too high, so they couldn't be buried. Before they built the crematorium, the bodies were thrown into the army bunkers."
Bad as it was, Theresienstadt was a model camp. Hitler held Jews there who were wealthy or veterans of World War I. It was the only camp he permitted the International Red Cross to inspect, after Burger built a Potemkin Village-like facade.
In examining the consciences of those who served under Burger, it would be hard to find a more ambiguous case than Schuele, now 75. She was the Nazi ideal - tall, blonde, blue-eyed - and had been a lover of Siegfried Seidl, Burger's predecessor at Theresienstadt.
An SS princess, she spent her free time riding horseback through the fields and forests of northern Czechoslovakia.
One day, she saw Czech police unloading elderly Jews from a freight car, "throwing them on a pile like sacks of wheat."
"The more I saw the suffering of the Jews, the more it moved something in my conscience, which to my shame I must admit that I repressed for many long years," Schuele said in an interview in Stuttgart.
That repression was in force when Burger appeared at her door in 1953 and asked her to help him find a job, she said.
He had been sent from Munich by Rolf Barthels, an SS man with a decent reputation and a large art collection of mysterious origins, who after the war ran an underground support network for SS men on the run.
Schuele could not help Burger because his fake ID was so poor. But she let him stay a few days and did not go to the police afterward - to protect the good man Barthels, she says.
In 1962, Burger found his haven in Essen, where a contractor gave him papers and a sales job.
He created a past for himself as an emigre from Czechoslovakia. That would explain his remarkable collection of prewar Czech stamps, probably pilfered from some hapless Jew, and his lack of a birth certificate.
Thirty years later, Wiesenthal anonymously received a briefcase with some of Burger's personal papers. They contained a reference to Schuele, and she helped the police. She visited Barthels' widow in 1993 and passed on her suspicions that the widow was hiding something.
A search of the Barthels apartment uncovered a calendar containing Bauer's address and birth date, the same as Anton Burger's. The investigators called Essen and learned that Bauer/Burger had died.
"I regret that we got onto him too late," police investigator Ludwig Thomas said in an interview. "His trial would have been important. People still need to learn what was done in their name."
Mueller-Tupath writes that Burger's common-law wife would not speak about him but that her son was "infuriated" by the revelation. Burger had not hid his bigotry, but the son never dreamed he had been an important Nazi.
Wiesenthal is 86 now. Bitter as it was to lose Burger, he reflects that the four decades Burger lived in fear of discovery "are a part of the punishment he deserved."
About 8,000 cases of Nazi war crimes remain open in German courts, but they involve very small fish - typically guards charged with a few murders - and few will be prosecuted.
Alois Brunner, Eichmann's right-hand man, is believed to have died in Syria three years ago. Shimon Peres, the Israeli foreign minister, has promised Wiesenthal to seek proof from Syrian officials if he meets them in peace negotiations.
 Load-Date: September 25, 1994

 

End of Document
