

The Artists: Art Between a Rock and a Hard Place
The Associated Press
August 27, 1993, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 884 words
Byline: By ANITA SNOW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MEXICO CITY
Body




Six months ago, Jose Bedia and Glexis Novoa were part of a thriving colony of Cuban painters who found Mexico City a refuge where they created and sold art without political or economic constraints.
Now, they are among a handful who remain, torn between returning to Havana, where art materials are scarce, or emigrating to Miami, where they fear they will be forced to take a political position.
The Mexican government initially seemed friendly, sometimes granting extensions when their one-year visas expired, the artists said.
But in recent months, several have been denied extensions, forcing them to choose between their communist homeland and Florida's conservative Cuban-American community.
"Before Mexico City, there were two options: Cuba or Miami," said Bedia. "Now we're back to those two options."
Janette Brusi, a spokeswoman for Mexico's Interior Ministry, which oversees immigration affairs, said there had been "no special changes in cases involving Cubans."
But Bedia and Novoa worry they may have to make a decision when their visas expire this year.
And both said that if they cannot stay, they will probably choose the United States. It won't be easy.
"We're gusaneros," Bedia grinned, a cross between the "gusanos," or worms Cuban President Fidel Castro criticizes for leaving the homeland and the "companeros," or comrades, who remain.
"I just want to do my art," added Bedia. "I'm not a politician."
Bedia said that in the past, Cuban artists found refuge in the capitals of Brazil, Argentina, Venezuela and Spain. But just as in Mexico, they eventually found it difficult to stay.
Novoa, 28, got a taste of Miami at an art fair there last year.
Several people wouldn't buy his paintings for fear the money would to Cuba's communist regime. An art agent promised to represent him if he became a political exile.
"In Miami, to do well you have to dedicate yourself to a political career apart from your art career," Novoa sighed.
The Cuban painters began arriving in Mexico City for prolonged stays - with Cuban government approval - in 1989, after the government closed part of a controversial art exhibit in Havana.
The offensive works included a painting of two monstrous figures copulating before a portrait of revolutionary hero Che Guevara, who was portrayed as a black man. Another showed the Cuban flag as a piece of mutilated meat.
That exhibit ushered in the end of the decade, Cuban artist Eduardo Ponjuan said in an interview published in a catalog of paintings he and partner Rene Francisco displayed in Mexico City earlier this year.
"Artistic policy in Cuba changed," Ponjuan said. "For almost the entire decade it had been one of dialogue between institution and artist and of international promotion for us. Afterward, artists started leaving Cuba."
Most were born after the Cuban Revolution that ousted dictator Fulgencio Batista in 1959. Bedia was just 5 days old when Castro seized power.
They benefited from a system that nurtured young artists and most attended the country's premier art school - Havana's Higher Institute of Art.
They enjoyed privileges rare among Cubans - the right to travel, access to dollars.
But like all Cubans, they suffered from the economic crisis that began when communism collapsed in the East. Art supplies, even food, became scarce.
So they came to Mexico City, many settling, by coincidence, downtown on Republica de Cuba street near La Habana Hotel. They had the art materials they needed and freedom to paint what they liked.
The painters also had Nina Menocal, a Cuban-born gallery owner who came to Mexico when she was 12. At her Ninart gallery they sold their works for thousands of dollars, keeping the profits rather than giving it to the Cuban government. Nevertheless, most retained ties to the Cuban regime, and their right to return to the island.
Meanwhile, careers soared.
Bedia, 34, described as the most important Cuban artist remaining in Mexico City, has exhibited his characteristic outline paintings in museums throughout the United States and Europe and two are on display in New York's Museum of Modern Art.
Bedia's work - and the apartment he shares with his wife and young son - reflect his passion for the indigenous cultures of Latin America and Africa. The walls are adorned with masks of native people from Mexico and the Sioux of South Dakota, with whom he lived for several months in the late 1980s. Inside a closet is an altar where Bedia practices palo monte, a religion with African roots popular in Cuba.
Bedia wondered aloud how much it will cost to move and where he'll end up.
He said some painters have returned to Cuba, including Ponjuan and Francisco, a pair of whimsical deconstructionists who displayed their work at Ninart in the spring. But most have opted for Miami or other U.S. cities.
Tomas Esso, whose works were among those in the censured exhibit, lives in Miami and is known for his painting of a disembodied head of Castro attached to an inner tube - like those used by Cubans fleeing the communist isle - bobbing on a stormy sea.
Painter Arturo Cuenca also lived in Mexico City until breaking with Castro's regime, settling in New York.
Bedia won't denounce artists who broke with the regime and speak out and hopes he won't have to.
"The people in Miami have a rancor, a bitterness that isn't mine," he said.

 

End of Document
