

The Station The Army Couldn't Silence Goes Public
The Associated Press
June 22, 1992, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 699 words
Byline: By DOUGLAS GRANT MINE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN SALVADOR, El Salvador
Body




For more than a decade, the army tried to blow it off the air, blast it out of the ground and block its signal, but the rebel Radio Venceremos kept cranking out its version of the news.
With the end of the civil war "Radio V" and its sister station, Radio Farabundo Marti (RFM), have moved to the capital. Their most difficult times may lie ahead as they try to make it in the commercial market.
The war that began in October 1979 and took more than 75,000 lives ended in January with a series of U.N.-supervised peace accords. Ten RFM staff members were among the dead.
With the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front reorganizing into a political party, its radio stations are learning to cope with rents and music formats instead of rockets and mortars, and plan to replace propaganda with news.
Both get money from the parent organization for now, but plan to become normal commercial stations, depending on advertising revenue to operate.
During the war, the insurgent broadcasters covered the country with shortwave and FM programs of propaganda, news and music. Now that their tale can be told, it has caused a sensation.
"The 1,001 Stories of Radio Venceremos," oral histories compiled by Jose Ignacio Lopez Vigil, a journalist, is a bestseller in its third printing.
Eduardo Rodas, the distributor, said 7,000 copies have been sold. If a locally published book sells 1,000 copies, it is considered a resounding success in this small nation of 5.2 million.
One of the "1,001 Stories" is of the government sending 1,600 soldiers to wipe out Radio V soon after its inaugural broadcast in 1981. There was a standoff for a few days, with the soldiers only 500 yards from a guerrilla position where the portable transmitter was secured underground.
When the rebels started up the generator each afternoon for the daily broadcast of Radio Venceremos, whose name means "We will win," the soldiers would shout insults and fire mortars.
"The program aired live every day, in the middle of that craziness, with ambient sound," says an account in the book. "The mortars, though they didn't break through the tree trunks above us, the sound came through to the microphones. Since they were monintoring our radio, we obliged them by broadcasting right back at them the sounds of the same explosions they were sending to destroy us."
More than once, the army erroneously announced that it had blown up the mobile transmitter.
Carlos Henriquez, founder and director of Radio V, spent 11 years in the mountains. He and his staff eluded elite infantry units, dug trenches and caves as shelter against air raids and thought up schemes to stay supplied with tape recorders, cassettes, batteries and gasoline for the generator.
What lies ahead, he said in an interview, "is the most difficult stage in the history of Radio Venceremos." For instance, he said, landlords are reluctant to rent space to the station for fear of attacks by rightists.
Radio Farabundo Marti has rented a large house in downtown San Salvador and is remodeling it.
On a tour led by Ricardo Sibrian, the station manager, the walls of sound booths were covered with egg cartons for acoustic insulation. Two computers, a desktop and a portable, stood at the ready in the newsroom.
"It's a lot different from sitting on a rock in the woods with a ballpoint pen and notebook," Sibrian said with a laugh.
RFM and Radio V plan to operate 18 hours a day with little more staff than they had in the mountains: 25 volunteers for RFM and 15 for Radio V.
Both station managers said the hardest part of the transition is philosophical and psychological.
"One of our greatest resources was the mystique of our work, our love for our work and for the cause," Sibrian said. "Maintaining that mystique is one of the greatest challenges.
"The objective is to professionalize our journalism in the quest for objectivity. The spirit of the project is one of pluralism and democracy. The slogan is 'A different kind of station for a changing nation'."
He said RFM will try to attract what it sees as a neglected peasant audience, and will include cultural and educational programming. The music will be mainly Salvadoran and Latin American, with interludes of rock and jazz.

 

End of Document
