

There's a New World Order, But Americans Are Still Funding the Old One
The Associated Press
January 18, 1992, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 814 words
Byline: By JIM DRINKARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Sen. Claiborne Pell was startled by the scene at a New Year's party in Moscow: The Russian Army men's chorus, in full uniform, singing "God Bless America."
Amid such stark signs of a New World Order, there is virtually unanimous agreement among U.S. policy-makers, academics and lobbyists that the country's $ 15 billion foreign aid program, aimed for decades at containing communism, needs to be revamped from the bottom up.
That kind of review will likely jeopardize allies who found favor under the old system, countries such as Israel, Egypt, Turkey and Greece. It could benefit the developing world - Africa, Latin America - and nations embarking on experiments with democracy, such as the former Soviet republics.
But agreement is just as solid that American taxpayers are going to be paying for the Old World Order for at least another year. In fact, the biggest struggle this year will involve whether to grant $ 10 billion in loan guarantees to Israel, which already gets the most aid.
The reason? This is election season, and no politician wants to breathe the words "foreign aid," let alone become immersed in a complicated rewrite of the program, at a time when "America first" has become a political battle cry.
The sensitivity is demonstrated by Pell himself, whose job as Foreign Relations Committee chairman is to seek passage of aid legislation.
"I will support what the traffic will bear," he said. "But conditions are not good in our country, either. I had 7,000 people in my state lining up for food."
Since World War II, U.S. foreign policy has been dominated by the idea that all efforts - economic, diplomatic, military or humanitarian - should be aimed at thwarting Moscow. That threat has vanished, replaced by worries about economic competitiveness, political instability, ethnic strife and terrorism.
But U.S. aid programs, insulated by well-entrenched lobbying groups, bureaucratic inertia and governmental indifference, have remained immutable.
"There's probably no other area of government policy where there's such a great gap between current policies and new realities," said John Sewell, president of the Overseas Development Council, a privately funded policy analysis center.
President Bush, devoting more time to domestic policy these days, has yet to offer a comprehensive proposal for changing foreign aid. Democrats fanning the criticism are equally loathe to raise the subject.
Most U.S. foreign aid continues to flow in the form of weapons or cash that simply props up the budgets of foreign governments. That is true of the two leading recipients, Israel and Egypt, as well as countries such as Greece, Portugal, Turkey and the Philippines, where American military forces have been based.
Relatively little aid goes to the smaller-scale programs that experts agree provide the greatest help to Third World countries - programs such as population control, agricultural development, health care and education.
"The administration has to recognize that at least half the aid program has been designed to counter the so-called Soviet threat in the Third World, and it's not there anymore," said Rep. David Obey, D-Wis., chairman of the House Appropriations foreign aid subcommittee.
"We need to look at every region to see whether continued aid is justified. We should ask the administration whether they have any objection to beginning a five-year phasedown of the massive aid we're providing in the Middle East. … It seems to me nobody has a permanent entitlement right for the aid budget."
Among ideas that have been advanced for the next generation of foreign aid:
-The unabashed promotion of American trade. Under a proposal by Democratic Sens. David Boren of Oklahoma, Lloyd Bentsen of Texas, Robert Byrd of West Virginia and Max Baucus of Montana, aid could be used by foreign recipients only to buy American goods, especially major items like power plants and other technology.
-Encouraging free-market reform and building local democratic and economic institutions.
-Supporting peaceful solutions to regional conflicts and providing reconstruction and development aid for war-scarred areas like the Middle East, Central America, southern Africa, Cambodia and Afghanistan.
House Foreign Affairs Committee Chairman Dante Fascell, D-Fla., said the United States will have to increasingly act through organizations like the United Nations and the World Bank, and rely less on the current brand of direct aid to individual countries.
"We just can't take care of everybody," he said in an interview. "There's not enough money. … We're going to take care of ourselves."
But isolationism isn't the answer, either, he said.
"The United States cannot count itself out of the international picture - at a time when it's needed more than it ever was - just because of domestic political considerations," he said. "If we do, we'll be making the biggest mistake of the century."

 

End of Document
