

Third World: Poverty, Not Population, Is the Main Issue
The Associated Press
September 13, 1994, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 694 words
Byline: By KHALED DAWOUD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




Some delegates at the U.N. population conference say the Third World's problem isn't too many people, but grinding poverty. They blame crippling debts and too little access to rich Western markets.
The so-called North-South division - industrialized northern countries vs. poor southern countries - arose in several disputes at the meeting aimed at curbing the world's population explosion and fostering development.
Some delegates complained the West's domination extended to the conference. Others conceded their inexperience with such meetings was part of the problem. Still others said the real missed issue was the imbalance of wealth between North and South.
"So long as 20 percent of the world's population has 84 percent of all income while the bottom fifth has a mere 1.4 percent, conferences on population will be nothing but mere conversation," said M.S. Swaminathan, an adviser to the Indian government.
Several Third World delegates complained the U.N. population and development conference addressed mainly Western concerns. Kenya's Daniel Mbekar said the entire meeting was dominated by abortion and sexual rights "which might be the peak issues in Europe and the West but not in our African poor south."
Eka Esu-Williams, a Nigerian attending an accompanying meeting of activist groups, said the main sexual issue for Africans - the spread of AIDS - also was given short shrift.
"This is a problem which has a devastating impact on our country, but it was totally ignored," she said.
Economic issues came out at the meeting in the Third World's plea for migrants to be given a "right" to family reunification - bringing their families to developed countries.
In the final report, the West prevailed with its argument that this would interfere in immigration policies. Reuniting families became an "important principle," not a "right."
African nations also said they couldn't afford their part of the $ 17 billion a year target for population and health programs. The conference report says donor nations should pay one-third and developing countries two-thirds.
There are legions of statistics to show why developing countries need help.
The World Bank's 1993 World Development Report shows Third World nations with a population of 4.1 billion and estimated annual per capita income of $ 900, while the main developed countries have 789 million people with an average yearly income of $ 19,900.
The developing world includes Sub-Saharan Africa, India, China, other Asian states, Latin America, Caribbean nations and the Middle East.
Egypt's President Hosni Mubarak, opening the meeting last week, noted that foreign debt in Africa alone stands at $ 285 billion.
Lately, many in the Third World have accused Western financial institutions, such as the World Bank, of loaning millions for projects in developing nations that turned out to be misguided. Corrupt regimes also siphoned off much of the money.
Swaminathan, the Indian adviser, praised the conference's final report for linking poverty, development and population stability.
But he said far more time should have been spent to discuss alleviating poverty, ending unfair trade practices that keep Third World products out of rich northern markets and - above all - dealing with Third World debt.
"The debt problem should be the first problem to be solved, especially as these debts are getting higher one day after another while prices of Third World products are coming down," he said.
Pierre Defraigne, director for North-South relations at the European Union, agreed more emphasis was needed on development. But he rejected the view that the poor countries don't have a population problem.
"In many southern countries, the population is growing too rapidly for the present resources, which impedes development," he said. "We have to cope with both problems of poverty and overpopulation."
In reply to complaints the West is pushing population programs mainly to cut immigration, Defraigne conceded that the pressure of illegal immigrants "creates problems in our countries."
But he added: "We are trying to help in solving this by supporting programs which will develop jobs for these people in their countries."
 Load-Date: September 13, 1994

 

End of Document
