

Three Pan Am Execs Face the Ax
The Associated Press
September 12, 1991, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 660 words
Byline: By DIRK BEVERIDGE, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Pan Am Corp.'s creditors and Delta Air Lines have agreed to replace Pan Am's three top executives with a new management team as they take control of the struggling carrier, an attorney for the creditors said Thursday.
"There's no captain of the ship - you've got to have a captain," Pan Am creditors' attorney Marc Richards told reporters after a hearing in U.S. Bankruptcy Court.
The Pan Am managers are Chairman and Chief Executive Thomas G. Plaskett, Chief Financial Officer Richard H. Francis and Chief Operating Officer Peter T. McHugh.
Richards said the creditors and Delta, which is buying most of Pan Am, had agreed new management would need to be installed. He made reference to Delta's ability to run a profitable airline.
His remarks took Pan Am and Delta off guard, and the airlines immediately sought to distance themselves from it.
"This is a decision that will have to be made by the management of the reorganized Pan Am at a later date," Delta spokesman Neil Monroe said.
"The issue of senior management of the reorganized company is obviously under intense discussion at this time," Pan Am spokesman Jeffrey Kriendler said. "However, no determination has been made as to who will constitute the new management team. Any determination will be consensual among all parties."
Delta has agreed to buy Pan Am's operations across the Atlantic Ocean and beyond, leaving Pan Am to emerge from Chapter 11 as a smaller carrier that will move from New York to Miami and concentrate on serving Latin America and the Caribbean. The new Pan Am will be owned 55 percent by the creditors and 45 percent by Delta.
Delta and the creditors currently have no representation on Pan Am's board of directors, so they would technically be unable to fire the executives until they control the new Pan Am. But Kriendler said all three sides were working together to ensure an orderly transition.
Pan Am, once the proud unofficial U.S. flagship carrier, has been in bankruptcy court since January and agreed to sell most of its assets this summer, as it kept bleeding money and ran perilously close to collapse.
Pan Am and the creditors appeared before U.S. Bankruptcy Judge Cornelius Blackshear Thursday afternoon to say they had agreed on a severance package that will total $ 8.1 million for seven senior vice presidents, 21 vice presidents and between 150 and 170 Pan Am executives who fall below the rank of vice president.
Pan Am has sought severance of $ 2.1 million for Plaskett, Francis and McHugh.
The two sides were unable to agree on a package for the three top executives, and asked for another week to resolve their differences. Richards then told the judge that creditors hope to install a new manager or management team, perhaps as early as next week.
After the brief hearing, Richards told reporters that money was not the sticking point.
"We want to get a new team in there," Richards said. "That's the primary issue. We have to get new management."
Richards said he had no idea who would replace Plaskett, Francis and McHugh, although he held out the possibility that some of the lower Pan Am executives could be promoted.
Neither Delta nor Pan Am would comment on who might run the new Pan Am.
Richards would not say whether it was the creditors or Delta pushing to have Pan Am's management removed, or why the executives were being replaced.
"It's not a question of how soon they're out. It's how soon the new people are in," Richards said.
The other Pan Am executives will be eligible for the severance pay only if they lose their jobs because of the changes at Pan Am and do not get similar jobs with Delta or elsewhere.
The seven senior vice presidents and 21 vice presidents will get one year's salary, plus benefits and living allowances if they are based overseas. The other executives will get a share of a $ 4 million pool that will be divided up based on salary and years of service but will not amount to more than a year's salary in the case of any one executive.

 

End of Document
