

To The Cheers of Hundreds, Democratic Government Warily Takes Office
The Associated Press
September 2, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 644 words
Byline: By MICHAEL NORTON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti
Body




A democratic government tiptoed into office Thursday urging joyous supporters to show restraint, aware that restive soldiers still held the weapons used to seize power nearly two years ago.
Hundreds of Haitians surrounded the National Palace, chanting the names of new Prime Minister Robert Malval and soon-to-return President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Malval said his government represented perhaps Haiti's "last chance as a nation," and he urged supporters to temper their enthusiasm.
"We can express our joy, but in an orderly way," he said. He swore in his Cabinet before 650 people in the grand hallway of the palace.
A half hour later, plainclothes police stopped a budding pro-democracy rally outside by punching and shoving demonstrators.
Malval and foreign diplomats lobbied all day Thursday to maintain the momentum of a U.N. plan under which army commander Lt. Gen. Raoul Cedras is to resign and Aristide to return. Malval, installed Monday in Washington by Aristide, bluntly described the stakes involved.
"Our mission is simple: to save our country from anarchy, from administrative disorder, from hate," Malval said, appealing for the return of hundreds of thousands of Haitians who fled after the September 1991 military coup. "It is perhaps our last chance as a nation."
Cedras and the army high command did not line up to shake hands with the new Cabinet members. Many rank-and-file soldiers strongly oppose Aristide, saying he will allow retribution if he regains power. On Wednesday night, a Parliament member who supported the coup, the Rep. Evans Picot, was shot in the left shoulder in suburban Petionville.
U.N. mediator Dante Caputo, White House envoy Lawrence Pezzullo and three senior foreign military officers laid the groundwork for the next United Nations armed overseas force - a 1,000-member team that will oversee police reform and economic development. An advance team of up to 30 members is to begin arriving Sunday, U.N. officials said.
The U.N. mission will have a much greater U.S. role than originally thought, with the Pentagon funding the army reform mission and the U.S. Justice Department paying for the program to establish a civilian police force.
The separation of the police from the army will be modeled on programs used in El Salvador and Panama, Pezzullo told reporters. A new police academy will be established, and graduates will be commanded by the civilian justice minister, Pezzullo said.
The army reform program, commanded by U.S. Army Col. Greg Pully, is intended to give a new mission to the Haitian army, known more now for repression than for upholding the law. Some of the new tasks for the army will include building barracks and hospitals, Pezzullo said.
State TV and radio, which are still controlled by the military, have given ample coverage to nationalists who say the police training mission violates Haitian sovereignty.
The state media has harshly criticized an existing U.N.-Organization of American States human rights monitoring mission.
The military trainers will be armed but will not intervene in conflicts or serve as bodyguards for Aristide, U.S. officials said. Aristide gave permission for the trainers to bear arms, Pezzullo said.
Haitians outside the palace cheered the foreign diplomats and booed nationalist and anti-Aristide politicians. Malval broke away from the diplomats to shake hands through the black iron gate as people chanted "Aristide! Malval!"
Among those listening to the ceremony was a beaming Eric Lamothe, whose north coast radio station was destroyed by soldiers three days after Aristide's overthrow. "I want to rebuild now," he said. "I have confidence in the future."
But many Haitians tempered their enthusiasm, as Malval did.
"We've suffered a long time waiting for this," said Fern Dalzon, 26, a Protestant theology student. "But we know we haven't seen the last of repression."

 

End of Document
