

U.N. Report: Humans Forcing Other Species Off The Planet
 The Associated Press
November 14, 1995, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 517 words
Byline: By DAVID BRISCOE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Human beings have been obliterating other species for centuries, but a new U.N. report tries to quantify the destruction and estimates that more than 30,000 plant and animal species now face possible extinction.
"Biodiversity represents the very foundation of human existence," says the Global Biodiversity Assessment, the first comprehensive look at the issue by scientists from around the world. "Yet by our heedless actions we are eroding this biological capital at an alarming rate."
The 1,140-page report makes several attempts at estimating the human impact on other species. It says mammal extinctions this century are 40 times what fossil records show they were millions of years ago. The rate of species extinctions since humans first walked the Earth may be 1,000 times what would have been on the planet without human intervention.
In the last four centuries, 484 animal and 654 recorded plant species have become extinct, according to the report. Nearly three times as many bird and animal species have disappeared since 1810 than in the previous two centuries.
Threatened species include 533 mammals, 862 birds, 257 reptiles, 133 amphibians, 934 fishes, 2,647 insects and other invertebrates and 26,106 plants, the study found.
The report, being released today at an international conference in Jakarta, Indonesia, contains what is said to be the best estimate yet of the total number of species in the world - 13 million to 14 million.
Only about 1.75 million species have been formally identified and given scientific names. The biggest group of undocumented species is insects, with more than 7 million varieties undescribed.
Threatened tropical forests are believed to hide millions of species awaiting scientific scrutiny.
In addition to the increase in endangered species, the report decries the loss of genes, habitats and ecosystems. The assessment, funded by the Global Environmental Facility for the U.N. Environment Program, is the result of work by about 1,500 scientists.
It cites several reasons for the decline in species, including:
-Human population growth and economic development deplete biological resources.
-Human failure to consider the long-term consequences of actions that destroy habitat, exploit natural resources and introduce non-native species.
-Failure of economic markets to recognize the true value of maintaining the variety of species.
-Increased human migration, travel and international trade.
-The spread of water and air pollution.
An example cited in the report of the possible benefits of maintaining seemingly unimportant species is the day-flying moth, Urania fulgens.
The moth, found in South America and Mexico, metamorphoses from a caterpillar that feeds exclusively on a particular variety of trees and vines known as Omphalea.
The heavy defoliation due to the caterpillar causes the trees to produce a protective chemical, making them unpalatable to the moths. The toxic plant compounds have been shown to be effective against the AIDS virus in test-tube experiments.
The toxin is produced only from the interaction of a large population of moths and the plants.
 Load-Date: November 14, 1995

 

End of Document
