

U.N. Chief Promises To 'Stay the Course' in Somalia
The Associated Press
October 6, 1993, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 801 words
Byline: By ANDREW KATELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




The U.N. peacekeeping chief warned on Wednesday that a U.S. withdrawal from Somalia could prompt other countries to pull out and bring back the "chaos and confusion" that killed 300,000 people there.
Kofi Annan of Ghana, undersecretary-general for peacekeeping, told a news conference he understood the anger behind calls for a U.S. withdrawal but said it could cause the 28,000-member force to "unravel altogether."
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali told the Security Council earlier the United Nations would "stay the course."
He said he would go to the region to focus on a political settlement. Annan also planned a trip to Somalia, starting Friday.
In a move that should ease U.N. fears at least temporarily, a senior administration official said Wednesday that President Clinton plans to authorize a short-term increase in troops while setting a date to pull out.
The Security Council on Wednesday began reviewing the mandate it outlined for the United States and 32 other countries in the U.N. peacekeeping force in Somalia.
"There will be a process of soul-searching," Ronaldo Sardenberg, Brazil's U.N. ambassador and Security Council president, told reporters after Boutros-Ghali briefed the council.
No decision was announced, but diplomats said the consensus seemed to be to agree with Boutros-Ghali to stay in Somalia, at least until the Security Council's mandate for the mission expires Oct. 31.
Critics say the U.N. operation has lost its humanitarian focus and shifted to trying to capture and arrest warlord Mohamed Farah Aidid. His Somali clan faction has been blamed for attacks on U.N. peacekeepers, starting with June ambushes that killed 24 Pakistanis.
Because of the killing of 12 American soldiers and the wounding of 78 in Mogadishu late Sunday and early Monday, Clinton is facing growing calls from the American public and lawmakers to get out of Somalia.
Clinton met for the third time in 24 hours on Wednesday with Madeleine Albright, U.S. ambassador at the United Nations, and other top national security aides.
"We are anxious to conclude our role there honorably but we do not want to see a reversion to the absolute chaos and terrible misery which existed before," Clinton said afterward.
Pentagon sources speaking on condition of anonymity said one option being considered is to send at least 2,000 new combat troops and more heavy weaponry to the northeast African nation. The United States already has 4,700 troops in Somalia.
Albright and Peter Tarnoff, U.S. undersecretary of state for political affairs, were to brief Boutros-Ghali about White House thinking in a meeting Wednesday evening.
Boutros-Ghali has warned that a withdrawal of U.S. soldiers from Somalia could condemn the African country to renewed civil war, which caused a famine that killed an estimated 300,000 people in 1992. The Americans are the best trained and equipped contingent in the U.N. force.
International intervention, begun with a U.S.-led military operation last December, has restored order in much of Somalia. But American soldiers and other U.N. troops have been bloodied in increasing fighting with Aidid's militiamen, whose stronghold is in southern Mogadishu.
Boutros-Ghali told the Security Council he would travel to the region next week for a "new diplomatic action." He planned to meet with African leaders in Ethiopia, Mozambique and Kenya and also visit Mogadishu.
"I have to study on the ground what ought to be done to maintain peace, to continue the humanitarian assistance and to promote the national reconciliation among the different factions," the U.N. chief told reporters.
That appeared to be Boutros-Ghali's response to the operation's critics.
In his campaign to counter the criticism, Boutros-Ghali said in a speech Tuesday that the United Nations "must show ourselves to be resolute and firm."
"For the sake of future generations, in Somalia and elsewhere, we must not abandon Somalia," he told world leaders attending the U.N. General Assembly session.
Boutros-Ghali has criticized the U.S.-led operation that patrolled Somalia from last December until May for not disarming the warring factions. The U.N. peacekeeping force has suffered 346 casualties, including 74 deaths, Boutros-Ghali told the world leaders Tuesday.
For his part, Clinton is coming down hard on the United Nations. In an interview with Copley newspapers, Clinton referred to the deterioration of the Somalia operation since the world body took over in May.
"This didn't happen to us when we had 28,000 people there and we could control the situation," Clinton said.
The president said he is reluctant to operate under a U.N. structure that no longer provides "the help we need to protect our people." Asked to respond, Boutros-Ghali told The Associated Press: "I welcome all the criticism all over the world."
 Load-Date: October 6, 1993

 

End of Document
