

U.S. Turns Up The Heat On Japan
The Associated Press
March 31, 1994, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 754 words
Byline: By MARTIN CRUTSINGER, AP Economics Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Clinton administration took the first step Thursday toward establishing a "hit list" of countries judged to have erected the most harmful trade barriers to American products as it continued to turn up the pressure on Japan.
The administration released a 281-page report in which it cited 35 countries and four trading blocs for alleged unfair trading practices.
This report, known as the "National Trade Estimate Report on Foreign Trade Barriers" will serve as the basis for targeting a much smaller list of nations by Sept. 30 for possible trade sanctions if they do not agree to remove the offending barriers.
While nations from Argentina to Australia were cited in the report, administration officials left no doubt that the primary focus was on Japan.
The section of the report covering Japan took up 44 pages, an increase of 57 percent over last year. And the report's harshest comments were reserved for Japan, which it said had import barriers that far exceeded those of other major industrial countries and placed "an unacceptable burden on the global trading system."
Ira Shapiro, general counsel for the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, said this year's report showed significant progress had been made globally in reducing barriers, especially with the December completion by 117 nations of negotiations on a new global trade pact that would cut tariffs and remove other barriers to goods and services.
Still, the United States found plenty to complain about in the report, which the executive branch has been required by Congress to publish for the past nine years.
This year's report took on added significance when President Clinton on March 9 issued an executive order reviving a lapsed provision of trade law known as Super 301. This provision is deeply resented by foreign governments who see it as a form of unilateral bullying on the part of the United States, forcing governments to make trade concessions in the face of threats of punitive U.S. tariffs.
The Clinton administration revived the law after broader market-opening talks between the United States and Japan broke down in February when Japan refused to accept American demands that any market-opening offers include specific import goals to measure progress.
Japan earlier this week unveiled a new market-opening proposal aimed at reducing its huge $ 59 billion surplus with the United States but it was rejected as inadequate by U.S. officials who said they would await better offers before agreeing to restart the stalled negotiations.
A spokesman for the Japanese embassy in Washington said he would have no comment on the trade barriers report until it had been reviewed in Tokyo.
Ella Krucoff, a spokeswoman for the 12-nation European Union, said the EU would release by the end of April a listing of what it deems to be unfair trade barriers erected by the United States against European products.
"We have done this for a number of years as reminder that the United States also has barriers and it is not just a problem with the rest of the world," she said.
The European Union had 26 pages devoted to its alleged barriers in the U.S. report, second after Japan.
Shapiro said the United States would be engaged over the next six months in talks with nations interested in avoiding being targeted under Super 301. The last time Super 301 was in effect, in 1989 and 1990, several nations made trade concessions to keep from being put on the target list.
During those two years, the Bush administration, which was not in favor of the Super 301 process, targeted Japan, Brazil and India. No sanctions were ever imposed and critics charged that the negotiations produced only limited market-opening successes.
Under the Super 301 timetable, the administration will decide by Sept. 30 what barriers are the most harmful to American companies and target those countries for negotiations that can last from 12 to 18 months. Only if those talks failed would sanctions be imposed.
The countries and trading groups named in the new report included the Arab League for its trade boycott of Israel, Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, the European Union, Finland, Guatemala, the Gulf Cooperation Council, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia and Israel.
Also Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, the newly independent states of the former Soviet Union, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Russia, Singapore, South Africa, Switzerland, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey and Venezuela.
 Load-Date: March 31, 1994

 

End of Document
