

U.S. Troops Hit the Beach To Questions Fired by Media
The Associated Press
December 9, 1992, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 640 words
Byline: By G.G. LaBELLE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOGADISHU, Somalia
Body




When the first wave of U.S. forces came ashore in Somalia today they faced no bullets, only the glare of televison lights and questions fired by reporters.
About 300 foreign correspondents have arrived in Mogadishu in the past week to cover the troops' landing. Scores were at the airport as an advance squad of Navy frogmen and Marines came ashore shortly after midnight.
The scene of troops arriving in full battle gear being greeted by TV cameras produced the words "media circus" from both disgruntled Marines and reporters themselves.
But there was a serious side as well.
Many of those at the airport wrote the stories or took the pictures and videotapes that aroused the world's sympathy for Somalia - and probably brought the U.S. forces to the famine-wracked country.
Others were newcomers to Somalia and the story even brought out media stars - network anchormen Dan Rather of CBS, Tom Brokaw of NBC and ABC's Nightline host, Ted Koppel.
In Washington, Pentagon officials complained about the coverage of the landing, saying bright TV lights put troops at risk. But Marine Maj. Gen. Frank Libutti, briefing reporters in Mogadishu, had told them they were welcome to cover the landing and did not say anything about prohibiting TV lights.
The peaceful arrival of the American troops contrasted with the random gunshots that reporters hear regularly in the Somali capital.
On Tuesday, three American journalists said they were fired on by a young gunman, but no one was hit.
The three - Yunghi Kim of the Boston Globe, Chris Walker of the Chicago Tribune and free-lancer Cheryl Hatch - said a militiaman about 15 years old fired on them near the so-called Green Line dividing the city between the forces of Mogadishu's two main rival warlords.
Ms. Kim, a photographer, said their driver was fearful about being in the area and kept stopping to talk to militiamen from the faction of one warlord, Gen. Mohamed Farrah Aidid, probably making the fighters nervous.
"He shouldn't have done that. We took off back here when the guy shot," she said after rejoining other reporters.
The incident was a larger version of what has been happening to journalists - the pointing of weapons to scare them away.
This reporter and AP newsman Nick Tatro had a rocket-grenade launcher leveled at them to frighten them out of Mogadishu's open-air gun market.
It worked.
The largest number of correspondents are from the United States. But some have come from as far afield as Brazil, Japan and India.
They have lugged in tons of equipment on chartered planes - everything from satellite dishes that provide the telephone service totally lacking in Somalia to pens and notebooks, cans of tuna fish and candy bars.
Passengers of the scheduled Kenya Airways flight from London to Nairobi, the jumping-off place for Somalia, found themselves diverted to Larnaca, Cyprus, to pick up an important financial customer. It turned out to be reporters and technicians from Cable News Network. Colleagues said CNN paid more than $ 50,000 for the flight to be diverted.
The journalists have also done their part to bolster Somalia's devastated economy. Many reporters hired cars at a cost of $ 100 per day, including pay for the gunman to protect the vehicle.
Aidid's militia insists on reporters getting press credentials - at a cost of $ 10 for two weeks' stay.
Before the White House offered to intervene in a Nov. 25 announcement, only a handful of journalists were in Mogadishu at a given time. In fact, one room in an aid agency's headquarters was enough to accommodate them all.
Now, journalists have essentially financed the refurbishing of a 56-room, unused hotel named The El Farid by paying a huge advance. Several news agencies came up with several thousand dollars toward the remodeling of the hotel.
Reporters have dubbed it the Hotel Sohafi - the Arabic word for journalist.

 

End of Document
