

U.S. Prepared To Resume Radar Operations in the Andes
The Associated Press
December 2, 1994, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 541 words
Byline: By GEORGE GEDDA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The United States is about to resume an anti-drug intelligence operation with Colombia that the administration suspended seven months ago because of questions about its legality.
An administration official said resumption of the program is imminent, adding that agreement with Peru is close as well. A congressional study carried out during the summer said that suspension of the program had benefited narcotraffickers.
Until last May, ground-based U.S. radar was able to keep tabs on drug flights out of the two Andean countries. Very few flights were intercepted but authorities in Bogota and Lima were able to use the data to stage raids on cocaine laboratories and storage facilities, officials said.
The United States discontinued the program in May on grounds that U.S. officials could be held liable under international law if Colombia or Peru used the U.S.-supplied data to shoot down civilian aircraft suspected of being used in drug trafficking.
American sensitivities about the downing of innocent aircraft were heightened in April when U.S. F-15 fighters, in a case of mistaken identity, shot down two American helicopters in northern Iraq.
Just two weeks later, nervous administration officials called a halt to the radar operations in Peru and Colombia.
Legislation approved by Congress at the administration's request this past summer requires the administration to certify that the country receiving the intelligence data has taken measures to protect against innocent loss of life.
An administration official, asking not to be identified, said details of the new arrangement have been completed with Colombia and "we're almost there with Peru."
Civilian aircraft is the most common means to send cocaine base from Peru to Colombia for final processing and for ultimate distribution in the United States.
The study carried out during the summer by the General Accounting Office, a congressional agency, said the May decision made life easier for the drug traffickers in several ways.
It said they were able to use multiple flights with smaller drug loads than before. They also began flying during daylight hours instead of the early evening. In addition, they were able to spend more time on the ground and used more direct air routes instead of the more circuitous ones used previously.
Denouncing the suspension of the program, Rep. Al McCandless, R-Calif., said, "We have emboldened the cartels and drug traffickers, lessening their risks and costs."
Richard Baum, who publishes a newsletter on drug policy, said the intelligence-sharing operation yielded few benefits but he believes it should be reinstated.
"Turning on the radar could be the first step of a more aggressive program that eventually could yield results," he said. Baum said Peru, in particular, is eager to cooperate more with the United States but the administration has cut back on ties with Peru because limitations on democratic rule imposed by President Alberto Fujimori in April 1992.
The May decision prompted expressions of outrage from officials in Colombia and Peru, who felt it demonstrated a lack of U.S. resolve. It also produced a deep rift between the counter-narcotics offices in the Pentagon and the State Department, which vigorously opposed the suspension.
 Load-Date: December 2, 1994

 

End of Document
