

Under the Sun-and-Fun: Mafia, Drugs and Money Laundering
The Associated Press
May 15, 1993, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 931 words
Byline: By KEVIN NOBLET, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ORANJESTAD, Aruba
Body




A bout of political mudslinging in this sunny Dutch dependency has revealed a glimpse of the Caribbean's shady side: organized crime's extensive presence in the region.
In the bitter aftermath of a hotly contested January election, Prime Minister Nelson Oduber and his opposition are tarring each other with allegations of ties to a notorious Sicilian Mafia family that moved into Aruba in the late 1980s.
The charges are unusual only in that they are public. Many officials in the Caribbean are loath to discuss crime and corruption openly, lest the region's carefully cultivated reputation as a vacation paradise be tarnished.
But under the sun-and-fun surface of many islands, from the Caymans to Curacao, is a criminal underground laundering money and stolen goods, running drugs or guns.
Law enforcement experts say the Caribbean's politics, economics and even geography have combined to make it especially vulnerable to the mob. Its small governents, often less than professional, are ill-equipped to cope with the problem.
Organized crime is hardly new to the region. Pirates and buccaneers plied the blue-green waters centuries ago. Havana was rife with mobsters before Fidel Castro's revolution in 1959. Thieves and con men like fugitive financier Robert Vesco, now living in Cuba, traditionally have found safe haven in the Caribbean.
According to law enforcement experts, events in the last two decades created an even more powerful magnet for big-time crooks.
As the cocaine industry developed in nearby South America to feed the American and European markets, some British and Dutch islands were becoming independent and others were achieving greater political and economic autonomy.
With few natural resources, the new governments turned to tourism, gambling and tax sheltering as sources of income.
"They plighted their troth with the convenience of offshore banking and casino gambling," said Merrill Parks, operations chief of the FBI organized crime-drug branch.
Tourist services "are all cash-intensive businesses," he said in a telephone interview from Washington. "It's easy to hide money in them."
More recently, Italian crime groups began forging alliances with Colombian cocaine cartels, often working from bases in Caracas, Venezuela. They found the Dutch islands, just off Venezuela and not far from Colombia, especially attractive.
"They've infiltrated casinos, hotel and tourism businesses on the islands of Aruba, Bonaire, Curacao, St. Maarten," Parks said.
The mudslinging in Aruba involves the Sicilian brothers Pasquale, Paolo and Gaspare Cuntrera, who according to Dutch and Italian press reports made extensive investments in Aruba in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
Foes of Oduber allege that members of his Cabinet had dealings with the Cuntreras, who were arrested in Venezuela in September. They were sent to Italy to face charges of laundering hundreds of millions of dollars in drug smuggling profits.
"Corruption was not part of our daily life, it was an exception," said opposition leader Hendrik Eman. "Now that's changing."
Oduber claims it was Eman who let the Cuntreras into Aruba when he was prime minister in 1986-1989. He says Eman and his aides overruled lower-ranking officials who recommended the Cuntreras be kept out.
"If Mr. Eman wants to talk about the Mafia, he should look in his own backyard," Oduber said in an interview.
The Dutch islands are not alone. Money-laundering scandals periodically arise, and often are quickly hushed up, in the current or former British dependencies of Antigua, the Bahamas, the Caymans, Montserrat, and Turks and Caicos.
U.S. drug enforcement officials refer to larger Caribbean nations - Haiti, the Dominican Republic and Jamaica - as "aircraft carriers" for the drug cartels. Even Cuba allegedly has served as a transshipment point for U.S.-bound cocaine.
Other types of organized crime also have taken root.
In the Dominican Republic a year ago, FBI agents and local police raided an international bookmaking ring that served high-stakes sports bettors in the United States.
The operation, which used toll-free "800" numbers, also worked out of Jamaica's Montego Bay, where it was raided in December, and is believed to continue elsewhere in the region.
U.S. investigators say the ring has ties to Mafia groups in the United States and to casinos in Las Vegas and elsewhere.
"They had weekly transactions in excess of $ 3 million" in the Jamaica office alone, said Jamaica's deputy police commissioner, Bertram Milwood.
Milwood said another major racket is the sale of stolen cars from the United States and Europe.
Montserrat's chief minister suffered political embarrassment in 1992 when he had to surrender his BMW. It had had been stolen in Britain, then passed through a ring that shipped cars to Montserrat, Antigua and other islands.
The U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration and FBI, Britain's Scotland Yard and French and Dutch detectives all have pushed for tighter crime controls in the Caribbean.
Parks of the FBI said he has noted "a change in the will" of governments, which are beginning to pass money-laundering laws and other anti-crime legislation. He said the islands are realizing that if they do not crack down, "they'll end up being run by the criminal element."
Dutch officials took direct control of St. Maarten's finances last year, responding to allegations of corruption, and may extend the supervision to other Dutch islands.
Aruba's prime minister, Oduber, cautioned that too many controls might strangle the Caribbean economies.
"We have no natural resources," he said, "and we have to survive."

 

End of Document
