

Voters to Decide If Caribbean Dynasty Is for the Birds
The Associated Press
March 7, 1994, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 633 words
Byline: By DAVID BEARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ST. JOHN'S, Antigua
Body




V.C. Bird fought the sugar planters, led his Caribbean homeland to independence and held on to power, dominating his small nation for more than a half-century.
Now, at age 84, he is stepping down, but not without trying to ensure that a son succeeds him as prime minister and keeps Antigua and Barbuda - which has a reputation as one of the Caribbean's most corrupt countries - in the family.
Opponents in the election Tuesday are fighting an uphill battle to prevent a Bird dynasty.
Their messages do not reach the nation's broadcast media, which are controlled by the Birds. The opposition fears the Birds also will manipulate the electoral machinery, noting that in 1989 many registered voters could not even get a ballot.
"We are basically in a hopeless situation," concedes Baldwin Spencer, 49, an Oxford-educated trade unionist who leads the opposition United Progressive Party, which won only one of 17 parliamentary seats in 1989. "If you try to raise your hand to control the situation, you will be hammered."
However, in recent weeks, the opposition has creatively bypassed the Birds' media control, carrying a videocassette recorder with a promotional video to informal meetings. Hundreds of people turned out for an opposition block party, and on Feb. 27, Spencer led Antigua's biggest-ever motorcade on the island's bumpy roads.
V.C. Bird's son and longtime lieutenant, Lester Bird, expresses confidence he'll sweep to victory and continue economic policies that have made this tourist-dependent island one of the most prosperous in the eastern Caribbean.
And yet the 56-year-old lawyer seeks to distance himself from his father's administration, during which Antigua was used as a conduit for 10 tons of Israeli weapons en route to Colombian drug lords.
Lester Bird promises more accountability if he wins office, a pledge that elicits bitter laughter from the opposition.
"It's in the very nature of the Birds to be dictatorial," Spencer said. "(An opposition victory) would be a redemption, not only for this nation, but for the entire Caribbean."
The elder Bird transformed a poor nation of sugar and rice farmers to a tourist mecca, expanding the V.C. Bird International Airport and developing marinas for yachts and their rich and famous passengers, such as the Kennedys, Mellons and Bushes.
But Bird's administration also brought embarrassment to other black leaders. From Antigua, arms-makers shipped super cannons to South Africa's white-dominated government in the 1970s. The government tried to turn part of the sister island of Barbuda into a dump for the West's toxic waste. American financier Robert Vesco fled to the nation after allegedly cheating investors out of $ 200 million.
Spencer says the Birds have not disclosed a detailed government budget since 1982, have failed to pay on the nation's $ 400 million foreign debt for years and have allowed nearly 20,000 people to emigrate in the past quarter century, leaving the nation with only 59,355 residents.
The prime minister declined to be interviewed. Seen entering his hilltop office one morning, the once 6-foot-5 Salvation Army official looked nearly a foot shorter as he was helped by an aide to the door. After an hour in the office, he returned home.
He has denied repeated allegations of corruption, including a charge that he drained a government account to pay for a shopping spree by Cutie Francis, one of a long series of mistresses, whom he met at an eighth-grade beauty pageant.
Many older and rural Antiguans revere Bird for improving working conditions through the triumph in the 1940s of his labor movement over the foreign sugar plantation owners.
In his few public appearances, the prime minister has tried to transfer his personal mystique to Lester, holding hands with him at a recent rally entitled "Rising Son."
 Load-Date: March 7, 1994

 

End of Document
