

WALTER MEARS: Did Gates Cross the Line?
The Associated Press
October 3, 1991, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 759 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




There is no map to a safe route around the dangerous intersection between politics and intelligence, between the work of the policy makers and that of the agents assigned to keep them forewarned.
The nomination of Robert M. Gates to become director of the CIA could be stalled at that crossroad, in controversy over the alleged politicization of intelligence reports, some lending support to policies that went wrong.
His detractors argue that Gates should not get the job because he tilted intelligence findings to please his bosses when he was No. 2 man at the agency. His defenders deny it, insisting that Gates was a tough intelligence taskmaster, harsh on subordinates as he demanded answers to questions they ignored.
Gates himself has said he did not slant intelligence findings, that he would not so violate the ethics of his calling and of the agency he served and wants to run.
The dilemma is as old as the profession itself: a spy can deliver findings that conflict with the policies or plans of the people who hired him, or he can do some tailoring to please them and, perhaps, to fit his own beliefs.
The ancient ruler killed the messenger who came with bad tidings. The modern penalty isn't that dire, but unfavorable findings can get an official buried in the bureaucracy, or even tossed out of it.
But intelligence bent to fit policy can have disastrous results, as in the Bay of Pigs debacle in 1961, the false optimism of military reports from Vietnam a few years later, the arms sales that were supposed to foster a moderate faction in Iran in 1986.
President Bush nominated Gates more than three months ago for a second attempt to get Senate confirmation to head the CIA. Ronald Reagan chose him in 1987, but Gates later withdrew under the crossfire of the Iran-Contra scandal.
That looked like the biggest problem he would face this time too, since Gates needed to convince the Senate that he hadn't known about the diversion of Iran arms sales proceeds into illegal aid to Nicaraguan rebels, even though his boss at the CIA knew and his deputy did too.
Gates testified that he didn't know; by the count of a critical Democratic senator, he fended off Iran-Contra questions by saying 38 times that he couldn't recall things.
He seems to have passed that obstacle on the route to Senate confirmation when broader questions about his performance as deputy to CIA Director William J. Casey and the allegations of skewed intelligence reports were raised in a secret session of the Senate Intelligence Committee.
That led to the public testimony of six current and former CIA analysts, three pro, three con, none with a smoking gun to prove the case. It defies proof, anyhow.
A Senate investigation of the CIA in 1975 led to a report that the United States had been involved in assassination plots against five foreign leaders between 1960 and 1970, and to laws that banned such conduct and forced closer supervision of covert operations. According to that report, there were at least eight CIA plots against Fidel Castro, plus schemes to put drugs in his cigars and use chemicals to make his beard fall out.
That involved agents and operations abroad. This controversy is about conduct at headquarters, and the work of the analysts who weigh intelligence reports there, sometimes, one of them testified, with debates that "can be raucous and bloody." Office politics among spies is a tough business.
But there are no clear lines for a senator to follow to a yes or no on Gates' conduct and confirmation.
"We lack even a consensus opinion on a definition for politicization," said Sen. David L. Boren, D-Okla., the intelligence committee chairman. "What is to one individual the skewing of intelligence to another is effective management review."
One of the accusers, Jennifer Glaudemans, an intelligence analyst who quit the agency, told the committee Wednesday that intelligence analysis was and still is politicized because of Gates' influence.
But it is a subtle process, with no paper trail, she said, so it quickly becomes one person's word against another. She said "politicization is like fog," real although it can't be grasped or nailed to the wall.
In the end, it's going to be up to Gates to deal with the doubts his accusers have raised, and convince the panel that he merits confirmation. "He'll either pass the test or he won't," said Boren.
And the test looks increasingly difficult.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 25 years.

 

End of Document
