

WASHINGTON TODAY: Mum's the Word for Intelligence Panel Members
The Associated Press
August 5, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 671 words
Byline: By STEVEN KOMAROW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Former House Speaker Jim Wright had a secret, and he couldn't hold it back.
Yes, the United States was interfering in the internal affairs of Nicaragua, he asserted. "We have clear testimony from CIA people" that it was being done, he said.
The Texas Democrat's apparent intention was to get a pesky reporter off his back, but it turned out to be a major gaffe.
Republicans demanded punishment for that 1988 breach - revealing information from a classified briefing - and it soon added to the burden that led to Wright's resignation a year later.
It was also a rare case.
The select few on Capitol Hill who are privy to the nation's intelligence work are expected to have the self-control to say nothing, and they almost always do.
What the House and Senate Intelligence committees hear in their secret meetings with the government's spy chiefs must not be passed along to anyone. They keep mum even when they know they could sway the public debate, even when it seems that one more leak wouldn't even be noticed.
"It's a great intellectual challenge … (But) there are times it's frustrating," said Rep. Dave McCurdy, D-Okla., chairman of the House committee. Sometimes you can only say to your colleagues, "Trust us - this is covered."
In exchange for their silence, the committees learn things about the world the rest of us can only imagine. And they have power.
The panels don't give the rest of the Congress, never mind the public, the opportunity to review their work. They deal with the CIA and other intelligence agencies directly, sometimes changing covert policies with their votes.
If they're going to succeed, they can't talk.
"The oversight process, if it's going to work, … requires the (intelligence) community and its leadership to be totally forthcoming," said Sen. Dave Durenberger, R-Minn., who chaired the Senate Intelligence Committee in 1985 and 1986.
"They've got to tell you everything they know - even if you don't ask the right questions," he said. And, he said, they usually do.
That can put members in some tough positions.
When William Casey was President Reagan's CIA director, the agency was sometimes at odds with stated U.S. foreign policy. Committee members had to deal with Casey while not forgetting their responsibility to the rest of Congress and the public.
"They (senators) trusted me. They didn't trust Casey. So I had to trust Casey," Durenberger said in a recent interview. Sometimes, he said, "it didn't work too well."
By all accounts, the frictions have been reduced with William Webster as CIA director.
But with the Senate now considering President Bush's nomination of Robert Gates to be his successor, the secrecy issue arises anew. Can the Senate committee make its case for or against confirmation if it can't tell the whole story?
Last month, committee Chairman David Boren, D-Okla., announced to reporters that the panel had empowered him to subpoena a CIA station chief in Europe named Jerry Gruner. By law, such a name is secret.
The committee wanted Gruner because it was reviewing some questions about how much Gates knew about the sale of arms to Iran to covertly finance the Contra rebels in Nicaragua.
But Boren denies he goofed in any way. Gruner's name had appeared in numerous news accounts of the Iran-Contra affair and in Oliver North's publicly released notebooks, and the CIA had no problems with it, he said.
The Iran-Contra affair is a prime example of the frustration of being on an intelligence committee.
In the Senate committee's earlier investigation, one member, Sen. Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., resigned from the panel after prematurely revealing a committee report.
Sen. Howard Metzenbaum, D-Ohio, recalled when the Senate committee was interviewing former national security adviser John Poindexter about the secret arms sales.
"My wife asked me when I got home, 'What happened?' And I said, 'I can't tell you,"' Metzenbaum recalled. "And then she told me what happened. She saw it on the television news."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE: Steven Komarow covers Congress for The Associated Press.

 

End of Document
