

WASHINGTON TODAY: Certain Knowledge is Power in the Capital
The Associated Press
September 30, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 582 words
Byline: By STEVEN KOMAROW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




In a secret, locked-door, senators-only meeting, a senior Democrat spoke in support of President Reagan's CIA director, William Casey. Back in the senator's office a few minutes later, the telephone rang.
It was Casey, thanking him for the kind remarks - and, without uttering another word, reminding that senator of something else.
There's more to power in Washington than just titles, money and votes. There's power in information. And, more specifically, dirt.
By definition, dirt spends most of its time underground. After all, a secret isn't worth much if it's widely known. But recent events on Capitol Hill serve as a reminder that this unseen force is at work.
First, there was the revelation that Casey's CIA intercepted conversations between the leftist leaders of Nicaragua and some House Democrats who opposed Reagan's backing of the Contra rebels trying to overthrow that government.
House Republicans, looking for a scandal to hurl at the Democrats, are asking President Bush to make those transcripts public.
But some of the Democrats involved in the Nicaragua fight, including former Speaker Jim Wright of Texas and former Rep. Michael Barnes of Maryland, say they already knew about their existence. The Reagan administration had tried to coerce them with the threat of public release years ago, they say.
There's no national policy debate in the revelations surrounding the House bank. But the fact that dozens of House members, without penalty, routinely overdrew their checking accounts at the facility has provoked a new round of public outrage against the perquisites of office.
The fact that House Speaker Thomas S. Foley, D-Wash., won't release the names means that there's plenty of dirt potential. Clearly, the career of a congressman or woman could be ruined if it were disclosed he or she were a check kiter.
Dirt is so valuable that people fight over the ability to collect it.
Foley and other top House officials are battling to make sure notification is given them if the Capitol Police cooperate in any investigation initiated by an outside law enforcement agency, such as the FBI.
It's a constitutional matter, they say, just protecting the separation of powers between different branches of government. But the dirt potential is enormous as well, and they don't want the executive branch controlling the action.
Given its clandestine nature, the uses and abuses of dirt often don't become known for years. It has been discovered since his death that FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover gathered more than even his harshest critics imagined.
Like Hoover, those in the best positions to collect dirt are senior bureaucrats. They also have a motive: possession of dirt can be like university tenure.
It certainly seems that way in Congress. While announcing his crackdown on the abuses at the House bank, Foley took great pains to express to reporters his total confidence in the people in charge there.
These folks had failed to follow Foley's earlier directives to clean things up. Indeed, House Sergeant at Arms Jack Russ, who oversees the bank, himself bounced a $ 10,000 check there, according to The Washington Post.
But Foley, who says he doesn't use the bank himself, is giving the bank crew, who know which lawmakers bounce checks, another chance.
Politicians like to play it safe in these cases, like the senator who got the call from the now-deceased Casey years ago - and still doesn't want his name used.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE: Steven Komarow covers Congress for The Associated Press.

 

End of Document
