

WASHINGTON TODAY: Jamaican Shuns Castro, Embraces the Gipper, Survives
The Associated Press
May 17, 1991, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 644 words
Byline: By GEORGE GEDDA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Jamaican Prime Minister Michael Manley sat down for breakfast the other day with a group of reporters. Before he even had his first sip of coffee, he was spouting the virtues of the free market and the evils of state intervention.
Meet the new Michael Manley, the man who turned his back on former pal Fidel Castro and Third World radicalism to become a kind of Caribbean version of Ronald Reagan.
It is rare for a politician to do an ideological flip-flop the way Manley has and still survive politically. But Manley, after being hounded from office by angry voters 11 years ago, has made a masterful comeback, restoring his standing with the electorate by parlaying his finely tuned rhetorical skills and his newly minted economic conservativism.
The new Manley began his second tour as prime minister two years ago after spending the previous eight watching from the sidelines.
As he described it, his task now is to carry out an "economic revolution" in Jamaica, going much further than his conservative predecessor, Edward Seaga, had gone in reducing the state role in the economy.
The impossible had happened: Manley, the former foe of capitalist, was outflanking Seaga, a favorite of Reagan's, from the right.
Nowadays, Manley is all for price deregulation, the elimination of subsidies, free movement of foreign capital and "remittance of profits without delays or problems." Government-owned hotels for tourists? Manley can't wait to sell them to private investors.
To Manley, the world looks a lot different now than it did a dozen years ago when radicals like himself appeared to be gaining the upper hand.
While the United States seemed to be retreating into timid isolationism, the Soviets were picking up allies in Asia and in the Caribbean as well - there were left-wing revolutions in Grenada and Nicaragua within a space of four months in 1979. The left was on the march in El Salvador, among other places.
When Castro played host to a Third World summit in September 1979, Manley was there along with 54 other heads of government. At the time, it was believed to be the largest such meeting ever held.
The anti-American undercurrent was strong, and Manley felt right at home.
No other area in the world, he told the gathering, "has had more extended exposure to, experience with and proximity to imperialism than Latin America and the Caribbean."
And, with Castro seated nearby, he said, referring again to the United States, "those among the developed countries who seek to malign you and your country as a surrogate acting upon foreign (Soviet) orders mistake the Cuban revolution … and mistake the man, Fidel Castro."
Thirteen months later, the voters ousted Manley and his party, fed up with the country's plummeting economy. At 56, he seemed washed up. He left office just as Reagan was being elected for the first time in 1980 and was returned as Reagan was completing his second term and as the socialist bloc was beginning to unravel.
Thus far, the Jamaican economy seems to be performing better than it did when Manley was at the helm the first time. At least it is growing.
Castro looms much smaller on Manley's horizon these days, and he has only kind words for President Bush. In an Oval Office meeting Wednesday, Bush praised Manley, the White House said, for his "courageous leadership in pursuing an economic reform program, including deregulation, privatization and monetary policies."
Manley also spent time here visiting international financiers he once shunned. He wants cash to help him meet Jamaica's onerous debt repayment schedule.
When asked about the long distance he has traveled ideologically, Manley demonstrated a penchant for understatement: "I have had to learn that the state is not a useful instrument in which to organize an economy."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - George Gedda has covered foreign affairs for The Associated Press since 1968.

 

End of Document
