

WASHINGTON TODAY: Were the Naysayers Right?
The Associated Press
March 25, 1994, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 740 words
Byline: By JILL LAWRENCE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The assassination of Mexico's leading presidential contender puts U.S. officials into a defensive mode. They are trying to head off the impression that chaos and violence are overtaking America's heralded new economic partner.
The tragedy renewed questions about the stability of a country some already believed was not ready for a free-trade partnership and closer ties with the United States.
One congressman, Democrat Robert Torricelli of New Jersey, suggested Thursday that the Mexican assassination, like earlier killings of American leaders in the United States, was an indicator of "a larger social tension."
But the line from most officials and academics here is this: Wednesday's fatal shooting of Luis Donaldo Colosio at a Tijuana rally was an isolated incident and Mexican institutions are strong enough to handle the consequences.
"They're our neighbors, and we think they have a great future. And we don't expect any long-term damage to come from this terrible personal tragedy and political setback," President Clinton said Thursday night.
The preludes to the assassination were an Indian peasant uprising in the south less than three months ago and, late last year, a bruising trade debate over the North American Free Trade Agreement. Both took their toll on Mexico's fragile image.
NAFTA opponents relentlessly assailed Mexico's human rights, worker protection and environmental records. Ross Perot sometimes made Mexico sound like an entire nation of roiling, poverty-stricken shantytowns.
Were the negative images accurate?
"I hope not," Texas Gov. Ann Richards said Thursday. "I hope the people will look on this as an aberration, just as what Texas went through at a time when an assassination took place in our state."
In the last three decades the United States has endured the fatal shootings of President John F. Kennedy, civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr. and presidential candidate Robert Kennedy, plus attempted assassinations of Presidents Ford and Reagan.
By contrast, the last major political assassination in Mexico was in 1928 when President-elect Alvaro Obregon was killed.
"We in the United States have seen far more assassinations than the modern country of Mexico has. We should be very careful not to judge," said Susan Golding, the Republican mayor of San Diego, just across the border from Tijuana.
The Clinton administration took a huge political risk in promoting NAFTA, the trade pact between Canada, Mexico and the United States. Analysts say a supportive reaction to the current crisis is the only viable course despite Richards' acknowledgment that "all of us feel nervous and concerned" when something like this happens.
"Second-guessing the attempt to get closer (to Mexico) would be disastrous," said Cynthia McClintock, a Latin American specialist at George Washington University. "There are all kinds of questions about immigration, the environment and the economy. And clearly business groups in the United States want the free-trade relationship with Mexico."
Nora Lustig, a Latin American expert at Brookings Institution, said the political atmosphere in Mexico is improving in part because of the high-profile NAFTA debate.
In the glare of international attention, she said, Mexican authorities have tended "to try to solve things in a peaceful and democratic way, rather than turning to violence or authoritarian mechanisms."
One example was the government's willingness "to find a peaceful and meaningful negotiated solution" to the rebellious peasants' demands for improved living conditions and reforms to clean up the country's fraud-ridden electoral system, Lustig said.
"Yes, Mexico faces situations that are very critical," she said. "But they are being handled in a mature and constructive way."
Ironically, some observers say Mexico's tranquil political history and moves toward democracy fostered conditions that led to Wednesday's tragedy.
Because it's been so long since a major politician was killed, U.S. Ambassador James Jones said Thursday on ABC, "the kind of security even the president has is very loose compared to the kind of security we have in our country."
Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien was in Mexico on a trade visit when Colosio was shot before a crowd of 3,000. He called it "the price of democracy. It's the price of going to the people and being close to the people."
 
 ---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Jill Lawrence covers the Clinton administration for The Associated Press.
 Load-Date: March 25, 1994

 

End of Document
