

WASHINGTON TODAY: The Massacre No One Wanted To Believe
The Associated Press
July 16, 1993, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 701 words
Byline: By GEORGE GEDDA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Twelve years ago, the Reagan administration was attempting to halt the spread of communism in Central America with the help of an admittedly flawed instrument: the Salvadoran Army.
Just how flawed was demonstrated again Thursday with the release of an official report that provides a rare, intimate glimpse of how administration officials dealt with the atrocities that the Salvadoran Army regularly committed in the name of defending freedom.
The administration's point man at the time was Assistant Secretary of State Thomas Enders, who was faced with the daunting task of convincing Congress that the Salvadoran Army's rights record, however abysmal, did not invalidate American security concerns in the region.
The State Department report, commissioned by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, concluded that the most significant misjudgments by U.S. policymakers during the 12-year El Salvador war occurred during Enders' watch in early 1982.
In effect, the report said Enders did not come clean with Congress in responding to newspaper accounts that a massacre had occurred in the Mozote area of El Salvador in late 1981. In what was perhaps the most grisly of all the atrocities committed during that brutal conflict, hundreds were killed by a U.S.-trained battalion over a three-day period, mostly women and children.
The report noted that Enders was deeply skeptical of the early accounts of the massacre, seeing them as a propaganda ploy of the leftist guerrillas. There had been prior instances of rebel propaganda and, the report said, "clearly the administration wanted to believe that El Mozote was a similar instance and was accordingly eager to discredit the source."
A few days after the accounts appeared, Enders testified before Congress that there was "no evidence" to confirm the reports of a massacre. But, as the report pointed out, exhumations years later proved that the allegations were correct and Enders was wrong.
The panel that conducted the inquiry concluded that the administration's handling of El Mozote "damaged the department's credibility and that of the administration as a whole. The reported atrocity should have been pursued more vigorously."
At another point, the report said the administration made only a fainthearted effort to get to the bottom of El Mozote when circumstances demanded "an extraordinary effort."
It is unusual for a government agency to investigate itself and confess to errors in judgment. But Sens. Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., and Christopher Dodd, D-Conn., who opposed U.S. involvement in Central America, were not impressed. Leahy said the report "glosses over … the lies, half truths and evasions." Dodd dismissed it as a "whitewash."
The report does not mention that 15 months after his controversial testimony, Enders was dismissed from his post, not because he was too indulgent with Salvadoran Army excesses but because the Reagan White House felt he was too eager for a negotiated settlement to the conflict.
Two hours after the report of the Christopher panel was released, a new assistant secretary, Alexander Watson, was sworn in to the job that Enders vacated 10 years ago.
Virtually all of Watson's predecessors over the past two decades - six in all - were present. Among the handful of absentees was Enders himself; he has long since left the Foreign Service and was on a business trip Thursday in Western Canada.
However, in an opinion piece written in March, Enders acknowledged he was wrong in asserting that there was "no evidence" of a massacre. He also admitted "responsibility for not having been able to confirm" that a massacre had taken place.
Beyond accepting responsibility, he said, "I make no apologies."
He added: "We accepted the opprobrium of helping a flawed army as the only way to end human rights abuses while preventing a Communist takeover. Under our influence, violence against civilians peaked, fell and ended.
"The war is over. … There is one less major conflict to deal with in this war-ridden decade. That could not have happened had we not engaged. For all the scars - some of them self-inflicted - that was worth being part of."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - George Gedda has covered foreign affairs for The Associated Press since 1968.

 

End of Document
