

WASHINGTON TODAY: So Much for the Domestic Agenda, Rio Here We Come
The Associated Press
June 10, 1992, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 809 words
Byline: By TOM RAUM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Bush, finding his ratings at home at a new low, is retrieving his passport to engage in what everybody says he does best: foreign policy.
But Bush's trip to the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro - his first trip out of the country since last January's ill-fated visit to Japan - could backfire.
While Bush's aides are now stressing his international credentials instead of trying to hide them, the Earth Summit hardly seems the ideal place to showcase his world leadership.
The global respect that Bush commanded shortly after the Persian Gulf War will be little in evidence in Rio, where the United States has been isolated and widely criticized even by allies for its in-your-face environmental stance.
Consequently, Bush's attendance at the summit will be a short one - just a day and a half.
Still, the Rio summit - and a diversionary side trip to Panama - mark the first in a series of events over the next month that will enable Bush to demonstrate to U.S. voters his cherished interest in foreign policy.
It is followed by next week's summit meeting here with Russian President Boris Yeltsin, then the seven-nation economic summit next month in Munich, Germany.
Last winter, Bush was buffeted by public opinion polls showing that most people felt he spent too much time on foreign policy and not enough on domestic issues. The recession was uppermost on everybody's mind.
The president had just come under heavy criticism for taking auto executives with him on his trip to Japan, some of whom later ridiculed his performance. And he was publicly humiliated when he got sick at a state dinner in Tokyo and vomited on the Japanese prime minister.
He all but surrendered his passport, embarking on a domestic-policy-only diet throughout the just-completed presidential primary season. He defended his past globe trotting as little more than a hunt for new markets for U.S. goods.
And while Bush's yearnings to be back on the foreign-policy circuit broke out from time to time, such as when he told a campaign audience in New Hampshire "Don't Cry for Me, Argentina," he mostly stuck to the low-fat foreign-policy regimen.
However, Bush's ratings in public opinion polls didn't improve even with the focus on domestic affairs. If anything, they kept plunging.
Campaign strategists did notice, however, that one of the few categories to remain on the positive side in the polls was Bush's conduct of foreign policy.
For instance, a poll by The Washington Post and ABC News released on Monday showed undeclared presidential candidate Ross Perot leading both Bush and Arkansas Gov. Bill Clinton.
But when those surveyed were asked which candidate would do the best job on foreign affairs, 56 percent said Bush - compared with 15 percent for Clinton and 17 percent for Perot.
"That's still his greatest strength," said Charles Black, a senior Bush campaign adviser. Thus, Black said, "a little dose from time to time of foreign policy doesn't hurt."
Campaign advisers were particularly heartened by Bush's decision to visit Panama on Thursday on the way to Rio.
"We are delighted he's going. It points out his leadership," said campaign spokeswoman Torie Clarke.
She said the trip will continue to emphasize that Bush's role as commander-in-chief remains his top assignment.
Bush's greeting in Panama should help balance the negative reception he will receive in Rio while serving to remind people that Bush successfully liberated Panama from dictator Manuel Noriega.
And, despite the prospect of some anti-U.S. demonstrators in Panama, "our general expectation is that there will be a lot of people there who will be very grateful for the United States presence in Panama," said White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater.
The trip to Panama may also serve to blunt criticism of Bush by Perot on Bush's conduct of the Persian Gulf War.
Perot, who opposed the war, has complained that Bush helped build up Iraqi President Saddam Hussein before the conflict and failed to topple him from power during the allied invasion.
In addition to emphasizing foreign policy anew, the Perot challenge also has brought about another change to Bush's campaign strategy.
In the face of Perot's success with TV interviews and the talk-show circuit, Bush is changing his own tactics and plans to do more TV interview shows, campaign officials said.
"Everything is under consideration," said Clarke. "It's our belief that the more people see of him … the better he actually does."
But wherever he goes, whatever he does, Bush remains haunted by Perot.
When Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev met with Bush and Secretary of States James A. Baker III on Tuesday to discuss the upcoming Yeltsin summit, a reporter jokingly asked Kozyrev: "Did the name Ross Perot come up?"
"Many names came up, many names," Kozyrev said.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Tom Raum covers national politics for The Associated Press.

 

End of Document
