

What Has The Special Prosecutor Accomplished
The Associated Press
November 16, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 784 words
Byline: By PETE YOST, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




It's very simple: The purpose of criminal prosecutions is to obtain convictions. By that yardstick, Iran-Contra prosecutor Lawrence Walsh's five-year investigation is an abysmal failure.
He's spent at least $ 28 million of the public's money and here's what he's managed to pin on the big names in the scandal.
Oliver North. Case dismissed. John Poindexter. Convictions reversed.
Walsh has been trying to find out who knew what about two Reagan administration operations. One was the sale of arms to Iran, a nation that had once grabbed American hostages and held them for 444 days. Another was diverting some of the Iran arms sale money to a gun-running operation for the Nicaraguan Contras, a rebel force that Congress had cut off military aid to.
Both undertakings were secret and politically explosive. Neither has been found to be illegal.
There have been convictions in the case. Seven people have pleaded guilty to a dozen crimes.
But in the end, all the public wants to know about any scandal is who went to jail.
The answer in Iran-Contra: nobody.
Walsh's biggest courtroom victory is the conviction of Thomas G. Clines.
Thomas G. Clines?
This peripheral Iran-Contra figure was a retired CIA officer-turned-arms-middleman. He assisted the gun-running operation to the Contras and didn't report all the money he made off the deals to the Internal Revenue Service. He was sentenced to 16 months in prison and is free pending appeal.
Poindexter, a retired Navy rear admiral and Reagan's national security adviser, had been convicted of five felonies, including conspiracy, obstruction and false statements. An appeals court threw out the convictions Friday, saying his trial had been wrongly tainted by testimony he gave to Congress with the promise of immunity.
North's 1989 conviction was thrown out for similar reasons and prosecutors finally asked a federal judge to dismiss the case against the retired Marine lieutenant colonel.
Walsh has tried to get witness after witness to provide real help in getting to the bottom of Iran-Contra.
There have been few takers.
North and Poindexter both have bad memories. Poindexter, a former national security adviser, just can't seem to recall much about those daily meetings with President Reagan. Neither can Reagan, who testified by videotape at Poindexter's trial.
Among a book full of unanswered questions:
-Did someone tell Reagan about the diversion of Iran arms sales to the Contras? North, a former national security aide, says he thinks the president knew. Reagan says he wasn't told.
-Did Reagan and George Bush know about North's secret resupply network to the Contras? North wrote thousands of pages of memos about what he was doing. But Reagan and Bush insist they didn't know. Bush has never submitted to a public grilling about Iran-Contra. The closest he came was an acrimonious exchange with CBS anchorman Dan Rather. Elapsed time: several minutes.
Walsh is still plowing along.
While a federal appeals court was throwing out Poindexter's convictions Friday, North was spending the day in front of a federal grand jury being questioned by Walsh's prosecutors. As usual, North wasn't happy to be there. His lawyers had waged an unsuccessful court battle earlier in the week trying to block the questioning.
Calls for Walsh to end it are getting louder.
"Mr. Walsh's exercise in futility," Sen. Bob Dole calls the investigation.
"Closing the doors on this lavish $ 50 million waste would be the 'November Surprise' the American taxpayers have been waiting for," says Dole, nearly doubling what Walsh says the probe has cost.
Walsh appears to be running out of surprises.
He's only found one truly cooperative important witness - former CIA officer Alan Fiers, whose assistance appears to be too little and too late to break open the investigation. Fiers' guilty plea in July sent a palpable shudder through the CIA. He implicated the spy agency's former No. 3 official, Clair George, in the scandal.
Pocketbooks opened. Resolve stiffened.
Retired CIA officers set up a legal defense fund and quickly took in $ 40,000. They're still pulling in money and they've stopped giving out the total to inquiring reporters.
The benefactor presumably is George, who refused to cooperate with Walsh and now faces a 10-count felony indictment in a case that may never come to trial.
The Bush administration in 1989 torpedoed an Iran-Contra criminal case against a former CIA station chief, Joseph Fernandez. Citing national security grounds, the administration refused to allow the release of classified information deemed necessary at Fernandez's impending trial.
George's lawyers have gotten access to the same classified information, and are asking for even more sensitive material.

 

End of Document
