

White House Makes The Case For Potential Invasion Of Haiti
The Associated Press
July 14, 1994, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 911 words
Byline: By RITA BEAMISH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Wary of public opposition, the Clinton administration is carefully making a case for a potential invasion of Haiti, citing political killings and kidnappings and U.S. regional interests as justification.
Aides to President Clinton insist he has not made a decision whether to launch a military operation to topple coup leaders in Port-au-Prince. But the president, on more than one occasion, has cited a laundry list of American interests in Haiti when asked about an invasion. By extension, those interests would become the underpinning for a decision to use force.
An invasion would meet an uphill battle in public opinion.
In recent polls, two thirds of Americans surveyed opposed sending U.S. troops to oust military leaders who seized power nearly three years ago from democratically elected President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Congressional opposition also is strong, despite efforts by some Congressional Black Caucus members to drum up support.
Pressure from caucus members, along with a high-profile hunger strike by TransAfrica leader Randall Robinson, prodded Clinton to change his approach to the refugee issue. He subsequently reversed the practice of automatically repatriating Haitian boat people.
The resulting flood of refugees now may be driving U.S. policy as much as any other factor.
The refugee issue is "the bottom line of U.S. interests there, when you strip away the platitudes and rhetoric. We have to do something about it," said Donald Schulz, a Haiti expert at the U.S. Army War College in Carlisle, Pa.
Clinton this week called the refugee situation "a significant problem," but said, "We have very clear and significant interests in addition to the massive outflow of people seeking refugee status in our country."
In a recent explanations, Clinton offered these U.S. interests in the Caribbean island nation:
- Protection of some 3,500 Americans living in Haiti.
So far there has been no evidence that they are in danger. Haiti's de facto rulers have carefully avoided harassing American business people, religious workers and others living there. Any violence against them would almost surely be answered by U.S. military action.
- Reports that Haitian rulers are cooperating in illegal drug smuggling.
Aristide said last month that 46 to 48 tons of cocaine have passed through Haiti annually to the United States since he was deposed in September 1991. The Justice Department is investigating the charge. The State Department's assessment in April was that drug-related activity through Haiti was relatively low compared with the Bahamas or Mexico. It also said the U.S. government does not have evidence directly linking Haitian officials to drug trafficking.
A former U.S. diplomat called drug trafficking a poor justification for invasion, wryly noting, "If you invaded every drug transit country, you'd invade them all" in Latin America.
- Dealing with the refugee flood, with more than 15,000 boat people picked up by the Coast Guard this month, and 23,000 so far this year.
Clinton blames the refugee flood on repression by Haiti's military. He has decreed, in the face of American resistance to absorbing the Haitians, that the boat people can no longer come to the United States for asylum. With U.S. ships and the military base at Guantanamo Bay swamped, the administration has been scrambling to get other countries to provide temporary safe haven. Three Caribbean islands have agreed and Panama's incoming president said he would help after taking office Sept. 1.
The boat people flow ebbed this week, and officials are hopeful that that signals a permanent turnaround. Wednesday's total was 176 intercepted, compared with a high of more than 3,200 on July 4.
- Political killings and other human rights abuses.
The State Department this week said the military is "turning Haiti into hell," with a dramatic rise in political killings, rapes and even murders of children. But other nations have equally bleak human rights records.
"It's hard for us to stand up on human rights when we grant MFN (most-favored-nation trade status) to China," said Sen. Dennis DeConcini, D-Ariz. DeConcini supports invasion, but on the basis of protecting democracy.
- Regional instability that might follow if coup leaders who ousted Aristide are allowed to remain in power.
U.S. officials argue that many of the hemisphere's democracies are fragile, and some have survived coup attempts already. But lack of a stern U.S. response in Haiti could embolden anti-democratic forces in other countries, they say. Even administration critics concede this point.
- Haiti's proximity to the United States.
Critics note that Clinton is not contemplating invading Cuba, which is even closer, barely 90 miles from Florida. The administration notes Cuba, unlike Haiti, had no democratically elected government before communism.
- Responsibility to 1 million Haitian-Americans in this country. No one has elaborated on this point except by inference that the Haitian cause also generates support in the nation's black population at large.
"I don't think any of them are a justification for invasion. There are no national security reasons which would dictate an invasion of Haiti," said Eric Melby, a former National Security Council staff member. Melby and former NSC Adviser Brent Scowcroft authored a recent paper advocating lifting of economic sanctions for all except the Haitian military, and opening negotiations with the de facto regime to schedule new democratic elections.
 Load-Date: July 14, 1994

 

End of Document
