

Widows and Daughters Inherit the Politics in Asian Subcontinent
The Associated Press
May 23, 1991, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 757 words
Byline: By EARLEEN FISHER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW DELHI, India
Body




When the party bosses chose a successor to the slain Rajiv Gandhi, they followed a tried and true path on the Asian subcontinent: They picked the widow.
But the Italian-born Sonia Gandhi, still grieving beside the body of the former prime minister, rejected the honor today, 20 hours after it was made. She said the tragedy made it impossible for her to lead the Congress Party.
The party's top leaders met again to choose someone else.
Had she accepted, Mrs. Gandhi would have joined a prestigious list of the region's other wives and daughters who brushed aside tears and picked up the political mantles of their fallen menfolk:
They include former prime ministers Indira Gandhi of India, Benazir Bhutto of Pakistan and Sirimavo Bandaranaike of Sri Lanka; newly elected Prime Minister Khaleda Zia of Bangladesh; and opposition leader Sheik Hasina of Bangladesh.
This persistent practice of turning to women - frequently ones who had little previous political inclination except as the helpmate of a husband or father - is rare outside the subcontinent.
Philippines' President Corazon Aquino took the widow's route to power, as did Violeta Chamorro in Nicaragua and Isabel Peron in Argentina.
The practice may seem puzzling on the Asian subcontinent, where many women are still sold into marriages or brothels, discarded for failing to produce sons and allowed to eat only the morsels of food left by males of the family.
But it makes good political sense for several reasons.
In these fledgling and sometimes flawed democracies, where the electorate is largely illiterate with the exception of Sri Lanka, emotions govern voting far more than they do in the West. The bereaved widow or daughter garners an automatic sympathy vote capable of generating a landslide.
The father or husband who headed the party was usually such a dominating figure that he had no clear successor. To avoid political infighting that would splinter the party - and the subcontinent's parties splinter with dizzying frequency - the male party bosses compromise by picking the dead leader's female heir.
As a further bonus, the men in the party often think the woman will be so pliable that they can play puppetmaster while buying time to advance their own political fortunes.
However, this can backfire - as it did most notably with the young Indira Gandhi, who vanquished foes inside and outside the Congress Party.
Also, 82 percent of India's 844 million people belong to the Hindu faith, whose huge pantheon has a paradoxical approach to sexual roles. All the supreme deities are gods, but goddesses are in charge of the things that really matter in everyday life such as health, wealth, fertility and pestilence.
One of the most feared deities is Kali, the goddess of destruction, who is usually depicted with blood dripping from her tongue and human heads dangling from her waist.
For centuries, women from powerful families periodically ruled the princedoms that once dotted the subcontinent. Sometimes the power was overt. Sometimes it was from behind the Islamic veil, but it was felt and accepted.
From these legacies and circumstances, the subcontinent produced a diverse set of women leaders:
- The first woman ever elected as a prime minister was Sri Lanka's Sirimavo Bandaranaike. Her husband, Prime Minister S.W.R.D. Bandaranaike, was assassinated by a Buddhist monk in 1959. She governed from 1960 to 1965, then again between 1970 and 1977, and remains in Parliament as opposition leader.
- Indira Gandhi, daughter of Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru and mother of Rajiv Gandhi, governed from 1966 to her assassination in 1984 (except for 1977-1980). She took over after Nehru died of natural causes.
- Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto of Pakistan became the first woman to rule a Muslim nation in modern times. She was the daughter of Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, who was executed in 1979. After his jailer and successor, Gen. Mohammad Zia ul-Haq, died in a plane crash in 1988, Ms. Bhutto led Pakistan for 20 months and is now an opposition leader.
- Prime Minister Khaleda Zia of Bangladesh two months ago became the first leader to take power through a fair and free election in her coup-prone country's 20-year history. Her husband, Gen. Ziaur Rahman, was assassinated in a 1981 coup.
- Bangladesh's chief opposition leader, Sheik Hasina, is Mrs. Zia's longtime personal and political foe, but she joined her in the campaign for multi-party democracy. Hasina is the daughter of Bangladesh's first president, Sheik Mujibur Rahman, who was assassinated in a 1975 coup.

 

End of Document
