

Will Capture of Drug Kingpin Cripple The Cali Cartel?
The Associated Press
June 10, 1995, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 670 words
Byline: By CHRIS TORCHIA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia
Body




Despite the capture of a leader of the Cali drug cartel, half a dozen wealthy kingpins remain at large and their labs still churn out tons of cocaine. Authorities had little time Saturday to celebrate the arrest of Gilberto Rodriguez Orejuela.
Soldiers patrolled the capital to prevent possible cartel reprisals from Friday's arrest, while police raided more kingpin hideouts in Cali, the southern city that is the center of the operation that produces 80 percent of the world's cocaine.
The prosecution of Rodriguez Orejuela will be a test of Colombia's troubled justice system, which drug traffickers have often bribed and manipulated to gain light sentences.
"We still have a long way to go," said an official with the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration in Washington, who requested anonymity. "Gilberto is certainly a prize, the leader with the most stature, but there are others out there and they're not going to quit."
Colombian officials, bristling at U.S. accusations they have been lax in the drug war, rejoiced when police arrested Rodriguez Orejuela, 56, who was hiding in a closet in a luxurious Cali home.
Aides applauded a beaming President Ernesto Samper, and top law enforcement officials were showered with confetti at national police headquarters.
"When I heard the news, I felt as if a piano had been lifted off my back," said Samper, who described the arrest as the beginning of the end of the cartel.
But the cartel still has formidable resources and power and officials were trying to assess how much effect Rodriguez Orejuela's capture would have. He is a significant catch because he was considered the cartel's strategic planner, handling international deals, contacts and cocaine routes to Europe and the United States.
Among those still in business are Rodriguez Orejuela's 51-year-old brother, Miguel, who handles the cartel's legitimate businesses. Despite the cartel's low-key image, at least one other kingpin, Henry Loaiza, favors violence as a way of doing business.
Gilberto Rodriguez Orejuela's arrest is unlikely to immediately affect production in cocaine labs scattered around Colombia, some protected by well-armed leftist guerrillas. The cartel also has entrenched transport routes through the Caribbean and Central America.
Cocaine is such big business in Colombia that traffickers often smuggle it in tons aboard refitted passenger planes.
Cali was already handling most of Colombia's cocaine trade when security forces killed Pablo Escobar, leader of the more violent Medellin drug cartel, in December 1993. His death had little impact on dwindling Medellin operations. But officials believe if other Cali kingpins fall, it could shatter the tradition of big drug gangs in Colombia.
The death of Escobar "took Medellin out of the picture and Cali supplanted them," the DEA official said. "But there is nobody around to supplant the (Cali) cartel."
Rodriguez Orejuela's arrest is no guarantee that he will be punished. Under Colombian law, traffickers get significant sentence reductions for good conduct and cooperating on drug cases.
"It's not just a question of capturing him but of conducting a rigorous investigation," government ombudsman Jaime Cordoba told RCN radio. The justice ministry said Rodriguez Orejuela faces up to 24 years in prison if convicted.
"He must get … the punishment he deserves," Bogota's El Tiempo newspaper said in an editorial. "Nothing would be worse than to wipe out with one hand what was done with the other hand."
The drug kingpin has escaped the law before. In 1984, Spanish authorities extradited him to Colombia where he was acquitted of drug charges and released. Spanish authorities had turned down a competing U.S. extradition request.
Last year, the U.S. government stopped sharing evidence on new drug cases with Colombia in the belief that too many Colombian officials have been bought with cocaine money.
Colombia has no extradition treaty with the United States, where Rodriguez Orejuela has been indicted and would likely face a tougher sentence.
 Load-Date: June 10, 1995

 

End of Document
