

With Devaluation on the Horizon, Venezuelans Go Shopping
 The Associated Press
November 2, 1995, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 741 words
Byline: By ED McCULLOUGH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARACAS, Venezuela
Body




Usually, when a government is forced to devalue its currency, the date and the amount are national secrets. Otherwise, people might do just what Venezuelans are doing.
"I just bought a car," investment manager Antonio Sanchez said. "After devaluation, I'll sell the old one and get almost as many bolivars as I paid for a new one, which obviously will cost a lot more."
Across the country, Venezuelans who have money are on a shopping binge, turning soon-to-be-worth-less bolivars into personal computers, cellular phones, stereos, washing machines and other durable merchandise.
Darker signs of economic uncertainty and pending upheaval are shortages, hoarding and unscheduled factory shutdowns as businesses refuse to sell stock they can't comfortably price because they don't know what it will cost to replace. Unemployment is at least 12 percent and rising.
"If you knew a boxer was going to hit you in the liver, that's what you'd try to protect," said Santiago Angulo, owner of a trendy furniture store where sales have boomed during the past few weeks. "That's what Venezuelans are doing: preparing for a blow they know is coming. People are buying compulsively."
Devaluation is taken for granted even though the government of President Rafael Caldera doesn't talk about it openly and still makes half-hearted claims that the bolivar isn't really overvalued.
The bolivar officially has remained frozen at 170 to the dollar since July 1994. Meanwhile, inflation soared by nearly 80 percent, and the parallel market value of the bolivar plunged to about 285 to 1.
Venezuelans have more confidence in what the government does than what it says. Caldera officials have gone to the International Monetary Fund seeking a loan, a condition of which undoubtedly is devaluation.
How much and when are the questions - not whether.
The assumption is that a formal devaluation will take place soon after state governor and mayoral elections set for Dec. 3.
The issue is a watershed for Caldera. Exchange controls are a hallmark of his 21-month presidency. So are price controls, a subsidy that makes gasoline the cheapest in the world and his lukewarm support for the sale of money-losing public companies he considers the national patrimony.
Caldera, a 79-year-old populist who also was president from 1969 to 1974, faces pressured to yield on a number of policy fronts.
"Once definite measures are agreed on, will Caldera be willing to accept them? That's the same question I ask myself," said Carlos Bernardez, a Cabinet minister and IMF negotiator.
As Caldera sees it, he inherited a bank crisis that turned into one of the most expensive bailouts in Latin American history. He says the fact that the demonstrations and coup attempts that destabilized his predecessor haven't happened attest to his capable leadership.
"I have to reject firmly the claim that … there is more hunger, more misery, more poverty, more crime" than when he took office, an irate Caldera said at a recent news conference.
Nevertheless, the government's own data show the jobless rate at nearly twice the 1993 level and the economy mired in a steep, three-year recession Wages have shrunk by perhaps 40 percent, and nearly one of every two Venezuelans live in poverty.
Last year's inflation rate of 71 percent was the highest by far this decade.
Caldera's Convergencia movement is expected to fare poorly in upcoming elections. Congress recently censured Caldera's health minister, forcing him from the Cabinet in what essentially was a rebuke to the president.
"Venezuela's problem isn't economic. It's political," economist Miguel Rodriguez said in a published interview. During the 1993 campaign, "Caldera … didn't have the remotest idea of where things stood. Not now, either, I think. But I imagine he's being forced to learn."
Venezuela's long-term prospects seem assured. Its oil reserves are the largest outside the Middle East. There also are tremendous deposits of shale oil, natural gas, iron ore and gold along with numerous rivers, massive hydroelectric power, timber, fertile land and a sunny Caribbean climate.
But the chances of stimulating a stagnant economy, attracting investment and cutting a fiscal budget deficit estimated at 7.6 percent of gross domestic product is slim.
"We're in a national emergency," said Domingo Maza Zavala, the Central Bank director and a Caldera confidant. If the government does not change course, he says, "the economy will collapse very soon."
 Load-Date: November 2, 1995

 

End of Document
