

With Violent Crime On The Rise, Even Nuns Pack Pistols
The Associated Press
October 9, 1991, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 688 words
Byline: By DORALISA PILARTE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MANAGUA, Nicaragua
Body




When burglars broke into the Missionaries of Christ the King convent one night, Sister Cristina Olmos took the saying to heart: God helps those who help themselves.
She pulled a pistol from under her pillow and fired two shots, scaring the intruders away.
Nicaragua, never the safest of countries, is in the grips of a growing wave of violent crime and people are arming themselves for protection.
Staff and budget cuts have weakened the police force; weapons in civilian hands are common and massive unemployment in the post-war era has made crime the only means of survival for many.
The deterioration of law and order has emboldened criminals, such as the 20 men in camouflage uniforms and combat weapons who recently blocked the Pan American Highway and robbed passengers in 30 vehicles.
Reported crime rose by 20 percent in the first six months of 1991.
"The increase is markedly in crimes against persons: muggings, rape, murders," said Cmdr. Roger Mayorga, chief of investigations for the National Police. "The least important criminal works with a pistol.
"And there is a new generation of criminals that are not the traditional outlaws, but people who have military weapons and experience," he added.
Peace after a decade of war meant that 20,000 Contra rebels and at least 60,000 government soldiers and police suddenly found themselves out of work.
Only about 6,000 former Contras have received land to work, leaving many others to roam the countryside hungry, landless and with few prospects.
Unemployment is estimated at 45 percent.
Under the leftist Sandinistas, who were voted out of office 18 months ago, the police force prided itself in the uncorruptibility of its officers.
Now, traffic cops will take as little as $ 8 to overlook an infraction. They even give change if the motorist doesn't have the exact amount.
Crime in the countryside first was confined to cattle rustling and petty theft. But bank holdups and highway robbery have become common in the provinces and the outlaws' modus operandi indicates military training.
"We have to be careful about fighting crime in the countryside in order to avoid an armed confrontation," Interior Minister Carlos Hurtado said recently.
Half of all reported crime is in Managua, which has close to 1 million of the country's 3.5 million people.
In the capital, police say they need 50 to 60 patrols, three times more than they have, and a bigger budget, Mayorga said.
Police say they have no gasoline for patrolling the neighborhoods, an answer that infuriates crime victims, such as Maria Alicia Talavera.
She says she was stopped at a traffic light on her way to work when two teen-age boys grabbed two gold chains she wore, yanked them off her neck and ran. She didn't chase them.
Traffic light thieves work in teams, and while a lone motorist chases the snatchers, cohorts are poised to hop in the car and drive off.
"I went to report it to the police station and they said they couldn't come pursue them because there was no gasoline for the patrol," she said.
Most motorists routinely roll up their windows, even when they lack air conditioning, and lock their doors at traffic lights, ignoring the gaggle of street vendors.
Diplomatic immunity doesn't help.
A senior western European diplomat was home with a visitor from abroad, cooking a Sunday lunch.
When the diplomat went to fetch a book to bolster his point, he found instead a man pointing a Makarov pistol at him.
The man took some valuables and left after bludgeoning the guest.
Colleagues along the South Highway, where many diplomats live, have been victimized by burglars, who are undeterred by attack dogs, high fences or guards.
Cement- block walls around homes are raised to 12 feet or higher; others put barbed wire or broken glass on top.
Those who can afford it hire armed guards. Those who can't watch out for each other and form neighborhood watch committees.
Still others, like Sister Cristina, arm themselves and hope for the best.
She has since left the country, but police officers who investigated the incident say burglars have stayed away from the convent, knowing they could face yet another pistol-packing nun.

 

End of Document
