

'The World in 1998' gives the news that will be
December 31, 1997, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 668 words
Byline: By LYNN ELBER, AP Television Writer
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




Here's the big tip-off that "The World in 1998" is devoid of sexy New Year predictions a la Jeane Dixon: The host is that sober-minded journalist, Robert MacNeil, and the program airs on PBS.
Another clue is that the 90-minute show is based on an annual forward look by The Economist, a magazine not generally known for forecasting a Prince Charles remarriage or prospects for JFK Jr. offspring.
For those issues, the supermarket tabloids are the dependable source.
But for the events with a potential impact on the nation, the world and our lives, "The World in 1998" (9 p.m. EST Friday; check local listings) is the program to watch on Day 2 of the new year.
MacNeil, in his first return to public television since exiting "The MacNeil-Lehrer NewsHour," confidently takes us on a whirlwind tour of hot issues in business, international politics, technology, entertainment and sports.
The show has its lighter side. We get a look at Hollywood's newfound fascination with World War II epics and learn about videocassettes that self-destruct, allowing you to rent a movie without getting hit with late-return fees.
But the real success of "The World in 1998" comes in spotlighting major stories that have been steadily bubbling, some inconspicuously, and are about to burst forth in 1998. Among them:
-Gas from the oil-rich Caspian Sea will pour into American cars for the first time. But funneling oil out of the politically sensitive region poses a challenge.
-China will conduct the largest sale yet of its state-owned industries, with the likely result of widespread unemployment and the end of cradle-to-grave worker support.
- The Shroud of Turin, which some contend is the burial cloth of Jesus, will go on public display again next year, an event likely to revive the debate over its authenticity.
- A cellular phone system that will make worldwide telephone calls possible is scheduled to hit the market, with dozens of satellites and a high-status $ 3,000 phone part of the package.
-The world's first "cybercity," with every house, office and shopping mall wired into a fiber-optic grid, is going up in the Malaysian jungle. But it's unclear whether regional economic woes will undermine the futuristic city.
"The World in 1998" also looks at stories that are technically old news but continue to develop and remain important to track, said Richard Thomas, the show's co-executive producer.
There's the scourge of AIDS, for instance. While new drugs are giving hope to patients in the developed world, nine of 10 new cases are in Africa, where expensive medication is largely unavailable, said Thomas.
But there is a spark of hope: A United Nations pilot program to supply subsidized drugs to Uganda, the Ivory Coast, Vietnam and Chile will help some AIDS sufferers in 1998.
Thomas said that identifying key stories for "The World in 1998" was a challenge, but rapidly changing events such as the Asian economic crisis really put the production team to the test.
"I watched the International Herald Tribune every day to see whether our clearing in the jungle, our cybercity, had been canceled," Thomas said. "That is tough, to see whether any of the trends you predict are in fact being reversed."
One trend absent from the program is the fascination with the coming millennium, an interest sure to build next year. Thomas said he hopes to make the PBS program an annual event but vows even a 1999 show will keep its focus narrow.
"I think there will be so much on the millennium, on the century that's passed and the century that's yet to come, that we'll keep focused on single years," he said. "That's daunting enough for me."
 
 Elsewhere in television …
KICKOFF VS. KISS-OFF: As an alternative to New Year's Day football games, cable's American Movie Classics is offering viewers a sneak peek at Romance Classics, its spin-off channel. The schedule includes the biographical movies "Chanel: Solitaire," about designer Coco Chanel, showing at noon EST, and "Lady Jane," starring Helena Bonham Carter, at 5:30 p.m. EST.
 Load-Date: December 31, 1997

 

End of Document
