

'Wag the Dog' and urgent pages: a vacation interrupted
The Associated Press
August 20, 1998, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 517 words
Byline: By SANDRA SOBIERAJ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: EDGARTOWN, Mass.
Body




On a satellite TV at the top of President Clinton's dusty vacation driveway, "Wag the Dog" played for idle reporters.
Then the White House press pool got the call - "Load up!" - as the president's armored bronze Suburban sped their way.
At a press center a few miles away, in the gym of Edgartown School, White House spokesman Mike McCurry was being pelted with questions about Monica Lewinsky - "Is there some sense that the White House or the president should make an apology to her?" - when his pager vibrated.
McCurry frowned at the message and interrupted the questioner, saying he needed "to do a very important piece of business." He was handed a piece of paper.
His deputy, Nanda Chitre, taking a call from senior adviser Doug Sosnik, had hurriedly scrawled a note on the back of a spare press release. "The president has departed. 12 minutes to arrival."
The president was on his way to the school for "a national security announcement that he has to make," McCurry said.
He offered nothing more as camera crews - in shorts and sandals - raced to position tripods and lights and news service reporters punched out bulletins on their laptops.
Materializing from nowhere, Secret Service agents whipped out yellow police tape to clear the president's path. A White House aide found a tilting American flag in the school and set it up behind the podium.
Brad Chaffee, 16, a Martha's Vineyard local, pressed his back against the bleachers. Tried to blend in.
"Just don't say anything," he warned his mother.
In a starched white shirt, dark business suit and grave tone, Clinton read his statement from double-spaced pages of large type: "Today, I ordered our armed forces to strike at terrorist-related facilities in Afghanistan and Sudan."
No one asked about Ms. Lewinsky.
The United States had struck back, the president said, at terrorists believed to be responsible for the Aug. 7 bombings at U.S. embassies in East Africa.
A split-second later, back in Washington, a reporter's phone rang. Without announcing himself, a snickering White House official offered, "Robert DeNiro as Harry Thomason!"
In "Wag the Dog," DeNiro's character scripts a foreign crisis to distract attention from the president's sex scandal. Thomason is the TV producer helping Clinton in his responses to the unfolding Lewinsky investigation.
Clinton reboarded his motorcade, headed to Air Force One and back to the White House. Thirteen days after the bombings, three days after he confessed to the nation an affair with Ms. Lewinsky, the president wanted to speak to the nation from the Oval Office.
"Is this for real? Can you imagine?" asked Sandy Chaffee.
"It was kind of like the movie, 'Wag the Dog,"' Brad said. He'd just watched it on video the night before.
Clinton "just walks in right after he announces the scandals and says we're attacking a terrorist base."
After the commotion quieted, Barbara Kajdi, 55, tiptoed to the podium and posed for a snapshot.
"The real news is, I retired!" the Baltimore teacher said into the microphone where Clinton had just spoken.
"Resigned?" a reporter shot back.
"No, just retired," she laughed.
 Load-Date: August 20, 1998

 

End of Document
