

1999 YEAR IN REVIEW; For 1999, a roll call of those who left the world stage
The Associated Press
December 23, 1999, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 2688 words
Byline: By POLLY ANDERSON, Associated Press Writer
Body




We got to know John F. Kennedy Jr. as a toddler, romping in the White House and saluting his father's coffin as the nation mourned.
John-John grew into a handsome man, trying to remain friendly and unassuming, seemingly at odds with wealth and celebrity. He was 38 and piloting his private plane when it went down on a summer night off Martha's Vineyard.
We got to know Joe DiMaggio in his prime, when his grace and power on the baseball field made him an idol. His 56-game hitting streak for the New York Yankees in the summer of '41 set a record that became one of the game's most enduring. His 1954 marriage to Marilyn Monroe didn't last but added to his legend.
DiMaggio also left us this year, after a private battle with cancer. His reticence, obvious at the height of fame, reinforced the quiet of his later years.
Among others:
John Minor Wisdom, Frank M. Johnson Jr. and W. Arthur Garrity Jr., three judges who issued landmark rulings on the issue of racial segregation, and Harry A. Blackmun, who wrote the Supreme Court decision legalizing abortion.
Kings Hussein of Jordan and Hassan II of Morocco, who worked for peace in the Mideast and North Africa.
Paul Mellon, billionaire philanthropist who gave the nation the East Building of the National Gallery of Art.
Glenn Seaborg, who discovered plutonium and other elements, including one that bears his name.
Gene Sarazen, golfing great of the 1920s and '30s, and Payne Stewart, a star of the '90s, whose trademark knickers on the course linked their eras.
Here, a roll call of some of the figures who left their mark:
 
---
 
JANUARY:
 
Jerry Quarry, 53. Popular heavyweight boxer who fought Muhammad Ali and Floyd Patterson as a top contender in the '60s and '70s, later lapsing into a punch-drunk fog. Jan. 3. Pneumonia, boxing-caused dementia.
Carl Elliott, 85. Alabama Democrat who served eight terms in Congress and won a John F. Kennedy Profile in Courage Award for advocacy of education aid and moderate stand on race during segregation days. Jan. 9.
Edgar Nollner Sr., 94. Last survivor of 1925 dog-team relay carrying diphtheria serum to Nome, Alaska, a run that inspired the Iditarod race. Jan. 18.
Susan Strasberg, 60. Actress daughter of acting coach Lee Strasberg; played Anne Frank on Broadway. Jan. 21. Cancer.
Charles Brown, 76. Pianist, singer and composer whose "cool blues" style influenced such artists as Ray Charles. Jan. 21.
Cecil Smith, 94. The "Babe Ruth of polo" who over six decades won nearly every award in the sport. Jan. 21.
Robert Shaw, 82. Raised the art of choral conducting to new heights as leader of the Robert Shaw Chorale. Jan. 25.
Sarah Delany, 109. Sister of Bessie and co-author of "Having Our Say: The Delany Sisters' First 100 Years," a best-selling memoir on growing up black in pre-civil rights era. Jan. 25.
Charles Luckman, 89. Industrialist and architect who helped design New York's Madison Square Garden and several Los Angeles landmarks. Jan. 26.
 
---
 
FEBRUARY:
 
Paul Mellon, 91. Billionaire philanthropist of the arts; also set up Cape Hatteras (N.C.) National Seashore. Feb. 1.
King Hussein of Jordan, 63. Grew from boy king to elder statesman, a symbol of endurance and a voice for peace in a landscape of crisis and war. Feb. 7. Cancer.
Dame Iris Murdoch, 79. Modern British novelist admired for works such as "A Severed Head" and "The Black Prince." Feb. 8.
John D. Ehrlichman, 73. President Nixon's domestic affairs adviser imprisoned for 18 months for his role in the Watergate conspiracy. Feb. 14.
Curtis Carlson, 84. Minnesota businessman took a $55 loan during the Great Depression and built it into the giant Carlson Companies Inc. Feb. 19.
Gene Siskel, 53. Film critic shared thumbs-up, thumbs-down reviews and banter with Roger Ebert on their TV show. Feb. 20. Complications of brain surgery.
Andre Dubus, 62. Short-story writer acclaimed for collections such as "Dancing After Hours." Feb. 24.
Glenn Seaborg, 86. Nobel Prize-winning chemist who discovered 10 atomic elements including plutonium and seaborgium. Feb. 25.
Jose Quintero, 74. Tony Award-winning director whose landmark productions of "Long Day's Journey into Night" and other dramas renewed interest American playwright Eugene O'Neill. Feb. 26.
John L. Goldwater, 83. Creator of comic book characters Archie, the red-haired, average teen-ager, and his friends Jughead, Betty and Veronica. Feb. 26.
---
 
MARCH:
 
Dusty Springfield, 59. Husky-voiced soul singer of '60s with such hits as "Son of a Preacher Man." March 2. Breast cancer.
Harry A. Blackmun, 90. Retired Supreme Court justice wrote the 1973 decision that legalized abortion nationwide. March 4.
Stanley Kubrick, 70. Visionary cinema craftsman whose films such as "Dr. Strangelove" and "A Clockwork Orange" often reflected life's despairs. March 7.
Joe DiMaggio, 84. Made the spectacular look easy and captivated the nation as dignified star of marquee New York Yankees during baseball's golden era. March 8.
Yehudi Menuhin, 82. His youthful virtuosity as a violinist grew into one of the great musical talents of the century. March 12.
Garson Kanin, 86. Prolific playwright who created the classic "Born Yesterday" for stage and screen. March 13.
Harry Callahan, 86. His photos of the ordinary made him one of the most influential photographers of the century. March 15.
Joe Williams, 80. Grammy winner who sang with every great jazz artist of the past half-century. March 29.
---
 
APRIL:
 
Lionel Bart, 68. British lyricist and composer and creator of "Oliver!" and other musicals. April 3. Cancer.
Early Wynn, 79. Fiercely competitive pitcher whose 300 wins, including five seasons with 20 or more, put him into Baseball Hall of Fame. April 4.
Charlie Whittingham, 86. Hall of Fame thoroughbred trainer who sent Ferdinand and Sunday Silence to Kentucky Derby victories in the 1980s. April 20.
Senor Wences, 103. Master ventriloquist known to TV audiences for comic Spanish accent of his puppet-in-a-box Pedro and his falsetto-voiced hand puppet Johnny. April 20.
Charles "Buddy" Rogers, 94. Star of 1927 movie "Wings," the first to win best-picture Oscar; widower of screen legend Mary Pickford. April 21.
Roman Hruska, 94. Conservative Republican and former Nebraska senator whose career was overshadowed by his comment that mediocre judges "are entitled to a little representation" on the Supreme Court. April 25.
Al Hirt, 76. "King of the Trumpet" in the 1960s who won a Grammy for his hit "Java." April 27.
Rory Calhoun,76. Stalwart hero of Western movies and the TV series "The Texan." April 28.
 
---
 
MAY:
 
Oliver Reed, 61. British actor who played fearsome Bill Sikes in the 1968 musical "Oliver!" May 2. Apparent heart attack.
Leon Hess, 85. Oil tycoon and owner of pro football's New York Jets. May 7.
Sir Dirk Bogarde, 78. British star of more than 70 films, achieving his greatest fame in "Death in Venice." May 8.
Shel Silverstein, 66. Author and illustrator of children's books such as "A Light in the Attic" and "Where the Sidewalk Ends." May 10. Heart attack.
Saul Steinberg, 84. Creator of hundreds of drawings for The New Yorker, including one of how the world looks to New Yorkers. May 12.
Meg Greenfield, 68. Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist who ran the editorial page at The Washington Post for 20 years. May 13. Lung cancer.
Gene Sarazen, 97. Elegant, knickers-clad "Squire" of golf in the 1920s and '30s was one of only four men to win golf's four major titles. May 13.
John Minor Wisdom, 93. Last survivor of federal appeals court that forced the Deep South to end segregation. May 15.
 
---
 
JUNE:
 
Mel Torme, 73. Singer of jazz and pop known as "the Velvet Fog" for his warm vocals; co-writer of "The Christmas Song." June 5.
DeForest Kelley, 79. Crusty Dr. Leonard "Bones" McCoy on "Star Trek" who told fellow space travelers, "I'm just a country doctor!" June 11.
Clifton Fadiman, 95. Radio host of "Information Please"; shaped America's reading habits as senior judge for Book-of-the-Month Club. June 20.
Sir John Woolf, 86. British producer who brought "The African Queen" and "Oliver!" to the screen. June 28.
Allan Carr, 62. Produced "Grease" the movie and won a 1984 Tony award for producing "La Cage aux Folles" on Broadway. June 29. Cancer.
 
---
 
JULY:
 
Edward Dmytryk, 90. Directed films such as "The Caine Mutiny" and went to prison as member of the Hollywood Ten during 1940s anti-Communist hysteria. July 1.
Joshua Nkomo, 82. Father of Zimbabwe's fight for independence from white colonial rule, known to supporters as "the old lion." July 1.
Sylvia Sidney, 88. Waiflike star of the 1930s nominated in 1973 for comeback role in "Summer Wishes, Winter Dreams." July 1.
Forrest Mars Sr., 95. Created M&Ms candies and built one of the biggest fortunes in America as head of the Mars candy empire. July 1.
Mario Puzo, 78. Romanticized the Mafia as the fiercely loyal Corleone family in "The Godfather" novel and subsequent Oscar-winning screenplays from it. July 2.
Pete Conrad, 69. Apollo 12 astronaut and third man to walk on the moon, shouting "Whoopee!" as he hopped onto its dusty surface. July 8. Motorcycle accident.
James S. Farmer, 79. Co-founder of Congress of Racial Equality who served alongside Martin Luther King Jr. and other civil rights giants of the 1950s and '60s. July 9.
Rep. George E. Brown Jr., 79. California Democrat and oldest member of the House; championed technological issues ranging from space race to the Internet. July 15.
John F. Kennedy Jr., 38. Affable, athletic and handsome heir to Camelot who forged a life apart from the traditional politics and scandals that drew in much of his family. July 16. Private plane crash that also killed wife Carolyn Bessette Kennedy, 33, and sister-in-law Lauren Bessette, 34.
David Ogilvy, 88. Master ad man who put eye-patch on the Man in the Hathaway Shirt and created the distinguished Commander Whitehead to pitch "Schweppervescent" mixers. July 21.
King Hassan II of Morocco, 70. Ignored regional taboos to help forge Mideast peace and ruled his North African country for 38 years. July 23.
Frank M. Johnson Jr., 80. Federal judge who issued key rulings that helped bring down racial barriers in the South and improved treatment of prisoners and mental patients. July 23.
Anita Carter, 66. Featured performer with country music's legendary Carter Sisters. July 29.
 
---
 
AUGUST:
 
Willie Morris, 64. Former editor of Harper's magazine and one of Mississippi's most treasured writers of Delta stories from his childhood. Aug. 2. Heart attack.
Victor Mature, 86. Handsome, brawny movie star of the 1940s and '50s who played Samson in "Samson and Delilah" and Doc Holliday in John Ford's "My Darling Clementine." Aug. 4.
Pee Wee Reese, 81. Hall of Fame shortstop and Brooklyn Dodgers captain who smoothed Jackie Robinson's entry into major league baseball. Aug. 14.
Lane Kirkland, 77. Reunited major labor unions during presidency of AFL-CIO and was hailed by President Clinton as "one of the towering figures in the American labor movement." Aug. 14.
Leo Castelli, 91. One of the world's most influential art dealers who fostered careers of such painters as Robert Rauschenberg and Jasper Johns. Aug. 22.
 
---
 
SEPTEMBER:
 
Allen Funt, 84. TV prankster-host of "Candid Camera." Sept. 5.
Herbert Stein, 83. Economist and chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, was key in shaping President Nixon's economic policies. Sept. 8.
Jim "Catfish" Hunter, 53. Former New York Yankees pitcher with five 20-game seasons, one perfect game and a Cy Young Award; became baseball's first big-money free agent. Sept. 9. Lou Gehrig's disease.
W. Arthur Garrity Jr., 79. Federal judge whose 1974 order to desegregate Boston schools led to rioting and racial turmoil and resentment that lingered a quarter-century later. Sept. 16.
Raisa Gorbachev, 67. Stylish and outspoken wife of the last Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev. Sept. 20. Leukemia.
George C. Scott, 71. Actor whose eagle profile and gravel-voiced air brought new life to Gen. George S. Patton and earned him an Oscar he refused to accept. Sept. 22.
Judith Campbell Exner, 65. A reputed presidential mistress who claimed to have ferried messages between John F. Kennedy and Mafia boss Sam Giancana. Sept. 24. Breast cancer.
Oseola McCarty, 91. Frugal washwoman who donated her $150,000 savings to the University of Southern Mississippi. Sept. 26.
 
---
 
OCTOBER:
 
Ted Arison, 75. Billionaire founder of Carnival Cruise Lines and an original partner in pro basketball's Miami Heat. Oct. 1.
Akio Morita, 89. Co-founder of Sony Corp. who helped give new meaning to the words "Made in Japan." Oct. 3.
Martin S. Davis, 72. Reshaped Gulf & Western conglomerate into Paramount Communications, a publishing and entertainment powerhouse. Oct. 4.
The Rev. Bruce Ritter, 72. Roman Catholic priest founded Covenant House shelters for homeless teens then resigned amid a sex scandal. Oct. 7.
Wilt "The Stilt" Chamberlain, 63. NBA's second-leading scorer and leading rebounder who so dominated pro basketball that the league changed its rules. Oct. 12. Heart failure.
James Elliott Williams, 68. One of the nation's most decorated Vietnam War heroes. Oct. 13.
Julius Nyerere, 77. Tanzania's first president and a universally revered elder statesman instrumental in efforts to forge African unity. Oct. 14.
Jean Shepherd, 78. His easy storytelling style on radio and in the film "A Christmas Story" earned comparisons to Mark Twain. Oct. 16.
John Chafee, 77. Longtime senator from Rhode Island who stood for moderation and environmental protection as other Republicans moved to the right. Oct. 24.
Payne Stewart, 42. Pro golfer with trademark knickers and tam-o'-shanter cap and two U.S. Open titles. Oct. 25. Airplane crash.
---
 
NOVEMBER:
 
Walter Payton, 45. Former Chicago Bears running back and leading rusher in NFL history. Nov. 1. Bile duct cancer.
Daisy Bates, 84. Civil rights leader who helped nine black students break color barrier at Little Rock Central High School in 1957. Nov. 4.
Primo Nebiolo, 76. Longtime head of International Amateur Athletic Federation who built track and field into a commercial empire. Nov. 7.
Jacobo Timerman, 76. Argentine journalist who defied ruling military junta and wrote about his brutal treatment as a political prisoner in the 1970s. Nov. 11.
Alfred Gwynne Vanderbilt, 87. Descendent of railroad baron Cornelius Vanderbilt and a thoroughbred racing fixture for six decades. Nov. 12.
Donald Mills, 84. Last of the singing Mills Brothers who broke racial barriers in radio, film and society. Nov. 13.
Paul Bowles, 88. American author and composer best known for "The Sheltering Sky" and other novels set in North Africa. Nov. 18.
Horst P. Horst, 93. Photographer of the famous, including Harry Truman, Marlene Dietrich and Maria Callas. Nov. 18.
Quentin Crisp, 90. Eccentric British-born writer, performer and raconteur best-known for his autobiography "The Naked Civil Servant." Nov. 21.
 
---
 
DECEMBER:
 
Edmond Safra, 67. Billionaire founder of the Republic National Bank of New York. Dec. 3. Arson fire in Monaco.
Madeline Kahn, 57. Oscar-nominated actress-comedian best known for daffy and lusty characters in "Paper Moon" and Mel Brooks farces such as "Blazing Saddles." Dec. 3. Ovarian cancer.
Rose Bird, 63. First woman on California's Supreme Court, whose opposition to the death penalty led voters to remove her as chief justice. Dec. 4. Breast cancer.
Robert A. Swanson, 52. Co-founder of Genentech Inc. and pioneer in biotechnology industry. Dec. 6. Brain cancer.
Rick Danko, 56. Country boy from Canada who helped shape American rock 'n' roll as a bass player and singer with The Band. Dec. 10.
Peter La Haye Sr. 59. Millionaire inventor of implantable lenses for cataract patients and other eye-saving products. Dec. 12. Private plane crash.
Joseph Heller, 76. His darkly comic first novel "Catch-22" defined the paradox of the no-win dilemma and added a phrase to the American language. Dec. 12.
C. Vann Woodward, 91. Pulitzer Prize-winning historian whose works such as "The Strange Career of Jim Crow" shaped America's understanding of the South. Dec. 17.
Hank Snow, 85. Country music legend for his gaudy rhinestone suits and million-selling classics like "I'm Movin' On." Dec. 20.
End Adv for Immediate Release
 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY471-472 of Dec. 15
 Load-Date: December 24, 1999

 

End of Document
