

78 children, many women among the dead in Uganda
The Associated Press
March 20, 2000, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 765 words
Byline: By ANDREW ENGLAND, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KAMPALA, Uganda
Body




Prisoners dug a long trench Monday and a bulldozer shoveled charred corpses into a common grave, the final resting place for hundreds of members of a religious cult led by a former prostitute.
Most of the victims apparently were women, and police counted the bodies of 78 children, the interior minister said. He put the total number of dead at 330.
"These are the ones we could count," Interior Minister Edward Rugumayo said. "The others are unrecognizable."
Rugumayo spoke to reporters in Kampala after inspecting the burned hulk of the church hall just outside Kanungu, 215 miles southwest of the Ugandan capital. He said that in addition to the 330 bodies found after Friday's fire in the church, five bodies were spotted through a hole in a nearby pit latrine.
Rugumayo said police were sure there were more bodies in the latrine, a walled, communal structure common in African villages, but were awaiting digging equipment to excavate the pit. He did not offer an explanation of how or when the bodies got into the latrine.
Official estimates of the number of deaths have varied between 235 and 600. On Monday, bodies were shoveled into a long trench dug by inmates, but it did not appear that officials were counting victims.
"What emerges out of all this," Rugumayo said of the sect, "is that the authorities never suspected anything."
He said the 10-year-old Christian sect, known as the Movement for the Restoration of the Ten Commandments of God, was founded by Cledonia Mwerinde, a former prostitute who had the chapel built on the grave of her father. The sect had about 1,000 members in nine districts in Uganda and was legally registered as a nongovernmental organization.
"There are still sect members out in other districts, and they are being pursued," Rugumayo said. "We're going to close down all the branches of this sect and are going to be more vigilant about NGO-registration in the future," he said. "But we can't stop freedom of worship."
Details about the sect were sparse.
Police had earlier identified the five primary leaders as the 40-year-old Mwerinde; Joseph Kibweteere, 68, also known as "The Prophet;" and former Roman Catholic priests Dominic Kataribabo, 32, Joseph Kasapurari, 39, and John Kamagara, 69.
Local Roman Catholic Church officials have not spoken about the fire and deaths; officials said all local bishops are away on a retreat. The press office of the Vatican said Monday it had no information and no comment about the reports that some sect leaders had been priests.
Police said earlier Monday that the five main leaders - including Mwerinde, whom her followers called "the one who has had a vision" - all died. But Rugamayo said later that only two leaders' bodies had been positively identified - the manager of the sect's farm and "a priest."
There was no explanation for the discrepancy.
Gerard Banura, a professor of theology at Kampala's Makerere University, said the group was an offshoot of the Roman Catholic Church.
"The whole thing centered around worship because these were people who were very uncomfortable with the way worship was being carried out by the church," he said.
Following the fire, people who lived near the compound told police and reporters that sect members had told them about a sighting of the Virgin Mary and that something big was going to happen. Kibweteere had reportedly predicted the world would end on Dec. 31. When that didn't happen, he moved the date up to Dec. 31, 2000.
Syncretic Christian religious sects are mushrooming across Africa as many people become disillusioned with the inability of politicians to improve their lives.
Sect members insisted on receiving Holy Communion on their knees rather than standing and refused to speak for fear of breaking commandments. But they did sing and pray aloud.
President Yoweri Museveni warned the nation's religious leaders against those who might endanger the lives of the unsuspecting.
The government "believes in the freedom of worship. It also has a duty to protect the lives of the people of Uganda … and to ensure that Ugandans are not at the mercy of some dangerous and opportunistic individuals who parade themselves as religious leaders," a statement from Museveni's office said.
Dr. Florence Baingana, a psychiatrist in the Ministry of Health, said fears about what would happen in the year 2000 and grinding poverty have fueled religious sects in Uganda.
"People have these gaps in their lives, spiritual gaps, and they look for different ways of filling them like joining cults," she said. "Our history has made us more vulnerable because life has been very hard."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos ENT101-102, AP Graphic UGANDA
 Load-Date: March 21, 2000

 

End of Document
