

A busy, looping pathway across the sea
The Associated Press
November 1, 1999, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 558 words
Byline: By CALVIN WOODWARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




It looks like an improbable loop on a flat map - the United States to Egypt by way of Newfoundland. But the North Atlantic path where Flight 990 met its end is a superhighway of the skies.
Along with vast stretches of ocean, the ever-shifting corridor takes in small places most people don't think about until an airline disaster forces attention on them - places like Nantucket, the rocky shore of Nova Scotia, Gander in Newfoundland, Lockerbie in Scotland.
The EgyptAir 767 that crashed Sunday was, in Earthbound terms, on a principal onramp to the transoceanic highway.
The jetliner was about 30 minutes into the leg from New York to a zone where North American feeder routes converge into a collection of pathways - known as tracks - across the sea.
It was on that leg that Paris-bound TWA Flight 800 went down off Long Island, N.Y., in July 1996, killing all 230 on board shortly after takeoff from New York. In September 1998, Swissair Flight 111 crashed off Nova Scotia en route from New York to Geneva with the loss of all 229 people.
John F. Kennedy Jr.'s small plane plunged into the sea off Martha's Vineyard in the same region where searchers now comb the waters for the bodies and debris of Flight 990.
The Federal Aviation Administration's Air Route Traffic Control Center in New York handles 700 to 1,100 oceanic flights a day - a job it shares in the western Atlantic with Canadian officials in Gander. About a third are flights to and from Europe from continental North America.
Typically, the bulk of flights from the northern United States down to its midsection will sweep up along the Nova Scotia coast or farther north to Newfoundland en route to Europe or northern Africa.
That was the prevailing route in the early hours of Sunday when Flight 990 went down.
Although officials have not discussed the plane's precise course for the flight, five of the six eastbound trans-Atlantic tracks that night were on a northerly course managed by Gander.
It was at Gander where 256 people died when an Arrow Air charter carrying U.S. soldiers home to Kentucky from Cairo crashed upon takeoff after a refueling stop in 1985.
A course from North America to Europe over the skies of Canada's Atlantic provinces is known by navigators as a "great circle route," an arc that is the shortest distance between two points.
"If you took a string and laid it on an actual globe, it would be a direct route," said TWA dispatcher Marc Brodbeck. Maps that don't account for the Earth's curvature make those routes look meandering.
Still, the jet stream varies so much, and is so important to flight time and fuel efficiency, that routes differ by the day and responsibility for managing trans-Atlantic tracks shifts between New York and Gander.
If Flight 990's route was typical, the timing of its distress was not.
Cruise flight - the level phase between takeoff and landing when even nervous fliers relax a bit - is normally the safest stage of a trip, a safety analysis last year found.
Looking at fatal accidents and lost planes over 10 years, the Boeing Co. found that the flight phase accounted for 57 percent of air time, yet only 9 percent of the accidents.
Final approach and landing accounted for 4 percent of the flight time, yet 47 percent of the accidents. Takeoff and initial climb made up 2 percent of the flight time, but 21 percent of the accidents.
 Graphic



 
AP GRAPHIC Corridor-Crashes
 Load-Date: November 2, 1999

 

End of Document
