

A canoe trip down the Zambezi puts you close to the hippos
The Associated Press
June 8, 1998, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 606 words
Byline: By KAREN SCHWARTZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MANA POOLS NATIONAL PARK, Zimbabwe
Body




The day can start cool and mysterious on the Zambezi River before the sun has a chance to burn off the morning fog.
From the mist ahead of us came the "thwack" "thwack" "thwack" of our guide's paddle against the side of his canoe. This alerted the hippos ahead to our presence and let them move towards deeper water, where they watched with baleful eyes and twitching ears as we paddled past.
You don't want to surprise a hippo, or get between it and deep water. These were the two rules we were told before setting out on our 40-mile trip down the Zambezi River as it flows past Zimbabwe's Mana Pools National Park on the right, and Zambia on the left.
All the guide books warn that despite their rather comic appearance, hippos are responsible for more human deaths than any other animal in southern Africa. Fortunately, with rare exception, hippos are as delighted to avoid us as we are to avoid them. This is good, since our fiberglass, two-person canoe would afford little protection against the long tusk-like incisors of the two-ton beast.
So with this in mind, the three canoes set off down the broad slowly flowing river with our guide tap-tap-tapping our way, directing the route we were to take and pointing out the wildlife as we quietly moved past.
You can get much closer to many of the animals in a canoe than on foot or in a vehicle. The hippos for sure, but also elephants, Cape buffalo, water buck, and other game that come to the river's edge to drink and to play. Not to mention the crocodiles that bask in the sun along the banks, or skulk in the deep water just beyond the drop-offs waiting for an unsuspecting meal to venture too close to the edge.
And there were the birds. Egyptian geese flying in low formations, colorful bee-eaters darting into their nests carved into holes in the banks, stately fish-eagles perched atop trees, and numerous herons and storks of all types.
Evenings brought us to our camp sites, where a staff of four had already arrived to setup our tents and heat the water for showers. Dinner was served on china under the stars, with the sounds of the African night - punctuated by the honking call of the hippo - providing the music by which we dined.
This wasn't hard-core camping obviously, but even luxury camping in Africa does have it's moments. Such as finding a large, bull elephant standing squarely between you and the outhouse. This was a game of chicken I wasn't going to play.
Mana Pools is remote, and is accessible by car only part of the year. Mana means four, a reference to the four pools around park headquarters. Away from the water, it lacks the density of wildlife seen in the better known parks in Zimbabwe. But this part of the Zambezi Valley is still wonderfully wild, and should remain so since Mana Pools was named a World Heritage Site by UNESCO.
We finished the trip in three days, and the next morning had us climbing aboard a Land Rover for the bumpy 3.5-hour trip back to the Ruckomechi Camp where we had started.
That night was pure heaven. After watching the stars rise and joining the others at the resort for dinner, my husband and I were asked what time we wanted our bath. At the appointed time, an armed guard (the area has many lions) escorted us to a brightly painted concrete room, which had only three walls and a giant bathtub. The roof, like the fourth wall that would have closed off the Zambezi, was nonexistent. The water for our tub had been heated with a wood fire, candles had been lit and an open bottle of chilled wine left nearby.
It was the perfect end to the perfect trip. A moonlit soak in our water while we watched the hippos soak in theirs.
 Load-Date: June 8, 1998

 

End of Document
