

A new challenge for the world's women: the Internet
The Associated Press
June 8, 2000, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 603 words
Byline: By LISA SINGHANIA, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Expanding access to the Internet is crucial to improving the lives of women in the 21st century, advocates told a UN conference on women's rights.
"I will rank it as the No. 1 challenge because it brings information and the possibilities of education to women," said Gisele Yitamben, who heads ASAFE, a group that helps sub-Saharan African women develop businesses and obtain technical skills. "With the Internet, you have the possibility to reach out to many people."
Yitamben was one of several speakers Wednesday at "Let Everyone Play: Women Crossing the Digital Divide," a forum on the role of technology in women's lives.
Since the 1995 UN conference on women at Beijing, the role of technology in commerce and communications has grown exponentially, the speakers said. The problem: the growth has largely bypassed women and poor nations.
Nearly 90 percent of Internet use is concentrated in the industrialized world, which accounts for 15 percent of the global population, according to the United Nations. Most of those users are men: about 62 percent in the United States, three-quarters in Brazil, 93 percent in China and 96 percent in Arab states.
"In developing countries, almost all the computers and telephones are owned by men, so women have very little access, " said Sarah Murison of the United Nations Development Program on Gender, who ranks technological access as the third-most important issue facing women, after poverty and violence.
To that end, the United Nations is looking to the corporate world and non-profit community for help expanding opportunities.
At Wednesday's forum, Chell.com, a business incubator, said it was donating $40,000 to ASAFE, the sub-Saharan African women's group, to provide e-commerce capabilities to 3,000 African women entrepreneurs and artisans in Cameroon. Chief executive Cameron Chell told the audience the gift is a step to a possible business opportunity for him as well.
"Cameroon does have 15 million people. If we can demonstrate success there, then frankly there isn't anywhere it can't be done," he said.
Cisco Systems and the nonprofit Academy for Educational Development are working together to increase women's access to training and careers in computer networking in 10 countries, ranging from South Africa to Argentina.
"If we want to ensure women have a place at the table, we need to make sure they join the ranks of not only the technically literate, but the technically elite," Christine Hemrick, a Cisco vice president, told the group.
Internet access alone is not enough, the speakers cautioned. In many parts of the world, social customs may make it difficult for women to assume - or keep - a leadership role.
Richard Holbrooke, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, recalled how efforts three decades ago to share advanced agricultural technology with poor countries ended up in the hands of men, not women.
"It seems to me that new technologies are a chance for women to close the gap in the Third World, but there's also a danger. Who's going to control the mouse?" he said.
Murison, the United Nations staffer, described a situation where an African businesswoman lost her successful e-commerce business when the village elders decided to take it over.
Technology "has the potential to make the divide much worse but when it's properly managed it could make things better," she said. "But it's not greater than social structure. Those problems have to be resolved also."
---
 
On the Net:
http://www.un.org/womenwatch 
http://www.cisco.com 
http://www.chell.com 
ASAFE: http://www.networkedintelligence.com/asafe.html 
http://www.learningpartnership.org 
 
 Load-Date: June 9, 2000

 

End of Document
