

A new challenge in Mozambique: Distributing the aid
The Associated Press
March 6, 2000, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 757 words
Byline: By MIKE COHEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MAPUTO, Mozambique
Body




Tens of thousands of Mozambicans who managed to reach aid camps after surviving raging floods and days of being stranded in trees and on rooftops faced the challenge today of finding food and clean water.
An estimated 250,000 people were crowded into 72 makeshift camps, mostly in southern and central Mozambique, said Georgia Shaver, regional manager of the U.N. World Food Program. One hundred tons of food needed to be moved every day to feed those in the camps, Shaver said.
Aid workers reported they were running out of clean water, increasing the risk of cholera outbreaks. Cases of malaria were said to have tripled.
Ravenous and thirsty after being trapped for up to a week as floodwaters rose around them, survivors have scrambled for food and drinking water, sometimes fighting as aid workers struggled to distribute emergency supplies.
As floodwaters in the swollen Limpopo and Save rivers receded, relief efforts shifted Sunday from plucking survivors from harm's way to dispensing aid to the hundreds of thousands of desperate survivors, many of whom could be reached only by air.
The official death toll stood at 400 this afternoon and was expected to rise, said Antonio Mantose, spokesman for the Mozambican disaster management center. Aid workers said they expected the death toll to soar into the thousands as water levels dropped, revealing the mud-covered remains of the dead.
The Mozambique's national disaster center today said 950,000 of the country's 19 million people had been affected by the floods. The center said some 473,000 people will require food aid, and the remainder will require other forms of assistance.
South African, French, German and British helicopters began operations today to deliver food and other aid to the Limpopo River valley, 125 miles north of the capital, Maputo.
German planes and British boats conducted relief operations in the Save River valley, 500 miles farther north of the capital. U.S. and Spanish aircraft were expected to pitch in today or Tuesday.
South Africa has taken on most of the burden of rescuing stranded Mozambicans. Through Friday, its helicopter crews had snatched 12,142 people from swirling, muddy waters.
But after a slow, sometimes confused start, the international relief operation to the devastated southeast African nation appeared to be operating more smoothly. "I think we are really on course," Lindsey Davies of the World Food Program said today.
Even so, Mozambique's former first lady, Graca Machel, spoke bitterly of what many here say was the failure of the United States and other Western powers to provide aid quickly enough.
"It seems the world has no conscience when it comes to human life," said Machel, the wife of former South African President Nelson Mandela.
U.N. special envoy Ross Mountain defended the international response, but conceded: "Obviously we all wish that this could be done faster."
Mountain said many survivors were ignoring the pleas of aid workers and government officials and returning to flood-battered areas, raising the possibility they might need to be rescued again if heavy rains and flooding resume.
Cyclone Gloria, which together with a steady, three-week downpour caused the deluge, has been downgraded to a tropical storm. Still, remnants of the storm hovered over the Indian Ocean off the coast of Mozambique and were expected to bring more rain.
Up to 100 U.S. troops were at Hoedspruit air base in South Africa today to set up the $40 million U.S. relief mission dubbed "Operation Atlas Response," a U.S. military spokesman said.
Six U.S. military personnel were in Mozambique, and five Air Force planes loaded with relief supplies and equipment were expected to arrive at Hoedspruit later in the day, 1st Lt. Mike Naschen said by telephone from the air base.
President Joaquim Chissano said flood victims would need to be fed for at least 10 months - until they could grow new crops. He also said a minimum of $250 million would be needed for reconstruction and pleaded with Mozambique's creditors to forgive the country's foreign debt.
The flooding has destroyed one of Africa's fastest-growing economies. After abandoning socialism in 1989, Chissano won praise from international institutions and donors for selling off state-run companies and loosening foreign investment regulations.
Despite the economic progress, Mozambique has remained one of the continent's poorest countries, with half the population unemployed.
On the Net: Relief organizations: http://www.interaction.org 
World Food Program: http://www.wfp.org/index.htm 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos MMAP101,102,104
 Load-Date: March 7, 2000

 

End of Document
