

A Nigerian neighborhood, emptied of life, is left to the corpses
The Associated Press
February 28, 2000, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 934 words
Byline: By TIM SULLIVAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KADUNA, Nigeria
Body




At the little concrete restaurant, the scene is as it should be. Benches are pulled up in front of small wooden tables. Serving dishes are stacked in the back. A green-and-white sign hangs above the door, showing a crudely drawn knife and spoon laid across a bowl of stew.
But the Nache Food Restaurant doesn't belong here. It is an unsettling island of sanity. Everything around it is destroyed, testament to one neighborhood's apocalypse.
Nothing else escaped: the Primary Health Clinic, the Truth & Life Gospel Church, the shops that sold soap and candles, the homes. Kaduna's Rigasa neighborhood is in ruins - except, inexplicably, for this one restaurant whose wooden door, blowing in the afternoon breeze, opens onto Rigasa's nightmare.
A man's body lies in the street; pigs are eating his burned, bloated corpse.
On Feb. 21, the 5,000 residents of Rigasa, a working-class neighborhood on the edge of this northern city, saw their world explode when Christians and Muslims went to war. Across Kaduna, neighbors turned against neighbors, butchering men, burning buildings, forcing women and children to flee. At least 300 are dead, though some officials put the number at more than 2,000.
If any side "won" the war - ignited by a proposal to bring sharia, or Islamic law, to Kaduna state - it remains unclear. For Nigeria, though, the calls for sharia across the largely Muslim North, and the virulent Christian opposition, could become a nationwide disaster in a country already riven with ethnic and religious violence.
On Monday, soldiers were deployed to the eastern town of Aba, where Muslims were targeted in revenge attacks after the bodies of Christians were returned home from Kaduna.
A week after Kaduna's violence ended, Rigasa has been left to the corpses. The bodies in the streets are reminders of distrust twisted into obscene bigotry.
Who are these people? Who is the man without a head, sprawled next to a mortar and pestle where a woman once pounded yams? Who are the three men cut down in front of a clinic, two hanging off the building's patio, the other with a white plastic chair thrown over his head?
No one seems to know. Their corpses - 39 counted during one visit, though many more presumably rotting out of view - belong to people with no one to bury them.
It began during a Christian protest against sharia. Rigasa's residents, nearly all Christians, had gone downtown to join the demonstration. It quickly turned violent.
Within hours, fistfights escalated into gunbattles. Entire city blocks burned. People were doused with gasoline and set ablaze as Kaduna's Christians and Muslims battled one another.
In Rigasa, things were even worse. After fighting their way home though Muslim neighborhoods, Rigasa's Christians found themselves surrounded.
Hundreds of attackers moved in from surrounding neighborhoods. Then, said Caleb Zaka, an unemployed preacher, the looting, burning and slayings began.
People caught in the mob's path were killed, many beaten and then burned. Christian men were herded into groups and marched away; many never returned. Women and children were forced to their knees and ordered to chant "Allahu Akhbar!" or "God is great!"
But the fighting was not merely religious. The anger and distrust is linked to Nigeria's ethnic and geographic divisions: Muslims are overwhelmingly Hausas or Fulanis from the North, while most Christians are southerners of other ethnicities. All are united in a nation cobbled together by British colonizers.
Some also see sharia as a way for Hausa northerners to reassert their influence, which has waned since military rule ended last year.
Calls for sharia are cascading across northern Nigeria. It took effect last month in neighboring Zamfara state, which is overwhelmingly Muslim. And despite the violence in Kaduna, two more states passed sharia bills last week; others plan to follow.
In Rigasa, Muslims turned on Christians. But in Kaduna, plenty of Christians slaughtered Muslims, residents say.
What makes Rigasa different is that the army, fearful of a neighborhood off the main roads, has not taken full control. Days after the violence died down, it remains a vision of hatred gone wild.
Bodies are scattered in macabre anonymity - twisted, bloated and burned, eyes and lips eaten away by insects, skin peeling away in scaly white chunks. They lie splayed in sewage ditches or alone in empty lots. The yearly Harmattan wind blowing down from the Sahara has coated the town in a fine dust, leaving everything covered in shades of brown.
During the day, before Kaduna's 4 p.m. curfew takes effect, small groups of Christians wander the streets, many of them women looking for brothers, fathers, daughters, sons. After curfew, the neighborhood empties almost completely, still watched over by attackers who stare at visitors from a distance through the haze.
Harry Zango, a solemn, 20-year-old student, spent Sunday digging graves. "My brother," he says, pointing at a small mound of dirt. "He was the one we called Bala."
A moment later, Yusuf Abdullahi walked past. A Muslim, he shook his head and denounced the lack of policing. "It shows an absence of law and order - nothing but that," he said.
Perhaps. There are few phones for residents to call for help. And anyway, no one would come: Nigeria's police are notoriously ill-equipped and ill-trained. So the people of Risaga, both attackers and victims, made their own rules.
For some, the carnage, however appalling, brings hope. Perhaps the scale of butchery, they say, will make people stop.
"The Muslim people don't really want to fight us," Zango said. "They too are afraid."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos ABU102-107
 Load-Date: February 29, 2000

 

End of Document
