

Africans to Clinton: Invest in our future to atone for the past
The Associated Press
March 21, 1998, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 723 words
Byline: By IAN STEWART, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MONROVIA, Liberia
Body




Liberia still sways to gospel music brought by freed slaves from the American South. Ghana's dank slave castles overshadow the coastline's crashing surf. Goree Island, Senegal, has become a symbol of the evil of human bondage.
Slavery's legacy echoes across West Africa.
But in a region shackled by poverty and debt, the debate about whether America or any other nation should apologize for slavery is widely regarded as an intellectual luxury.
As Bill Clinton pays the first visit to sub-Saharan Africa by a U.S. president in more than 20 years, many Africans say they would rather have trade, aid, loans and debt relief than dwell on the sins of the distant past.
Despite calls by some U.S. civil rights campaigners, the White House says Clinton will not be issuing any apology for slavery in America, and most Africans seem to go along with that.
"There are more things that Africa needs from America than a mere apology," says human rights activist Kofi Woods of Liberia. "Practical actions by Washington will demonstrate to Africa and the Third World that America is ready to do away with the past."
Apart from financial help, some Africans look to Clinton to support the stop-and-start attempts at democracy on a continent long prone to military dictatorship, political violence and tribal genocide.
"He should preach to our leaders the need to uphold democracy and tolerate divergent views," says Joseph Mensah, a Ghana opposition politician.
While an apology for slavery may seem irrelevant to Africa today, the painful legacy is not forgotten.
There's Goree Island, where the enslaved people of West Africa were herded aboard disease-ridden boats to journey into servitude on the sugar and cotton plantations of the Americas.
In Ghana's coastal town of Elmina, dank stone castles rise along the coast. Built by Portuguese and Swedish traders in the 15th century, they became Dutch and British depots where human cargo was loaded onto ships.
Today Ghanaian officials are debating how to make the castles more attractive to tourists. A restoration project is under way, financed partly by a $ 10 million grant from the U.S. Agency for International Development.
A different sort of echo comes from Liberia, founded in the early 19th century as a homeland for repatriated slaves.
The Liberian president's house, called the Executive Mansion, stands on Capitol Hill in the capital, Monrovia. The city is named after James Monroe, the fifth U.S. president and head of the American Colonization Society that worked to return freed slaves to Africa.
Neighboring Sierra Leone, a former British colony, is also home to descendants of repatriated slaves.
But in neither case could the experiment be called a success. Both countries have become crumbling, looted wrecks, ravaged by civil war, corruption and avarice.
Some 10 million Africans were sold into slavery between the 1500s and 1800s, often bartered by their own tribal kings and chiefs to European traders for gunpowder, alcohol and mirrors.
"The scars of slavery are still there," said Kofi Siame, a writer and former diplomat from Ghana.
Apart from trade and aid, the United States owes West Africa restitution, he says.
Senegal's Bernard Founou-Tchuigoua, research director for the African office of Third World Forum, a think tank, sees Clinton's visit to South Africa, Uganda, Senegal, Ghana, Botswana and Rwanda as a chance to correct "the rather vague relationship which has existed between Africa and the United States since the slave trade era."
Through the years, Africa's natural wealth - minerals, oil, gems and gold - has been lost to colonial greed, squandered on war and pilfered by corrupt officialdom.
Most West African countries are mired in trade imbalances and foreign debt. Ghana owes $ 5.6 billion - about four times its annual government revenues, according to the African Development Bank. The debt keeps growing at about 7 percent per year, while revenues are virtually static.
"America should focus attention on bringing investment to Africa," says Kwame Awakye, a mechanical engineer from Ghana's capital, Accra.
"They are the ones who decide what we should receive for our cocoa and gold. They dictate and impose financial policy and budgets on us."
Senegal owes $ 3.8 billion in foreign debt, while Sierra Leone's deputy finance minister last month declared his country was broke.
 Load-Date: March 21, 1998

 

End of Document
