

Africans work on learning to keep the peace at home
May 25, 1997, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 1110 words
Byline: By ANGUS SHAW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NYANGA, Zimbabwe
Body




It's only an exercise. But the bodies lying at each end of the bridge look real enough, and the goal is deadly serious - training African soldiers to keep the peace in their continent's hot spots.
In the carefully scripted practice, peacekeepers stand guard at the bridge, keeping watch over rival militiamen waiting nervously to swap their dead as the first step toward a peace accord.
The atmosphere is tense, and anything unexpected could trigger a firefight. The trainees are being taught how to keep the parties calm while dealing with the unforeseen, such as the U.N. helicopter that suddenly approaches. A quick shout into a walkie-talkie, and the aircraft veers away.
"We had to tell the pilot to turn sharply away. That could have spoiled everything," says Col. Tony Potter of Britain, one of the trainers.
The recent Exercise "Blue Hungwe" (Blue Eagle) in the mountainous bush of eastern Zimbabwe was the first attempt to train African armies in joint peacekeeping operations. Organized by Britain and Zimbabwe, it brought together 1,400 soldiers from 10 African countries.
The idea is simple: Wealthy industrial nations pay for and train a force of African soldiers capable of responding quickly and acceptably across the continent.
That is consistent with calls by African leaders like South African President Nelson Mandela for "African solutions to African problems." They want to show the world Africa can police itself and be a partner in creating stability.
It also would help Western powers avoid a repeat of missions such as Somalia, where a two-year, $ 2 billion peacekeeping operation resulted in the deaths of more than 100 U.N. soldiers and no resolution of the clan feuding.
The two-week Blue Hungwe exercise gave participants a taste of the complexities that have stymied other international efforts in Africa.
For example, the body exchange, supervised by Red Cross officials with hand-held radios, was intended to establish contact between the belligerents as a prelude to a hoped-for prisoner swap and peace talks. Details were exact, down to ketchup-like paint smeared on the "corpses."
"It's a moment of trust between the two parties. The peacekeepers are here to stop any treacherous event and provide neutral pallbearers," said Dominic Dufour of the Geneva-based International Red Cross. "It has been absolutely realistic."
While African contingents have joined Western-led U.N. operations in Africa, such as in Somalia, the idea for predominantly African intervention has arisen only in recent years.
The switch in emphasis came after Somalia, where racial scandal tainted Canadian and Belgian troops and American units were bloodied.
"They don't want to see body bags. They don't want to see white soldiers putting down blacks in Africa or be accused of racism. It makes sense to train Africans to do the job," said Michael Guerra-Quintana, an international defense consultant.
But, he concedes, it may not be easy.
While impoverished African governments have never been shy to accept money from the West, they would insist on total command and control of any military operation without outside interference.
"They don't want to be seen as stooges," Guerra-Quintana said. "And that's going to present problems to paymasters who will inevitably want some say," fearing failures like those that bedeviled the peacekeeping force formed by West African nations to deal with Liberia's civil war.
Analysts say the West African force had several problems: a fractured command structure dominated by Nigeria, lack of unity and discipline, vague objectives, political rivalries that led to favoritism for certain Liberian factions, corruption and looting.
Africa's notoriously slow bureaucracy also could be a problem. Reaching consensus among governments is a long process that often ends in compromise, half-measures and even inaction.
"We have seen crisis summits every few months that don't achieve much at all. Even if some will was there, we have seen no relevant African military intervention in major African theaters," Guerra-Quintana said.
American military officers have a different spin, and they don't rule out active participation by Western troops.
Col. David McCracken, commander of the 3rd Special Forces Group at Fort Bragg, N.C., said the United States had no intention of paying for or creating a costly, unmanageable African intervention army.
Instead, it wants to train 10 African battalions across the continent over the next five years and have them participate in two annual combined exercises with American forces.
McCracken says such troops trained in common tactics would give African nations the ability to decide whether to commit to a specific crisis under United Nations or regional mandates.
U.S. troops could even be deployed again on African soil, he said.
"Instead of mobilizing three U.S. battalions to a crisis site, we'd take only one to work with two African battalions we trained with and understand," McCracken said.
That seems a long way off, especially with hostilities continuing in Zaire and Sudan and instability rife in Burundi, Algeria and other spots.
South Africa, the region's strongest military power, has so far stayed out of peacekeeping missions. Just three years after its first all-race elections, apartheid-era guerrillas are still being integrated into the army, and troops also are assisting civilian police.
"Of course, it is up to the politicians, but the military view is we're nowhere near ready to commit ourselves," said Col. Chris du Toit, who commanded 300 South African soldiers sent to Nyanga for the exercise.
The shadow of expensive peacekeeping failures across Africa lingers.
Aside from Somalia, U.N. missions in Angola and Rwanda were either under strength or underestimated their task, said Mark Malan, a senior researcher for a South African strategic studies think tank.
While U.N. troops provided security during two-year transitions from civil war to a peaceful election in Mozambique and the installation of a unity government in Angola, the costs were high and the delays frequent. Angola cost an estimated $ 1 million a day.
"When there is no articulated doctrine of how to intervene forcefully, the tendency is to stand back," Malan said. "Perhaps regional organizations could determine how to wield a bigger stick."
Brig. Adrian Naughton, head of British military trainers in Zimbabwe, believes there now is a chance for armies to overcome their colonial histories and lack of cooperation.
"Yes, I agree Africa couldn't stop Angola or Rwanda, but it did put out bush fires like the small mutiny here and there," Naughton said. "Maybe we're now at a very early stage of the turning point."
 Load-Date: May 26, 1997

 

End of Document
