

After the Beef War, European Union Business Slows to Normal
June 23, 1996, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 614 words
Byline: 105-6, By PAUL AMES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: FLORENCE, Italy
Body




The European Union on Saturday failed to agree on a plan to fight high unemployment in Europe, but the world largest trading bloc did announce its opposition to U.S. efforts to punish foreign companies that do business in Cuba, Iran and Libya.
The Florence summit, a two-day gathering of presidents and prime ministers from 15 European nations, started out strong as leaders finalized a deal to end the three-month crisis over mad cow disease.
And they wrapping up the summit expressing "deep concern" over the Burton-Helms Act aimed at Cuba and pending legislation that would punish Iran and Libya.
The United States accuses the latter two nations of sponsoring terrorism.
The EU "asserts its right and intention to react in defense of … (its) interest in respect to" the laws, said a final statement issued at the community's summit here. But it took no action.
The Burton-Helms Act allows Americans to sue foreign companies that do business in Cuba. It also would deny U.S. visas to employees of foreign companies active on the Communist island nation.
The White House supports similar legislation pending in Congress that is aimed at Libya and Iran.
EU officials are fuming over the notion that a European company can be taken to court in the United States because of business they transact in Cuba. The Europeans contend that the United States is attempting to impose its policy on them unilaterally through such "secondary boycotts."
The agreement to phase out a ban on British beef exports - imposed after London announced a possible link between the fatal bovine disease and a fatal human malady - persuaded British Prime Minister John Major to stop blocking EU decisions requiring unanimous approval.
Still, any hopes that European harmony would follow proved premature.
Hours after the mad cow deal was sealed, Britain again stood alone over plans to set up a pan-European police unit. A compromise was reached that allows the Europol force to start up but exempts Britain from key provisions.
A plan to put some of Europe's 18 million unemployed to work with a $ 1.5 billion public works package was pushed off for further study by Britain, Germany and the Netherlands.
"In Florence, the European Council took note of lots of things, but decided little," said Klaus Haensch, president of the European Union's parliament.
German Chancellor Helmut Kohl appeared unfazed by the lack of progress: "In Europe we go forward step-by-step, not by giant strides."
Other officials wearily acknowledged Britain's acrimonious beef war had left everyone with a hangover.
"Because of the crisis over the mad cow disease, there's need for a new impetus and new momentum in the European family," Irish Foreign Minister Dick Spring said.
Ireland, which takes over the EU presidency from Italy on July 1, has called a special European summit for October to carry on work left undone during the mad cow stalemate. But Irish Prime Minister John Bruton downplayed the meeting: "We'll only talk about … reaching a better understanding."
European leaders are trying to revamp the Union's founding treaty to tie members closer together and streamline decision-making procedures before bringing in new members from eastern Europe.
Membership talks with the leading group of candidates - expected to include Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Cyprus and Malta - would begin within six months of the overhaul.
As usual, leaders of former Communist candidate nations were invited for the second day of the twice-yearly summit. But there was little indication of when they might be allowed to join.
"Today brought us closer to the EU - by just one day," Hungarian Foreign Minister Lazlo Kovacs told The Associated Press.
 Load-Date: June 23, 1996

 

End of Document
