

After the terror, the relief of evacuation - and the sorrow of being left
May 30, 1997, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 888 words
Byline: By CLARENCE ROY-MACAULAY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: FREETOWN, Sierra Leone
Body




While looters carried off TVs and mutineering soldiers careened around in trucks, U.S. helicopters swooped into the chaos Friday to save the lucky - and leave the unlucky behind.
For about 900 Americans and other foreigners who clambered aboard the helicopters at a downtown hotel, the operation meant the safety of an American warship.
But hundreds more would-be evacuees were left in a city still in turmoil from Sunday's bloody coup by mutinous soldiers. They milled about the Mammy Yoko hotel Friday after the last helicopter had left, many of them weeping.
"They left me behind," sobbed a woman from nearby Gambia, watching as her American boyfriend climbed aboard a helicopter. An anxious Marine handed her $ 5 for the taxi ride back home.
More than 300 expatriates had waited out the days since the coup at the Mammy Yoko, where the helicopters touched down Friday to whisk the lucky to safety. The first night they huddled in the basement, listening to mutinous troops hold up staff at gunpoint and then help themselves to drinks at the bar.
Away from the relative safety of the waterfront hotel, shocked residents surveyed damage to their city and mutineers rumbled through the streets in stolen vehicles, firing in the air and shouting, "If you don't want us, then you are going to die!"
The Sierra Leonians, also hard hit by the coup, had little time for the renegades who did little to endear themselves to their countrymen.
Many of the foreigners who got out of the West African nation were grateful to the United States for their rescue.
"Our government has forgotten us," said an embittered Italian, Guglielli Narciso, before boarding a helicopter. "They don't care."
But perhaps the most eloquent plea to flee the terror in what was once an easygoing, ramshackle town was from an 18-month-old girl found wandering the hotel where the evacuees waited, a British passport and enough cash for a London taxi journey tucked into her shirt.
Michelle - left to fend for herself in the human stampede around the Mammy Yoko - was one of the youngest people evacuated Friday before the U.S. Embassy shut down and the operation ended.
U.S. Marines managed to helicopter out 300 Americans and some 600 other nationalities to the USS Kearsarge, ignoring a flight ban by the low-ranking soldiers who ousted civilian President Ahmed Tejan Kabbah on Sunday. One pregnant evacuee was in labor and some 200 were children also flown out during the nearly 90 sorties. There were no injuries and no reports of hostile fire.
About 200 Marines provided a security cordon around the hotel during the operation.
The evacuees will later be taken to Conakry, Guinea and the Americans will leave there on flights chartered by the State Department. Other nationals will be on their own once in Guinea.
"We are very sorry we could not have everybody on board who wanted to go," U.S. Charge d'Affaires Anne Wright said before boarding the final helicopter. "We hope we have got those who have no way to sustain themselves here."
An embassy statement cited "the seriously deteriorating situation," in the decision to shut down operations.
Officials said all the Americans who wanted to evacuate were believed to have left the country. About 120 Americans who had registered with the embassy had stayed behind, Wright said.
Sunday's coup was the third in five years in Sierra Leone. Kabbah's election in February 1996 ended several years of army rule and installed a civilian government.
In Freetown, the mutineers joined forces with the Revolutionary United Front rebel army, which had waged a five-year war against the government, to cement control of the capital. Checkpoints went up around the city, manned by shabbily dressed soldiers carrying machine guns.
West African countries, led by Nigeria, sent in reinforcements - bringing their total number in Sierra Leone to more than 1,500 - and warned they reserved a military option to restore Kabbah to power.
On Friday, that option appeared to be turning into a threat, with Western diplomats in Freetown reporting a massing of Ghanaian troops on Sierra Leone's border.
Maj. Johnny Paul Koroma - whose jail breakout Sunday launched the coup - blamed Kabbah for the collapse of a peace treaty with the United Front rebels and said the government he planned to install would bring peace
But Koroma could barely control his own troops. They burst into homes and businesses, taking what they could.
Earlier Friday, nearly 400 British, Canadians, Australians and other foreigners scrambled aboard a British-chartered jet at the Freetown airport.
Many said they had been robbed of everything by soldiers.
"Seven of them just went through our home, taking everything," Maureen Cummings, a 36-year-old Briton, said at London's Gatwick Airport on Friday.
Koroma has blamed civilians "dressing up" as soldiers for the looting.
Michelle, the little girl found wandering in the Mammy Yoko hotel, was spotted by hotel manager Roger Cookes. She was believed to have dual citizenship.
Cookes, a Texan, gave the girl to his fiancee, Vanessa Schillaci, and took a final look at them before they boarded a helicopter. Cookes stayed behind.
He wasn't surprised that Michelle's guardians had apparently left her at the hotel. "Our hotel's become a safe haven," he said, adding bitterly of the mutineers, "They were bandits, not soldiers."
 
 Load-Date: May 31, 1997

 

End of Document
