

After eight months on the run, weary Rwandan refugees look homeward
June 24, 1997, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 760 words
Byline: By KARIN DAVIES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MBANDAKA, Congo
Body




Hobbling on bleeding feet after eight months on the run, scores of Rwandan refugees struggled off a slippery gangplank Tuesday from the barge that took them from Congo's steamy jungles with a promise of flights home.
The thousands of families and orphans now reaching the sweaty river port of Mbandaka are some of the lucky ones among the Rwandan refugees in Congo, who have survived massacres, starvation and disease to reach the end of a circuitious journey they calculate at 2,500 miles.
Fighting pushed the refugees to this far western edge of the Central African nation, and persisted even here with a massacre that claimed as many as 1,000 of the refugees. After nearly three years in exile, the refugees who reached here Tuesday are eager to return to what they hope will be a safer haven in Rwanda.
"Each step has been painful," said Isaikere Mulengeze, 58, nursing toes battered on a tree-choked trail. "I survived the trip only with patience and God's grace. Many days I had nothing to eat, and only trees for shelter."
The refugees are among more than 1 million Rwandan Hutus who fled into Congo - then called Zaire - in 1994, when rival Tutsis came to power in their homeland.
After 2 years in U.N. refugee camps just across Rwanda's western border, they fled again when civil war broke out in eastern Zaire in September.
More than 883,000 Rwandans have gone home since the fighting started, including more than 8,000 from Mbandaka, a Congo River city 375 miles northeast of the capital, Kinshasa.
Between 150,000 and 180,000 refugees remain unaccounted for, according to Daniel Endres, senior emergency officer for the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees.
Thousands of them died of fatigue and starvation on their long journey - the troops of Laurent Kabila, Congo's rebel leader turned ruler, prevented them from getting aid, Endres said.
"There was a lot of death. You couldn't walk 10 meters without seeing a refugee dead of exhaustion, sickness or hunger," said Rwandan Hutu Martin Nsangimana, who stepped off the barge.
"I saw the bodies of a mother and child being eaten by ants. I didn't want to end up like that, so I kept walking," the 25-year-old said.
Kabila's troops killed many refugees outright, they say - including one May 13 massacre at a town 10 miles southwest of Mbandaka.
Kabila's troops suddenly appeared in the town of Wendji that morning, shouting at the residents of the town to stay in their homes, witnesses said, speaking on condition of anonymity. "We come for the refugees," the soldiers told the villagers.
Villagers saved some refugees by giving them white headbands - a symbol of support for Kabila - and clean clothes, so they would look less like refugees, witness Alphonse Beka said.
The soldiers headed for a makeshift camp of about 20,000 refugees on the banks of the Congo River - where they fired volley after volley. Some refugees took cover in the jungle. Others dove into the river, and drowned.
A man who rode his bicycle through Wendji afterward counted 245 corpses.
Villagers report that after the shootings bodies littered the streets, and there were pools of blood at the port.
Red Cross workers buried at least 113 refugees that day. Soldiers threw dozens of others into the river, survivors and villagers said.
Edmond Mbodombo, vice governor of the region of Equateur, said he's seen no evidence of massacres, but said U.N. officials were welcome to investigate. "We are happy to cooperate," he said.
For now, he's anxious for the United Nations to keep moving refugees off his turf - they've stolen food which was already in short supply, he said.
Aid workers regularly send barges along tributaries of the Congo River into the jungle to find stragglers among the refugees.
Tuesday's barge brought 220 people, including 83 children separated from their families during their flight. As the refugees waited to disembark in Mbandaka, they sang a song of arrival. Canoes carrying fishermen and water lilies drifted past.
From the barge, the sickest went to a hospital for treatment. Those who were simply tired and hungry went to a transit camp to pass a couple of days before going back to Rwanda - a three-hour flight in a cargo plane over the swamps and jungles they spent eight months walking through.
The second child of Emmanuel Sakamana, 30, was born aboard the barge as dawn broke on the island-tangled river.
His first child, a son, died at the age of 6 months in a refugee camp near Uvira.
"We want to take our daughter home to grow up in Rwanda," Sakamana said. "The life of a refugee is nothing to give a child."
 Load-Date: June 24, 1997

 

End of Document
