

After the crash: a sea of bodies, a few survivors
The Associated Press
January 31, 2000, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 831 words
Byline: By ALEXANDRA ZAVIS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: OFF THE IVORY COAST
Body




As dawn broke Monday across the inky waters of the Atlantic, the men of the Artaban launched their ship into a nightmare. Bodies surrounded them: men, women, children, limbs that had been torn away.
The remains floated amid the baggage, books and clothes of dozens of passengers killed when Kenya Airways Flight 431 slammed into the sea. When the corpse of a baby dressed in a purple dress bobbed past, face down, the ship's commander Jean Pierre Athalys turned away in horror.
"That's too much," he muttered, as the tiny body was fished out and zipped into a billowing, adult-sized body bag.
At least 10 people survived the disaster. By Monday evening, 86 bodies had been brought to shore, rescue workers said, and most searchers had given up for the night.
The plane, an Airbus 310, took off at 9:08 p.m. Sunday into overcast skies. Destined for Lagos, Nigeria, it crashed into the ocean after only one minute in the air, according to George Dapre Yao, the head of air traffic at Abidjan's Felix Houphouet-Boigny Airport.
Flight 431 carried 10 crew members and 169 passengers, officials said. It originated Sunday in Nairobi, Kenya, and was to have landed in Lagos that afternoon. But because of bad weather, it went on to Abidjan, Ivory Coast's main commercial city.
The hulking Dutch-owned Artaban, which services oil rigs, was one of more than a dozen vessels - from military speed boats to fishing ships - that set out into the choppy waters around 11 p.m. in a spontaneous rescue effort.
With only the light beamed down by two helicopters to guide them, the ships cut through the wreckage - long streams of twisted metal, broken hunks of plastic, battered suitcases and thin oil slicks carried along by the Atlantic currents - in an overwhelming, and an often terrifying darkness.
"We had no visibility last night, but we could hear the screams of people - that was painful," fire department rescuer Tanoh Price told an Associated Press reporter who spent much of Monday aboard the Artaban along with the crew, French soldiers and members of other Ivorian rescue services.
The men on the Artaban were tough and stoic, unaccustomed to being emotionally affected by their work. Many, despite the shell-shocked looks that would wash over their faces when they'd see another horror, could only talk about it in the most clinical terms.
But sometimes, it was just too much.
Three bodies were hauled onto the ship along with several severed limbs. Finally, in the hours before dawn, a man was brought from the ocean alive, only to roll over a few minutes later and die.
"Enough to bring tears to my eyes," said Keith Francklin, a South African diver among the predominantly French and Ivorian crew, shaking his head in frustration.
Two survivors, a man and a woman, were later found clinging frantically to wreckage three or four miles offshore, giving the crew its first surge of hope. The woman, however, had blood pouring from a head wound, and the boat headed back to port.
The next time out, a hazy sun shed light on the search, but the bodies and wreckage had been spread by the current across three or four miles of ocean.
Crew members scanned the waters with binoculars, pointing excitedly when they spotted anything that looked like a person.
This time, though, there were no survivors. They retrieved six bodies, some only partially clad, using a long hook to grab the corpses' clothing. Two more were collected from French soldiers who moved about in small speed boats.
The bodies were dropped off at the dock, where they were lined up in a long row, their arms frozen in twisted gestures.
One American man was registered on the flight, according to the U.S. Embassy in Nairobi. It was unclear if he was among the survivors.
A Nigerian passenger rescued by another ship blamed some of the deaths on the two hours it took rescuers to arrive.
"If they had come sooner, a lot of us would have been saved," Samuel Ogbada Adje, wrapped in a blanket at Abidjan's port, said bitterly before being pushed into an ambulance.
But Lt. Col. Blaise Grah, an Ivorian firefighting official, defended the rescue effort.
"Two hours, we believe, is a reasonable time, given the materials that had to be gathered, the vastness of the ocean and the imprecise information we were given" about the wreckage's location.
What went wrong with the flight remained unclear Monday. Adje said the plane had problems immediately after takeoff.
"It wasn't quite balanced, and the next thing we knew we were in the water," he said.
Airline officials declined to speculate on a cause, but Kenya Airways Technical Director Steve Clarke, speaking in Nairobi, said "there were no technical problems of any significance."
Kenya Airways engineers and investigators were headed for the Ivory Coast and Nigeria, Clark said, along with a team of Airbus engineers and three French investigators.
Most of the passengers were believed to have been Nigerians, Clarke said. The route is popular among Nigerians heading to Dubai for duty-free shopping.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos ABI101-107,201,301;NAI101-107
 Load-Date: February 1, 2000

 

End of Document
