

AGE OF THE PYRAMIDS: Landmark exhibit on Egypt arrives at the Met
The Associated Press
September 13, 1999, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Travel
Length: 533 words
Byline: KATHERINE ROTH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




With some surprising works veering off the beaten track of Egyptian art, the first major exhibit ever devoted solely to the age of the pyramids - Egypt's Old Kingdom - opens at the Metropolitan Museum of Art on Thursday (Sept. 16).
The 250 works created for use in the temples and tombs surrounding the pyramids - and tools used to build the last remaining wonders of the ancient world - date from about 2650 B.C. to 2150 B.C. They trace the evolution of artistic standards that remained in place for centuries to come.
"Strangely enough … there has never before been a show devoted to the great dynasties of the Old Kingdom," says Philippe de Montebello, director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art. The exhibit features masterpieces from 30 museums in 10 countries.
The works underscore the "supreme confidence of Egyptian people of the time, and the moment … when most of the artistic conventions of Egyptian art have been set for the following three millennia," Montebello adds.
Dorothea Arnold, curator in charge of the museum's Department of Egyptian Art, gestures toward one of the vast gallaries and says, "It's clearly the formative time of Egyptian art … It is the time that for once, there's a set 'This is Egyptian art.' … So we are at the roots of the whole culture."
Some of the most striking works are startlingly realistic sculptures which distinguish themselves from the slender stylized figures that became typical in later periods of Egyptian art.
One of the crown jewels of the exhibit is a life-size statue of a corpulent Hemiunu, who was thought to be responsible for the building of the Great Pyramid of Giza.
"It's an immense piece, a study of this really heavy physical presence. It hits you in the eye and that's just what we wanted," Arnold says.
The fleshy, seated figure - more disturbing for the unhealthy pallor of the limestone - stops visitors in their tracks as they enter one gallery.
Another highlight is the mesmerizing statue of King Menkaure and a queen, possibly his mother, which humanizes Egyptian monarchy and allows a glimpse into the personality of the middle-aged builder of the third and last of the Giza pyramids.
"That, of course, is one of the finest pieces of Egyptian art ever … When you look at the faces, you have the faces of real people. This is not an ideal pair. This is Menkaure as he really was, with his bulbous eyes, the funny kind of bulby nose, the lower lip coming forward," Arnold says. "Not a very beautiful man, but a man alive.
"Don't forget this is the third millennium B.C. … We are really a long time away, and here are artists who show in a representative work of royal people, real human beings. To my view, this may be one of the first times this has ever been done in human history."
Also featured is one of only two remaining beaded netting dresses of the time, made of 7,000 cylindrical and ring-shaped faience beads, originally in contrasting shades of pale and dark blue.
The exhibit, which has already appeared at the Grand Palais in Paris, will remain at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in its sole American showing until Jan. 9. It's third and final appearance will be at the Canada's Royal Ontario Museum, where it opens in February.
 Load-Date: September 13, 1999

 

End of Document
