

Aid groups take the lead, and take the heat
The Associated Press
December 30, 1996, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1109 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Body




In a world wary of getting involved, a "Humanitarian International" is growing stronger by the day, rushing in where governments won't. Now these aid groups are coming under fire.
In Somalia, in Liberia, and most recently in Rwanda, relief organizations have ended up inadvertently adding fuel to conflict, aiding combatants, even genocidal killers. And this dilemma of doing harm while doing good is unsettling nerves in the "aid community."
"I think every single one of us is questioning what we do and how we do it," said Marge Tsitouris, emergency chief for CARE, the big U.S.-based relief agency.
Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the outgoing U.N. secretary-general, calls the dilemma "one of the most difficult challenges facing the humanitarian community in recent times."
Rwanda was a turning point.
For two years, spending well over $ 1 billion, scores of NGOs - non-governmental organizations - supplied food, water and shelter at camps in eastern Zaire where the perpetrators of Rwanda's genocide dwelled among fellow refugees, rearming and plotting a new Rwandan war.
The upheavals of recent weeks have emptied the camps and reshuffled the pieces of the Rwandan puzzle. Refugees are streaming back to Rwanda or farther away. The NGOs, meanwhile, are reflecting on their role and their reaction next time.
Critics like Alex de Waal would like to see changes.
"It's clear what those camps were being used for … for the killers to plan a re-invasion of Rwanda," said de Waal, of the London-based group Africa Rights. "I think, unfortunately, that does mean the international agencies must bear some culpability."
In the post-Cold War '90s, quagmires were inevitable as the aid groups stepped up activities across the global map. Today an estimated 4,600 Western-based NGOs work in the Third World, most in long-term development, many doing emergency aid duty as well.
Autonomous and quick to mobilize, they were out in front in such crises as the Somali famine, while the U.S. and other governments were reluctant to intervene. Eventually, in part because of the drumbeat of NGO publicity, governments did intervene in Somalia, out of simple humanitarianism. But along the way, money and food extorted and seized from the aid groups supported the clan militias in their war.
With Rwanda, the pattern re-emerged.
Over 2 million Rwandans, mostly Hutus, poured out of that central African nation in mid-1994 as Tutsi rebels won a civil war. Aid groups responded - at least 200 organizations were on the scene almost immediately.
People around the world saw pictures of refugees dying of cholera by the thousands in squalid camps in eastern Zaire, and finally governments acted, sending U.S. and other troops temporarily to help supply water and other needs.
But the "refugee cities" soon were dominated by the fugitive Hutu government and extremist militias from Rwanda, the forces responsible for the slaughter of at least 500,000 Tutsis and moderate Hutus earlier in 1994.
Aid workers had to deal with these Hutu elements to get food distributed. Sometimes the arrangement wasn't cooperative: A U.N. World Food Program official estimated 25 percent of its food was simply stolen.
As they embarked on a guerrilla campaign to retake Rwanda, control of relief supplies gave the extremists power over the refugee masses.
The aid groups saw what was happening.
"The delivery of aid in this situation undoubtedly helped fuel the conflict," acknowledged Justin Forsyth, Washington director for Oxfam International. But his and other organizations decided to stay on to help the non-belligerents.
"It is not the job of humanitarian organizations … to sort out who's a genocidal killer and who is a 'real' refugee," said Emma Bonino, the European Union's humanitarian affairs commissioner.
Other agencies did take action.
Some, like CARE, withdrew in late 1994 as armed groups made work too dangerous. The French section of Doctors Without Borders pulled out earlier, deciding they would not tend to a community harboring mass murderers.
"Frankly, we got a lot of abuse from other NGOs when we pulled out," section director Jean-Herve Bradol said by telephone from Paris. "They said we should be ashamed, doctors abandoning their patients. It was a very difficult decision."
The debates still divide the aid community. But all seem agreed on one thing: The ultimate failure lay at higher levels.
Boutros-Ghali in late 1994 sought a U.N. force to disarm the camp militants, but Washington and other governments resisted. Eventually, in late 1996, the Rwandan government and a newborn Zairean rebel army took on the job themselves, chasing the Hutu forces deeper into Zaire's interior, clearing the way for the return of hundreds of thousands of refugees.
Even more fundamentally, critics say, the big powers should have intervened in Rwanda in April 1994 as the genocide began.
If they had, "many, perhaps most, of those who died would probably have survived and much of the massive expenditures on the provision of humanitarian assistance been unnecessary," concluded a multinational study of the Rwanda crisis, commissioned by Western governments and published last March.
"Aid policy" is replacing foreign policy, said Julia Taft, president of InterAction, an umbrella group of 160 U.S. NGOs.
"Those who should be responsible for diplomatic intervention and political solutions are sitting back and saying, 'As long as people are fed, we're going on to other things'," she said.
Because that looks unlikely to change, the NGOs are preparing for a long haul in the forefront.
They have developed tactics to try to keep food aid away from combatants - distributing it only to women, for example, or delivering only cooked meals so militias can't seize and sell food commodities.
And these independent-minded organizations are making tentative moves toward unity of action. In Liberia last June, a dozen major groups jointly suspended aid operations because too much food and equipment was being stolen by the civil war factions.
The NGOs have produced their first common - if vaguely worded - code of conduct, and the leaders of U.S. and European aid groups have met twice in recent months to discuss policy coordination. Individual organizations, meanwhile, are conducting their own reviews of what happened in Rwanda.
"These are hard questions," said Oxfam's Forsyth. "We want to learn lessons."
De Waal of Africa Rights, who proposes an international commission of inquiry on the NGOs' role in Rwanda, acknowledges that lessons seem already to have been learned.
"The potential is there for it to happen again," he said, "but I think a lot of people are going to be a lot more vigilant next time."
 Load-Date: December 30, 1996

 

End of Document
