

Algerian killings claim 72 lives on the eve of Ramadan
December 30, 1997, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 558 words
Byline: By RACHID KHIARI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ALGIERS, Algeria
Body




The beginning of the Islamic holy month of Ramadan brought more bloodshed to Algeria, where raiders wielding knives and guns and attackers disguised as police killed 72 people.
The death toll in the past 10 days is estimated at more than 300 - victims in a surge of violence blamed on Islamic insurgents that has marked Ramadan in Algeria for the past several years.
The new moon Monday signaled the start of the month of dawn-to-dusk fasting. Last year, violence during the holy month killed more than 400 people in Algeria.
Anticipating an increase in attacks, the army has set up extra roadblocks and multiplied its patrols in Algiers and other areas. But the government seemed unable to halt the frequent massacres in rural regions.
Shortly before dawn Tuesday, maurauders slit the throats of 34 people in Ain Boucif, a village about 60 miles south of Algiers, said hospital workers who refused to be identified by name.
Armed attackers set up a fake police roadblock Monday on a highway near the city of Mascara in central Algeria, emergency workers said. After stopping a bus, they killed its 14 passengers and the driver by shooting them or cutting their throats.
The attackers doused many of the victims' bodies in gasoline and set them on fire, said the emergency workers, who also spoke on condition of anonymity.
Two motorists, apparently doing some pre-Ramadan shopping, were stopped by the assailants and left for dead. They were in serious condition Tuesday at a hospital in nearby Sidi Bel Abbes.
Sunday night, an armed group used another false roadblock in the region to pull over and slay 17 motorists, shooting three and slitting the throats of the others, residents of the area said.
A terrorism expert who declined to be identified said the Armed Islamic Group, the country's most violent insurgent faction, has stepped up its attacks in the Mascara region in an attempt to establish a second "triangle of death" there.
A wide swath of the southeast suburbs of Algiers already bears that name because so much of the carnage has taken place there.
In other attacks reported Tuesday:
- At the village of Djelfa on Sunday, 150 miles south of Algiers, assailants tortured and cut off the heads of a man and his two sons, ages 5 and 7, and kidnapped the man's wife and three young daughters, according to their neighbors.
- The same day, at Hassi Bahbah, 60 miles farther north, an armed group killed a mother and two children, and left the father in critical condition, a Hassi Bahbah doctor said.
Algeria's nearly 6-year-old insurgency has claimed more than 75,000 lives. It began after the army canceled 1992 legislative elections that Muslim fundamentalist parties were poised to win.
The Islamic militants seek to establish a government based on a strict interpretation of Koranic law, which would require women to cover their heads, ban alcohol and institute compulsory Koranic education.
Such a system is anathema to many secular Algerians who subscribe to Western ways, learned during the French colonial period that lasted more than 130 years and ended in 1962.
To Muslims, Ramadan marks God's revelation of the Koran, Islam's holy book, to the Prophet Mohammed some 1,400 years ago. During the holy month, the world's 1 billion Muslims abstain from food, drink, smoking and sex during daylight hours as an act of sacrifice and purification.
 Load-Date: December 30, 1997

 

End of Document
