

All players in the Congo boxed in by their own rhetoric, interests
October 9, 1997, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 651 words
Byline: By ROBERT H. REID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




The dispute over the U.N. plan to investigate massacres in Congo looks like traffic gridlock: Nobody can move unless someone else does. And they all put themselves in this fix.
Last week, Secretary-General Kofi Annan suspended efforts to get a team into the field to investigate whether President Laurent Kabila's forces massacred thousands of Rwandan Hutu refugees during the revolt that toppled Mobutu Sese Seko.
Annan summoned the team to New York for consultation, hoping to give the United States time to persuade Kabila and his allies in Rwanda and Uganda that the investigation is in their interests.
The United States and Western Europe have threatened to withhold economic aid unless Kabila cooperates with the investigation.
Kabila isn't the only player who stands to lose if the mission is scrubbed.
Annan, the first U.N. chief from sub-Saharan Africa, would look like a weak figure who caved in to pressure from an African revolutionary leader who may have blood on his hands.
Failure of the mission would also call into question Annan's promise to make human rights a centerpiece of his administration, and disappoint human rights groups and other non-governmental organizations which Annan had vowed would have a more prominent role within the United Nations.
The Clinton administration's plans to extend U.S. influence in Africa could also suffer a setback. Washington had pinned its hopes on forging strong ties to Uganda, Rwanda, Zimbabwe and a new government in Congo, formerly Zaire.
There are risks for Washington no matter how the dispute plays out.
The United States has warned it will not help Kabila rebuild the country unless the investigation into the massacres goes forward.
But it appears Washington has not decided what to do if the investigation incriminates Kabila and other African leaders it is courting. The United States could hardly rush to the defense of those accused of genocide.
Human Rights Watch/Africa, in a detailed report Wednesday, said most of the massacres were carried out by the Tutsi-led Rwandan Army and Congolese Tutsis allied with Kabila.
Their motive was said to be revenge for the 1994 genocide of a half-million Rwandan Tutsis and Hutu moderates by Hutu extremists who ruled Rwanda at the time. The Hutu refugees had fled into the former Zaire to escape reprisals when Tutsi rebels overthrew the government in Rwanda.
Those refugees, along with Hutu soldiers and militiamen, took shelter in sprawling camps in eastern Congo, which the United Nations supervised. During Kabila's rebellion, his forces sought to clear those camps and drive out Hutu guerrillas.
In its report, Human Rights Watch said the Pentagon decided as early as August 1995 not to oppose Rwanda's plans to clear the Congolese camps "provided it was a clean operation, meaning one with limited civilian casualties."
Under pressure from the Europeans, Washington signed off on a Security Council plan to send a multinational force to assist the return of refugees to Rwanda.
When fighting erupted near the camps, up to 1 million refugees reached Rwanda on their own. Washington insisted the multinational force was no longer necessary, and it was scrubbed.
Only later did Washington concede that up to 400,000 other refugees had fled into the bush. There, human rights groups say, many were slaughtered.
Some U.N. officials, speaking privately, believe Kabila himself is willing to approve the investigation. But he is under pressure from Rwanda and other regional officials, who may have had a personal hand in the murders.
Some senior U.N. officials have said privately it may have been a mistake to link international support so closely to the investigation. With or without help, Kabila's fragile government could unravel, threatening any hope of regional stability.
---
EDITORS: Robert H. Reid is the U.N. chief correspondent for The Associated Press. He previously reported from Africa for four years.
 Load-Date: October 9, 1997

 

End of Document
