

Amid the violence, Israel and Palestinians hope to resume talks
December 17, 2000, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 670 words
Byline: By DINA KRAFT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




A Palestinian died in an explosion and two more were killed in clashes with Israeli forces, but Israeli and Palestinian leaders both expressed hope Sunday that high-level peace talks could resume within days.
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat said Palestinian and Israeli delegations could head to Washington soon. A top aide said negotiators would leave Monday night but declined to give additional details.
Arafat added that he might even meet with his off-and-on peace partner Prime Minister Ehud Barak in the near future. "If there is a need to, why not?" Arafat told reporters in the Gaza Strip after meeting a delegation of dovish Israeli lawmakers.
"Let's work for peace," he told the lawmakers.
The violence, now in its 12th week, shows no signs of abating, but in recent days senior officials from the two sides have resumed contacts that had largely broken down.
Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak, making an election-campaign stop at a housing project in Jerusalem, was cautiously optimistic.
"It's too early to predict, and like all of you we are hopeful to have a resumption of negotiations in the appropriate time, based on reduction in the level of violence," he said.
Barak has been insisting on the restoration of calm before peace negotiations can resume. However, he is now facing a tough re-election campaign with a ballot set for Feb. 6 - one analysts say he is unlikely to win without a peace deal.
In renewed violence, two Palestinians were killed in Rafah, in the southern Gaza Strip near the border with Egypt. According to Palestinian officials, the two were killed and three others were injured when an Israeli tank fired towards people as they crossed street. No comment was immediately available from the army.
Also, Sameh Malabee, a 28-year-old activist in Arafat's Fatah movement, was killed in a blast north of Jerusalem overnight. Details were sketchy, but Palestinians described it as a possible assassination by Israel. The Israeli army said it had no comment on the incident outside of Kalandia Refugee Camp.
Arafat said the deaths did "not help the peace process."
Israeli Foreign Minister Shlomo Ben-Ami said Israel was determined to keep working toward a peace deal and suggested that any new talks could involve the sensitive topic of the al-Aqsa mosque compound in Jerusalem's walled Old City.
Built on the ruins of the ancient Jewish temple, the holiest shrine in Judaism, the mosque compound is known as the Temple Mount to Jews and the Noble Sanctuary to Muslims who revere it as the third holiest site in Islam.
Israel claims sovereignty over the site, though it is run by an Islamic religious trust.
"We need to find a solution for the Temple Mount that fits with the current situation," Ben-Ami told Israel's army radio. "Although we are sovereign today over the Temple Mount, we are also hostages of the Temple Mount."
Ben-Ami, Israel's senior negotiator, did not say what concessions, if any, Israel might offer the Palestinians, who are demanding full control of the site.
The current round of violence erupted after Israel's hard-line opposition leader Ariel Sharon made a controversial visit to the compound Sept. 28.
Sharon, who hopes to run against Barak in February, said he would not support a peace deal negotiated by the embattled Barak, who prompted the prime ministerial vote by resigning last week.
Barak "cannot now as an election maneuver make concessions at the price of Israeli security and its future," Sharon told army radio.
Barak was elected on a peace platform just 19 months ago, but he could face resistance if he offers wide-ranging concessions to the Palestinians while the violence is still raging. Public support for his peace policies has dropped since the violence began.
President Clinton, who is hoping to mediate a peace deal before he leaves office next month, called Arafat on Saturday to discuss the efforts to resume the negotiations.
Clinton and Arafat agreed that Israeli-Palestinian talks should continue, and the Americans would take part in coming days.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos JRL102,104
 Load-Date: December 18, 2000

 

End of Document
