

An Israeli journalist's view from the Gaza Strip
The Associated Press
October 18, 1999, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Lifestyle
Length: 588 words
Byline: By PRUDENCE HELLER, Associated Press Writer
Body




The Gaza Strip, which lies along the Mediterranean between Egypt and Israel, is small and crowded: about 1 million people, mostly Palestinians, living in 147 square miles. Many live in poverty, often in refugee camps where they or their families settled after expulsion or flight from Israel when it was created in 1948.
To many in Israel, says Israeli journalist Amira Hass, Gaza is savage, violent and hostile to Jews. But she knows better. In her informative, absorbing book, "Drinking the Sea at Gaza: Days and Nights in a Land Under Siege" (Metropolitan, $ 26), she tells us why.
As correspondent for the Israeli newspaper Ha'aretz, Hass, the Jerusalem-born daughter of European-Jewish immigrants, lived in the Strip for four years, starting in 1993. She had been there before, as a volunteer for the Workers' Hot Line, an Israeli organization representing workers from the occupied territories in their grievances against Israeli employers.
"My experience in Gaza," she writes, "the ease with which people accepted me, the natural way we talked about things and even argued, was my answer to all the Israelis who asked, 'How come you're not afraid?"'
She mentions the "intifada," the Palestinian uprising against the Israelis in the occupied territories that began in 1987. She tells of life in Gaza under Israel's military occupation and Civil Administration, and now under the Palestinian Authority. She discusses prisons, midnight raids and the wrecking of homes by Israeli soldiers, the safety net represented by extended Palestinian families, the Gazans' homesickness for their former villages.
And above all, Hass tells about Erez checkpoint.
At the checkpoint, Israel does or does not let Gazans out of the Strip to work at their jobs in Israel, get medical care, visit families, attend a university and the like. On occasion, the Gaza Strip has been sealed off. Such closures can mean lost weeks of work.
Since the Palestinian Authority took over Gaza, it too checks those seeking to cross into Israel, but Israel still has the final word. Security is, of course, a major Israeli concern. But Hass challenges Israel's use of security considerations as the reason for rejecting crossing permits on numerous occasions.
Hass also faults Israel for failure to develop the Strip and for keeping its economy, in practice, under Israeli control. She finds, too, that Israeli practices in the West Bank as well as in Gaza have tended to split Palestinian society.
What's most important about this book (which was translated by Elana Wesley and Maxine Kaufman-Lacusta) is the way Hass makes one realize the human aspect of the plight of the Palestinians of Gaza.
She concludes: "In their hearts Palestinians will persist in seeing all the land as theirs. … But from living in Gaza I learned that its people have the ability and an honest desire to separate their heartfelt wishes from the need for a peaceful political solution. … On condition, of course, that any solution treat the Palestinians with dignity, as a people with elemental rights and a claim equal to that of the others who live in this land and call it home."
The book provides an effective background for the Gaza story that is still unfolding as the peace process continues.
---
Editor's Note: Israel and the Palestinians resumed the peace process recently, and reached agreement on a safe passage route for Palestinians between Gaza and the West Bank. The route, covering about 28 miles, stretches between Gaza's Erez Crossing and the West Bank village of Tarkoumiya.
 Load-Date: October 18, 1999

 

End of Document
