

Arab summit defies the masses, holds out hope for negotiations
The Associated Press
October 23, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 756 words
Byline: By DONNA BRYSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




Arab demonstrations calling for a "holy war" can't be ignored by their leaders and were referred to more than once at the Arab summit that ended in Cairo.
But the weekend summit ended without a clear call to cut ties with Israel to punish it for what many in the region see as its use of unnecessary force against Palestinian protesters. For in a region run mostly by kings and dictators, mere expressions of public anger and anguish over the deaths of Palestinians aren't enough to dictate what is decided at such a summit.
After all, the Egyptian government, the main voice of moderation at the summit, has for years ignored Egyptian citizens' often heartfelt opposition to its own peace treaty with Israel - the first in the Arab world.
With that 1979 treaty, Egyptian leaders recovered land lost in war and found themselves elevated to America's partner in the region. Reason enough to argue now for the benefits of negotiation over confrontation. And Egypt wants other Arab nations to strike deals with Israel to justify its own early decision and to firmly establish it as a regional leader.
The United States also has pressured Mubarak to champion the peace process. After President Clinton asked, Mubarak called a summit last week bringing together Israeli and Palestinian leaders.
The Arab summit's declaration said Arabs were justified in considering severing relations after more than 120 people, the majority Palestinian, have died in three weeks of violence. Several have done with low-level ties. But Egypt and Jordan, the only Arab nations with diplomatic ties with Israel and both major recipients of U.S. aid, made it clear they would not go so far.
Instead, the Palestinians got pledges of support and funds. The world was called on to investigate who started the violence - though Arab leaders have already laid the blame at Israel's feet.
Charles Ayyoub, publisher and editor-in-chief of Lebanon's conservative Ad-Diyar newspaper, declared the summit a failure.
"How can the summit succeed while the majority of Arab rulers have accepted the restrictions of agreements with Israel and the restrictions of subservience to America?" he wrote in an angry front-page editorial Sunday.
"We were not under the illusion that the summit would succeed because the priority of (Arab) rulers is to preserve their thrones and regimes," he wrote. "Their priority was not the conflict with Israel and resisting oppression and occupation."
Days before it even began, Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi, a master of attention-grabbing stunts, went on one of the region's most popular satellite television shows to wave what he said was a draft of the planned summit declaration. Gadhafi, noting the declaration repeated calls for greater economic cooperation, ridiculed it and accused other Arabs of thinking of mere money when Palestinian lives were at stake.
Gadhafi sent a delegation to Cairo only to have it walk out the first day, declaring Arab leaders did not have the will to confront Israel.
As Libya's all-powerful leader, Gadhafi is free to pander to protesters who have taken to the streets across the Arab world demanding their leaders stand up to Israel. If protests get out of hand, leaders like Gadhafi can simply throw the demonstrators in jail.
Saddam Hussein, who rules his Iraq with an even firmer hand than Gadhafi wields in Libya, also took an extreme position at the Cairo summit. Saddam's speech, read in Cairo by an aide, called for "holy war" against Israel.
And after the summit ended, Iraq issued a statement calling on Arabs to "increase your struggle against the rulers, especially the Saudi rulers - the head of misery - along with their colleagues in evil and plotting," read a statement issued Sunday night.
The Arab League is made up of 22 nations led in many cases by dictators preoccupied first and foremost with holding onto power.
Even Egypt's Mubarak, who can make perhaps the best case for describing his country as democratic, has been in power as long as any dictator - two decades. Presidential elections are nothing more than referendums in which the public is given a chance to say "yes" or "no" to Mubarak's continued rule.
Still, thousands of students in Egypt staged noisy demonstrations to vent their frustration at the summit. "Where is the Arab army?" they chanted.
"It was a total failure, but we never expected anything more than lip service from our leaders," said Jordanian electrician Abdullah Ayyoub, 27.
---
EDITORS NOTE - Donna Bryson has been the AP's Cairo-based Middle East news editor since 1999.
 Load-Date: October 24, 2000

 

End of Document
