

Arafat urges diplomats to 'save the peace process'
March 15, 1997, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 605 words
Byline: By SAMAR ASSAD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GAZA CITY, Gaza Strip
Body




Yasser Arafat urged foreign diplomats today to stop Israel from building in east Jerusalem, which the Palestinians want as a capital, and to "save the peace process."
Actions by the government of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu mean "we no longer have a partner," Arafat told envoys from the United States, Russia, Japan, Europe, Jordan and Egypt.
"The reason for this meeting is to save the peace process and return it to its normal track."
Arafat called the meeting to register his anger over Netanyahu's plan to build a new Jewish neighborhood in historically Arab east Jerusalem and over the size of Israel's next planned withdrawal from the West Bank.
The four-hour meeting ended with assurances of support from the diplomats - but few promises of action.
Edward G. Abington, the U.S. Consul General to Jerusalem, said the diplomats agreed that plans for the Har Homa neighborhood were straining relations in the region, and that "each government would conduct intensive efforts to lower the tension and restore confidence."
Israel, which was not invited, claimed the meeting violated its peace agreements with the Palestinians, which call for the two sides to take joint action to resolve disputes.
The United States will continue to tell Israel its concerns, Abington said, but would like to see talks between the Israelis and Palestinians resume. Such talks, he said, are "the best way" to resolve disputes.
Israel's Cabinet voted unanimously Friday to go ahead with the construction of the 6,500-unit Har Homa neighborhood in east Jerusalem, despite warnings from Israeli intelligence that it could lead to violence.
The Cabinet approval came a day after a Jordanian soldier shot and killed seven Israeli schoolgirls on the border between the two countries. The gunman's relatives said he was mentally unstable and not politically motivated, but Israeli leaders blamed it, in part, on the growing tension.
Netanyahu said he was "more determined than ever" to go ahead with the construction plan.
"No government can allow itself to change its policy because of threats of violence," Netanyahu adviser David Bar-Illan told The Associated Press. "Once a government yields to pressure, it will never be able to do anything unpopular again."
Palestinian leaders have warned of a new uprising should Israel build the housing units. "Our people will defend their existence and their land," the speaker of the Palestinian legislative council, Ahmed Qureia, said Friday.
Asked what the Palestinian response would be if Israeli bulldozers start working at Har Homa on Monday as planned, Arafat said today: "I do not know. You have to ask the Palestinian masses."
However, he said the plan would "isolate Jerusalem … and destroy the peace process."
The Palestinians charge that the construction plan is part of an Israeli strategy of cutting off Arab parts of Jerusalem from the West Bank, destroying Palestinian hopes of establishing a capital in east Jerusalem.
Israel captured east Jerusalem in the 1967 Mideast War and later annexed it. It insists the city must remain united under Israeli sovereignty.
The response to Thursday's shooting also helped to prevent a complete unraveling in ties between Israel and Jordan, damaged this week by a strongly worded letter from Jordan's King Hussein criticizing Netanyahu's policies toward the Palestinians.
Hussein's office said today he will visit Israel on Sunday to offer his condolences for the deaths.
The king will visit families of the victims and two girls recovering from the attack at Jerusalem's Hadassah Hospital. He also was to meet with Netanyahu and Israeli President Ezer Weizman.
 Load-Date: March 15, 1997

 

End of Document
