

Art by majority: The results are predictably banal
The Associated Press
November 12, 1999, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 487 words
Byline: By KARREN MILLS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ST. PAUL, Minn.
Body




The people have spoken, and they like wild animals, water, ordinary people having fun and the color blue. At least in their paintings.
Those are among the elements favored most in surveys commissioned by Vitaly Komar and Alexander Melamid, Russian artists who set out to create paintings that most pleased and displeased people in the United States and 13 other countries.
Their project is also a thinly veiled commentary on polling and what some might call the tyranny of the majority.
"The People's Choice," a traveling exhibit featuring 33 of their paintings, opened Friday in St. Paul with the unveiling of the city's own "most wanted" painting, commissioned by the Minnesota Museum of American Art.
"We thought this was an important time to look at our choices in art" with the move into the new millennium, said curator Lin Nelson-Mayson.
Like the other "most wanted" paintings from around the world, the St. Paul painting is mostly blue. It shows a family near a lake surrounded by hills and includes an elk and a lighthouse.
The U.S. painting, based on a sampling of 1,001 adults nationwide, shows two deer and a hippopotamus in a mountain lake on a partly cloudy day with people relaxing near the shore. A small image of George Washington in period costume was included because people like pictures of famous people almost as much as those of ordinary people.
The artists take no position on the quality of their paintings.
"Whether it's good or bad is not the point. The point is to show the public. I don't think it's up to us to explain. Let the public decide," Melamid said. "Some think it's a joke. Maybe that's true. But many of the works went into textbooks in different countries."
The artists were surprised by the similarity in taste around the world. Blue was always the favored color and people preferred representational paintings of outdoor scenes with wild animals and people at leisure.
Only those in Russia and Kenya wanted religion in their artwork. As in America, people worldwide generally disliked abstract and geometric paintings.
America's most unwanted painting shows randomly scattered, overlapping triangles and rectangles in shades of gold, orange, peach and teal.
Melamid said the project developed after he and Komar moved to the United States in 1978 and became fascinated with their new country and the prominent use of public opinion polls.
In an interview on The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer last week, Komar likened the power of the majority to the power of dictatorships known in his homeland.
"It was our idea to visualize this view of the new kind of dictator, because we grow up in a condition of dictatorship - Lenin, Stalin, etc. And when we came to United States, we recognized that another dictator here is the so-called majority."
After closing in St. Paul on Jan. 21, the exhibit will move to Tucson, Ariz.; Charlotte, N.C., and Lewiston, Maine. The tour opened in Akron, Ohio, last year.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo MP102
 Load-Date: November 13, 1999

 

End of Document
