

As Freetown quakes, the faithful gather at their leader's house
The Associated Press
May 6, 2000, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 651 words
Byline: By ALEXANDRA ZAVIS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: FREETOWN, Sierra Leone
Body




As residents of Sierra Leone's capital grew increasingly fearful of attack, the atmosphere Saturday at the home of the notorious former rebel leader who lives in their midst was almost carnival-like.
Women in brightly colored African print dresses sang and waved. Comedians dressed in oversized clothes, their faces painted white, cracked jokes for dozens of former rebel fighters and armed U.N. peacekeepers.
Dressed in a dapper gray suit and shiny shoes, Foday Sankoh played host Saturday to a steady stream of visitors - U.N. officials, a high level delegation from Libya and supporters - all of them asking about the fate of more than 300 U.N. peacekeepers reportedly held by his forces somewhere in the jungle.
To each one he repeated that his Revolutionary United Front was committed to this West African country's shaky peace.
"These people they are foreigners here. They do not know the terrain," Sankoh said in an interview with The Associated Press. "As time goes on, I think all of them will come out," he said, adding that he had instructed rebel fighters to look for the missing soldiers.
But he also said that if anyone was being held by his soldiers, they would be freed.
Such contradictions are common with Sankoh, an unpredictable man worshipped by many of his followers, who often refer to him simply as "pa" or "the leader."
The rebels, who killed tens of thousands of civilians and deliberately maimed many more during eight years of civil war, insisted that the United Nations and the Sierra Leone government are the ones jeopardizing the implementation of a peace accord signed in July.
But even as he spoke, U.N. officials reported that they had lost contact with 200 more peacekeepers in the country's interior. If the troops, all of them Zambians, have been captured by the rebels, that would bring the number of U.N. personnel being held by the RUF to nearly 500.
The RUF, who officially are part of a power-sharing government, say the missing U.N. soldiers accuse the peacekeepers of provoking clashes in the interior by trying to forcibly disarm rebel fighters.
Dozens of Sankoh's supporters were milling Saturday outside his Freetown house, a plain, two-story building with green trim and white paint fading to gray - and heavily guarded by U.N. troops. While none of his followers were brandishing guns, concealed weapons could occasionally be spotted on some of the RUF guards.
Unlike many of their comrades living in the jungle, who often struggle to find food to eat, many of Sankoh's hangers-on wore flashy jewelry, brand new bluejeans, t-shirts and hooded tops.
Across the street, gathered under a canopy made of wooden poles and plastic sheeting, were the political organizers of the rebel political party - the Revolutionary United Front Party - who listened attentively as an RUF official lectured them on the basics of the peace process.
Sankoh, who has a government position equivalent to vice-president, had a long list of complaints against the Sierra Leone government. He said the appointment of RUF ministers was a sham and his party was being "marginalized" by the country's authorities.
In a statement issued Saturday, the RUF claimed disarmament was one-sided, with members of a pro-government militia known as the Kamajors refusing to turn in their weapons.
RUF spokesman Eldred Collins also complained that ex-fighters who turned in their guns were not getting any help starting new lives.
But Sankoh insisted such grievances had nothing to do with the incidents that began Monday, as the West African intervention force that has fought the rebels for years on behalf of the government made its final withdrawal.
Some former members of that force, were at Sankoh's house Saturday. Now wearing the United Nation's trademark blue caps, they sat side by side with their former foes, each keeping watch over the residence - and each other.
"The road to peace is rough," Sankoh said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos planned
 Load-Date: May 7, 2000

 

End of Document
