

At Dutch trial venue, a calm before the media storm
The Associated Press
March 25, 1999, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 606 words
Byline: MIKE CORDER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAMP ZEIST, Netherlands
Body




An empty missile casing lies in a parking lot, rusting near a partially stripped jet engine with a corroding tangle of electrical innards.
There are few signs that Camp Zeist, a deserted U.S. air base nestled in the windswept heath of the central Netherlands, may soon play host to the latest - and possibly last - "trial of the century."
This is where two Libyans accused of blowing up Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988 will be brought to trial if Libya makes good on its promise to turn over the suspects to the United Nations by April 6.
Abandoned in 1994 by the U.S. Air Force, the Cold War-era camp, moss staining its drab jumble of concrete buildings, has the air of a ghost town.
The Dutch Military Aviation Museum is housed here, along with the Dutch Air Force Orchestra, but most of the 25-acre site is uninhabited. All that, of course, will change the moment the bombing suspects are handed over for trial here under Scottish law.
Abdel Basset Ali al-Megrahi and Lamen Khalifa Fhimah, alleged former Libyan intelligence agents, are accused of planting the suitcase bomb that shredded the jumbo jet on Dec. 21, 1988, killing 270 people - mostly Americans and Britons - in the air and on the ground.
Far from being apprehensive, locals in the nearby village of Soesterberg about 30 miles southeast of Amsterdam are looking forward to a bit of excitement after five years of peace and quiet.
"It used to be like the Wild West here with all the Americans," Jago van Ekries, who runs a gas station in the well-to-do town of 6,000, said with a sigh. "Then the Berlin Wall came down, the Americans left and it got quiet again."
A Lockerbie trial, he said, will "put a bit of life back into Soesterberg and put us back on the map."
Readying the base for a trial is expected to cost up to $ 200 million. It is a steep price for justice, but hearing the case on neutral territory was the only way Britain and the United States could get Libya to agree to turn over the suspects.
On Tuesday, the U.N. Security Council reiterated that sanctions against Libya would be suspended when the men are handed over.
The trial, expected to run for months, will be held under tight security before a panel of three Scottish judges. If convicted, the men will serve their sentences in Glasgow's Barlinnie jail, Scotland's highest-security prison.
So far, the only visible sign of change is a new armored police post guarding one of the base entrances.
If and when the suspects arrive in the Netherlands, they will be taken into Dutch custody and kept at an undisclosed jail until they can formally be extradited to Britain ahead of standing trial at the makeshift Dutch court.
Dutch authorities say that process could be completed within a week to 10 days, but could take months if the suspects decide to fight their extraditions. After extradition proceedings are completed, the suspects will be arraigned, and under Scottish law their trial should start 110 days later, Baird said.
Soesterberg residents remain largely unconcerned about the legal history which could be written on their doorsteps - or about the potential security risks it could bring.
"I don't think it will give us much trouble," said Ton Epping, 48, who runs a hardware store in the village. "There will be some strange people coming here, but I don't think it will be dangerous for us."
Van Ekries said a local politician recently asked him if he was worried that terrorists would target the town.
"It sounded like she wanted me to be against it, but this is only positive for Soesterberg and for the Netherlands," he said. "We are showing that there is justice and democracy."
 Load-Date: March 25, 1999

 

End of Document
