

At the Movies: 'Amistad'
December 11, 1997, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 888 words
Byline: By DOLORES BARCLAY
Body



AT THE MOVIES Logo
About midway through Steven Spielberg's estimable new movie, "Amistad," we are thrust into the belly of a slave ship during the horrific Middle Passage from Africa to the Americas.
Human beings are stacked like sacks of flour, chained naked and writhing in their own sweat and feces. They are starved, beaten, otherwise tortured, and when the "load" impedes the speed of the ship, men, women and children - shackled in heavy chains to one another - are tossed into the endless salty sea.
It is a sickening and monstrous scene. But it also is a visual sequence that adds power and juice to a film that at times suffers from a misplaced perspective.
"Amistad" is based on the true story of a group of Africans who are kidnapped in Sierra Leone by Portuguese slave traders. En route to plantations in Cuba, they overpower and kill all but two of the Spanish crew of the slave schooner La Amistad on July 1, 1839, and demand passage back to Africa. But the Spaniards dupe the captives and allow the ship to drift northward for nearly two months, setting the 39 survivors off the coast of Long Island in New York.
Thus begins one of the most curious, important and little-known episodes in American history. And it largely is the kidnapped Africans' legal entanglement that serves as Spielberg's focus.
The Africans are put on trial for murder, and everyone wants a piece of them: the two Spanish sailors who claim them as their "property"; the commander of an American naval vessel that seizes the slave ship off Montauk Point considers the Africans "salvage"; and the frivolous 11-year-old queen of Spain (Anna Paquin) wants "her" slaves back.
Abolitionists Theodore Joadson (Morgan Freeman) and Lewis Tappan (Stellan Skarsgaard) suspect the Africans aren't legally slaves and enlist the services of a young real estate lawyer, Roger Baldwin (Matthew McConaughey), who successfully fights his way through a federal court in New Haven, Conn., which rules that the Africans were not slaves.
But the case becomes so embroiled in politics, as the nation slouches toward civil war, that President Martin Van Buren (Nigel Hawthorne) has the decision overturned, forcing the case to the mostly pro-slavery U.S. Supreme Court. Former President John Quincy Adams (Anthony Hopkins) comes out of retirement to plead the Africans' case before the high court.
Much of "Amistad" depends on the perspective of the whites who work so hard to free the Africans, which seems to be the proscribed Hollywood treatment of slavery and black civil rights. "Ghosts of Mississippi," for example, documented not the efforts of Medgar Evers' family, but instead depicted the problems of the white prosecutor who fought to try his murderer.
"Amistad" does pretty much the same thing.
But the movie's strength comes from the powerful depiction of America's most ghastly legacy through the eyes of those who endured it, not from the well-meaning antics of the white saviors.
Especially poignant and dramatic is that the Africans speak in Mende, the language of Sierre Leone. Subtitles are used, but inconsistently. But John Williams' overwrought score deafens the nuance.
The movie focuses on Cinque (Djimon Hounsou), who emerges as leader of the rebels. The film opens with a tight close-up of a man digging a nail out of the wooden hull of a ship. His fingers and the wood itself are bloodied. He uses the nails to undo the shackles that bind him. Cinque emerges from his chains and, in a bloody montage set against an electrical storm, he leads the murderous rebellion.
Though it is Cinque who struggles to communicate with Baldwin, Cinque and his comrades are amused by the Americans; they even think a bunch of missionaries are "sad entertainers."
They consider Baldwin someone who collects "dung." And that's understandable: McConaughey looks and acts goofy as he peers from behind spectacles, a fringe of whiskers around his jaw. He also affects an odd accent that makes him even goofier. He is completely overshadowed by the charismatic Hounsou, whose outbreak in court, "Give us us free," packs an emotional wallop.
McConaughey also is outclassed by Freeman (who unfortunately is underused), Hopkins and Hawthorne. Hopkins' interpretation of Adams as a doddering old fool is something of a historical inaccuracy, though, as is Hawthorne playing Van Buren as a moron.
But even though Spielberg plays games with history, "Amistad" remains a beautifully filmed and compelling movie. It is a story that deserves to be told and understood.
Janusz Kaminski's deep-focus cinematography is both breathtaking and astounding. When the slave ship passes a boat filled with formally attired whites sipping champagne and listening to a chamber orchestra, the image is ghostly, almost otherworldly.
"Amistad" is produced by Spielberg, Debbie Allen and Colin Wilson. It is a DreamWorks Pictures release in association with HBO Pictures and is rated R.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Load-Date: December 11, 1997

 

End of Document
