

At the Movies: 'Twin Town'
May 5, 1997, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 752 words
Byline: By MATT WOLF, Associated Press Writer
Body



AT THE MOVIES Logo
The Wales Tourist Board is unlikely to be thrilled with "Twin Town," a smugly unpleasant film that takes its characters on many a wild ride while leaving the movie audience in search of a way out of the theater.
If you believe the hype, writer-director Kevin Allen's film (co-written with Paul Durden) is the Welsh equivalent to "Trainspotting," last year's sleeper hit about Scottish heroin addicts. That film's producer and director, Andrew Macdonald and Danny Boyle, are the executive producers here.
Its hip veneer notwithstanding, the new film is far closer to a blackly comic film noir - Joe Orton as he might have looked directed by the Bob Rafelson who made "Blood and Wine."
The question is, who will find these antics even remotely amusing? Do your sides split at the sight of a decapitated dog? A family home set on fire? Two men - the "twins" of the title - urinating on a crowd?
If so, you might warm to Allen's anarchic comedy set among the Swansea dispossessed, a "Wayne's World" for Britain's errant youth. Most, though, may well regard the film as a failure of judgment, both of tone and of an audience's probable tolerance.
Scottish actor Dougray Scott stars as "bent copper" Terry, one of two local police officers enmeshed in the drug racket in the coastal Welsh city once described by its native son, poet Dylan Thomas, as "the graveyard of ambition."
Considerably less savvy, though no less fond of an illegal substance or two, are brothers Julian and Jeremy - known as The Twins, though they are in fact three years apart - who spend their lives careening through Swansea in one stolen car or another.
The Twins' father, Fatty (Huw Ceredig), is injured in a roofing accident, which takes the boys to the home of Fatty's fat-cat employer Bryn (William Thomas), a contractor who happens to be one of Terry's better customers.
It is the misfortune of Bryn's wife Lucy (Sue Roderick) to be confronted with her brutally murdered dog. But the pooch's fate is merely the first in a casual pileup of corpses that makes "Hamlet" look discreet, as the Twins leave behind them a legacy of destruction and death that finds them at film's end setting sail for Morocco. (North Africa, you've been warned.)
The film clearly intends to trade on the same cheerful amorality that has made a hit out of such British TV shows as "Men Behaving Badly" or even "Absolutely Fabulous," though moved down a social notch (or two or three) from the latter show's Edina and Patsy.
A brief clip from "Serpico" suggests unearned parallels between a 25-year-old film classic about police corruption, New York-style, and Allen's updated version on an entirely different set of mean streets.
No one could accuse Allen of selling an audience short on plot. Though barely more than 90 minutes in length, "Twin Town" has at least three false endings while the narrative embraces as many twists and turns as one of the Twins' runaway cars.
More of a shame is the director's skimpy way with those telling moments that would root the film firmly in a sense of place. About the most revealing vignette is the food served at the dog's funeral - sausage rolls and Welsh cakes. Elsewhere, Welsh supporters will no doubt balk at the film's implicit mantra, "If all else fails, try Wales."
None of the actors - some of them known outside of Wales through television, others from the London theater - are likely to spring to fame from "Twin Town," in the way that "Trainspotting" made a star of Ewan McGregor. (If the women fare better, they tend to be less obnoxious.)
Still, one can't help feeling that, for all its sideswipes, Allen feels affectionately toward his former home. In that case, think of "Twin Town" less as a case of you-had-to-be-there than you-had-to-be-from (or at least have lived) there.
"Twin Town" was directed by Kevin Allen from a script by Allen and Paul Durden. It is a Polygram Filmed Entertainment release of a Figment Films Production in association with Agenda. Peter McAleese was the producer, with Andrew Macdonald and Danny Boyle as executive producers. Rated R, it runs 98 minutes.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Load-Date: May 5, 1997

 

End of Document
