

Barak not optimistic for the revival of Israel-Syrian peace talks
The Associated Press
April 9, 2000, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 760 words
Byline: By DINA KRAFT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




On the eve of his departure for a Washington summit meeting with President Clinton, Prime Minister Ehud Barak downplayed hopes Sunday for a breakthrough that could revive peace talks with Syria.
"I am in general not optimistic about the resumption of talks with the Syrians but we are responsible and sensitive enough not to totally close the door," Barak told reporters in Jerusalem.
Talks between the sides broke down in January, and hopes that a Geneva summit between Clinton and Syrian President Hafez Assad would revive them were jettisoned after the meeting ended with no progress.
Barak told his Cabinet on Sunday that parts of the West Bank abutting Jerusalem will ultimately come under Palestinian control, although a large Jewish West Bank settlement near the disputed city will be annexed to Israel.
The Israeli prime minister has previously rebuffed Palestinian Authority demands for full control of any areas adjoining Jerusalem, most recently in an interim withdrawal last month.
Barak's announcement to his ministers indicated a new flexibility in his position just as Israeli and Palestinian negotiators met in Washington to hammer out the framework of a final peace agreement.
Earlier Sunday, Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat said there had been no recent progress in the negotiations, which are in their second session at an Air Force base outside Washington.
The two negotiating teams were attempting to draft a framework for a final peace deal - grappling with the toughest issues on the table, including borders, the status of a future Palestinian state, refugees and Jerusalem.
"There is not enough response from the Israeli side to implement what we had agreed upon," Arafat told reporters as he returned to Gaza from Cairo, where he met with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak.
Clinton, in an effort to press the sides into agreement, is slated to meet Tuesday with Barak and on April 20 with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat.
Barak said he was expecting Clinton to give him a detailed report of an earlier summit in Geneva when the two meet on Tuesday.
He said the hastily arranged Washington summit will focus on Israel-Palestinian peace efforts.
Additionally, Barak said his meeting with Clinton will deal with Israel's plan to withdraw unilaterally from south Lebanon.
Barak has said he would prefer to end Israel's 18-year presence in southern Lebanon through an agreement with Syria, the chief power in Lebanon. As Barak's July deadline for the withdrawal looms, public fears in Israel have increased that pulling out with no deal could prove bloody.
The prime minister told his Cabinet that the United States is closely following the planned pullout and is involved in diplomatic activity to help draft international support for the plan.
Barak has said he believes Syria is opposed to a unilateral withdrawal, because it would lose leverage in its efforts to regain all of the Golan Heights, a strategic plateau captured by Israel in the 1967 Mideast War. Assad insists on reclaiming the heights all the way to the Sea of Galilee - one of Israel's main water sources.
Barak's advisers and Cabinet ministers reacted warily to a proposal aired this weekend by Assad confidante Patrick Seale to share territory along the Sea of Galilee.
In interviews with the Israeli press, Seale suggested a plan that would give Israel sovereignty over the Sea of Galilee but allow Syria control of the northeastern shore of the lake. The shore area would not have border crossings, Seale said, and Israelis would be allowed free access. Both countries could develop the site's tourism potential.
Syria has not commented on the proposal. Barak security adviser Danny Yatom rejected it.
"In order to control Israel's only freshwater sources, Israel needs to have sovereignty over the Sea of Galilee and the area northeast of the lake," Yatom said in an interview with Israel radio. And in a statement Sunday, Israeli Foreign Minister David Levy said Syria should make proposals "face to face and not through telepathy, not through fax and also not through a journalist."
Strengthening hopes Syria is staking out a new position, Syrian Foreign Minister Farouk al-Sharaa was quoted as saying that Syria is ready to negotiate a water deal with Israel to break the stalemate in their peace talks.
"Land is not negotiable, but water is," al-Sharaa was quoted as telling several Egyptian newspapers during a visit to Cairo on Saturday for talks with Mubarak, who is trying to help revive the Israeli-Syrian talks.
Barak will discuss the Syrian track with Mubarak in Cairo on Monday.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo JRL101
 Load-Date: April 10, 2000

 

End of Document
