

Black yuppies carving out piece of the pie in South Africa
The Associated Press
April 25, 1999, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 1036 words
Byline: s NY303-304 of April 19, By ANDREW SELSKY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, South Africa
Body




Zipping along freeways in BMWs. Shopping at DKNY and other high-end stores in glitzy malls. Meeting for power lunches at trendy restaurants.
Five years after apartheid was swept away, black yuppies are joining the action in South Africa. Unlike their counterparts elsewhere, these go-getters are pioneers, encountering twists and turns as they enter previously all-white domains.
And, in a development closely watched by society, the newly successful are confronting the question of whether to become part of a take-all-you-can "me generation" or try to lift up fellow blacks as native tradition demands.
The ascendance of this black professional class highlights how much South Africa has changed since all-race elections in 1994 ended apartheid.
In just four years, the value of shares of black-controlled companies on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange has skyrocketed from $ 800 million dollars to $ 9.8 billion, according to BusinessMap, a research group.
That increase is fueled by government-sponsored black empowerment initiatives but also by pragmatic, cutthroat business practices.
"In business, the only color that counts is the color of money," says Mzi Khumalo, head of a real estate and finance holding company.
That attitude is by no means the rule, but many black yuppies worry they're losing the African spirit of "ubuntu" - a focus on helping the community rather than on individualism.
Clifford Zungu, an Avis executive, and his wife, Tandeka, head of a government auditing team, are comfortably settled in a small, neat house in Rivonia, a predominantly white Johannesburg suburb. Yet they are uneasy about their cushy life in a neighborhood of walled-in homes.
"In the township, I'd drive past friends' homes and see them sitting outside, and stop in for a drink," Zungu recalls wistfully. "Here, the person who lives across the next wall I probably wouldn't even recognize in the street."
The Zungus fear that as more blacks become suburbanites and acquire more consumer goods and Western values, the spirit of ubuntu is fading.
"Ubuntu still exists in rural communities," says Mrs. Zungu. "But in suburban life, one lives for himself. You see a starving kid and think 'It's got nothing to do with me.' In a rural area that is unheard of."
Black yuppies can be classified into two types, Patrick Kuwana, an executive with Hewlett-Packard, says over a beer at the bar of the Hyatt hotel in Johannesburg.
"One is the person who says 'I've reached this position in life, but others are lagging far behind and I'm concerned about that,"' Kuwana shouts over a rock video blaring from an array of 16 television sets. Black executives, their ties loosened and some smoking fat cigars, down drinks at nearby tables.
"The other says 'To hell with the rest of you guys, I'm going to get as much as I can," the computer executive says.
It's hard to resist looking out for No. 1 - not surprising since blacks were denied so much for so many years.
"We want to compete with our white counterparts," Kuwana says. "We want the type of cars they drive. We want to live in their nice neighborhoods. Now that these things are available, we're going a bit overboard."
While more blacks are becoming wealthy in South Africa, more are also joining the ranks of the poor, according to a government report. The proportion of blacks in the highest income levels tripled to 6 percent while those earning the lowest wages grew from 34 percent to 38 percent from 1990 to 1995, it said.
Those who fit into Kuwana's first category are trying to help the ones left behind.
Ntombi Msimang owns a popular African-cuisine restaurant, Safika ("We Have Arrived" in the Zulu language) in Pretoria, and recently opened a second restaurant.
At one moment, Msimang sounds like a Reagan Republican, complaining about nettlesome taxes and work regulations.
"We are tied up in a whole lot of labor laws that are going to end up discouraging employment," she moans. "If workers are not performing, I should be free to let them go without being taken to a labor court."
But in the next minute, she tells of her desire to try to help society at large. Furthermore, Msimang is putting words into action.
She administers a church-run investment fund that provides start-up loans for black businesses. She is currently helping low-income black farmers win a loan by advising them how to form a company to market flowers and vegetables.
"It's important to try to make a difference and make this country work," Msimang says.
As the upwardly mobile blacks blaze trails, pressure is mounting on others to achieve the same success.
Some would-be yuppies feel so pressured they've become suicidal, says Professor Lourens Schlebusch, head of medical psychology at the University of Natal in Durban.
At one major Durban hospital, attempted suicide cases involving black men and women have increased 58 percent since 1988, according to a new study that Schlebusch co-wrote.
Most of those in the study were young and well-educated - people normally expected to be full of hope instead of despair, Schlebusch says.
"They are thrust into a situation where they have to compete heavily now for a place in the sun," he says. "Socioeconomic competition, stock market crashes, expectations placed on them by their parents - all these stressors are taking their toll."
For those who do achieve success, many are propelled by perseverance and a bit of luck.
Peggy-Sue Khumalo, the illegitimate daughter of a black maid and a white farm boy, grew up poor but has a can-do attitude that is typical of her peers. After graduating from high school, she worked as a waitress in Johannesburg to pay her way through college.
There, she competed in a local beauty pageant and won, then went on to capture the 1996 Miss South Africa pageant. While she held the crown, Khumalo joined a public relations company. She works about 12 hours a day and is now the firm's executive director.
Her message to fellow black South Africans is: Don't whine. Don't expect handouts. Lift yourself up.
"We came from poor families. So what? Our parents didn't have an education. So what?" she says. "The black people of this country have really suffered, but some of us have broken barriers.
"If I can do it, anybody can do it."
 Load-Date: April 25, 1999

 

End of Document
