

Books and Authors: 'Techno-Thriller' Writer Larry Bond Still Doing Wargames 'On The Side'
June 28, 1996, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 891 words
Byline: By DOUGLAS J. ROWE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Like any good storyteller, Larry Bond begins at the beginning. He relates how he got turned on by wargames at age 8, when he received an old Avalon Hill bookshelf game, Afrika Korps.
The 44-year-old former naval officer and warfare analyst grew up to design Harpoon, first published in 1980 and still used by the U.S. Naval Academy and on ships as a training aid.
Now he still designs wargames "on the side" - when he's not writing best-selling geopolitical potboilers. The latest: "The Enemy Within."
His fourth novel, it tells of a terrorist campaign against the United States, meticulously orchestrated by a foreign power to make it look like white supremacists and other domestic crazies are the real culprits and foment roiling racial tensions.
The book is his first novel set in the States, and his first to feature a female protaganist - and it's shorter and more personal than his previous efforts: "Red Phoenix" (about an invasion of South Korea by North Korea); "Vortex" (the story of a reactionary Afrikaner government in South Africa) and "Cauldron" (pitting America against a France allied with a reunified, restrengthened Germany).
Bond can sound genuinely self-effacing as he tells you how unlikely it is that he's a successful writer.
He tells you how his background is in computers (a degree from St. Thomas College in St. Paul, Minn.) and mathematics. And how he met Tom Clancy, the dean of techno-thrillers, and worked as an apprentice, "gaming-out" aspects of Clancy's "Red Storm Rising."
"I have no background in the literary arts," he notes. All of his previous writing experience came from writing technical nonfiction about such esoteric topics as the number of carriers needed by the year 2005.
"If I had ever wanted to write a book, I imagined it would be some World War II battle I was interested in or some current defense issue," he says.
"I like it. I like being a storyteller. It's good work. I can't argue with the hours. I can't argue with the commute," says the writer who works out of an office in his Virginia home where he lives with his wife and two daughters, aged 7 and 4. "There's a lot of reasons to like it."
He also had the good fortune, he says, of "inheriting" Clancy's agent. (He remains close to Clancy and is godfather to one of his kids.)
"I started at the top, and I've been peddling like crazy to keep up ever since," he says.
Right now he's at "the story definition stage" of his next book.
"It's like any genre. You have rules. You've got to have trenchcoats in mysteries … And obviously we have to have a crisis somewhere, and it has to involve U.S. interests somehow."
And it must be based on reality. "The 'thrill' in thrillers is knowing that it can actually happen, it might happen. Possible," he says, hitting the last word hard. "Not probable. But plausible."
He says a little of the book is autobiographical, too, going back to 1976, when he was in Officer Candidate School in Newport, R.I. Among his fellow students were Iranians, minions of the Shah who wanted them to learn Western ways - language, culture, weapons systems and military tactics.
"What if one of those officers survived the purges" that followed in the Iranian revolution, Bond wondered - and that meditation helped inspire this book.
Another rule: Put a human face on tragedy. He gives a name and a personality to a young boy who's blown to smithereens at Disneyland, for example, and a Seattle woman who's worried about running late to work yet again - until she's vaporized.
"If you just blew up a monorail in Disneyland, but didn't put real people on the monorail, I think the individual reader would not be nearly as deeply affected by it," he explains.
"I know Rule No. 1 in journalism is to try to put a personal face on whatever story you're trying to put across. And I think that holds in storytelling, too."
Bond likes to think the characters in his latest novel are better developed than those of his previous books, which featured armies on the march.
This one is a smaller story with a faster pace and includes the love story between his female protagonist, Helen Gray, head of an FBI Hostage Rescue Team, and Peter Thorn, a colonel who once headed Delta Force, the Army's anti-terrorist elite.
Bond acknowledges that character development is the hardest thing for him.
"I can write a battle scene. That's no problem. But having some individual go through personal change, or personal growth … It's like writing a love scene. I hate writing love scenes. First of all, I don't have that large a base of experience. Second of all, how many battles have you been in? I could write anything. How would you know if I got it right?"
He says, too, that he always wanted to have a really strong female character, since that's one way to get women to read what he calls a "boy-toy kind of a book."
Bond isn't much into gadgetry and jokes about how his stories aren't to be confused with an Ian Fleming spy story where James Bond grabs the gun from one bad guy, does a backflip, and shoots another opponent before he hits the ground.
"Sometimes, it's really cool. And sometimes it's very important for the story," he says of the "techno" part of techno-thrillers. "But it's there for the same reason horses are there in a Western. They're there to let the hero do the job, or the bad guy do the job. They're not supposed to get in the way."
 Load-Date: June 28, 1996

 

End of Document
