

Brazzaville seemed - on the surface - an African success story
June 8, 1997, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 731 words
Byline: By ALEXANDRA ZAVIS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KINSHASA, Congo
Body




Five years ago, the Republic of Congo was shaping up to be an African success story.
It was a compact, manageable country, across the river from its huge and unwieldy neighbor, the former Zaire, now also called Congo.
An autocrat transferred power smoothly to a democratically elected Republic of Congo president. A bourgeoisie formed, propped up by trickle-down oil wealth, and was spending lazy Saturdays at Paris-style cafes.
Today, ethnic tension, power-grabbing and old-fashioned greed is exploding into urban warfare. Government soldiers battled former president Gen. Denis Sassou-Nguesso's "Cobra" militia on Sunday for control of the streets. Residents spent a fourth day cowering indoors - or out looting neighbors' abandoned homes.
Just months ago, the Republic of Congo was seen as such a sure bet that when Zaire was collapsing earlier this year, the United States, Britain, Belgium, France and Portugal positioned evacuation troops in Brazzaville, across the river from Kinshasa.
It seemed the logical choice. Kinshasa was sprawling and chaotic; Brazzaville was easy to negotiate and so civilized.
On the Brazzaville side of the river, travelers find courteous customs clerks at the ferry crossing, set fees for visas and a pleasant cafe. On the Kinshasa side, outstretched hands demand bribes, big men with sticks beat desperate smugglers until they cough up cash, customs clerks shake down foreigners.
In the end, there was little for the Western soldiers to do - all but the French left once Laurent Kabila sent Mobutu Sese Seko's corrupt regime packing and introduced a degree of order in Kinshasa. The French, concerned for a few hundred of their citizens, stayed because Kabila's regime made threatening noises against France for having politically backed Mobutu.
Little did they suspect they would be forced to protect more than 2,000 French in Brazzaville. But the signs were there.
On May 4, loyalists of Sassou-Nguesso beat to death a soldier they suspected of plotting to kill the former Republic of Congo president. Six days later, loyalists of Gen. Jacques-Joachim Yhomby-Opango retaliated by killing 11 Sassou-Nguesso loyalists.
The animosities ran deep. Yhomby-Opango was briefly president in the 1970s, until Sassou-Nguesso installed his brand of Marxist one-party rule. Yhomby-Opango spent much of the 1980s in jail or under house arrest.
The men were from rival tribes and each commanded loyal followings.
Domestic and foreign pressures forced Sassou-Nguesso to introduce democratic reforms, and in 1992 Pascal Lissouba - an ally of Yhomby-Opango - became the country's first president elected in multiparty elections.
The prospects appeared good: European oil giants, including Elf, Agip and Shell, mined oil off the southern coast, and detected reserves to the north.
Sassou-Nguesso began opening up markets and cultivating French and American influence, and Brazzaville developed a middle class.
Residents enjoyed quality restaurants and cafes. The country's small population - barely two million - seemed to guarantee equitable growth.
But during May 1993 legislative elections, it blew open.
Sassou-Nguesso's resentment had been building; members of his tribe had been bumped from senior army posts. He and Bernard Kolelas, another opposition leader, accused Lissouba's party of rigging the elections, a charge later partly backed up by the courts.
Sassou-Nguesso had more in mind than the ballot box: His loyalists seized the Brazzaville-Pointe Noire Railway - the country's lifeline - and demanded a cut of offshore oil revenues.
Soon, the country was gripped by violence. In a scene replayed in the past week, pillaging government soldiers targeted French expatriates - many invited in by Sassou-Nguesso during the 1980s - and French troops were sent in for evacuations.
By summer's end, there were 2,000 dead, 200,000 homeless and three 5,000-strong militias - followers of Yhomby-Opango, Sassou-Nguesso and Kolelas. The militias became more entrenched over time.
The strongmen kept on vowing to disarm their militias, most recently just eight days ago. Two days later, Sassou-Nguesso's Cobras attacked a government army convoy in Oyo, their northern stronghold, killing four.
Outraged, Lissouba vowed to disarm the militias. Government troops moved in on Sassou-Nguesso's residence Thursday in the northern suburb of Mpila. The Cobras were ready, and the battle rages on.
 Load-Date: June 8, 1997

 

End of Document
