

Breakthrough in the Balkans, breakdown in the Middle East
The Associated Press
October 7, 2000, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 633 words
Byline: By GEORGE GEDDA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Thumbs pointed skyward and a triumphant look on her face, Madeleine Albright savored the moment as she stood on the State Department's second-floor balcony.
"Great news," the secretary of state said when word came that Russia had swung around to the U.S. view that Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic was finished.
That elation, however, was tempered by peace setbacks in the Middle East as violence escalated between Israelis and Palestinians. And on Saturday, as Vojislav Kostunica prepared to complete a bloodless change of power in Yugoslavia, even Lebanese guerrillas entered the Middle East fray on Israel's northern border.
Overall, it was a decidedly mixed week for Albright, and her boss, President Clinton.
Less than three months ago, Palestinian and Israeli leaders had joined Clinton at Camp David in a quest for a final peace settlement. Hopes for peace now seem as distant as they have been in years.
At the White House, Clinton worked the telephone Saturday, holding urgent consultations with Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat. More calls to other world leaders were expected.
With the rising casualty toll, particularly among Palestinians, Albright had invited Barak and Arafat to Paris last Wednesday.
At Camp David, with U.S. prodding, the parties had grappled with the core issues that divided them, particularly the future of Jerusalem. In Paris, Albright had a far more modest agenda: an end to the violence and a return to the "psychology of peacemaking" evident at Camp David.
The marathon talks in Paris and later discussions in Egypt, which Barak shunned, had little effect on the violence. Albright headed home Thursday, her disappointment over the Middle East assuaged by the mass revolt against Milosevic that day in Belgrade.
Clinton captured the dichotomy of the extraordinary week when he said Friday, "It's been kind of an emotional and intellectual roller coaster; so much good news in one place, and so much trouble in another."
Nowhere has Albright devoted more energy than in the Balkans and in the Middle East.
As a child of Central Europe, she roamed the streets of Belgrade, the city where her father was posted as a diplomat. Steeped in the region's history, she believes Milosevic is the product of an authoritarian tradition that has caused much grief and suffering.
Her former spokesman, James P. Rubin, recalled Albright's distress over what he described as the "Milosevic-inspired Bosnia war" in 1992.
"Albright was very conscious of the evil that his brand of nationalism represented," Rubin said Friday from his home in London. As U.S. ambassador to the United Nations beginning in 1993, Albright found the administration's policy toward Milosevic appallingly timid.
Albright was an enthusiastic backer of the late summer bombing campaign in 1995 that brought Milosevic to the negotiating table. As secretary of state almost four years later, at the time of the NATO bombing campaign against Yugoslavia, her identification with the policy was such that some called it "Madeleine's War."
Rubin said Albright has tended to be more fatalistic about the Middle East peace process than she is about Yugoslavia.
"One has to recognize there are limits to what she can do to bring about agreements between the parties" in the Middle East, Rubin said. As she herself has said many times, "It's up to the parties themselves to make the hard decisions."
On the other hand, Rubin said Albright recognized from the outset that the United States and Europe had far more opportunity to shape events in the Balkans.
"Western decisions have been crucial," Rubin said. "The two situations are a reflection of where American can be decisive and where America can only help those who help themselves."
On the Net: State Department: http://www.state.gov 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY115
 Load-Date: October 8, 2000

 

End of Document
