

Britain Rolls out The Red Carpet for Nelson Mandela
July 9, 1996, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 496 words
Byline: By AUDREY WOODS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




At a lavish banquet to honor the first-ever state visit to Britain by a South African president, the queen on Tuesday called Nelson Mandela a worldwide symbol of liberation and reconciliation.
Earlier in the day, thousands of cheering Britons filled the streets to get a glimpse of the South African leader in his horse-drawn carriage.
"You and your country can show the world, often dominated by division, that reconciliation and decency can prevail," Queen Elizabeth II told the 78-year-old Mandela at the Buckingham Palace banquet.
"You … by your willingness to embrace your former captors, have set the course towards national reconciliation and freedom for all the people of South Africa."
The tall, gray-haired president, imprisoned for nearly 30 years, said his four-day visit to Britain, together with the queen's 1995 tour of South Africa had "set the seal" on a new relationship between the two countries.
More than 6,000 people packed the Horse Guards parade ground around noon to see South Africa's first black president. Royal gun salutes boomed across the capital from Green Park and the Tower of London.
Mandela stepped slowly from a limousine to be greeted by the queen, her husband Prince Philip, Prime Minister John Major and Cabinet ministers.
Before departing for Buckingham Palace, where he and his daughter Zenani Mandela-Dlamini were staying during their visit, Mandela inspected an honor guard while a military band played the South African national anthem.
Later, the dean of the Westminster Abbey, the Very Rev. Michael Mayne, presented Mandela with two pamphlets - one from a thanksgiving service held at the abbey to celebrate Mandela's release from prison in 1990; and another celebrating South Africa's return to the Commonwealth with the end of apartheid in 1994.
Mandela plans to meet this week with Major, other political leaders and business executives. Britain is South Africa's largest foreign investor and one of its biggest trading partners.
The president also will address a joint session of the House of Commons and the House of Lords, receive eight honorary degrees and visit charity projects in south London with Prince Charles on Friday. He also will stop by the predominantly black neighborhood of Brixton.
"It must not be forgotten that masses of the people in this country and elsewhere were in the forefront of the anti-apartheid struggle," Mandela told British Broadcasting Corp. radio.
In the House of Commons on Tuesday, Labor Party lawmaker Donald Anderson asked Major, a Tory, if part of "the historic greatness of President Mandela is that he is prepared to forgive and forget the collusion of the Tory government of the time with apartheid?"
Former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher had opposed economic sanctions against South Africa's white-minority government, though she had called for Mandela's release from prison.
Major deflected the jab at his predecessor, saying only that Mandela "was a very welcome guest of the United Kingdom."
 Load-Date: July 10, 1996

 

End of Document
