

Caribbean emigres keep the Rastafarian faith in Ethiopia
December 10, 2000, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 883 words
Byline: By ABRAHAM FISSEHA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SHASHEMENE, Ethiopia
Body




A Jamaican lilt rises in Albert Allen's voice as he chants the multiples of five in English to a group of wiggly children in the cement-block Rasta Community School.
Not satisfied with their response, he switches to Amharic, the national language of Ethiopia, the land of emperor Haile Selassie - the man revered by Allen and his fellow Rastafarians as the manifestation of God.
Tall and thin, his dreadlocks stuffed inside a gray beret, the 43-year-old Allen was trained as a civil engineer in Jamaica and came to Ethiopia a decade ago to realize the dream of going home to Africa.
"We are not here in numbers, but we are here as pioneers," he said of the small community of Rastafarians of Afro-Caribbean origin who have settled in Shashemene, a market town of 50,000 people 170 miles south of the capital, Addis Ababa.
The community stands out in Ethiopia, where many people are Ethiopian Orthodox Christians who are often puzzled by the Rastafarians.
Rastafarians consider Haile Selassie, whose name before his 1930 coronation was Ras Tafari Makonnen, as the messiah of the black man.
On Nov. 5, the remains of Haile Selassie, who died in 1975 while held by the military junta that overthrew him a year earlier, were reburied in a colorful, emotional ceremony in Trinity Cathedral in Addis Ababa.
But Allen and his fellow Rastafarians do not believe he is dead. They believe he transcends mere mortality.
"We're not interested in the body. We're interested in the spirit," Allen said of the 83-year-old emperor, whose remains were discovered in 1992, a year after the military regime was ousted. "He was, and he still is, the spirit and the force for all the black people, wherever they are."
Haile Selassie was the last emperor in a line that royalists believe reaches back to King Solomon and the Queen of Sheba. Ethiopia was once known as Abyssinia, an ancient black kingdom.
In the early decades of the 20th century when European colonialism still stretched around the world, a back-to-Africa movement was born in Jamaica among the descendants of former slaves.
"Look to Africa, where a black king shall be crowned, for the day of deliverance is here," the movement's founder, Marcus Garvey, said in 1927.
Three years later, Ras Tafari assumed the throne in Addis Ababa as Haile Selassie I, King of Kings, Lord of Lords, Conquering Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Elect of God and Emperor of Ethiopia.
Ethiopia had begun to encourage educated African-Americans to come and help build a modern society. Not many did.
It wasn't until 1955 that 500 acres of the emperor's personal land in Shashemene were offered to "black people of the West" to settle on. It took until 1971 for the first to arrive.
At its height, the Rasta community numbered around 2,500, most of whom were farmers like their Ethiopian neighbors. There are now about 1,000.
Gladstone Robinson, 71, who had lived in Barbados and Philadelphia, said he was among the first dozen Rastafarians to claim land in Shashemene.
"Regardless of what people say about these bones, Haile Selassie is alive and well and will live in the trees and the mountains and the grass and in my heart," said Robinson, a former U.S. Army medic who set up five pharmacies in Ethiopia during the emperor's reign.
Today, Robinson and his large family live on his monthly U.S. Social Security check of $500, a tidy sum in this poor country.
He is concerned about restrictions placed by Prime Minister Meles Zenawi's government on the immigration of more Rastafarians.
"We're not expatriates - we're repatriates. We're coming home," Robinson said.
Jemal Ibrahim, head of the Foreigner Department of the Ethiopian Immigration Authority, said there are no restrictions on Rastafarians or other Caribbean blacks visiting Ethiopia as tourists. But if they want to become residents, they must get work permits like all other foreigners.
Besides its best known practitioner, the late Jamaican singer Bob Marley, Rastafarianism is most often associated with the smoking of marijuana. Called "ganja" in Jamaica, it was traditionally used there in folk remedies before the advent of the Rastafarians, who believe it encourages the calm necessary for religious meditation.
But Allen and other members of the Rasta community in Shashemene are impatient with the stereotype of the ganja-smoking, reggae-singing Rastafarian.
"People should not always see us as smoking ganja; they should see us from other angles as what we can do," said Allen, who has taken it upon himself to make sure the Rasta community's 100 children get extra teaching after normal school hours.
Among the subjects is English. Many of the children have Rasta fathers and Ethiopian mothers and tend to speak Amharic.
Janet McLaughlin, who was born in Britain to immigrants from the Caribbean island of Dominica, first visited Ethiopia as a tourist in 1987. She returned a year later to marry a Rastafarian carpenter.
"Everything suited me, everything fit," the 42-year-old mother of five said as birds twittered in the trees and the sun shone on a garden filled with flowers. "There's no regrets at all. Ethiopia is so vastly different from England. The peace of mind, you would never get that in England."
---
On the Net:
Rastafari site: http://www.swagga.com/rasta.htm 
Jamaica site: http://www.africana.com/tt(underscore)122.htm 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY318-319 of Dec. 4, Graphic ETHIOPIA RASTA HOME
 Load-Date: December 11, 2000

 

End of Document
