

Catholics seek state intervention for Church of the Holy Sepulcher door
The Associated Press
November 3, 1999, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 637 words
Byline: By DINA KRAFT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




One of the Christian sects squabbling to decide on whose turf a new door at the Church of the Holy Sepulcher should be located has requested a new mediator: the Jewish state.
The sects have for centuries fiercely guarded their corners of the church where tradition says Jesus was buried, and the question of who would control a suggested new door raises issues that have prompted priestly punch-outs.
"The Israeli government or the (Jerusalem) municipality must press the communities to make a decision," said Father Claudio Baratto, a Franciscan monk who speaks for his church's interest at the tomb.
The Public Security Ministry, fearing a safety disaster with one door and an expected millennium rush of pilgrims, said Tuesday that minister Shlomo Ben-Ami would lead a panel to consider the sects' proposals on an "emergency exit."
The Tourism Ministry added a warning: If the groups fail to agree on a solution by the end of the year, the government will make a unilateral decision.
Calls to leaders of other denominations who share control of the church were not immediately returned.
The cavernous basilica currently accommodates 700,000 visitors a year, who file in and out through a single door. That number is expected to grow in 2000, when Israel expects a 50 percent rise in tourism.
"It's a matter of security," said Ben-Ami's spokesman, Moshe Debi. "God forbid something happens and there is only one door serving as both an entrance and an exit." An 1840 fire in the church killed dozens of people.
Debi stressed that any decision would involve the leaders of the six sects staking claims to the 900-year-old church, built on what pilgrims since the fourth century have believed is the site of Jesus' crucifixion, burial and resurrection.
Greek Orthodox, Roman Catholic and Armenian Orthodox groups share main control of the church, and the Ethiopian, Egyptian Copt and Syrian churches also maintain a presence there.
The division was codified in the 1850s, when the ruling Ottoman Turks issued rules for guardianship of holy sites.
Baratto's call for Israeli intervention is unusual - Christians in the Old City do not formally recognize Israel's sovereignty in the areas it captured in the 1967 Mideast war. Israel also is usually hesitant to intervene in such disputes - a wrong move could set back its campaign to earn international recognition for its claim to Jerusalem.
Daniel Rossing, an expert on Jerusalem's Christian communities, said the internecine rivalries may seem petty, but church officials represent minorities who are threatened by anything that could impinge on their stake in choice Christian real estate.
"It's a shrine, a symbol," Rossing said of the labyrinth of winding corridors and chapels, pillars and archways. "It's very powerful, not easily compromised on."
Tensions have exploded into the occasional fistfight between Ethiopian monks and Egyptian Copts - like after the night in 1970 when the Ethiopians switched locks to a door connecting a rooftop monastery to the church below, while the Copts attended Easter rites.
The sensitivities don't stop with Christendom. Talk of a new door may jeopardize the privileges of two Muslim families who have served as the sole gatekeepers to the church for 800 years.
The Nuseibeh and Joudeh families were entrusted with guardianship over the door by the Arab conquerer Saladin in the 12th century, who sought to end fighting among Christians over which denomination should keep the key.
Baratto insists the Franciscans get a copy of the keys to a new door, although the families say they would see that as undermining their status. The Tourism Ministry has said any new keys would likely be in the hands of church leaders.
Lobbying may be less than celestial, Baratto said, but "if you want something, you have to push for it. It's not coming from the sky."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo JRL104, GRAPHIC JERUSALEM DOOR
 Load-Date: November 4, 1999

 

End of Document
