

Caught in the crossfire, Freetown's residents brave a new war
The Associated Press
January 9, 1999, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 655 words
Byline: IAN STEWART, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: FREETOWN, Sierra Leone
Body




Cut off from the world, carved up into neighborhoods of warring loyalist and rebel gunmen, Sierra Leone's capital is a city of suffering in a postcard setting of swaying palm trees and rolling surf.
Amid the now regular thunder of artillery fire, the people of Freetown hunkered down Saturday for another night without electricity, dwindling food supplies and uncertainty for their future.
"They burn our homes, they kill our people. All we want is peace to live our lives," shopowner Samuel Torto said of infiltrating rebel fighters.
Battered by war for the third time in 18 months, crippled by coups and corruption, this destitute West African capital barely functions.
A rebel army, infamous for hacking off the limbs of their living civilian victims, has marched into parts of the capital last week, bringing with them a new chapter of suffering for this often ignored nation the size of Indiana.
With phone lines to the outside world cut and the city's main power station in rebel hands, Sierra Leone and its people are in the dark.
Although a West African coalition army led by Nigerian troops is battling to preserve the democratically elected government in Freetown, residents of this former British colony say they have been abandoned by the West.
"The rest of the planet don't do nothing," said Yakanu Contah, a mother of two.
Barefoot and dressed in vitual rags, she's barely been able to feed her family since her eldest son - the family's breadwinner - was tortured and killed earlier this year by rebel fighters.
While Washington and other western capitals repeatedly call for peace and democracy in Sierra Leone, little else is offered up in the way of help, residents say.
"We're told by the United States to have democracy, but then its only lip service when we are in trouble," said Thomas Abassie, a retired school teacher.
Britain has dispatched a navy frigate that is now steaming towards the waters off Sierra Leone's Atlantic coastline to help evacuate about 50 Britons still in the country. The United States long ago withdrew its diplomats and aid workers.
The United Nations, a lifeline for relief aid, pulled out its last expatriate staff last week.
Freetown is a city of palm trees and crumbling Colonial-era buildings, set between the surf of the Atlantic Ocean and the small mountains that rise behind the city.
Rated by the United Nations Development Program as the world's worst country in which to live, Sierra Leone has stumbled through years of fighting, coups and violent destruction since its independence from British rule more than 30 years ago.
Now, rebels are running amok in city streets and government forces have ordered everyone to stay in their homes. Food is in short supply and where it is available prices are soaring.
"There's no way to go out to get food," said Francis Moijue, a university student. "Even if we can, we can't afford it."
In the capital, empty streets are now the domain of platoons of tense soldiers guarding roadblocks and toting rocket propelled grenade launchers.
"We've taken up defensive positions and are holding our ground," said a district government-allied commander who spoke on condition of anonymity.
Jet fighters scream overhead and seconds later loud explosions rattle the downtown district.
The rebels, using civilians as human shields, have so far foiled efforts to drive them back. Now they vow to continue their war until President Ahmed Tejan Kabbah is out of power.
Kabbah was deposed in May 1997 by a military junta along with their allied rebels. He was returned to power in March. Once again, a fragile albeit imperfect democracy in African is in jeopardy.
An announcer on state-run 98.1 FM radio acknowledged that the capital was in trouble, but he remained optimistic. "We gonna get the power and throw the junta man and the rebel man from the power," he said.
Until the rebels are out, it's the people of this troubled capital that are caught in the crossfire.
 
 Load-Date: January 9, 1999

 

End of Document
