

Changing gears on the fly, Holbrooke tackles Africa's wars
The Associated Press
May 11, 2000, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 831 words
Byline: By GLENN McKENZIE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ASMARA, Eritrea
Body




Jetting to seven countries in six days - some of them twice - U.S. Ambassador Richard Holbrooke led a U.N. Security Council delegation that tried to broker peace in two of Africa's most violent regions.
Wrapping up the tour Wednesday, Holbrooke seemed to lose patience with questions over whether the team's frenetic peace efforts were showing signs of success.
"We can only handle one war at a time," he snapped when asked why violence had resumed between Rwandan and Ugandan soldiers just a day after his team brokered a deal between the two as part of efforts to end Congo's 22-month civil war.
Five years after negotiating the historic Dayton accord, which brought peace to Bosnia but also entrenched an ethnically divided society, some observers say Holbrooke's Africa mission poses even bigger challenges than the Balkans.
Although the trip was originally intended to secure a 5,537-member U.N. observer force to monitor the flagging cease-fire in Congo, the delegation added Ethiopia and Eritrea to their itinerary at the last minute to try to keep the two Horn of Africa neighbors from embarking on another round of fighting.
Holbrooke displayed his trademark unorthodox style, changing plans often and using superlatives like "Africa's greatest conflict" to emphasize the importance of the mission, which also included Security Council members from Britain, France, Mali, Namibia, Netherlands and Tunisia.
The always media-savvy ambassador showed a similar attitude in January, proclaiming it "Africa month" at U.N. headquarters. He also made a health issue - Africa's AIDS epidemic - the center of a Security Council debate for the first time.
Both wars tackled by the mission can appear intractable.
Congo's involves five foreign armies, with Rwanda and Uganda supporting rebel factions and Zimbabwe, Namibia and Angola backing Congo's President Laurent Kabila. Numerous rebel and militias fight for territory, minerals and dominance.
Eritrea and its former ruler, Ethiopia, also have a difficult history. Longtime foes since Eritrea's 30-year independence war, they have fought intermittent but bloody battles since May 1998. The Security Council wants to persuade the sides to resolve their border conflict by diplomatic means.
But by the time the Africa trip ended Wednesday, Holbrooke conceded war still loomed in the Horn and that Congo "remains dangerous."
On the positive side, he said the mission demonstrated the Security Council's resolve to push for peace and emphasized its work would continue.
"We didn't just sign an agreement (between Uganda and Rwanda) and then disappear," he said.
Holbrooke's typically hectic schedule included meetings at all hours with dictators, politicians and warlords - sometimes berating leaders for their intransigence or lavishing praise on their successes.
Many who encounter Holbrooke are charmed by his ability to be both frank and flattering. During a meeting in Zambian capital, Lusaka, Holbrooke called Zambia's President Frederick Chiluba a great peacemaker for hosting Congo talks and said Lusaka could become a buzzword for peace, as Dayton has.
Holbrooke's wide-ranging career includes his diplomatic start in Vietnam in the early 1960s and work in the private sector with Lehman Brothers in the '80s.
Although long believed to have ambitions to become secretary of state should Vice President Al Gore win the presidency, he doesn't like to talk about the subject.
"That is the journalism question," he said as he jetted between Rwanda and Uganda.
A White House official knowledgeable about the vice president's foreign policy work said Gore and Holbrooke have a good working relationship. However, they do not share a personal history, and while Holbrooke would be a strong candidate for secretary of state, he is not a shoo-in, said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
Jennifer Seymour Whitaker, a senior fellow at the Council of Foreign Relations, a New York-based think-tank, said she didn't believe Holbrooke was trying to make peace in Africa just for political points.
"I think that his trip to Africa really caught him," she said of Holbrooke's trip to the region last year. "And if he was looking for some easy foreign policy wins, it's not a good one to take on despite his undoubted self-confidence."
But some observers worry his ambition could get in the way.
"I think he is certainly motivated in what he does by his political ambition. … Maybe (he) hasn't fought as hard for positions he thinks are right because he's worried about his career," said Eric Witte, an associate director of the International Crisis Group, a nonprofit research and advocacy group that focuses on Africa's Great Lakes region, the Balkans and Indonesia.
Holbrooke himself brushes off such discussions.
"I am happy in my job and what I do," he said, before changing the subject to the peace talks.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Associated Press Writers Sandra Sobieraj in Washington and Nicole Winfield at the United Nations contributed to this report.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY199
 Load-Date: May 12, 2000

 

End of Document
