

Charred bodies litter the ground after Nigerian pipeline blast
The Associated Press
October 19, 1998, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 695 words
Byline: By FRANK AIGBOGUN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JESSE, Nigeria
Body




The charred remains of victims still clutched the plastic cups, funnels and cans they had intended to use to scoop gasoline from a punctured pipeline before it exploded in this southern Nigerian town.
The bodies were among at least 500 killed when the fuel erupted into a ball of fire over the weekend, an inferno so intense that flames - some shooting 65 feet in the air - still flared Monday as firefighters let the last of the gasoline burn away.
The burned body of one woman was found with her dead baby still strapped to her back. Many other victims were farmers and villagers sleeping in homes consumed by the blaze that also spread to nearby towns.
Grieving relatives came Monday to Jesse, about 180 miles southeast of Lagos, searching for relatives who ventured to the town drawn by rumors that a huge pool of spilled gasoline was free for the taking.
"It is finished," cried Charity Unurhoro, after finding the horribly burned bodies of her mother and brother. "Now everything is over for me."
Authorities believe the pipeline was punctured intentionally, and that scavengers' tools sparked the explosion Saturday, said an official for Nigeria's state petroleum corporation, speaking on condition of anonymity. Some newspaper reports, however, said a lighted cigarette may have started the blaze.
A mass grave was being dug at the edge of Jesse to bury hundreds of unidentified corpses, many burned beyond recognition. Some bodies remained scattered about town on Monday afternoon, but most were piled together. Military officials estimated at least 500 died, and said about 100 people were hospitalized, many of them in serious condition.
Hospitals, most with only a handful of doctors and nurses and little in the way of burn care, were overwhelmed by the disaster. Doctors were exhausted and medicine was in short supply, local officials said.
Military ruler Gen. Abdulsalami Abubakar flew in by helicopter for a 15-minute visit. He said the government would pay for medical treatment, but that there would be no compensation to survivors, apparently because many of those killed were believed to be stealing fuel.
But area residents were furious over the deaths.
"This is a tragedy of huge proportions," the Rev. Andrew Imadu, a local minister, said at one funeral in Jesse. "Our own people have been driven by deprivation to such a desperate search for livelihood."
Southeastern Nigeria, while rich in oil, is scarred by decades of poverty and villagers in some areas are believed to regularly sabotage oil pipelines in order to file claims for compensation.
The above-ground pipeline that caught fire links a refinery in the southeastern city of Warri, 210 miles southeast of Lagos, with the northern city of Kaduna, nearly 380 miles away.
Over the weekend, hundreds of people descended on the town as rumors spread that a huge pool of gasoline - which had spilled from the pipeline into a concrete well - was available for the taking, said J.I. Ogude, village chief of Jesse.
The gasoline theft, known locally as "bunkering," had been going on since at least Saturday morning, he said.
The people gathering at the scene, who Ogude said came from at least seven area villages - including some attending a funeral nearby - were taking the gasoline to sell on the black market.
Ogude said government petroleum officials had been warned of the gathering scavengers and had tried to frighten people away with a hovering helicopter on Saturday. When that didn't work, police officers were dispatched to disperse the crowd. The explosion occurred as they neared the village, he said.
Witnesses said they heard a loud roar and saw flames spread quickly as the oily slick spread.
Despite Nigeria's enormous oil wealth, years of government misrule and corruption have resulted in almost perpetual fuel shortages, causing skyrocketing black-market prices and long lines at the gas pumps.
In other parts of southeastern Nigeria, ethnic Ijaw youths have attacked Western oil installations in recent weeks, demanding oil companies and the government supply them with schools, better roads and political representation. The fire in Jesse, though, was not believed related to those incidents.
 
 Load-Date: October 20, 1998

 

End of Document
