

Children Lost and Found On The Way Home
November 18, 1996, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 558 words
Byline: By HRVOJE HRANJSKI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NKAMIRA, Rwanda
Body




The exhausted young mother, barefoot, stepped inside the tent and began scrutinizing the faces of hundreds of children playing on the dirty floor and eating cookies.
Suddenly, she reached into the crowd and grabbed out her 8-year-old daughter by the arm.
Escorting the child out of the tent, Marceline Myiramzbrimba broke into a smile of relief. "I was holding her hand yesterday, and then suddenly she disappeared. I am so happy she is with me."
Myiramzbrimba is among 200 lucky parents who found their sons and daughters at a temporary camp on the Rwandan border. There are still hundreds of lost children here, separated from their parents during the confusion of a half-million Hutu refugees streaming back to their Rwandan homeland in the past four days.
These Hutu refugees fled into eastern Zaire two years ago, fearing retribution from the Tutsi government for Rwanda's genocide; Hutu militias had killed nearly 500,000 Tutsis and moderate Hutus.
The Hutu militiamen fled, too, and lived among the refugees in U.N. camps, using the civilians as human shields for their cross-border attacks on Rwanda and using intimidation and violence to keep the refugees from going home.
Last week, Zairian rebels routed the militiamen from the camps and freed the refugees to begin a journey back to Rwanda. The exodus started Friday.
The initial flight emptied the camp at Mugunga, which during recent fighting between Zaire's rebels and its army had swelled into the world's largest refugee outpost.
A half-million refugees choked roads Monday on both sides of the Rwanda-Zaire border. They trudged east along the scorching tarmac from the Zairian border to the transit camp at Nkamira, 20 miles.
Aid agencies say up to 700,000 refugees remain in the eastern Zairian mountains near Lake Kivu, and their situation is not clear.
A U.N. assessment team was heading for the area Tuesday, and the U.N. refugee agency was sending local aid teams into the Virunga forest to find those left behind, spokesman Ray Wilkinson said.
Some of those are children.
"The number of new separations is still higher than unifications," said Marie de la Soudiere of the U.N. children's organization, UNICEF. "We hope to unite them all soon."
As the column of tired refugees snaked along the road, Rwandan aid workers shouted through megaphones for parents to hang on to their children and told them where to look if their youngsters were lost.
Worried parents waited at the gates of the interim border camp; aid workers let them in gradually. Lost children were put into the huge tents there, divided by hometown.
Amazingly calm, the children - ages 2 to 16 - played or talked about their high-protein cookies, about the only food returnees get until they reach their homes.
"No child will stay here longer than 48 hours. Parents are moving on the way home, so that means we will have to take the children to their home communes if the parents don't show up." explained Fred Kasozi from the Save The Children agency.
Children wore coded bracelets to help parents find them. Those younger than 5 were photographed, their snapshots posted at the camp for parents to inspect and distributed to Red Cross offices throughout Rwanda.
If a child's parents or relatives cannot be found, aid agencies will try to find foster parents, said Claudete Murekatete of the U.S.-based World Vision relief agency.
 Load-Date: November 18, 1996

 

End of Document
