

China, U.S. haggle over a word to respond to the NATO attack on embassy
The Associated Press
May 15, 1999, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 605 words
Byline: NICOLE WINFIELD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




After 12 hours of semantic wrangling between the United States and China, the Security Council formally responded late Friday to NATO's strike on Beijing's embassy in Belgrade - one of several disputes over Kosovo that had deadlocked the Security Council's work.
A statement adopted by consensus expresses the council's "profound regrets over the bombing and deep sorrow for the loss of lives, injuries and property damage caused by the bombing."
Negotiations over the wording of the statement and an unrelated Kosovo humanitarian resolution became so intertwined and politicized that China and Russia announced Friday they would abstain from the humanitarian resolution.
The lengthy diplomatic discussions also threatened an unrelated council initiative - a resolution extending the mandate of the U.N. observer mission in Western Sahara.
The mandate was renewed 25 minutes before it expired. Pending votes on resolutions dealing with Tajikistan and a statement on Sierra Leone were also delayed, enraging other council members.
China had sought to condemn the May 7 embassy strike that killed three journalists and injured 20. After strong opposition from NATO members, Beijing agreed to have the council say it "strongly deplores" the bombing.
But U.S. officials objected to the phrase, saying they feared it could be interpreted that NATO intended to hit the embassy. The alliance says the strike was a mistake.
In the end, the final text said the council expresses its "deep distress and concern over the bombing." It also recalls a previous statement to the press, given hours after the strike, which expressed shock.
The debate was another sign of the uphill battle NATO members will face in trying to have the council endorse a Kosovo peace plan.
Russia and the world's industrialized countries agreed earlier this month that they would seek a council resolution to codify proposals that call for the withdrawal of Serb troops from Kosovo and the deployment of an international security presence to ensure the safe return of refugees.
Reference to those principles in the Kosovo humanitarian resolution drew stark opposition from China, which sought to have it deleted from the text on the grounds that the council hadn't yet discussed the so-called Group of Eight initiative.
China also tried to include a call for an "immediate cessation of all military action" in Yugoslavia.
Both suggestions were dismissed, prompting China to announce it would abstain. Russia said it would also abstain because it, too, wanted a reference to the need for an end to the strikes, U.N. officials said.
The resolution passed with the council's 13 other members voting in favor.
The final text of the humanitarian resolution encourages the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees and U.N. member states to continue aiding the refugees. It calls for humanitarian aid groups to have access throughout Yugoslavia and says refugees have the right to return home.
It emphasizes that the humanitarian situation "will continue to deteriorate in the absence of a political solution to the crisis consistent with the principles" adopted by the Group of Eight.
Chinese Ambassador Qin Huasun said it was outrageous for NATO to continue its airstrikes when the "illegal" campaign itself was responsible for the humanitarian catastrophe under way.
"As a victim, China has every reason, on both moral and legal ground, to demand that NATO stop bombing," he said.
China sought and received the council's support to hold two minutes of silence - one before adopting the statement, one before adopting the humanitarian resolution - to commemorate the victims of the embassy strike.
 Load-Date: May 15, 1999

 

End of Document
