

Christians mark Good Friday; pope carries the cross
The Associated Press
April 10, 1998, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 868 words
Byline: By DANIEL J. WAKIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ROME
Body




Protected from the driving, chilly rain by an aide's white umbrella, Pope John Paul II carried a wooden cross in a solemn Good Friday procession at the Colosseum to symbolize Christ's suffering before his crucifixion.
Thousands of people stood beneath umbrellas outside the ancient monument, holding candles during the annual ritual enacting Jesus' execution and the events leading to it. The pope walked haltingly for a short stretch, carrying the lightweight cross.
Later, in a homily, John Paul said Christ identifies through his own suffering with the anguish of the "humiliated, downtrodden and exploited" in today's world.
"In every person suffering from hatred and violence, or rejected by selfishness and indifference, Christ continues to suffer and die," he said.
For the fourth consecutive year, the pope bore the cross only briefly. The 78-year-old pontiff has been hobbled since undergoing hip replacement surgery in 1994. Still, his voice sounded firm, and he appeared to gather strength as the evening went on.
Others who joined the pope in bearing the cross during the procession included Catholics from the Philippines, Italy, Argentina, China and Burundi.
The homily marking the Good Friday ritual, known as the Stations of the Cross, was written by Orthodox Christian theologian Olivier Clement of France. It underscored the suffering of women and lamented the pain that Christians have inflicted on Jews by accusing them over the centuries of killing Jesus.
A landmark 1965 Vatican document said Jews should not be held collectively responsible for Jesus' death.
In the past year, the pope has devoted special attention to the involvement of Roman Catholics in the Holocaust. A major Vatican document last month expressed remorse for the silence of some Christians during the Holocaust.
In October, the pope said centuries of Catholic prejudice against Jews was based on a misreading of the Christian Gospels. That misinterpretation was to be blamed, he said, for the "deadening" of Christian resistance to Nazism.
Earlier, John Paul heard the confessions of 16 people in St. Peter's Church, a tradition he began in 1979. The confessors came from Burkina Faso, Italy, Spain, the United States and the pope's native Poland, the Vatican said.
Elsewhere on Good Friday, thousands of pilgrims retraced Jesus' last steps in Jerusalem, some shouldering wooden crosses.
Dozens of believers in Taxco, Mexico, whipped themselves or strapped 100 pounds of thorny blackberry stalks to their bare shoulders in penance. And in the Philippines, 18 people screamed and grimaced on crosses while nails were driven through their hands and feet.
Holy week culminates Sunday with Easter, when Christians celebrate their belief in Jesus' resurrection. John Paul will celebrate an open-air Mass and deliver a message and Easter greetings in more than 50 languages.
In Jerusalem on Friday, brown-robed Franciscan monks led pilgrims through the Old City's cobblestone alleys singing hymns in Arabic, Italian, Latin and English. They walked the Via Dolorosa, or Way of Sorrows, which tradition says Jesus took to his crucifixion.
Nuns fingered rosaries and pilgrims held up Bibles and small crosses as the procession made its way to the Church of the Holy Sepulcher. One group re-enacted Jesus' last walk in full costume.
Muslim families attending noon prayers at nearby Al Aqsa Mosque had to push their way against the crowd. Friday also marked the end of the Muslim holiday of Eid al-Adha and the start of the Jewish holiday, Passover.
Hundreds of Israeli soldiers were posted along the procession route. Israel has been on heightened alert because of threats of suicide attacks by the Islamic militant group, Hamas.
Inside the Church of the Holy Sepulcher, pilgrims placed silk cloth and Bibles on the slab where tradition says Jesus was placed after dying.
"I'm impressed to see all the nationalities here for the same cause," said Andrew Hayes, a monk from Valyermo, Calif.
In Mexico, members of Christian orders based in Taxco, 100 miles southwest of Mexico City, whipped themselves or carried heavy bundles of thorns - a tradition commemorated in the picturesque mining town for more than 200 years.
The men consider Holy Week the crest of their devotion. They have undergone at least a year of religious preparation to participate in processions that began Tuesday and mark the days leading to Christ's resurrection.
Each man has his own reason for enduring the pain, said Javier Ruiz Ocampo, the town's official historian. Some hope to please God for the benefit of a sick relative, or to pay for a sin of their own. Others simply pray for world peace.
Outside the village of San Pedro Cutud in the Philippines, an annual re-enactment of Jesus' crucifixion drew 15 participants and hundreds of tourists.
Fourteen men and one woman were nailed to crosses in the hot sun, where they remained for a few minutes. A man dressed as a centurion used a spear to make a small cut to draw blood from the chest of the men.
Three men also were nailed to crosses outside a chapel in the village of Lugam.
The crucifixion ritual has been carried out for more than 40 years in the Philippines, Asia's only predominately Roman Catholic nation.
 

 

 
 Load-Date: April 11, 1998

 

End of Document
