

Civil war reaches the outskirts of Congo's capital; hundreds wounded
The Associated Press
August 26, 1998, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 764 words
Byline: IAN STEWART, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KINSHASA, Congo
Body




The thud and echo of artillery fire shuddered through the empty streets of Kinshasa on Wednesday as a 3-week-old civil war spilled into the capital's eastern suburbs. Hundreds of fighters were reported wounded or killed.
Residents of the capital of this central African nation, already battered by power cuts and water shortages, hunkered down for what some feared was the start of a full-scale rebel assault.
Few pedestrians ventured out Wednesday as tense soldiers patrolled deserted neighborhoods - a dramatic shift from one day earlier when crowds of cheering, waving residents welcomed President Laurent Kabila back to the city.
The fighting between government soldiers and rebel forces trying to oust Kabila raged through the night and only began tapering off in the afternoon.
Information Minister Didier Mumengi insisted the situation was under control, but a dusk-to-dawn curfew was imposed on the city.
Rebel officials urged Kinshasa's residents to remain inside their homes.
"Our forces are now fighting inside the city of Kinshasa," Ernest Wamba dia Wamba told reporters in the eastern Congolese town of Goma. "We are determined to fight, we are determined to win and control the city."
Angolan and Zimbabwe warplanes have been staging air strikes in support of their ground troops, who are defending Kabila and his government.
Mumengi described the latest fighting as a government operation to flush out rebel fighters "hiding like monkeys" in the forests around Kinshasa.
Doctors from Kinshasa's General Hospital said hundreds of fighters had been wounded or killed. Troops with bullet and shrapnel wounds were pouring into the hospital, said one doctor who asked not to be identified.
Kabila last week enlisted the support of Angolan and Zimbabwean troops to help fend off the rebel force - a coalition of Tutsi fighters and disenchanted members of Kabila's own military. The rebels accuse Kabila of mismanagement and corruption.
Wednesday's fighting centered around Kinshasa's airport, near the Kingasani and Kinbanseke districts, suburbs 12 miles to the east.
Sharp blasts and long, thundering explosions rolled through Kinshasa. Green army helicopters, with gunmen leaning out, buzzed back and forth just above the city's rooftops.
"We couldn't sleep all night, the fighting was so loud," said a woman named Malu, who fled to central Kinshasa.
Mumengi, the government spokesman, warned city inhabitants to be on guard.
"Since this morning, our Congolese forces have been pursuing the bandits," he said in an unusual live broadcast on Voice of the People radio. "Today more than any other day we need to redouble our efforts against this aggression."
Throughout the day, the Voice of the People radio broadcast scathing attacks on neighboring Rwanda and Uganda - both of which have been accused by Kabila of supporting the rebels with arms and soldiers.
Roadblocks were erected in key districts in Kinshasa - including along June 30th Boulevard, one of the city's primary thoroughfares. Foreign journalists were not allowed to travel more than a few hundred yards from their hotels.
The few vehicles that did go out were stopped and searched, often at gunpoint.
The United States closed its embassy more than a week ago and many foreign embassies have sent all but essential staff home.
Rwanda - considered the main military and political sponsor for the insurgents - has repeatedly threatened to intervene if Zimbabwe and Angola do not withdraw their soldiers.
But Angolan Interior Minister Santana Pitra said his country would use all means at its disposal to keep Kabila in power, the Portuguese news agency Lusa reported. Pitra said Angola's involvement in the conflict was sparked by fears over the security of its northern border.
Uganda is also believed to have sent troops and tanks to support the insurgents, even though it denies backing the rebels.
A meeting scheduled between Kabila and four African peace envoys in Kinshasa was canceled Wednesday due to the fighting, as was a planned meeting between Congo's foreign minister and ambassadors.
In Zimbabwe's capital of Harare, President Robert Mugabe criticized his neighbors' efforts at mediation, saying southern African countries were deeply divided. He called on the Organization of African Unity to step in.
Fighting broke out earlier this month when members of Kabila's armed forces revolted after he ordered Rwandan troops out of the country.
The Rwandan soldiers - the core of the Kabila-led rebel movement that ousted Zairian dictator Mobutu Sese Seko last year - had stayed on in Congo as part of the national defense force.
 Load-Date: August 26, 1998

 

End of Document
