

Clashes in the West Bank as U.S. peace mission begins
March 28, 1997, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 614 words
Byline: By JACK KATZENELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Even as U.S. mediator Dennis Ross scrambled to try to save the collapsing peace process, Israel was moving large numbers of police into Jerusalem along with troops and snipers into the West Bank.
Israel brought in the extra police Thursday night to prevent disturbances during or after prayers today in the Old City mosques at the Temple Mount, police spokesman Shmuel Ben-Ruby said.
Police will be deployed in the Arab neighborhoods of east Jerusalem, in the Old City, and at Har Homa - site of a controversial Jewish construction project - and there will be extra roadblocks, searches and patrols, he said.
If fighting develops and gets out of hand, tanks and helicopters will move in, said Maj. Gen. Gabi Ofir, a top Israeli commander in the West Bank.
Israel TV also said the army posted snipers in the West Bank with instructions to "shoot to hit" if Palestinian police clash with Israelis - such clashes led to 80 deaths in September.
The measures reflected the deteriorating relations between Israel and the Palestinians during the past two weeks - since the start of construction at Har Homa and since Israel accused Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat of authorizing Islamic militant attacks in Israel.
Tension also is building ahead of Sunday's protests marking Land Day, an annual remembrance of six Arabs killed in 1976 riots protesting land seizures in northern Israel. In an unusual move, Arafat's Fatah group has joined the Hamas and Islamic Jihad movements in announcing joint protests for Land Day.
Ross, meanwhile, met for two hours Thursday in Morocco with Arafat before flying to Israel for a late meeting with Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu.
"The goal of my mission is to take account of the situation in the Middle East for the president and the secretary of state and to give them a report at the end of this week," Ross said after meeting with Arafat.
He would not discuss the content of his meetings.
Arafat said Israel's construction in disputed east Jerusalem was "a real crime versus the peace process."
The gaps between Israelis and Palestinians appeared far more difficult to bridge than the last time Ross visited the region, when he brokered Israel's January military withdrawal from most of the West Bank town of Hebron.
Israel demands that before peace talks can resume, Arafat send a clear signal to Islamic militants that he will not accept terrorist attacks against Israel, and that Palestinian stone-throwing riots end.
The Palestinians want an end to Israeli construction at Har Homa and a guarantee from the United States that there will be no further settlements.
Netanyahu claims Arafat gave the militants tacit approval for attacks before last Friday's bombing in a Tel Aviv cafe that killed three women and the bomber, and Israel is bracing for more attacks.
Arafat's Fatah faction of the PLO issued a statement Thursday saying that "the extreme government of Netanyahu is responsible for all acts of violence, because it is a reaction to (its) organized terror against Palestinian land and the peace process."
On Thursday evening, Palestinian youths in Jerusalem blocked a road with burning tires near the Mount of Olives, the police said.
Near the West Bank town of Ramallah, hundreds of Palestinians threw stones at Israeli soldiers. Israeli troops fired tear gas and rubber bullets, and Palestinian police moved quickly to disperse the protesters.
Israel TV also showed concrete walls and electric fences being erected around Jewish settlements in the West Bank, and rolls of barbed wire being laid out. A sign on a road for settlers near autonomous Ramallah ordered settlers not to allow Palestinian workers into their communities until the tension eases.
 Load-Date: March 28, 1997

 

End of Document
