

Clinton asks Mideast leaders to 'finish the job'
The Associated Press
November 2, 1999, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 844 words
Byline: By TERENCE HUNT, AP White House Correspondent
Dateline: OSLO, Norway
Body




President Clinton implored Israeli and Palestinian leaders Tuesday to "finish the job" of difficult peacemaking, winning pledges of intense negotiations and frequent meetings between Prime Minister Ehud Barak and PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat to reach a final agreement.
"We have revitalized the peace process," an upbeat Clinton declared after meeting with Arafat and Barak.
Drawing on the spirit of slain Israeli peacemaker Yitzhak Rabin and memories of a historic Mideast deal here six years ago, Barak and Arafat seemed energized to meet a February deadline for writing the outlines of an accord to resolve the toughest issues between them.
"Let's stop wasting precious time," Arafat said.
Barak promised to "finish the journey" initiated by Rabin, the Israeli leader gunned down by an Israeli opponent of the peace process in 1995. "Time is short and the challenge is demanding."
To reach the February goal, Clinton said "we might well have a summit" - likely patterned after the 1978 Camp David negotiations that produced the breakthrough peace agreement between Israel and Egypt. Moreover, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright will travel to the Mideast once - perhaps twice - before February, and Mideast envoy Dennis Ross will visit the region every couple of weeks.
Along with Clinton, Barak and Arafat joined together at a solemn memorial to Rabin. A mournful violin tribute filled the cavernous City Hall auditorium where, in 1994, Rabin and Arafat, along with then-Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres, had accepted the Nobel Peace Prize.
Despite expressions of good will and partnership, Barak and Arafat spoke pointedly of the huge obstacles to meeting February's deadline and a September goal for a final settlement. The issues include final borders between Israel and Palestinian areas, the future of Jewish settlements in Gaza and the West Bank, the conflicting claims to Jerusalem, water rights and the Palestinian refugees.
Barak, who took office as prime minister in July, promised to protect the "security interests and vital needs" of Israel.
Moments later, Arafat called for resisting "violence, terror, occupation, exile and settlements," a clear reference to Palestinian objections to Jewish settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Meeting later with Clinton, Barak and Arafat agreed to tone down their public rhetoric, an Israeli official said. While Barak did not explicitly say he would stop settlements, he told Clinton he would not make any provocative acts, the official said, speaking on condition of anonymity.
In his remarks, Clinton said Rabin "brings us back to Oslo. We can almost hear his kind but stern voice telling us: 'Well, this is all very nice, but if you really want to honor me, finish the job."'
Barak, a former general who served under Rabin, said, "I vow to you, Yitzhak, … to give your death a meaning by following your legacy until we achieve peace … I pledge to you, Yitzhak, to all our neighbors and to the whole world, to travel the course you charted and to finish the journey you have led towards security and peace in the Middle East."
Arafat - before and after his remarks - gave a military salute to a large photograph of Rabin on stage. Mincing no words about disagreements, Arafat called for an Israeli withdrawal from all areas it conquered in the 1967 Mideast war, including the West Bank, Gaza Strip and east Jerusalem.
Arafat also warned of the "destructive danger of Israeli settlements." The Palestinians have demanded that Israel freeze construction in Jewish settlements in the disputed lands. In a final peace treaty, the Palestinians hope to see all 144 settlements dismantled.
Arafat also said Palestinians dream of the "magic of a normal life," including the day when "refugees will be able to go back to their homes and prisoners will be able to go back to their families."
The Palestinians seek the return of millions of Palestinian refugees to what is now Israel. The Israelis say they cannot accept such a demand but are willing to negotiate the return of refugees to the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Clinton, seeking a place in history as a peacemaker, urged the two sides to reconcile.
"We have now a chance, but only a chance, to bring real and lasting peace between Israel and her neighbors," Clinton said. "If we let it slip away, all will bear the consequences."
Danny Yatom, Barak's security advisor, said there would be frequent meetings, especially between Arafat and Barak, the top decision-makers. Yatom also said that the Israeli and Palestinian teams intend to resume negotiations very quickly and "we hope to see a very, very positive conclusion and results in the very near future."
Palestinian negotiator Nabil Shaath said, "I think it went very well, it was an excellent atmosphere and excellent climate. We set a mechanism for the future. I think that's what was intended. I don't think anybody wanted to come here to negotiate substance, people came here to create the climate and the atmosphere."
Israeli and Palestinian officials said there were no negotiations on substantive issues.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos XOSL107, 109, 121
 Load-Date: November 3, 1999

 

End of Document
