

Clinton's world view comes into play in the Kosovo crisis
The Associated Press
April 6, 1999, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 636 words
Byline: By KEVIN GALVIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




On the fifth anniversary of the ethnic slaughter in Rwanda, with NATO's bombs aimed at halting the Serb onslaught against Kosovo's ethnic Albanians, President Clinton is again confronting a question he says poses the biggest challenge to progress in the 21st century.
"When you strip it all away, down deep inside there is this idea that you cannot organize personal life or social life unless some group feels better about itself only when they are oppressing someone else," he said Tuesday in pressing to expand hate crimes legislation.
The root problem is as old as time. Classicists refer to it as the problem of the one vs. the other, a tribe's tendency to define itself by its differences with another group.
It's a unifying theory Clinton sees running through conflicts all around the globe and at home, from "The Troubles" in Northern Ireland to America's racial divide. He even sees it in the politics of Washington.
"One of the things I have sought to do in our country is to bridge all these divides, and to get all of our people … to recognize that our common humanity is more important than these categorical differences," Clinton said.
Joe Montville, director of the preventive diplomacy program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, said the issue the president is grappling with is "as old as humankind."
"The whole idea of having outside groups that become the reservoir for your aggression or your fear - you try to build yourself up by putting them down," he said. "Some of the oldest names that people gave themselves was The People, to distinguish themselves from those who weren't quite human."
Clinton sees modern Us vs. Them tensions in conflicts from the bloody to the petty.
At political fund-raisers, he characterizes Democrats as the party of inclusiveness and the Republicans as the party that practices "the politics of personal destruction."
Thanking one of his impeachment defenders last month, he said "all of the problems I've faced" in politics might have vanished if people "could just understand that they don't have to define their lives in terms of putting someone else down."
A longtime Clinton ally, Maria Echaveste, deputy White House chief of staff, has seen him grapple with these issues since his first run for president in 1992.
"As a student of history, he's drawn connections and seen the similarities of conflict all over the world and through time," she said.
Echaveste said that the issue drove Clinton's race initiative - his attempt at fostering dialogue across racial lines - and informed his handling of peace talks in the Middle East and in Northern Ireland. She said Clinton has been "struck by how over and over and over, through both our history and world history, that conflict is so often based upon some rivalry, whether it's religious or ethnic, and some fear of the stranger."
When he began to brace the American public for NATO's intervention in the Balkans, Clinton couldn't resist a sweeping explanation for the U.S. interest rooted in the question of the one vs. the other.
He likened the problems behind the Kosovo bloodshed to domestic ethnic and social tensions here at home, "which is why I devoted so much time to that initiative on race, and why I keep fighting for passage of the hate crimes legislation - all these things," Clinton told a union audience on March 23.
"That's what Kosovo's about. … People are still killing each other out of primitive urges because they think what is different about them is more important than what they have in common."
In the Kosovo conflict, Montville can see centuries of Serb victimization playing itself out in aggression toward the ethnic Albanians.
"The whole tradition of insult, disdain, attack and aggression is really what history is all about," Montville said, in agreement with the president.
 Load-Date: April 6, 1999

 

End of Document
