

Clinton works the phones, awaiting decision on a summit meeting
The Associated Press
October 13, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 715 words
Byline: By DEB RIECHMANN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Clinton made a whirlwind of calls to Mideast leaders on Friday, and White House officials said he could travel to the region as early as Monday for a summit meeting intended to put a damper on two weeks of bloodshed between Israelis and Palestinians.
Administration officials say Arab leaders are pressuring Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat to agree to a summit. Arafat was refusing to attend until Israel agrees to stop firing at Palestinian demonstrators at flashpoints in the West Bank and Gaza.
Clinton, however, has been pushing for a summit with no conditions.
He worked into the night on breaking the Mideast stalemate, but took a break shortly after 9 p.m. EDT to call those gathered in Little Rock, Ark., for a Democratic fund-raiser.
"I have been working for the last eight days trying to restore calm in the Middle East, and I've been on the phone all day today and still have some more work to do tonight," Clinton told the group. "We may get a breakthrough sometime in the next several hours. We're working hard trying to turn this thing around."
Administration officials say that even if a summit eventually materializes, some time might be needed before the Palestinian and Israeli leaders can meet face to face.
There is a recognition by the parties that "even if the violence stops it will be very difficult to move on to the negotiating table immediately but some sort of cooling-off period needs to occur before they can sit down and work through their differences," White House press secretary Jake Siewert said.
If a decision is made to hold a summit, it would take about two days to put together. The meeting could be held as early as Monday, national security spokesman P.J. Crowley said Friday evening.
The president canceled a political trip on Friday to Missouri and Arkansas, but does plan to go to Denver and Seattle on Saturday to raise money for Democrats.
Vice President Al Gore, meanwhile, interrupted his campaign to attend a two-hour National Security Council meeting where Clinton was briefed on the volatile situation in the Middle East and the attack on a U.S. Navy destroyer. Attorney General Janet Reno and FBI Director Louis Freeh were also at the meeting.
"They spent a fair amount of time on the Mideast ..., assessing our options on how best to reduce the violence in the region," Siewert said.
The president talked on the phone three times Friday to Saudi Arabia's Crown Prince Abdullah. He also called U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan, King Mohammed VI of Morocco, British Prime Minister Tony Blair and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, who has urged a summit. Clinton did not talk to Arafat.
Clinton also talked to Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh about Thursday's explosion that tore a hole in the side of the USS Cole. And Clinton talked to Adm. Vernon Clark, chief of naval operations; Adm. Robert Natter, commander in chief of the US Atlantic Fleet; Vice Adm. Charles Moore, commander of the 5th Fleet; and Cmdr. Kirk Lippold, commanding officer of the Cole.
"He wanted to express first his condolences and those of the American people on the loss of the crew," Crowley said. "He indicated … that we would do everything in our power to learn what has happened here and if it was, in fact, an act of terrorism, to learn who did it and hold them accountable."
Increased violence in the Middle East and an attack on the destroyer led the State Department Friday to close 37 U.S. embassies and consulates for the weekend. The attack prompted heightened security in the United States, too.
Extra security was evident in Washington. More guards than usual were seen outside the Georgetown home of Secretary of State Madeleine Albright. And at Andrews Air Force Base, where Gore left in the morning for a campaign trip to Iowa, security officers at the gate checked names against a manifest. Usually, the officers wave through vehicles that displayed press credentials.
At Lafayette Park across from the White House, a rally in support of Israel attracted an estimated 2,000 people, most of them Jewish. The demonstrators, many wearing "We stand with Israel" stickers on their lapels, blamed the Middle East violence on Arafat. Several dozen Muslims gathered nearby and chanted anti-Jewish slogans, but were kept away from the larger crowd by police.
 Load-Date: October 14, 2000

 

End of Document
