

Congo under Kabila looks a lot like the Mobutu era
The Associated Press
March 5, 2000, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 960 words
Byline: By ALEXANDRA ZAVIS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KINSHASA, Congo
Body




It's the first thing you see when you land at the airport, looming from a two-story high poster. It's on pictures hanging from lampposts, on hotel walls and in government offices. The heavyset face of President Laurent Kabila is everywhere.
Kabila was welcomed as a liberator when his rebel army swept across Africa's third-largest country in 1997, promising to rebuild and democratize a nation wrecked by dictator Mobutu Sese Seko.
Less than three years later, his regime looks increasingly like a page out of the Mobutu era - down to the careful cultivation of a personality cult.
"We were all expecting great changes, but Kabila does nothing but copy Mobutu," said Salumu Mwana Lufu, secretary-general of the National Movement of Lumumba, one of numerous political parties that opposed Mobutu's rule.
Congo was ruined by decades of government neglect and corruption under Mobutu, who became one of the world's richest men by plundering the vast mineral wealth of the country then known as Zaire.
Today, the misery of Congo's impoverished citizens has only increased. Hospitals don't have medicine. Schools have shut down. Roads - if they exist at all - are unusable through large parts of the interior.
Kabila blames the lack of change - political or economic - on the latest civil war in the central African nation. Despite a cease-fire accord reached last summer, fighting continues and few expect the U.N. Security Council's Feb. 24 vote authorizing a truce-monitoring force to halt combat soon.
"Even with the war, the government has the money to buy weapons, so they should be able to buy a little bit of food for the people," said Mamina Masengo, a university student.
Kabila said he wasn't interested in hanging on to power when he toppled Mobutu, and promised elections within two years. But he immediately suspended all political activity and gave himself wide powers to govern without a legislature until a new constitution is adopted.
Nearly three years later, and 18 months after his opponents launched a rebellion against him, he shows no signs of releasing his tight grip.
While he says he is willing to share power with an elected legislature, he has yet to spell out what the body's powers and responsibilities would be, or set a date for elections.
Like Mobutu, he has surrounded himself with confidants from his home province and put relatives at the head of the army, government ministries and security agencies.
But while Mobutu started to allow the formation of opposition parties and tolerated some criticism in his waning years, under Kabila, politicians, journalists and rights activists are routinely harassed and detained.
The ban on political groups was lifted a year ago, but a new law requires parties to register with the government and fulfill numerous requirements - including providing medical certificates stating their members are in perfect health. All parties have refused to register.
Kabila has even cracked down on his own ministers, forbidding them to meet with diplomats without permission from the foreign minister.
Kabila says democratization has been stalled by the war. He had announced an election timetable but then a collection of ethnic Tutsis, disaffected Congolese soldiers and opposition politicians rebelled in August 1998, accusing Kabila of mismanagement, corruption and warmongering.
A cease-fire was signed July 10 by Kabila and his allies - Zimbabwe, Angola and Namibia - and by Rwanda and Uganda, which are backing the rebels. The main rebel factions signed on in the weeks that followed.
But Kabila seems more intent on consolidating his power than on creating an open climate for a national dialogue on the country's political future and eventual elections, as envisaged in the accord.
Footage of a beaming Kabila addressing ecstatic crowds is broadcast every night on national television after the evening news.
He has set up local People's Power Committees to promote a sense of civic responsibility, and recruited tens of thousands into a civilian defense force.
He even staged a 15-day "Patriotic Awakening" campaign, featuring rallies crowded with people waving posters of Kabila and dressed in traditional African fabric imprinted with his image.
The government claims such efforts are needed to build a sense of national identity across the vast, demoralized country. But Kabila's opponents are skeptical.
Patriotic Awakening is more about "the cult of personality than relieving the suffering of the people and building the noble values of patriotism, confidence and solidarity," said Floribert Chebeya Bahizire, president of Voice of the Voiceless, a rights group.
While vast sums are spent on propaganda, many in the crumbling capital, Kinshasa, don't manage to eat every day.
"When I go home today, the children will come running to me," said Honore Kambeke, a 57-year-old maintenance worker who has 13 children to feed. "When you have nothing to give them, it can make you cry."
Unable to make ends meet on his monthly pay of 200 Congolese francs ($9), he grows vegetables on the grounds of the national radio and television stations, where he works.
The government blames economic woes on the war, which has scared away private investment and caused the near total collapse of the formal economy. "All the wars the world has known have always ravaged the economy," Kabila said.
But the government's own policies, including price controls and stringent exchange regulations, have left hard currencies in short supply and contributed to the economic slide.
"At the time we believed the Mobutu regime was the worst regime on the continent," said Sylvain Kamanyi, a senior official in the country's largest opposition party, the Union for Democracy and Social Progress. "We never thought there could be a worse one."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY301-302 of Feb. 28
 Load-Date: March 6, 2000

 

End of Document
