

Countries with the greatest concentrations of land mines
The Associated Press
April 11, 2000, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 475 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




An estimated 100 million anti-personnel mines are buried around the world. Estimates vary widely about the extent of the problem, and some countries have few records. Others have records but will not make them public.
Here are some of the countries that have the largest concentrations of land mines according to the latest information available from the U.S. State Department, the International Committee of the Red Cross and the United Nations:
---
EGYPT - 22.5 million left over from wars with Israel, most found on the Sinai peninsula.
IRAN - 16 million planted along the border with Iraq during the decade-long war between those two countries.
CHINA - 10 million, with many found along the border with Vietnam. Little is known about where else they may be found.
IRAQ - 10 million mines found mostly in the northern Kurdistan region and along Iraq's southern borders with Iran and Kuwait. Minefields have left 50 percent of agricultural land unusable, seriously hindering the economy in those areas.
ANGOLA - 6 million mines found in areas covering 50 percent of the country. An estimated 120 people are injured or killed a month by mines and Angola has the highest number of amputees per capita in the world.
CAMBODIA - 4 million-6 million have yet to be removed from the western and northern parts of the country. Only 212 square miles of the country had been verified as mine-free by 1998.
AFGHANISTAN - 5 million laid since 1979 along the borders with Iran and Pakistan, mostly in agricultural areas near irrigation systems. Mines are found in 162 of Afghanistan's 356 districts.
VIETNAM - 3.5 million planted throughout the country during the Vietnam War, with many laid along the border with China during the brief border conflict between the two countries.
WESTERN SAHARA - 1 million-2 million found in the region disputed between Morocco and separatist rebels.
KOSOVO - As many as 1 million found in 2,000 mine fields planted by both Yugoslav forces and the rebel Kosovo Liberation Army.
KOREA - 1 million, all placed in the demilitarized zone between North and South Korea. The mines are considered by the United States to be vital to defending South Korea and were a major stumbling block preventing the United States from signing an international treaty banning land mines.
SOMALIA - 1 million planted mostly along the border with Ethiopia, most of them nonmetallic making detection difficult.
MOZAMBIQUE - 1 million mines throughout the country left over from the civil war there.
BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA - 600,000 to 1 million mines within 115 square miles of land. Officials estimate there are as many as 30,000 minefields in Bosnia, with records existing for only 12,000 of them.
ERITREA - 500,000 to 1 million scattered across the country, but there are few records kept of the location of mine fields or the number of casualties from mine explosions.
 Load-Date: April 12, 2000

 

End of Document
