

Cranky nominee for prime minister known as 'the Sphinx'
April 2, 1997, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 834 words
Byline: By RON KAMPEAS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KINSHASA, Zaire
Body




Zaire's new prime minister was succinct when asked to make a victory statement: "Get serious."
Those words from Etienne Tshisekedi, accompanied by a dismissive wave of the hand at reporters staking out his backyard, typify the cranky opposition leader dubbed "The Sphinx" by Kinshasa's voluble press.
But they also reflect the rock-and-a-hard-place job description that being prime minister of Zaire has become. On one side is President Mobutu Sese Seko, a power-hoarding autocrat who habitually sacks premiers. On the other, a disciplined rebel army sweeping in from the east, promising to oust the government once it gets to Kinshasa.
On Wednesday night, Mobutu accepted Parliament's nomination of Tshisekedi as prime minister, presidential spokesman Kabuya Lumuna Sando said.
Tshisekedi (pronounced CHEE-sa-kedie) started his opposition to Mobutu's one-party dictatorship in the 1970s, when he quit a cushy position as a Mobutu functionary to campaign for democratic reform.
His chubby, casual look and phlegmatic charisma endeared him to many. The privations he suffered - imprisonment, beatings, house arrest and internal exile - added to his popularity.
He is known for precise, odd habits. He maintains two offices, one in his house and one in his garage. Every night, at 11 p.m., he moves from house to garage. No one knows why - Tshisekedi, 66, eschews interviews.
In 1992, a national conference of delegates from the government, the opposition and civic groups elected Tshisekedi to his first stint as prime minister, after Mobutu acceded to demands for democratic reform from a West that no longer needed him as a buffer to Soviet expansion.
Tshisekedi's Democratic Union for Social Progress advocated a constitution guaranteeing basic human rights and the reform of a system that had disenfranchised most Zairians.
Mobutu refused to let him assume the post, not least because Tshisekedi demanded the key to the treasury. Diplomats and opposition leaders accuse Mobutu and his family of plundering Zaire's enormous natural wealth - with some estimates of the family fortune as high as $ 5 billion - while the vast majority of its 43 million people languish in poverty.
Ever defiant, Tshisekedi ran a powerless shadow government from his backyard.
Meanwhile, Mobutu named a new prime minister each year, each thwarted by the dictator's insistence on keeping power for himself - and then fired for not saving the country from ruin.
His most recent casualty was Leon Kengo wa Dondo, sacked last month for mishandling the seven-month rebellion in the east sparked by government repression of ethnic Tutsis.
Parliament nominated Tshisekedi as prime minister on Tuesday, and on Wednesday Mobutu accepted the choice, the president's spokesman said. Mobutu and Tshisekedi were scheduled to meet, but the spokesman did not know whether they had actually done so.
With a government delegation heading to South Africa for peace talks, the new prime minister will have to make ending the war a priority. It is a tall order.
Zairian soldiers are unmotivated, not having been paid in months, and are clearing out of town after town as Laurent Kabila's rebel army advances from the eastern hills to the western savannas.
Kabila is in less of a mood to compromise: He says he will topple whichever government is in Kinshasa once he gets there.
The rebel leader, who has hidden in the eastern bush for 30 years waiting for this chance, once maintained friendly ties with Tshisekedi's party. But as he gets closer to power, he has become less eager to share it. He recently described Tshisekedi as a sellout who would taste the "poison chalice" for even dealing with Mobutu.
"We are fighting against Mobutu and his regime. If Tshisekedi agrees to be the prime minister, then he will be a member of the regime," rebel spokesman Raphael Ghenda said Wednesday in the eastern town of Goma. He softened his position when pressed, saying the rebels would fight him "if he carries out the politics of Mobutu."
Tshisekedi, for his part, is conciliatory toward the rebels.
"Mr. Kabila is our partner. We respect and salute his struggle," senior Tshisekedi aide Mukendi wa Muludba told The Associated Press. "He must respect our way of nonviolence. Zairians have died for the institutional order we have struggled for 20 years to achieve."
Tshisekedi's power to command loyalty and rally the nation behind him will be sorely tested in the coming days. Three times previously, when it looked as if Mobutu might accede to his premiership, supporters flooded the streets in celebration - only to retreat when the dictator changed his mind.
On Wednesday, the reaction was subdued - perhaps because Tshisekedi's appointment was taken as a thinly veiled bid by Mobutu to buy time to get his family out of Zaire.
"This fourth time, like a hydra pushing forth another head, Tshisekedi might get the prime ministership of his dreams," the newspaper Le Soft wrote in a commentary. "Only to wait, perhaps, for Laurent Kabila to boot him out, as promised."
 Load-Date: April 2, 1997

 

End of Document
