

Cruises, concerts - even the circus! - in Security Council bid
The Associated Press
July 23, 1998, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 586 words
Byline: By NICOLE WINFIELD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Cruises, concerts, even a trip to the circus! You never know what might sway a U.N. delegate.
In the fall, the General Assembly will pick five new countries to be represented on the 15-member Security Council, the most important decision-making body at the United Nations. They will replace Kenya, Portugal, Sweden, Costa Rica and Japan, all of which are winding up two-year stints.
The battle this year is fiercest within the regional group that encompasses Western Europe and North America. The group has two seats to fill but three candidates: Canada, the Netherlands and Greece.
The other three seats were expected to go to the single candidates put forth by other regional groups: Malaysia representing Asia, Namibia for Africa and Argentina for Latin America.
The campaign for the contested seats, which are nonpermanent positions on the council, attracted attention after Greece invited U.N. delegates for a weeklong visit that some diplomats here have dubbed a "blue water pitch" to get votes.
Greece's U.N. ambassador, Christos Zacharakis, denied the trip was related to Greece's council bid. He said it was intended to promote an "Olympic Truce" under which warring nations would stop fighting during the 2004 Olympic Games in Athens.
Greece isn't the only one wining and dining delegates.
The Netherlands organized a moonlit cruise down the East River in New York last month and invited delegates to a performance in New York of the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra of Amsterdam.
Canada also went the cultural route, offering tickets to Canada's biggest attraction in New York this summer, the Fellini-esque rock 'n' roll circus Cirque du Soleil.
There are 10 nonpermanent seats on the council and five permanent ones: the United States, Britain, China, France and Russia. Every year, five of the nonpermanent seats come up for election to a two-year term.
Despite the fun and games, the campaign for one of the two available seats is serious. Ambassadors, foreign ministers and even heads of state get involved in lobbying.
Canada plays a significant role in peace and security around the world, and contributes to U.N. development, human rights, social, economic and environmental programs, said Andras Vamos-Goldman, a political affairs official in the Canadian mission. Since the early 1960s, Canada has given $ 30 billion in overseas development assistance, he said.
The Netherlands also touts its contributions to peacekeeping and development, citing its ranking as the second-largest donor for development initiatives such as the World Food Program and UNICEF. "We think we've got a good track record for all the things the U.N. stands for," said spokesman Rob Zaagman.
Greece outlined its pitch in the latest issue of Thesis, a quarterly journal from the Foreign Affairs Ministry. It cited its participation in U.N. peacekeeping missions and its concern about disarmament, the environment and human rights.
Greece has only been on the council once before, in 1952-53. Canada has held the seat five times, most recently in 1989-90, and the Netherlands on four previous occasions, the last one being 1983-84.
Some believe Canada and the Netherlands have the best shot at landing seats because of the dispute over Cyprus, the Mediterranean island divided between Greek and Turkish Cypriots. Having Greece on the council could further politicize the issue at the United Nations.
Others cite the prominent Dutch and Canadian presence on peacekeeping forces as well as the continued Dutch influence over its former colonies.
 Load-Date: July 23, 1998

 

End of Document
