

Dole and Clinton: How The Facts, Their Words Stack Up
October 7, 1996, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 748 words
Byline: By JOHN SOLOMON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




From the size of tax increases to the number of soldiers on foreign soil, President Clinton and Bob Dole dueled with statistics and boasts in their first debate. How their words measured up to the facts:
 
 Troop Deployment. Dole accused Clinton of deploying "more troops than any president in history around the world." In fact, Clinton's high-profile deployment of troops to Bosnia, Haiti, Somalia and the Persian Gulf pale in comparison to the hundreds of thousands committed during the Gulf War, Vietnam War or World War II.
In all, Clinton sent about 20,000 troops to Bosnia, 23,000 to Haiti and 10,000 to Somalia. Last month when tensions flared with Iraq, Clinton deployed another 10,000 troops to the Gulf region.
Dole, however, was correct in noting that Clinton had promised to pull U.S. troops out of Bosnia by this December but recently made plans to keep thousands there through next spring.
 
 Smallest Government in 30 Years. Clinton has trimmed nearly 250,000 federal jobs since taking office and the total federal work force is now smaller than during the Kennedy administration. However, two-thirds of those cuts have come from the Defense Department because of the end of the Cold War. The non-defense federal work force - which has shrunk some under Clinton's "reinventing government" plan - is still about 40 percent larger than when John F. Kennedy was president.
 
 Drug Czar. Clinton and Dole battled over the White House drug czar's office. Clinton took credit for appointing a former general this year to head the office.
But in 1993, Clinton slashed the size of the office by about four-fifths as part of his effort to reduce White House staff by 25 percent.
Dole criticized the president for those cuts. However, then-Sen. Dole voted against creation of the drug czar's office during the Reagan administration.
 
 Trial Lawyers. Dole accused Clinton of being under the influence of trial lawyers. It is true that lawyers were Clinton's single largest source of donations for this election - a total of nearly $ 3.9 million. But Dole also got a healthy share of political donations this election from attorneys - $ 1.5 million.
 
 Taxes and Incomes. Dole alleged that under Clinton, wages had stagnated and families now pay 40 percent of what they earn on taxes - "more than you spend for food, clothing and shelter combined for taxes under this administration."
But two government studies paint a different picture.
The Census Bureau reported in August that the median household income, even when adjusted for inflation, rose 2.7 percent in 1995, the first increase in six years.
Dole's 40 percent tax figure came from a recent study by a conservative tax foundation, which estimated that it took until May 7 this year for the average American to earn enough to pay his or her taxes.
But that study has been attacked by several experts.
And the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported earlier this year that in 1994, the average family paid $ 5,897 in state, local and federal taxes in 1994. That was just one-third of what the average family spent on food, clothing and housing.
 
 Medicare Spending: Clinton accused congressional Republicans of trying to cut Medicare by $ 270 billion. In fact, Republicans never proposed reducing Medicare spending.
Both Republicans and Clinton have called for restraining the future growth of Medicare - the GOP by $ 270 billion over seven years, the president by $ 124 billion over the same period.
Under the GOP plan, Medicare spending still would have risen by 7 percent a year, the Congressional Budget Office says.
 
 The Largest Tax Increase. Dole charged that Clinton's 1993 budget resulted in the "largest tax increase in history." Well, not when you account for inflation.
With that adjustment, the largest U.S. tax increase since World War II came in 1982 under President Reagan. It was written principally by Dole, then chairmen of the Senate Finance Committee.
A dollar was worth more in 1982 than it was in 1993. Using 1993 dollars as a measure, Dole's 1982 tax increase cost $ 260 billion over five years. Clinton in 1993 proposed $ 266 billion in tax increases over five years, but congressional negotiators cut that to about $ 241 billion.
 
 Clinton took credit for putting 100,000 police on the streets. Congress in the 1994 crime bill authorized 100,000 new officers by the year 2000. But Congress thus far has allocated money for just 44,000 officers, and only about 20,000 of those are actually on the streets, the Justice Department says.
 Load-Date: October 7, 1996

 

End of Document
