

Down to the wire: 2004 race up in the air
September 4, 1997, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 813 words
Byline: By STEPHEN WILSON, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: LAUSANNE, Switzerland
Body




Too close to call.
With many members still uncommitted and little separating the five candidates, one or two votes could make the difference Friday when the International Olympic Committee selects the host city of the 2004 Summer Games.
"Betting on this one is a fool's game," Canadian executive board member Dick Pound said. "It can go any way. A lot of members are still undecided."
Dozens of interviews with IOC members and other Olympic officials point to Rome or Athens, Greece, as the likely winner, though no one is ruling out Stockholm, Sweden, either. Cape Town, South Africa, and Buenos Aires, Argentina, still look like outsiders.
"It looks like a triple dead heat," said Australia's Phil Coles said, referring to the three European bidders.
Friday's final presentations to the IOC could swing the outcome. Each of the five cities will have 55 minutes to espouse its cause with speeches, charts and videos.
The undisputed star of the show will be South African President Nelson Mandela, who will ask the IOC to complete the five Olympic rings by awarding the games to Africa for the first time. South America also has never staged the games.
"We consider it just and equitable that these two continents should have a chance of hosting the Olympic Games," Mandela said Thursday. "The winning of the bid will benefit Africa as a whole."
Stockholm will go first, followed by Cape Town, Athens, Buenos Aires and Rome. Then, at 5 o'clock, 107 members of the IOC will begin casting secret ballots.
A majority of 54 votes is required for victory. The vote is expected to go four rounds before a winner emerges. The city with the fewest votes is eliminated after each round.
The key to the race will be which city picks up the most second- and third-choice votes.
Europe has the largest bloc of votes with 44, followed by the Americas with 21, Africa 20, Asia 17 and Oceania 5.
The Asian votes could swing the race in the end. With Japan, China and others lining up bids for the 2008 games, the Asians may side with a European city to eliminate potential rivals in the next vote.
Sport Intern, an insider's newsletter which often reflects IOC thinking, projected the breakdown of first-round votes as: 25 to 30 each for Athens and Rome, 20-25 for Stockholm, and 15-18 each for Buenos Aires and Cape Town.
Mario Pescante, president of Italy's rich and powerful Olympic committee, said he believes 10 percent of IOC members are undecided and will be swayed by Friday's presentations.
"One, two or three votes will make the difference," he said.
Athens (1896), Stockholm (1912) and Rome (1960) have all staged the Olympics.
Conventional wisdom points to the Olympics going back to Europe after 10 years and four games away from the continent.
"There are good arguments for that," IOC president Juan Antonio Samaranch said recently. "The cradle of Olympism is in Europe. This is where the games were born. … But the games cannot simply be awarded according to geographical aspects. It's also a matter of the technical qualifications."
Italian officials fear Rome has no natural constituency and could lose out to the political pull of Cape Town, the sentiment of Athens, the novelty of Buenos Aires or the Anglo-Saxon leaning toward Stockholm.
"If geopolitics is the key issue, then Rome is weak," said Luciano Barra, a leading CONI and bid committee official. "If the vote is on rational issues, Rome is strong."
Rome hopes to minimize any backlash against Primo Nebiolo, the Italian who heads the International Amateur Athletic Federation.
Nebiolo has great influence but also many enemies. He didn't help Rome's cause by making scathing attacks against Greece during the world championships in Athens last month. If Rome loses, he will be the scapegoat.
"We have five cities that are all excellent, all capable of hosting the games," Nebiolo said Thursday. "If we will win, I will be happy. If we do not win, I will be the first to shake the hand of the winner."
While Rome features a collective leadership, the Athens bid is dominated by one person: Gianna Angelopolous-Daskalaki, a former member of parliament and wife of a Greek steel and shipping tycoon.
Many IOC members have been impressed by Angelopolous-Daskalaki's campaign, but others wonder whether there is enough expertise and resources behind her to organize the games.
Stockholm, with a solid bid backed by many of the world's top athletes, must overcome the relative lack of public support in Sweden and the recent series of bombs and fires directed at sports and Olympic facilities.
Many members feel it's too soon to hold the games in Africa. There is concern over crime in South Africa, the large number of facilities that still need to be built and the future after Mandela leaves.
Buenos Aires has impressed many members with its bid concept, but Argentina's geographical isolation and a shortage of management and resources hurt the bid.
 Load-Date: September 4, 1997

 

End of Document
