

Egypt and U.N. in tug-of-war over goals of aid to the poor
The Associated Press
August 9, 1998, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 919 words
Byline: By LOUIS MEIXLER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NUBARIYA, Egypt
Body




Mustafa Ali and his wife have two houses, two water buffalo and two farms tilled by laborers paid with food the couple gets under a U.N. program aimed at helping Egypt's poorest.
The two university graduates are hardly considered impoverished in a country where tens of thousands of peasants like the family's laborers have no land at all.
But Mustafa and Amani Ali are profiting because Egypt wants to direct aid to unemployed college and technical school graduates - a group it considers a potential political threat.
The U.N. World Food Program, although helping the Egyptian campaign, argues the aid should feed the poorest - rural women and landless farmers.
This tug-of-war is replayed in many places, especially in poorer nations, where aid dollars can have a significant impact on the economy and local political concerns are often at odds with the goals of aid groups. Usually, it is the powerless who lose out in the struggle.
In Egypt, the government desperately wants to resettle unemployed college graduates like the Alis away from city slums, which are fertile recruiting grounds for Islamic militants opposed to the country's secular system.
For the past 10 years, the World Food Program has helped that goal, spending more than $ 40 million to send wheat, cooking oil, lentils, sugar and tea to 20,000 families that have settled on reclaimed desert land to farm. Most of the recipients are college graduates.
The U.N. relief agency tried unsuccessfully to steer the program toward its own goal of serving the poor and now says it's getting tough, imposing quotas and threatening to withhold aid if targets are not met.
"We have to take care of the poorest of the poor," said Christa Rader of the agency's Egypt office. "I think it is time that the government realize that we are serious."
In Nubariya, a vast expanse of reclaimed desert land 50 miles south of Alexandria, settlers like the Alis receive U.N. food for four years while they learn to farm the rocky, sandy soil. Each settler gets enough food for five people.
Each also receives a small, squat, red-brick house with two rooms, five acres of land and some irrigation equipment under a 30-year interest-free loan from the government.
Some settler families, like the Alis, get double food rations and two houses if a husband and wife are accepted separately into the program or marry after being accepted. They are, however, a minority.
As far as the Alis are concerned, the U.N. food aid is necessary to achieve the legitimate goals of reclaiming land and creating jobs.
"It is vital to the family. Cash is not always available," said Ali, an unemployed accountant before moving to Nubariya last September.
Suzan Mohammed Kamel, the Agriculture Ministry's coordinator for the Nubariya project, said it is vital to get the unemployed graduates settled on reclaimed land, adding that many of them are from farm families and have few resources.
"If they were not here, they would be in the streets," she said.
She said the resettled graduates also give jobs to the poor. "They have no good experience with the land so they have to resort to laborers to help them."
Ali, for example, has five workers who are paid in part with food from his U.N. allotment but who also get 5 Egyptian pounds ($ 1.50) a day each.
The World Food Program says the government program must focus directly on the most disenfranchised in Egyptian society - female heads of households and landless peasants.
"If we look at the poorest of the poor, we have to gradually say good-bye to the graduates," said Peter Selmer, head of the agency's office in Cairo.
He has told the Egyptian government that 40 percent of settlers in the program must be landless peasants and 4 percent must be country women who head households.
"They know this and they have accepted it," Selmer said.
Officials have promised to cut out double benefits to people like the Alis.
The government also is offering to resettle 3,000 landless farmers from southern Egypt, a region where the World Food Program's mandate to feed the poor dovetails with Egypt's need to resettle people who lost their land when rent controls were scrapped for tenant farms.
Settling landless women is more of a problem because in conservative, rural communities women are expected to stay at home, not be homesteaders.
The success of the land reclamation program is crucial to Egypt. Once the breadbasket of the Mediterranean, it can no longer feed its own people and is banking on costly projects to make the desert bloom.
In Nubariya, the government has allocated $ 143.4 million to give the settlers houses and land. The World Food Program is spending $ 18 million over four years to feed 13,000 settlers in a new phase of the program that began in September 1996.
"The government would never be able to provide food to the area," Kamel said. "It is difficult enough for the government to meet the needs of people living in towns and in Cairo."
Things could be worse as far as countries trying to impose their goals on international aid. Last year, the charity World Vision shut down its programs in Eritrea after the government ordered it to stop monitoring where donations were spent.
Andrew Natsios, a former World Vision vice president, said developing countries often push their own goals for using foreign aid, but added that such things also happen in the West with government programs.
"Do you think all the government funding in the United States is based on need?" he asked. "It is based on congressmen and the … need for re-election."
 Load-Date: August 9, 1998

 

End of Document
