

Equality of The Sexes: Year After Beijing, Momentum Is On
August 25, 1996, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 971 words
Byline: Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Brazil has promised free cancer-screening exams for women. The United States is spending $ 1.6 billion to try to end domestic violence. South African President Nelson Mandela is setting up a unit in his office to monitor the status of women.
A year after 189 states pledged to make equality of the sexes a reality in the 21st century, many governments are crediting the conference for their latest steps to help women.
"The momentum is on - and this momentum is not only by women but even by governments and by men," said Gertrude Mongella, secretary-general of the Fourth World Conference on Women that adopted a 150-page plan to achieve women's equality.
Inspired by last September's U.N. conference in Beijing, five Mongolian women ran for parliament in June and won, bringing the total number of female legislators to seven out of 76. Women's groups in Zaire joined forces to try to change laws that bar women from traveling or opening bank accounts without their husbands' permission.
But very few countries have committed new resources to implement the women's agenda.
Many are juggling existing funds and some countries, like Argentina and Colombia, have drastically cut resources for women, according to a 25-nation survey by the New York-based Women's Environment and Development Organization.
South Africa was the only country surveyed that was considering reallocating part of its military budget to support women's economic advancement.
Noeleen Heyzer, director of the United Nations Development Fund for Women, is concerned the partnership between women's groups and governments that helped make the Beijing conference such a success may start to crumble - and a key reason is money.
"Many women's organizations are having problems sustaining themselves after Beijing - and yet they are most needed now in the monitoring and implementation of priorities and recommendations that have come out of Beijing," she said.
At the heart of the struggle for women's equality are the raw statistics of inequality: Females constitute 70 percent of the world's 1.3 billion poor, 65 percent of the illiterates and 11 percent of legislators. Womens' earnings average 75 percent those of men.
"What is really lacking is opportunities … especially in the area of women's economic and political participation," Heyzer said. "What's still lacking is partnership with the private sector."
Grassroots groups in many countries have started lobbying to put women in the top echelons of big business. In June, the first Global Women Entrepreneurs Trade Fair was held in Accra, Ghana.
International voluntary organizations have also set a goal of giving 100 million of the world's poorest families - especially the women - access to credit by 2005.
At Beijing, Western governments and lending institutions fell in love with this concept of "micro-credit" - providing small loans to enable poor women to start small businesses.
The grassroots groups are organizing a micro-credit summit in Washington on Feb. 2-4, with first lady Hillary Clinton as an honorary co-chair, and inviting lending institutions and governments to take part. They hope at least half the $ 20 billion in capital needed to help the poorest will come from the private sector.
One little-noticed outcome of the Beijing conference was a campaign by 1,000 voluntary groups to try to shift the funding priorities of the World Bank to issues women care about - alleviating poverty, improving health care and education.
Activists from the campaign - Women's Eyes on the World Bank - expect to meet the bank's president, James Wolfensohn, on Sept. 6. The bank has given $ 30 million to fund micro-credit projects and has asked 12 women from voluntary organizations to consult on its gender issues.
The campaign activists will be attending a conference in Washington from Sept. 5-8, organized by the Association of Women and Development, where 1,200 women from around the world will discuss progress on implementing the Beijing agenda.
In the United Nations, Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali appointed Assistant Secretary-General Rosario Green of Mexico to oversee implementation of the Beijing agenda and all U.N. conference agreements on gender issues.
The intense debates in Beijing over abortion, sexual rights and inheritance rights illustrated the divisions among women and governments on key issues.
Since Beijing, Heyzer said she has noticed that the old north-south divide between women from industrialized and Third World countries is diminishing - but the divide between feminists and fundamentalists is growing, especially in more developed countries.
Many Muslim countries in the Middle East and some staunchly Roman Catholic nations have been very slow to take on the Beijing agenda. But in some of these countries, women themselves are taking the lead.
Princess Basma, sister of King Hussein of Jordan and a newly named goodwill U.N. ambassador, is calling a meeting in late September to talk about implementing the Beijing platform in the Arab world. A conference on increasing women's participation in politics is scheduled in Yemen in October.
"There is no quick fix here," said Susan Davis, executive director of the Women's Environment and Development Organization. "This is centuries of inequality that we are trying to reverse in the context of severe global inequality."
But she is nonetheless heartened by preliminary results from a survey of over 50 countries on implementation of the Beijing agenda. Called "Beyond Promises - Governments In Motion," it will be published in September.
India, South Africa and Indonesia have already incorporated priorities from Beijing into national action plans.
On Sept. 28, town meetings linked by satellite to the White House Interagency Council will be held in 1,000 cities across the United States to develop the American plan.
 Load-Date: August 25, 1996

 

End of Document
