

Eyeing the presidency no longer a taboo in Zimbabwe
The Associated Press
July 12, 1998, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 725 words
Byline: By ANGUS SHAW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HARARE, Zimbabwe
Body




In the office where thugs tried to kill him, labor leader Morgan Tsvangirai leaned back and contemplated the possibility of becoming president.
The idea of replacing President Robert Mugabe, the country's revered independence leader, would have been considered a delusion only a few years ago. But the economy has gone sour, causing increasing unrest, and many Zimbabweans now view Tsvangirai as a likely president.
He is head of the country's main labor confederation, which has shot to prominence as a potent political force in the past year, elbowing aside a dozen small and fractious opposition parties.
"The situation is desperate and people are looking for alternatives. Certainly, there's pressure on me (to challenge Mugabe), but circumstances still have to evolve," Tsvangirai said.
Not only his supporters see him as a rising star.
Seven assailants beat Tsvangirai unconscious with pieces of office furniture in December, two days after he led a national strike that forced the government to scrap tax hikes. They were trying to toss him out a 10th floor window when office workers alerted by a secretary's screams chased the attackers away.
Tsvangirai calls it an assassination attempt by political opponents. After police closed an investigation without arresting anyone, his labor group, the Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Unions, conducted its own probe and gave the names of three suspects to authorities.
The names haven't been released, but Tsvangirai described them as security operatives with Mugabe's ruling party, the Zimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic Front.
Mugabe, 74, an ascetic intellectual, was long seen as an able statesman who guided the nation through the transition from a bloody bush war to become a model of prosperity, racial harmony and democracy.
But in recent years, the reign of the country's only black leader since white rule ended in 1980 has become increasingly corrupt and dictatorial.
In 1996 he married his former secretary - 40 years his junior and widely disliked for her regal airs - at a two-day ceremony criticized for its lavish feasting.
Since then, the unemployment rate has soared to more than 50 percent. Prices have jumped more than 30 percent since the Zimbabwe dollar lost more than half its value against the U.S. dollar in November.
"The time is ripe for change," Tsvangirai said. "Things are falling apart because the government has lost the capacity to manage the economy."
In late May, students tried to mount a protest campaign like the one in economically straitened Indonesia that drove President Suharto from power a few days earlier. But a sit-in outside Parliament broke up in disarray after three days.
Still, however inept, the students scared the government into closing down the University of Zimbabwe, said John Makumbe, a political science professor at the school.
"There is a real fear of Indonesia syndrome, and this was a warning of things to come," he said.
Makumbe said the biggest danger to Mugabe's hold on power lies in the threat by Tsvangirai's labor confederation - representing 80 percent of labor groups - to stage a five-day national strike to protest economic policies.
"A five-day strike takes on massive political overtones to get rid of the current regime, and people know it," Makumbe said.
In response to the economic turmoil, Mugabe created "a national economic consultative forum" of officials and business leaders. But its members have said he has repeatedly refused to listen to the panel's advice.
Mugabe rejected a proposal to give the forum policy-making powers that would have put professional expertise alongside political experience.
Opposition groups trace the beginning of Mugabe's troubles to the May 2, 1997, death of Shepherd Mhongo, a young civil servant who leaked details of corruption at a state war victims compensation fund. The government said Mhongo committed suicide after being questioned by security agents.
His disclosures that politicians and favored ruling party supporters took the equivalent of $ 22 million from the fund after submitting false disability claims led to violent nationwide demonstrations by former independence fighters.
Mugabe ordered tax increases to pay new pensions and bonuses to the veterans, but no officials were punished. That led to the strike by Tsvangirai's federation that forced Mugabe to back down on the tax hikes.
 Load-Date: July 12, 1998

 

End of Document
