

Father fights to clear the name of "Carlos the Jackal"
December 19, 1997, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 700 words
Byline: By BART JONES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN CRISTOBAL, Venezuela
Body




The aging Marxist lawyer proudly holds a photograph of his oldest son, then softly kisses the image sent from a Paris prison.
He had high hopes for his three boys from the moment of their births - naming each of them in honor of the leader of the 1917 Russian revolution: Vladimir - Ilich - Lenin.
It was Ilich who made a name for himself in the world: "Carlos the Jackal."
Speaking in a hushed voice, Altagracia Ramirez Navas warmly tells a visitor to this city in the northern Andes mountains of his son, a man accused of gunning down three men at the door of a Paris apartment.
"My son is not a terrorist," Ramirez says. "He's a guerrilla, a revolutionary warrior,"
For decades, Ramirez refused to speak publicly of his son - remaining silent as authorities across the globe hunted for the man accused of some of the Cold War's most sensational terrorist attacks: the 1972 massacre of Israeli Olympic athletes, the 1976 highjacking of an Air France jet to Entebbe, Uganda.
But in recent days, the start of Ilich's triple-murder trial in Paris prompted him to try to persuade the world that his son is no villain.
During a five-hour conversation with The Associated Press on Wednesday, he denounced the trial as "illegal" and said he is fighting to have Ilich returned to Venezuela.
France has no legal right to try Ilich, the experienced lawyer argues, because French intelligence agents "kidnapped" him from Sudan in 1994 without extradition papers.
Ramirez said he has sent thousands of dollars for his son's defense. His home betrays a declining wealth: The concrete floor living room is bare of furniture, hanging bedsheets serve as doors. Scores of names and telephone numbers are scribbled in pencil on the wood walls.
"His human rights have undeniably been violated," Ramirez insists, offering a rundown of his son's "rough treatment" since his capture.
By Ilich's own count, he killed 83 people before his capture.
To hear the father tell it, Ilich is a bright idealist who read Trotsky's biography of Lenin twice by age 11, and later fought for the Palestinians.
Exactly how Ilich made the transition from a young communist who studied at a reputed KGB training center in Moscow to a full-fledged terrorist is unclear. But his father said he is "proud" of what his son has become.
It has been 22 years since Ramirez says he last saw Ilich, now 48.
The Polaroid photograph taken in prison in May 1996 shows Ilich standing in what seems a park - actually a cloth backdrop of flowers and trees. A thick Cuban Cohiba cigar juts from his mouth.
Cursive letters written in Spanish under the image read: "What a delicious Cohiba!"
"This is the most beautiful picture there is of him in jail," says Ramirez. Another favorite is a published photo taken the day he kidnapped OPEC oil ministers in Vienna in 1975.
Standing on the back patio of his tin-roofed home, Ramirez shuffled through letters and newspaper clippings that he says show his son acted under orders from Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat.
Ramirez, who declines to give his exact age, earned degrees in law and political science in 1944, and says he was held for seven months as a political prisoner in Venezuela in the '40s.
He later became a successful lawyer and remains a respected resident of San Cristobal, his family's hometown in western Venezuela, near the Colombian border.
Ilich and his brothers moved to London with their mother in 1965 after their parents divorced. Ramirez said he visited the boys about once a year until 1975 - by then, the brothers had moved back to Venezuela and Ilich was a well-known mercenary.
Vladimir and Lenin now are engineers in the western industrial city of Valencia.
Ramirez's sympathy for Ilich finds more than a few supporters among Venezuelans, who prefer to overlook his terrorist past.
Ilich "is Venezuela's most outstanding man," says Luis Sandovar, 40, a gas station attendant in San Cristobal. "I admire him a lot."
Ramirez said his oldest son is never far from his thoughts. On Ilich's birthday two years ago, he dedicated a poem he wrote about Columbus to him. San Cristobal's biggest daily newspaper published it.
"Ilich is present with me every day and every night," he says, his eyes welling with tears.
 Load-Date: December 19, 1997

 

End of Document
