

First of the Great Post-Apartheid Trials Opens Monday
March 3, 1996, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 578 words
Byline: AP Photo NY195, By TOM COHEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DURBAN, South Africa
Body




To some, former Defense Minister Magnus Malan is the steel-willed military leader who saved South Africa from communist insurrection.
To many others, he is the ultimate white terror - mastermind of the brutal "total onslaught" campaign aimed at gutting the anti-apartheid movement.
On Monday, the retired general stands trial for murder, and his country confronts its most bitter divisions. Police have been implicated before in political killings under apartheid, but never before have such high-level officials been charged.
At issue is whether Malan and his military colleagues trained Zulu nationalist warriors and sent them on murder missions against anti-apartheid activists, particularly those linked to the African National Congress.
The defendants include former military chief Kat Liebenberg, former army chief Jannie Geldenhuys and a top official of the Zulu nationalist Inkatha Freedom Party, the main black rival of President Nelson Mandela's ANC.
All are accused of planning the massacre of 13 people - including six children under the age of 10 - at a four-room house in the KwaMakutha black township in 1987.
By the time testimony from up to 100 witnesses is completed, the names of Inkatha leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi and perhaps other members of former President P.W. Botha's government are expected to come up.
Buthelezi, now home affairs minister in Mandela's ANC-led government, has not been charged. Last weekend, he called the trial an ANC attempt "to rewrite history by attempting to fool the whole world … that we as (Inkatha) started the violence in this country."
White leaders called the indictment of Malan and 19 others last December the start of the long-feared ANC witch hunt against apartheid officials.
They asked Mandela to grant a blanket amnesty for all the defendants but he refused, saying they had rejected previous opportunities to apply for amnesty.
For years, Mandela and other anti-apartheid leaders have accused white leaders of working with Inkatha to wage war against the ANC and its allies. The 65-page indictment, supplemented last week by additional charges of a broader conspiracy to murder anti-apartheid activists, alleged exactly the kind of collusion long suggested by the ANC and others.
On Sunday, at the site of the 1987 attack - house number 1866 on a hilly road in KwaMakutha - Augustine Simane cradled her infant in a back room where blue paint covered bullet holes in the concrete wall. Until a neighbor told her, she was unaware the massacre occurred there when she moved in with her family five years ago.
Back then, the ANC-linked United Democratic Front was challenging Inkatha for control of the township in the traditional Zulu homeland. Victor Ntuli was a UDF leader.
On January 21, 1987, men with guns opened fire on the house, killing 13 of Ntuli's friends and relatives. He wasn't home that night, but reportedly was killed two years later.
The indictment alleges the killers were six of the defendants who belonged to a special force of 200 Inkatha fighters trained by the South African military.
According to the charges, Buthelezi had asked for the training, and the squad was given permission to act against enemies of Inkatha.
Prosecutors will have to prove that Malan and other top generals took part in decisions to use the squad for murder raids. In a speech to foreign journalists last year, Malan said the South African military could not be held responsible for subsequent actions by people it trained.
 Load-Date: March 3, 1996

 

End of Document
