

For the U.S. military, Africa is becoming familiar turf
The Associated Press
March 14, 2000, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 661 words
Byline: By GREG MYRE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MAPUTO, Mozambique
Body




The flood relief operation in Mozambique marks the third time in seven years the American military has jumped in to provide humanitarian help in Africa.
Aid missions to the continent have grown so common they're now part of the U.S. training program.
Well before the flooding in Mozambique left 1 million people in need of assistance, Maj. Gen. Joseph Wehrle, commander of the 3rd U.S. Air Force based in Britain, had organized a three-week training exercise in the west African nation of Cameroon. The mission: how to respond to a flood in Africa.
So, when the Air Force was called in for the real thing, "I was already taking my malaria tablets," said Lt. Col. Tom Dolney.
About 700 U.S. Air Force personnel and 15 aircraft are now in the region, operating from the Indian Ocean coastal cities of Maputo and Beira, and from an air base in neighboring South Africa.
Along with military units from several other countries, they have served as the air wing for international aid groups, flying in food and plucking stranded villagers from the flood zones in central and southern Mozambique.
More than 14,000 people have been airlifted to safety, including many who had been stranded in treetops. Most were rescued by South African helicopter crews, which were the first to respond to the disaster and for days were working alone, ferrying load after load of flood victims.
Capt. Jeff Burrell said he was initially shocked by the ragged condition of the flood victims when his helicopter landed in remote villages along the Save River basin. The trip nearly turned into a disaster when about 100 Mozambicans tried to storm the helicopter as it touched down in one hamlet.
"We immediately began hovering, but one man was hanging on the skids and refused to let go," said Burrell, a logistics officer from Toccoa, Ga.
The pilot didn't want to land amid the chaos, so the crew scrambled to pull the man on board, Burrell said.
Among the aircraft sent in for the aid effort is a U.S. C-130 cargo plane equipped with a powerful camera on its belly that can detect damage to roads and railways. The camera can also search isolated regions for displaced people who might otherwise be overlooked.
Huge Pave Low MH-53 helicopters can be refueled in the air, giving them the range to reach refugees in distant regions beyond the reach of most choppers.
The marriage of Western militaries and international humanitarian groups has become common in Africa, where young aid workers dressed in shorts and T-shirts work alongside U.S. servicemen dressed in long-sleeve camouflage despite the broiling African sun.
The aid groups have the expertise in organizing refugee camps and feeding large numbers efficiently, but they need the aircraft and logistical muscle that only the military can deliver.
Though President Clinton has been a leading proponent of greater American involvement in Africa, former President Bush began the recent trend when he sent troops to Somalia in December 1992 to halt a famine that had claimed hundreds of thousands of lives.
The Americans swiftly carved out safe corridors for aid distribution and helped end the famine, but nearly 40 Americans were killed in fighting with one of the factions in Somalia's civil war.
Scarred by the Somalia experience, the United States and other Western nations kept their distance during Rwanda's genocide in 1994, when the Hutu majority slaughtered hundreds of thousands of people, mostly minority Tutsis.
After the fighting ended, the U.S. military provided logistical support for the tide of refugees that fled to neighboring Zaire.
Mozambique is a country at peace, and that helped build a solid consensus for U.S. involvement.
"I was in Washington last week and I didn't detect any reluctance to getting involved," said Dean Curran, the U.S. ambassador to Mozambique. "We're getting loads of letters and e-mails from U.S. churches, individuals and aid groups. The mission has clearly touched the hearts of people in the United States."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo BEW102, AP Graphic AFRICA HELP sent March 13
 Load-Date: March 15, 2000

 

End of Document
