

For the first time, Zimbabweans wonder if Mugabe can endure
The Associated Press
January 22, 1998, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 741 words
Byline: By TERRY LEONARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HARARE, Zimbabwe
Body




Hard times get harder each day in the wretched corners of this southern African capital. Discontent, once voiced only in whispers, now boils into riots of anger.
Eighteen years ago, Zimbabwe was a leading hope of black Africa, a fertile country rich in resources and a leader of the struggle against apartheid in neighboring South Africa.
But the economy long has been in decline and thousands of Zimbabwe's urban poor recently have taken to the streets to protest tax increases and soaring food prices.
For the first time since independence in 1980, people are seriously asking if President Robert Mugabe, the only leader Zimbabwe has ever known, can endure.
The economy is in shambles and Zimbabwe's battered currency slides relentlessly downward. As prices soar, businesses fail or retrench. Skittish foreign investors retreat.
"You reach a limit on how much you can continue to squeeze people," Morgan Tsvangirai, the secretary-general of the Zimbabwe Congress of Trades Unions, said in an interview last week. "If you stay too long they will throw you out."
The government, whipping a familiar scapegoat, blamed the riots on profiteering by unscrupulous white businessmen.
But economists both white and black said chaos is the price of 18 years of government waste, mismanagement, incompetence, corruption, cronyism and patronage.
"We have destroyed our credibility in international financial circles," said John Robertson, an independent economist who analyzes Zimbabwean politics.
Tsvangirai and Robertson predicted the economic chaos will eventually lead to the ouster of the 73-year-old Mugabe, possibly by year's end.
Others, such as Dr. John Makumbe, a political scientist at Zimbabwe University, say that ouster will take more time.
"They underestimate the capacity of the ruling party to hoodwink the populace," Makumbe said. "The ruling party still has heaps of bones to throw to the people."
Information Minister Chen Chimutengwende, the government spokesman, ridiculed suggestions Mugabe would step down.
Still, Mugabe's iron-fisted grip on power clearly has weakened. Last month, his rubber-stamp Parliament rejected new taxes he ordered. Some ruling party deputies have openly criticized his leadership, and he has been lampooned in the independent press in ways that would have landed editors in jail a year ago.
In August, Mugabe was shouted down by his own former guerrillas at the usually solemn Heroes Day ceremony. They were angered that pensions to disabled veterans were frozen amid allegations that more than $ 36 million had gone to ruling party elite.
Mugabe then promised them $ 222 million in cash and pensions - and ordered new income, energy and sales taxes to fund the plan. But Zimbabweans, who already pay some of the highest tax rates in the world, shut down the country with a Dec. 9 general strike that erupted into anti-government riots in Harare.
Eventually, Parliament rejected all but the sales tax.
Anger at the government now transcends all economic and racial lines.
"To me it seems as if they don't care about people like us," said Netsai Nyamande, who sells food in a squalid open-air market.
Since November, the Zimbabwe dollar has fallen about 50 percent against the U.S. dollar. The Reserve Bank says it has established lines of credit worth $ 300 million to stabilize the currency. But even with help from donors, the economy is adrift.
"We are groping in the dark," said Danny Dube, an economist for a large Zimbabwe bank. "No one knows where the economy is going."
The dollar, stock market and economy all crashed in November, chiefly over concerns about the payoff to former guerrillas and the consequences of seizing 1,480 mostly white-owned farms.
The Commercial Farmers Union said Mugabe's land grab would cut production in the agriculture-based economy by 37 percent. The plan also troubles banks holding nearly $ 111 million in farm loans.
Mugabe needs to appease 8 million peasants who know the government is years behind on promises of land reform. Although Mugabe vows there is no turning back, resistance from donor nations could delay the plan indefinitely.
Meanwhile, basic food prices have risen more than 50 percent in four months, a staggering blow to people with an average annual income of less than $ 550.
Private economists say half the work force is unemployed and wages lag far behind price hikes.
The government has been "sitting on a time bomb," said Dube. "There is going to be a lot of turmoil."
 

 
 Load-Date: January 22, 1998

 

End of Document
