

For Israeli right, new accord is the crushing end of a dream
January 20, 1997, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 641 words
Byline: By DAN PERRY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TEL AVIV, Israel
Body




"Greater Israel" ideologues suffered a crushing blow this week when Benjamin Netanyahu, the very man they expected to revive their dream, all but extinguished it.
The dream envisioned Israeli control over all territory held by the Jews before they were expelled by the Romans nearly 2,000 years ago, including the West Bank. Religious Jews saw reclamation of the West Bank as a religious imperative; secular nationalists considered it a key strategic asset.
In recent years, Israel's Labor Party government began returning the West Bank to Arab rule in exchange for peace. But in last year's elections, the voters restored the hard-line Likud to power.
The "Greater Israel" camp saw Likud leader Benjamin Netanyahu's election seven months ago as a last-minute miracle: with Yasser Arafat's autonomy government still controlling only a quarter of the West Bank, they hoped the Israeli withdrawal, agreed to by Labor, could be halted and perhaps reversed.
But instead of forsaking peacemaking, Netanyahu this week reaffirmed and signed onto his predecessors' commitments.
True believers now accuse Netanyahu of betrayal.
"It's a dark day, full of sorrow and rage," lamented ex-premier Yitzhak Shamir, the previous Likud leader, who called for replacing Netanyahu.
Benny Begin, son of Likud founder Menachem Begin, angrily resigned as science minister to protest Netanyahu's Hebron-West Bank accord with Arafat. Settler leaders protested outside Netanyahu's office. Graffiti condemned his as a traitor.
Netanyahu argued that he didn't change - "It's the reality that has changed. The responsibility of a statesman is to combine the vision with reality."
Likud legislator Zeev Boim was more blunt: "We need to say the truth. We have abandoned 'Greater Israel,"' he said.
The question has riven Jews since the founding of the Zionist movement a century ago: Should they fight for all of Palestine, as demanded by firebrand Zionist Vladimir Jabotinsky, or agree to divide it with the Arabs who have lived here for centuries?
During the 1948 war that established Israel, the Zionists were headed by Jabotinsky's pragmatic rival David Ben-Gurion, who was content to conquer only part of biblical Israel, leaving Jordan in control of the West Bank and Egypt in control of the Gaza Strip.
But the schism reemerged with poisonous result when Israel conquered those territories in the 1967 war. The dispute has divided families and friends and in November sparked the assassination of peacemaker Yitzhak Rabin.
Labor said keeping the territories - and the more than 2 million Palestinians who inhabit them - meant endless conflict, the destruction of Israel's democracy and the creation of a divided state instead of a Jewish one.
Likud argued that giving them up would be unforgivable abrogation of the Jews' claim to their ancestral homeland and a security disaster - because the West Bank surrounds Jerusalem, comes within 20 miles of Tel Aviv and at one point leaves Israel only 12 miles wide.
In his book "A Place Among The Nations," then opposition leader Netanyahu argued forcefully that the West Bank was a "protective wall" that must never be abandoned.
But as prime minister, the U.S.-educated Netanyahu has another agenda: making Israel more prosperous and peaceful. After a breakdown in negotiations in September - when 79 people died in fighting between Israeli and Palestinian troops - Netanyahu, in the words of the Yediot Ahronot newspaper, "chose Washington over Hebron."
Yosef Burg, who for decades headed the National Religious Party that was the breeding ground of the most militant settlers, told the Haaretz daily Sunday that he has changed his mind about the desirability of keeping the West Bank and Gaza.
"It's impossible, at least without dictatorship, to keep in one state two peoples that hate each other and don't want to live together," Burg said.
 Load-Date: January 20, 1997

 

End of Document
