

Government imposes curfew, rebel fighters said in the city
May 13, 1997, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 783 words
Byline: By TINA SUSMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KINSHASA, Zaire
Body




Zaire's increasingly unpopular government imposed a curfew on Kinshasa on Tuesday and called on civilians to help the army defend the capital against advancing rebels.
Fearing a bloody battle, foreign mediators made a last-minute effort to keep peace talks on track between President Mobutu Sese Seko and Laurent Kabila, the rebel leader fighting to end 32 years of Mobutu dictatorship.
Kabila's army claimed its fighters were already in Kinshasa, but Zaire's government denied that. Raphael Ghenda, the information minister in the rebel-held city of Lubumbashi, hundreds of miles from Kinshasa, said "our first troops are in Kinshasa." He had no further details, and there was no sign of fighting in the capital Tuesday night.
The government has reported heavy fighting on the road to the capital, but spokesman Leon Kalima said the rebels were not yet in Kinshasa. He said the 8 p.m. to 6 a.m. curfew was called only to prevent looting and unrest.
A Western diplomat also denied that the rebels had reached Kinshasa. But the diplomat, speaking on condition of anonymity, added that the rebels were closer than ever and had reached the Black River, about 60 miles outside the city.
At a news conference, information minister Kin-Kiey Mulumba issued a clear call for residents to use force and weapons, if necessary, to fight off the rebels.
"The government signals that the population has the legitimate right to defend itself with proportional means to the rebels," he said, without elaborating. There were no signs that civilians were paying much attention to the government's call.
At the same time, the government said it was "putting all of its hopes" into peace talks between Mobutu and Kabila, set for Wednesday in Pointe-Noire, Congo.
In addition to imposing a curfew in Kinshasa, Mobutu's government announced that looters would be shot. Kabila's men have seized three-fourths of this vast nation since September, and government soldiers have looted many cities before retreating.
There were signs of heightened tensions in the capital Tuesday. Shops and stalls at the central market closed early. Long supermarket lines showed some residents were preparing to stay home through Wednesday. Plainclothes police roamed downtown, stopping people to demand bribes.
In a bid to increase pressure on Mobutu to resign, opposition parties called for the general strike Wednesday to coincide with the president's planned talks with Kabila in Pointe-Noire, Congo.
A leaflet circulating on the streets urged civilians and soldiers to fly white flags and sing "songs of joy" to signify their support for the rebels.
In Lubumbashi, in southeastern Zaire, rumors spread that Kinshasa had fallen to the rebels. Joyous residents shot off firecrackers, ran through the streets cheering and singing, and sang funeral songs for Mobutu while chanting Kabila's name.
Because of Mobutu's lack of support among both civilians and troops, Kabila's army has had a relatively easy time moving toward the capital. Soldiers in most cities have put up little resistance.
But as the rebels moved closer to Kinshasa, fighting has increased. The rebels and some foreign diplomats say that's because of help from former Angolan rebels called in by Mobutu - a charge the government denies.
Kin-Kiey accused the rebels of using Angolan government soldiers in their advance and said the insurgents were between Kinshasa and Kenge, about 120 miles to the east.
That seemed to confirm diplomatic reports of a battle over a bridge on the Kwango River, 100 miles east of the capital on the same highway as Kenge.
Security concerns prompted the U.S. Embassy to cut its staff Monday from 37 to 25, including the six Marines guarding the compound. Troops from the United States, France, Belgium and Britain are across the Zaire River in the Congolese capital in case they are needed to evacuate non-Zairians.
State Department spokesman Nicholas Burns on Monday urged Americans to leave the city, telling them "the end game is approaching."
However, the U.S. ambassador to Zaire, Daniel Howard Simpson, refused to call the Pointe-Noire meeting the last opportunity to avert a rebel attack on the capital. "I hope there are never any last chances for peace," Simpson said after discussing security concerns with Zaire's prime minister.
Kabila and Mobutu first met May 4 on a South African naval ship off Pointe-Noire. Two major issues divided them: the composition of a transitional authority, and when Mobutu would step down.
Mobutu, ailing with cancer at age 66, refused to quit immediately, saying he would give up the presidency only after elections. The rebels insisted Mobutu resign now and surrender power to a transitional authority led by Kabila.
 Load-Date: May 13, 1997

 

End of Document
