

Grand unveiling ceremony marks restoration of the Sphinx
The Associated Press
May 25, 1998, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 416 words
Byline: By MARIAM SAMI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




After a 10-year, $ 2.5 million restoration, Egypt staged a gala celebration Monday to unveil a newly shored up Sphinx many hope will help jump start a tourism industry hurt by terrorism.
The ceremony, attended by President Hosni Mubarak and his wife, Suzanne, marked the end of the project to repair erosion on the 4,500-year-old figure of a half-man, half-lion, built into a limestone outcrop in front of the Great Pyramids.
During the decade-long restoration, laborers carried 12,244 white limestone blocks - some weighing up to 1,320 pounds - to shore up the animal's weakened paws, legs and stomach.
When the renovation began, flakes had been falling for years from the sculpture's badly worn and pitted chest. Blocks weighing hundreds of pounds had tumbled from the body. And the sagging neck was a sure sign of aging.
The director-general of the UNESCO, Federico Mayor, praised the work as "magnificent." The Sphinx represents "a symbol of our common future" at "the dawn of a new millennium," Mayor said at the ceremony.
Egypt hopes the refurbished figure will bring back tourists who have stayed away from the country in large numbers since Islamic militants gunned down 58 tourists at another ancient Pharaonic site near the southern city of Luxor last November.
The evening began with a short film of the restoration process and climaxed when guards in loincloths rolled back a star-specked cloth shrouding the Sphinx to reveal the refurbished monument.
A laser light show and a performance by leading Egyptian opera singers Reda el-Wakil and Iman Mostafa followed in the celebrations that were broadcast live on state television.
The Sphinx, believed to show the face of its builder Pharaoh Chephren, is still missing its beard, parts of which are in the British and Egyptian museums. The nose was lost in the 14th century.
The damage to the Sphinx was brought by centuries of wear, but it is also blamed on water from drainage system of nearby villages.
The earliest restoration was undertaken almost 3,400 years ago by a prince later crowned Pharaoh Tutmosis IV. Other attempts were made in Roman times, in the 1920s and in the 1970s.
The new restoration funded by the U.N. Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization took care to use the same type of limestone and mortar employed by its ancient builders.
No one is sure why Chephren built the Sphinx, which sits 242 feet long and 66 feet high. Some historians say it was part of a temple complex that stood in front of Chephren's Pyramid.
 Load-Date: May 25, 1998

 

End of Document
