

Heir to the party of apartheid trying to court blacks, the poor
November 26, 2000, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 809 words
Byline: By RAVI NESSMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MACASSAR, South Africa
Body




The standard-bearer of the party that created apartheid drove into the Chris Hani squatter camp outside Cape Town trying to reach out to poor people of all races ahead of next week's local elections.
But the residents of the camp, named for a wildly popular anti-apartheid crusader assassinated by white extremists, are not ready to forgive Marthinus van Schalkwyk, leader of the remnants of the National Party.
Within minutes, screaming protesters from the ruling African National Congress overwhelmed his bus full of supporters. After a rushed campaign stop, the bus drove away.
In the raw political reality of the new South Africa, van Schalkwyk has little choice but to brave these protests. If he wants to become a viable political force in a country where whites are only 10 percent of the population, he needs the support of the blacks and the poor that his party oppressed for so long.
It promises to be a difficult struggle.
Van Schalkwyk remains popular in some mixed-race townships in the Cape Town area. But not with the Chris Hani camp's 350 blacks and mixed-race people, who live in the squalor of cramped one-room shacks of corrugated metal, mismatched timber and pieces of plastic and tarp. The camp has no toilets or water taps. Few people have jobs.
"We stay in a graveyard. We can't afford to stay like this," said Ronnie Peterson, a local ANC activist.
Many blame their poverty on the Democratic Alliance, which controls the provincial government in Western Cape Province, and the National Party, whose racist policies condemned many non-whites to poverty.
Technically, the National Party no longer exists.
Before national elections last year, it changed its name to the New National Party to boost its image.
It didn't help. The party attracted only 7 percent of the vote, mainly from whites and mixed-race voters who distrust the black government. The showing was a major drop from the 20 percent the party won in the country's first all-race elections in 1994.
The National Party was replaced as the leading opposition party by the Democratic Party, originally a white anti-apartheid coalition. The Nationalists were pushed in June into joining a Democratic Party-dominated coalition called the Democratic Alliance, which hopes to attract enough black support to win control of the government from the African National Congress in national elections in 2009.
As part of this campaign, van Schalkwyk has been dispatched to poor townships, squatter camps and black areas to stump for Democratic Alliance candidates in the Dec. 5 local elections.
He is trying to persuade voters that his party has moved beyond its roots of Afrikaner nationalism. He hopes they are willing to forgive its nearly 50-year rule - beginning in 1948 - when it passed laws segregating residential areas, forbidding mixed marriages, depriving blacks of political rights and forcing many into remote, desolate "homelands."
"The DA is a party for all income groups, all racial groups," van Schalkwyk, who is deputy leader of the Democratic Alliance, told The Associated Press during his trip to the squatter camp. "Whether you are black or not, ask yourself whose promises can you believe."
The African National Congress is destroying the economy, he said, pointing to the more than 500,000 jobs lost in the past six years. The Democratic Alliance promises to reduce the country's more than 30 percent unemployment rate, crack down on rampant crime, increase municipal services and provide free anti-AIDS drugs to rape victims and pregnant, HIV-infected women.
Van Schalkwyk drove into the Chris Hani camp aboard an open-backed red and yellow bus filled with dozens of mixed-race supporters and a band of trumpeters playing campaign songs. As his supporters got off and began dancing through the camp, a growing group of ANC supporters quickly challenged them, yelling slogans and waving posters.
"National Party out," said Oscarina Dyantyi, a 36-year-old black woman who lives with her husband and four children in a tiny wood shack.
After hurried speeches, the campaign stop was over - about 10 minutes after it started - and van Schalkwyk's supporters jumped onto the bus and sped away.
"He's using our people," Patrick Ras, a mixed-race resident of the camp, said as he tinkered with an old car.
The National Party "left marks, scars, but the deal is we must forgive and forget," Ras said. "We've got shacks; they've got mansions - but they want our vote."
Van Schalkwyk said he does not feel a moral responsibility for the plight of those in the camp because of his party's past. "I feel a moral responsibility because, as a leader of the new generation, I must help to build this country," he said.
Van Schalkwyk also said he did not see any irony in his push for black votes.
"People just have to adapt," he said. "In this country you either have to adapt, or die, or emigrate."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY340-342 of Nov. 20
 Load-Date: November 27, 2000

 

End of Document
