

Hold your breath and the wheel: Lagos driving tests the fearless
The Associated Press
December 16, 1998, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 689 words
Byline: TIM SULLIVAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LAGOS, Nigeria
Body




On the bad days, driving in Lagos is like maneuvering through a nightmare.
Traffic jams can last for hours, longhorn cattle occasionally wander across freeways, and armies of beggars descend on drivers trapped in stifling cars. Buying gasoline can require a three-day wait in line and the air is suffused with the stench of car fumes.
But at least it's not like it used to be.
"You must have noticed that it's better on the roads now," insists Ambrose Somide at Lagos' Ray Power radio station.
Somide directed a team of traffic reporters until skyrocketing prices for black market gasoline made it too expensive to send them out. Anyway, he says, the traffic has improved.
"It's fairly OK, compared to a couple of years ago," he says. He ticks off the improvements: repaired roads, less congestion from government offices moving out of town, more people taking buses because of gas shortages.
Then he changes his mind: "It's better than it was, but it's still bad."
Driving in Lagos is a chore and a challenge. In this overcrowded city of 10 million people, with its battered streets and fourth-rate policing, the infamous traffic jams - or "go-slows" as Nigerians call them - are as much a part of life as military rulers.
Go-slows are famous for materializing without warning, lasting for miles and disappearing abruptly. When they appear, they create a theater of traffic, right down to a symphonic accompaniment of blaring horns.
First come the peddlers: hordes of teen-age boys stalking stalled cars and selling everything imaginable. They have cold beer, toilet brushes, school pads, bread, videotapes, pens, dish towels, air fresheners, dinosaur shaped breakfast cereal, file folders, maps, candy.
One boy sells desktop electric organs, shuffling in the suffocating equatorial heat with a battery-powered model programmed to play "Jingle Bells" over and over again.
Make eye contact and you'll regret it. Hopeful hawkers will stand at car windows for minutes on end, silently displaying their wares, and will even jog alongside as drivers lurch forward.
Then the beggars arrive. In a country where the social security net is tattered beyond repair, begging in Lagos traffic is the only way to survive for thousands of people. Streets jammed with cars are also often filled with people who have slipped through society's cracks; the elderly, orphans, polio victims, the blind.
Finally, there are the drivers. Encounter Lagos in rush hour - particularly on secondary roads on the Lagos mainland, far from the wealthy enclaves on Ikoyi and Victoria islands with their relatively genteel streets - and discover Nigerian drivers at their white-knuckle worst.
Hyper-aggressive motorists combine with crowded streets to create automotive mayhem. Drivers go off the roads, straddle sewer ditches and weave through oncoming traffic, all the while twisting among everyone else doing the same thing. It can take 30 minutes to go 30 feet.
Then again, some days there are no problems at all.
"In Lagos, it happens in one minute," Somide says. "You go through a place and it's fine, and five minutes later there's a traffic jam."
Somide sounds wistful talking about his halcyon days as a traffic warrior, when his three reporters drove into the streets each morning armed with cellular phones.
"It was very effective," he insists. Ths hard to believe, since his crew had no helicopter and simply called in when they hit a go-slow. Then, of course, they'd be stuck like everyone else.
He also talks wistfully of the bad old days of Lagos traffic, when drivers sometimes spent entire afternoons trapped in traffic, and would begin their morning commutes hours before they had to be at work.
But just as Nigeria's military regime is finally giving way to civilian rule, so Lagos go-slows have mellowed.
Gone are the days when assassins took advantage of a traffic jam to gun down a military ruler, as coup-plotters did in 1976, and when monstrous potholes - some 25-feet-long and a foot deep - were ubiquitous. Where go-slows used to appear at all hours, now it's just most hours.
These days, the traffic is just terrible.
That, they insist in Lagos, is an improvement.
 Load-Date: December 16, 1998

 

End of Document
