

How Sydney's 'Green Olympics' became the 'Not So Clean' games
The Associated Press
January 23, 1999, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 937 words
Byline: By PETER JAMES SPIELMANN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SYDNEY, Australia
Body




John Coates already was worried about Sydney's chances to win the 2000 Olympics when he flew to Africa. Once he landed in Mali, he found the bid was in deep trouble.
Coates, the president of the Australian Olympic Committee, had seen Melbourne and Brisbane lose prior bids because they didn't woo IOC delegates aggressively enough - especially African members.
"I was in Mali, and we had met at the airport and driven into the capital, and it was explained to me that the Chinese government is paying for this new highway," Coates said Saturday. "Australia has some foreign aid, but not in that realm."
He realized then, in 1993 and with the vote coming up, that Sydney might well lose, Coates told reporters in a lengthy explanation of how to win an Olympic bid against stiff competition from cities such as Beijing or Manchester, England.
Sydney's "clean, green" Olympics bid, under pressure from developing-country IOC delegates and with big money at stake, became not so clean. And the green became the color of cash.
Coates adamantly said that $ 70,000 in inducements he eventually pledged to try to secure two African votes on the night before the International Olympic Committee balloting was aid to sports and not a bribe.
But he said the payments were contingent on Sydney winning the games. And his detailed descriptions and acknowledgement of five-figure cash offers aimed at swaying votes offer an extraordinary glimpse of the darker side of bidding for the world's biggest sports event, which can pump billions of dollars into a city's economy and boost the status of an entire nation.
It is such payments and other gifts and benefits to IOC members from bidding cities that is at the heart of the Olympics' biggest corruption scandal, with recommendations of member expulsions and major reforms expected from a special meeting in Switzerland this weekend.
At the time he visited Africa, Coates said, China was offering Cameroon "variations to loan repayments," had built an addition to a hospital and offered other aid.
"Wherever we went, China, in many cases, had been before," Coates said. "I was also aware that Bob Scott, who was heading up the Manchester bid, had had a run-through."
Coates said former Atlanta Mayor Andrew Young had toured Africa dispensing U.S. foreign aid commitments in exchange for support for Atlanta's successful bid for the 1996 Summer Olympics. He offered no source for such information and no other evidence to corroborate it.
"It was clear that others were offering more," he said. "What we were doing was no different to what governments do with aid."
Coates called the Sydney bid committee to tell it to get serious if it wanted to host the 2000 Olympics.
"I drafted the original strategies, and early on had identified that we had to do something in Africa," he said. "I came to grips with that because I knew that's how Atlanta had achieved it, so I didn't feel uncomfortable.
"I hope the Australian public understands from this that there are developing countries and developing-nation Olympic committees who, under this system, are leveraging their IOC member's vote. I think that should be changed, but that is a process we went into with our eyes wide open."
Efforts to reach Young in Atlanta on Saturday were unsuccessful.
Coates and the Sydney bid committee already had agreed to host two athletes from each of 11 African countries for three months of training at the Australian Institute of Sports.
Now they decided to extend the offer for each year up to 2000 if Sydney won the games - at a cost of about $ 1.3 million.
"What we did was within the guidelines, we did it just as China did it through their government aid and consulates and just as Manchester did it through the Millennium Foundation (fund), we did it through cooperation agreements with the Australian Olympic Committee," Coates said.
But as the crucial decision approached in September 1993, Sydney appeared to be losing ground to Beijing. Berlin and Manchester were by then out of the race.
"I saw our votes being eaten away," Coates said.
He offered the Kenyan and Ugandan delegates free lodging in London at the Dorchester, one of the city's most expensive hotels, in order to meet with them privately before the vote in Monte Carlo - away from Beijing's lobbyists.
"It was just a matter of trying to get them to lunches, dinners, whatever, and talk to them, and it was just very, very competitive," Coates said. "That was the political game we were playing."
The hotel room offer was declined, but Coates did not give up.
At a dinner in Monte Carlo Sept. 22, 1993, the night before the final vote, Coates decided not to sit at the head table in order to dine with crucial IOC members Charles Mukora of Kenya and Maj. Gen. Francis Nyangweso of Uganda.
"I was very concerned that night before the vote," Coates said. "I just felt an unease, I knew these guys and I just didn't think the next day I was going to be able to count on them to vote for Sydney."
So, on the spot, he offered them $ 35,000 each for their respective national Olympic committees - if Sydney won the bid.
The next day, Sydney beat Beijing for the right to host the 2000 Olympics, 45-43, in a secret ballot. The money was paid over the next seven years.
Coates said there is no way of knowing whether Kenya and Uganda tipped the balance for Sydney: "I'll die not knowing if those two voted for us," he said.
But Sydney had played the money marathon right and prevailed.
"We didn't win it on the beauty of the city and the sporting facilities we had to offer, and we were never going to," Coates said. "I wasn't going to die wondering why we didn't win."
 Load-Date: January 23, 1999

 

End of Document
