

Impoverished and desperate, Niger women entering the workplace
The Associated Press
November 8, 1999, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 1095 words
Byline: By ALEXANDRA ZAVIS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NIAMEY, Niger
Body




The shelves are almost bare, the structure little more than a shack. But the tiny grocery store in a dusty corner of the capital is Fatima Guy Roget's only source of income - and hope.
Guy Roget's husband, a retired military officer, hasn't received his $83 quarterly pension yet this year. So their extended family of children, grandchildren, aunts and uncles depends on the few francs she can scrape together at her store.
As growing numbers of men in this desperately poor, predominantly Muslim country find themselves unable to provide for their families, more and more women are breaking with tradition to earn money for themselves in jobs outside the home.
"Women have revolted," said Guy Roget, a 42-year-old mother of nine. "It is their children who are suffering because of this economic crisis."
Two-thirds of Niger is desert, and the country never recovered from the 1980s decline in world prices of uranium, its main export.
A succession of coups only added to the West African nation's economic woes. Foreign donors are withholding almost all support until junta leader Daouda Malam Wanke restores civilian rule.
Wanke, who seized power last April, promises to hand power to an elected government by next year, and voters are to choose a president and parliament Nov. 24.
The economic collapse has been devastating for Niger, which straddles the southern edge of the Sahara Desert. Many schools don't have furniture. Hospitals are short of medicine. Government workers can go months without a paycheck, and the state is the largest employer.
"Even if men don't want their wives to work outside the family, they have no choice because they can no longer provide for their families' needs," Guy Roget said, leaning back in a well-worn chair in her small, neat living room.
Surrounded by children and grandchildren, she is very much the center of the household, checking a small boy's homework, instructing a daughter to bring nuts for her guests and fishing out the equivalent of 25 cents that a visiting uncle needs for his taxi ride home.
Guy Roget helped found a neighborhood women's association, whose members contribute to a fund from which they can borrow startup money for small businesses.
She started out selling condiments in the street, but gradually saved enough money to open her store. Other women in the group raise cattle, collect firewood or sell brightly patterned traditional fabrics at the city market.
Similar groups have been mushrooming across Niger in recent years - in remote rural villages as well as bustling towns.
About 20 miles outside Niamey, the women of Boubon village have banded together to start vegetable gardens and make pottery.
The men farm millet and raise cattle, but are unable to produce enough food during the rainy season to sustain their families during the long dry stretches. Many are forced to abandon their wives and children for months, even years at a time to find work in more prosperous neighboring countries.
"In the old days, it was only lower class women who did pottery," said Saadi Saadou, 60, who recalled sneaking around her disapproving upper class parents to learn how to make the earthenware pots used to store grain. "Today, everyone is doing it."
The money women earn is theirs to keep. Besides purchasing household necessities, women in Boubon proudly cover the mud walls of their homes with woven carpets and fill ancient china cabinets with painted plates. Some also buy goats, sheep or cows.
In addition to the financial benefits, their growing economic role is starting to give women a greater say in decisions affecting their families and communities, said Zara Abdel Kader, secretary of an umbrella group of women's organizations called CONGAFEN. If men are still making most of those decisions, women are consulted more, she said.
However, a job doesn't free a woman from her domestic responsibilities - she is still expected to grind the millet, cook the meals, clean the family compound, feed the children.
For Guy Roget's neighbor Zalika Moumouni, the extra burden of selling vegetables at the market for long hours each day is overwhelming.
"I can't cope," the 37-year-old woman said bitterly, a baby sucking at her breast as she sat stiffly on Guy Roget's sofa. "I work because I have to survive. If everything was normal, I wouldn't do it."
Moumouni's husband, a road engineer who spends months at a time away from Niamey working on state projects, hasn't been paid since February. The couple can no longer afford their rent, so Moumouni and her seven children must live with her parents.
For all their newfound economic prominence, women remain second-class citizens in a country where 64 percent of the people survive on annual incomes of less than $125, and tradition subjugates them to their husbands, fathers and brothers.
Polygamy is widespread, the average marrying age for women is just 15, and women average 7.4 children in a lifetime, United Nations statistics say.
If political instability and economic crisis have pushed many women to break with tradition and assume a more central role in their families and communities, they may also have fueled a rising tide of religious fundamentalism.
Niger's recent ratification of the U.N. convention on women's rights provoked a Muslim backlash, including an attack on a radio station that broadcast supportive comments. Women have also been attacked in the street for wearing Western dress.
Guy Roget's daughter, Tounfa Aboubakar, has a high school diploma and secretarial qualifications but is cloistered at home by a husband who turned fundamentalist after they married.
"I used to love to go see a good movie, watch a concert or go dancing at a club," said Aboubakar, 23, who sits shrouded in a white veil with her two sleeping children on a mat at her mother's feet.
"Now he doesn't even want me to see my family. I agreed to give up everything, but not my family."
Aboubakar's husband, a customs official, has enough money to support his family, but she longs for a job.
"I don't like to have to ask him every time for money," she said. "At least if I am earning my own money I can take care of my needs, and maybe help my mother."
There are few options for women like Aboubakar. Niger's laws are an ambiguous mix of French, Muslim and traditional codes and provide little protection for women.
Still, Guy Roget is convinced women have made progress.
"Women are more responsible now and not so dependent on their husbands," she said. "Even if it is hard for a woman, she has a little pocket money, so it gives her a little hope."
End Adv for Sunday, Nov. 14
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY317-320 of Nov. 8
 Load-Date: November 15, 1999

 

End of Document
