

In Lebanon, for the first year, it's soccer Hezbollah-style
The Associated Press
May 21, 1998, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 638 words
Byline: By ANTHONY SHADID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BEIRUT, Lebanon
Body




On a sandy lot shadowed by the low-slung buildings of Beirut's slums, young men train diligently at dusk. They're rugged, they're disciplined and many of them are fired by the faith that fires Lebanon's Hezbollah.
But guerrillas they're not.
Rather, they play soccer for a team that is a standard-bearer of the radical Islamic movement, competing for the first time in the country's top soccer league.
The team, al-Ahd, is yet another twist in the story of a group better known for fighting Israeli forces in southern Lebanon and still shadowed by its suspected role, in its early days, in the bombing of a Marine barracks in 1983 and the kidnappings of foreigners in Lebanon.
Now, like Islamic groups across the Muslim world, it's as well known in Lebanon for its hospitals, clinics and schools. So, why not soccer? And why not soccer with what it considers the proper attitude of devout Shiite Muslims?
"The morals of Hezbollah are on the field, and they reflect on how we play our opponents," said Youssef al-Jawheri, a 21-year-old player. "We have a moral responsibility."
That responsibility translates into not a single red or yellow flag last year and the fewest of any team this year. Its fans are the best behaved.
And the players make clear their code: Don't argue with referees, don't pick fights and always take heckling in stride.
In Lebanon, a country of 18 sects that is scarred by years of sectarian war, religion infuses everything: from the candidate for president to the choice for the lowliest government job.
Most of the national league's 14 soccer teams, too, are colored by faith. The Druse have a team and so do the Maronite Christians.
Even the Armenians have two teams, one faithful to Armenian leftists, the other loyal to the community's right-wing.
But with al-Ahd, whose affiliation is best known, the team plays down any political connections. Instead, it's all about soccer, well-behaved soccer, in a field where other fans can get so rowdy that some games last year had to be closed to the public.
"Any movement in Lebanon - be it sports, politics or economics - will have political implications," said Hajj Amin al-Shiri, al-Ahd's president, whose office in southern Beirut has a box marked for donations to Hezbollah guerrillas.
"But it's our goal to keep politics away from sports," he said.
The team's board - run by sympathizers of the Islamic movement - says it would welcome any player, regardless of faith. Among the team's 30 full-time players, including four foreigners - from Jordan, Iraq, Senegal and Nigeria - only one Christian now competes.
His name is Henry Ajama, from Nigeria.
"Religion or no religion, my only concern is to play," he said. "All I know is that we all have one God."
But for some fans, the team is part of their politics - namely, support for a movement that is growing more popular through its extensive welfare services, its clean image in a country with rampant corruption, and the success of its guerrillas, known as the Islamic resistance.
"The fans love the resistance, and they see the team as their representatives," said Abu Hussein Sarour, a 25-year-old from Bint Jbeil, a town occupied by Israel in southern Lebanon.
Saturday was game day, and the match itself a microcosm of Lebanon: al-Ahd played al-Hikma, a Christian team, in a Druse neighborhood at a stadium plastered with slogans for the Druse political party.
Fans of Al-Ahd, currently ranked a mediocre but respectable eighth, turned out in droves. Like Hezbollah itself, they were well-organized and ardent, waving flags and placards and beating a drum to chants blared through a megaphone.
The match was scoreless most of the way, but al-Ahd's following kept up the fervor, gasping at each missed goal, applauding each save.
Occasionally, they shouted to the goalie, "God be with you."
Perhaps he was. Al-Ahd won 1-0.
 Load-Date: May 21, 1998

 

End of Document
