

In Senegal's forgotten rebellion, it's the innocent who suffer
The Associated Press
May 16, 1998, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 894 words
Byline: By TIM SULLIVAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ZIGUINCHOR, Senegal
Body




They come at night, slipping in from bases hidden in Senegal's dense forests.
Moving quickly through villages, the rebels open fire, steal cattle and leave behind land mines - many just the right size to blow a leg off the next villager who happens to pass by.
Yet they see themselves as liberators.
In the Casamance region of southern Senegal, where a separatist rebellion born of ethnic differences and geographic isolation has smoldered for 15 years, the rebels have turned against their own people. Low on funds, militarily weak and politically fractured, they have few targets left but the villagers at hand.
Slowly, the rebellion has bled the life out of the beautiful, agriculturally rich region, leaving parts of Casamance a wasteland of violence and economic stagnation.
"I don't know what I'll do now," said one former villager, a young mother who feared retribution and asked not to be identified. "How can I work in the fields?" She lost most of one leg earlier this year after rebels stormed her village, leaving mines to cover their retreat.
Having quit her village, she now sits at a friend's home in Ziguinchor, the small regional capital. She knits sweaters for her daughter, who lives hundreds of miles away, in the capital, Dakar, with the girl's father.
Senegal, one of the most stable countries in Africa, is popular with European tourists for its French-African culture and with black Americans in search of a link to their slave ancestors.
President Clinton praised the West African country during his visit in April for its peacekeeping efforts around the world.
But Senegal, with a population of 8.5 million, can't keep peace in Casamance, where the often-forgotten rebellion has left people frightened, the government frustrated and Senegalese soldiers accused of atrocities.
Some, though, say change might be coming.
The signs are vague, but one rebel official has said the guerrillas will not disrupt legislative elections May 24. A recent dip in attacks has some believing the rebels may talk peace.
"If the elections go well, perhaps that will be the beginning of the end," said the president of the regional council, Pascal Manga.
But peace may have to wait in Casamance, where countless ceasefires have failed, and rebel infighting complicates talks with the government.
Some rebels say they are preparing another offensive, while blaming government agents for the village attacks.
"It's a government plot," said Nkrumah Sane, a rebel official based in Paris.
The rebellion's roots lie in Casamance's geographic and cultural isolation. Separated from the rest of Senegal by Gambia, Casamance is lush, green and populated by the Christian and animist Diola people. Much of the rest of Senegal is arid and dominated by Muslims of the Wolof tribe.
Many of the 800,000 people in Casamance, whether they support the rebellion or not, feel the differences have left them neglected, deprived of jobs and public works projects and victimized by northern land speculators.
Disputed colonial-era agreements have some in Casamance believing the region should be independent.
Disaffection bubbled into violence in the early 1980s, with widespread backing for the separatist Movement of Democratic Forces of Casamance. Over time, support waned, many guerrillas made peace, and violence slowed considerably in some areas.
Today, only the radical Southern Front is still fighting.
It is a mysterious group. No outsiders are sure of its numbers or command structure. While Sane claims to be the group's voice, he is also believed to have clashed with Southern Front leaders operating in the forests. Diplomats and other observers say the group may be an amalgam of rebel bands that only sometimes work together.
But they have managed to keep peace at bay.
The Movement of Democratic Forces began attacking villages in the early 1990s - extorting money and support - and violence surged again last year after 18 months of quiet. An estimated 200 people have been killed and more than 400 wounded since July.
The renewed attacks cost the fighters dearly. Today, they appear to have little support among the people they claim to be liberating.
"People are fed up," Manga said. "It has stopped being a war of liberation and has become a war of destruction."
That destruction is not limited to the rebels, says Amnesty International, the London-based human rights group. Local security forces, for example, allegedly cut off the lips of a suspected rebel sympathizer, shoved them in his mouth and forced him to drink his blood.
Senegal's government denies its forces commit such atrocities.
For all its violence, Casamance often seems deceptively bucolic. There is no shooting in Ziguinchor's streets, no thump of mortars. Soldiers are not a major presence in town and tourists still visit occasionally.
Look closer, though, and the signs are there.
Heavily armed soldiers guard roadblocks. Large swaths of countryside are sealed off. Dozens of villages sit abandoned. Killings and highway holdups have become commonplace - both by rebels and by bandit gangs capitalizing on the chaos. Industry has been crippled; up to 80 percent of the population is unemployed.
Then there are the mines. They cause such terror that one rebel leader publicly exhorted followers to stop planting them. Not everyone listened.
"The rebels kept coming," the young mother said. "And every time, people died."
 Load-Date: May 16, 1998

 

End of Document
