

Is Russia on the brink of another war in Chechnya?
The Associated Press
September 27, 1999, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 803 words
Byline: By JUDITH INGRAM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




More than two weeks of air and artillery strikes and the deployment of Russian soldiers around the borders of Chechnya have raised a stark question: Is Russia on the brink of another protracted, bloody war with the breakaway republic?
The disastrous 1994-96 war against Chechen separatists still haunts Russia. Up to 100,000 people were killed, according to some estimates, and the reputation of the Russian army was shredded.
Russian troops took months to capture the Chechen capital, Grozny. Soldiers were poorly trained and led, and corruption was rife in the officer corps. The slaughter of Russian soldiers and atrocities against civilians fueled public disapproval of the war.
Few Russians would favor repeating that experience, and the government doesn't seem eager for an invasion, saying it is staging military strikes only to prevent Chechnya-based guerrillas from making incursions into other areas.
Russian public opinion is not on the Chechens' side, however. Crime has long flourished in the southern region, and its political leaders have been widely lumped in with the warlords as a group of bandits. Polls say Russians mostly oppose formally recognizing the independence that Chechnya already exercises.
For centuries, Russians and Chechens have regarded each other with hostility. Russians were the vengeful conquerors, the autocratic rulers, the persecutors. Chechens were the brigands, the rebels, the scheming thieves. Those ethnic stereotypes have never dissipated.
This summer, the Russian Interior Ministry began televising videotapes showing Chechen kidnappers torturing their victims - in one case, cutting off a captive's head. That further hardened Russians' contempt for Chechens.
The hatred has grown with the recent bombings of four apartment buildings in Moscow and other cities that killed some 300 people and were blamed on Chechen militants.
For now, the government seems intent on squeezing Chechnya militarily. On Sept. 14, Prime Minister Vladimir Putin pledged to establish a "quarantine" of Chechnya with three rings of Russian defenses.
Some 13,000 Russian soldiers are reportedly massed on the perimeters of Chechnya, backed by even more support troops. Police have closed the border.
Russian intelligence officials have sought diplomatic support from the West by pointing out alleged financial and material support to Chechen militants from Osama bin Laden, the fugitive Saudi accused by Washington of masterminding the bombings of two U.S. embassies in Africa last year.
Russia also has stepped up direct military pressure. Russian warplanes unleashed rockets and bombs on Grozny for a fifth straight day today, and the military pledged to keep bombing Chechnya until the militants are wiped out.
The strikes - the first against Grozny since the Chechen war - have hit an airport, oil refineries and communications centers.
Russian Defense Minister Igor Sergeyev said Sunday that he could not rule out the possibility of ground operations in Chechnya. But Putin said Russia would rely on air raids to eliminate the militants.
"We shall spare our men," Putin said in an interview published today in the Vremya MN newspaper.
Regardless of the official word, many in the Russian media seem convinced that a large ground operation is in the offing.
Independent experts say Russia's military is, if anything, even weaker than it was during the Chechen war.
The army and police did manage earlier this month to drive Islamic guerrillas from Dagestan into Chechnya, but they suffered heavy losses. And that was in a region where government forces enjoyed widespread support from the civilian population, including 25,000 local volunteers.
"Although the federal troops had heavy armaments like aircraft, tanks and artillery, the Chechen side lost approximately the same number of people - that is, 1,500 men," said Pavel Felgenhauer, a military expert. "The Russian units that fought there suffered losses up to 30 to 40 percent each."
Military experts say the federal force gathered on Chechnya's periphery is too small to have any hope of a successful invasion, not least because Chechnya's entire population would rise against them. The experts also say there aren't enough troops even to enforce the quarantine of Chechnya. Some 300,000 would be needed, Felgenhauer estimates.
Aside from public fear of getting bogged down in another unwinnable conflict, another argument against a wider war is Russia's struggling economy. The military is chronically short of money, resulting not only in hungry, ill-equipped soldiers but also in a lack of the most basic training.
The lack of funds means the military cannot afford to keep up a quarantine of Chechnya indefinitely, the newspaper Segodnya wrote.
"From the material point of view, an offensive is cheaper," Segodnya said. "If, of course, they can fight."
 Load-Date: September 27, 1999

 

End of Document
