

Islanders Expect the Worst: Crashed Plane Only Latest Invader
November 28, 1996, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 521 words
Byline: By TOM COHEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MORONI, Comoros Islands
Body




As the Ethiopian jet descended, Moussa Said Massoundi immediately thought "Mercenaries."
Even after the jet crashed, he was sure it had carried foreign soldiers seeking to topple the government. Why else would an unfamiliar plane fly low over the Comoros Islands?
"It seemed like the past again," said Massoundi, who lives near the beach where hijacked Ethiopian Airlines Flight 961 crashed Saturday into the azure waters of the Indian Ocean after running out of fuel.
Like many residents of this tiny archipelago, Massoundi knows from the past to expect the worst. After 25 years of assassinations, coups and invasions, some islanders see the crash as just the latest disaster inflicted on them by the outside world.
"We are just victims," Justice Minister Ali Ben Ali explained Tuesday. "The plane was not coming to the Comoros. The hijackers didn't choose the Comoros to land. It's just something strange and foreign. It just dropped from the sky."
Over the centuries, unwelcome visitors regularly have dropped in on these volcanic islands between Mozambique and Madagascar, known for white-sand beaches, sweet-smelling ylang-ylang flowers and fruit bats the size of crows.
Since their earliest days as a ship trading post, the Comoros have known a succession of conquerors and colonizers: wealth-hungry Sultans, European imperialists and pirates.
And since gaining independence from France 25 years ago, residents have seen little but political instability - from presidents who face repeated coup attempts to a feared French mercenary who has invaded twice, most recently last year.
Col. Bob Denard helped reinstate ousted President Ahmed Abdallah in 1978. Denard's influential presidential guard killed Abdallah in 1989, and he tried to seize power. French troops drove him out.
The next president, Mohammed Djohar, resisted several coup attempts, but the invasions and political infighting crippled development on the islands, which import more than twice as much as they export.
Last year, just like in 1978, Denard arrived with three dozen men in boats and seized the radio station and military barracks. He arrested Djohar, freed presidential guard members from prison and sought to set up a puppet government.
France again intervened, sending special forces that routed the mercenaries and forced Denard's surrender.
A new president - veteran politician Mohamed Taki - recently was elected with 65 percent of the vote, and Comorians have reason to hope for a period of stability.
And then, the plane crash.
The crash early Saturday killed more than 120 people and left Grand Comore, the main island, struggling to rescue the wounded and recover the dead.
The justice minister, Ben Ali, said the Comoros needed help to cope with problems created by the crash - the health risk from rotting bodies in the ocean, the diplomatic snarls as foreign governments tried to identify and bring home their dead, the drain on already limited finances.
But unlike other residents, he refused to see the crash as just one episode in a pattern of hardship.
"The coup, this plane crash, they have no link," he said. "Muslims say it all comes from God."
 Load-Date: November 28, 1996

 

End of Document
