

Israeli troops, Palestinians clash today in the West Bank
March 10, 1997, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 648 words
Byline: By DAN PERRY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Israeli troops and Palestinians clashed on the West Bank today, and Yasser Arafat complained that Israel's plan to give him only a third of the land he expected had created a "real crisis."
Arafat's top deputy threatened to resign over the dispute with Israel, and a top Israeli official said American intervention might be needed to resolve the impasse over the pullout, the first of three withdrawals Israel has promised to make by mid-1998.
Clashes broke out today in Hebron - where 500 Jewish settlers live amid 120,000 Palestinians - after dozens of Palestinians tried to stop bulldozers from clearing a new road near the Jewish settlement of Kiryat Arba.
After Israeli police and soldiers began beating protesters, several hundred Palestinians joined the melee, pelting the troops with stones. The scene quieted after Palestinian police officials arrived.
Seven Palestinians were hospitalized, and five were arrested.
"This kind of action escalates the tension in the city and doesn't make peace," Hebron Mayor Mustafa Natche said. "There is no agreement between the city and the Israeli army to open this road… This road is going to swallow more Palestinian land."
Israel and the Palestinians are in sharp disagreement over a Jewish housing project in Jerusalem and the pace of Israel's withdrawal from the West Bank.
Arafat "is facing a serious crisis, from Palestinian public opinion, from the legislative council, from the Cabinet," Palestinian minister Hanan Ashrawi said. She said Arafat was contacting Arab countries and the United States for help.
In Washington, President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt today urged President Clinton to use his influence for peacemaking in the Middle East.
"The president is a full partner in the peace process," Mubarak said. "Without the United States it would be very difficult to continue the peace process."
However, Mubarak said Sunday the United States lost some credibility in the Arab world when it vetoed a U.N. Security Council resolution condemning Israel's plan to erect the project in east Jerusalem, which Palestinians want as a future capital.
On Sunday, Arafat deputy Mahmoud Abbas gave Israeli Foreign Minister Davy Levy "an official memo expressing the Palestinian non-acceptance" of the proposed Israeli pullback. Abbas threatened today to resign as top negotiator in anger over Israel's limited withdrawal plan.
Israel's announcement last week that its first stage of West Bank redeployment will pull troops from 9 percent of the region has raised fears of a breakdown in the peace process.
The Palestinians had expected to receive 30 percent of the West Bank in each of three stages, but Israeli leaders say that U.S.-brokered accords allow them to determine the extent of each pullback.
David Bar-Illan, an adviser to Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, said U.S. action might be required.
"There'll have to be a kind of American intervention to resolve this thing," Bar-Illan said. "There is a brinkmanship game going on here which the Palestinians have chosen to play. I don't see that (Israel) can do anything."
Arafat said today he felt deceived.
"First of all, there is a real crisis because there is a real breaching of what has been agreed upon, a trick and the conspiracy against the peace process, against the agreement which has been signed," he said.
The Palestinians now have full autonomy over eight cities, 2.8 percent of the West Bank, and partial control over more than 500 villages, about 24 percent. They also control most of the Gaza Strip.
Under Israel's plan, 7 percent of the West Bank will be transferred from joint Israeli-Palestinian to full Palestinian control, while 2 percent now under Israeli occupation will come under joint control.
The pullouts are to be carried out concurrently with talks toward a final peace settlement - slated to begin next week and end in 1999 - in which the Palestinians hope to gain statehood.
 Load-Date: March 10, 1997

 

End of Document
