

Israeli Minister's Road Work Could Change the Route to Peace
July 30, 1996, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 519 words
Byline: By DIANNA CAHN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TEL AVIV, Israel
Body




Whether they ultimately prove roads to war or to peace, the roads that an Israeli leader wants to pave into the West Bank could send the peace process on a detour.
Infrastructure Minister Ariel Sharon said Tuesday that his plan to pave two new roads linking Jewish settlements in the West Bank to central Israel will be "a real contribution" to peace.
Palestinians fear it is part of an attempt to make it harder to create a Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
"Settlements and building roads in the heart of the Palestinian entity is tantamount to a declaration of war on Palestinians," said Freih Abu Medein, the Palestinian justice minister.
He predicted bloodshed if Sharon is given a free hand in the West Bank, where 140,000 Jews live among 1.2 million Palestinians.
Sharon's announcement further agitated Palestinians already angry at Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's comments Monday suggesting he favors expanding settlements in the West Bank, and perhaps building new ones.
The Palestinians, who have autonomy in Gaza and parts of the West Bank, hope to establish a state - an idea Netanyahu's government adamantly opposes. They say expanding settlements and building roads endangers the peace process and violates the Israel-PLO accords.
The accords stipulate that neither side will "initiate or take any step that will change the status of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip" pending the outcome of talks on a final peace settlement.
One proposed road would connect Israeli coastal towns with the Jordan River Valley; the other would connect parts of the West Bank with northern Jerusalem.
Palestinian negotiator Hassan Asfour called the plan "an attempt to push the peace process down a dead-end road."
"We cannot talk about peace at the time when land is threatened with a new settlement project," he told The Associated Press.
In Washington, President Clinton said Tuesday that reports of the project concern him, but "I don't want to blame them for something they haven't done yet."
"We expect and believe Israel will adhere to the agreements that have already been made," he said.
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, speaking with Clinton at a White House news conference, said he did not know details of the plan, but that it could "complicate the whole process."
Similar road-building plans had been stalled under the previous Labor Party governments of Yitzhak Rabin and Shimon Peres.
Sharon, who has opposed the Israel-PLO accords, said the planned new roads won't hinder peace.
"I believe it will be a real contribution to the peace," Sharon told reporters in his Tel Aviv office Tuesday.
Sharon oversaw a massive settlement construction drive as housing minister from 1990 to 1992. He was instrumental in positioning settlements in scattered clusters throughout the West Bank, breaking up the continuity of Arab towns and cities and making the land difficult to divide.
The roads, he said, would ease traffic congestion and be used by Israelis and Palestinians.
"When you have a road where Jews and Arabs travel together … it will only contribute to the relations between Jews and Arabs," Sharon said.
 Load-Date: July 30, 1996

 

End of Document
