

It's Not Entertainers But Bankers in the Limousines
October 2, 1996, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 671 words
Byline: By HARRY DUNPHY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




When "limo-lock" hits Washington, many residents know that can mean just one thing: The world's finance ministers and bankers are back in town.
But this year the traffic jam is even worse than usual, since Tuesday's start of the three-day annual meeting of the 180-nation World Bank and its sister organization, the International Monetary Fund, coincided with a Middle East summit.
Long, black limousines and an increasing number of vans glide about town, taking the 10,000 predominantly male, dark-suited participants from breakfasts to seminars, plenary sessions, private corporate receptions, dinners and parties.
"It's our busiest time," said Deidra Holland-Brown, a dispatcher at one of the city's limousine rental companies. "There's been no letup since last Thursday. We get a lot of repeat business so we know when they're coming."
Nelson Paul, a doorman at the hotel near the National Zoo where the meetings are held, said "people like limos for the convenience and safety and because they're used to traveling in luxury cars" in their home countries.
Not everyone uses a limousine. A delegate from the African nation of Lesotho, asked why he took the subway, replied, "economic realities."
Eliminating poverty in many developing countries like Lesotho is the World Bank's central objective and the yardstick against which it says it measures itself. But that goal is sometimes difficult to square with the limos and rounds of lunches, parties and receptions at the annual meeting.
There are only two official social events in the participant's handbook: an opening reception Sunday night at the host hotel and a concert by the National Symphony Orchestra Monday night at the Kennedy Center.
But invitation-only events abound at which bankers, officials and other participants can wind down, sip a free drink and eat cocktail party nibbles such as sushi, grilled shrimp or chicken sate.
There were four receptions Monday night, including Citicorp's gathering at the National Museum of Women in the Arts.
Republic Bank took over the National Gallery of Art on Tuesday night for "the party" of the week, while Merrill Lynch welcomed guests at the Folger Shakespeare Library. Banco do Brasil winds up the reception cycle tonight at another hotel.
In addition, some embassies hold gatherings for their visiting ministers.
Bank officials play down the parties. They say the trend has been away from champagne and caviar toward serious discussion of such issues as rural development in Third World nations and opportunities for private sector investment.
Mark Malloch Brown, the bank's vice president for external affairs, says the meetings have become an unofficial world congress of development, meaning there is a need for greater networking now that private companies are becoming increasingly involved in investing in poor countries.
"Ironically, while there are not as many parties as there have been, the meeting and the social events have increased in importance because the number of players has increased," he said.
Gaspard Sindayigaya, president of the National Development Bank in Burundi, said he tried to attend as many events as possible and not just to eat well.
"What's important is the physical contact," he said. "Seeing a person means you can accelerate what you are trying to do. It's much better than the telephone or faxes."
S. Solomon Raj, the head of a Indian Bank, agreed. He has attended four annual meetings - first as a public sector representative and now for the private sector.
"These meetings are often about deals so you have to go in order not to miss anything," he said.
Lisa McGowan, coordinator of a 170-group network of non-government organizations called "50 Years Is Enough" that opposes World Bank and IMF policies, said the hoopla surrounding the annual meetings does not impress her.
"The World Bank is not politically correct." she said. "There is a total lack of access to the most important information, not just for the meeting but on how the bank and the fund operate during the rest of the year."
 Load-Date: October 2, 1996

 

End of Document
