

It's the busy season for thieves preying on travelers
December 12, 1997, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 817 words
Byline: By DAVID L. LANGFORD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




So you're going home to mama's house for the holidays. Or you just spotted on the Internet a way to get to Cancun or Colorado on the cheap.
Rev up your street smarts and watch your back when you're on the go.
They're out there waiting for you, all manner of thieves and lowlife. On the streets, in crowded airport terminals and bus and train stations, even in hotel rooms.
It's the busy season for pickpockets, muggers, burglars, carjackers, scam artists and con men.
If you're leaving the country, it gets even worse.
Atrocities such as the November terrorist massacre of 68 tourists at the Hatshepsut Temple in Luxor, Egypt, are unlikely, but just being in a foreign land makes you an easy target for criminals.
For example, the U.S. State Department warns visitors to Mexico City not to hail those Volkswagen bug taxis cruising the streets. Some passengers have been kidnapped and robbed, forced to withdraw money from ATM machines.
Acapulco, Mexico, is generally considered safe for tourists, but on Tuesday (Dec. 9) 10 armed men dressed in the black uniforms of the federal police kidnapped Vincent Carrozza, manager of the Princess Hotel, one of the city's leading hotels.
One police officer was killed and another was wounded in an exchange of gunfire with the kidnappers fleeing in a stolen van.
Richard A. Lefler, a 20-year veteran of the U.S. Secret Service and now head of security for American Express Travel Related Services, says that because visitors to a foreign country are often unfamiliar with the language, surroundings and customs, they are easy prey.
"It's easy to get lost, or at least distracted, as you're trying to find your way," he says. "Unfortunately, this behavior attracts the attention of pickpockets and other criminals."
Getting lost led to the death of Barbara Meller Jensen, 39, of Berlin, one of at least 13 foreign tourists murdered in Florida over the past five years, including four Germans. She was robbed and killed on April 17, 1993, when she and her two children and her mother got lost on the highway and strayed into a tough neighborhood in northeast Miami.
Even on the home front you've got to be wary, especially at airports. Never let your luggage out of your sight.
"Most often, petty crimes are not random," Lefler says. "Victims are targeted by experienced, organized career criminals because of their dress, actions or inattentiveness. Criminals congregate where travelers congregate."
Some high-tech thieves use a device that can be inserted into the card slot of an ATM machine to capture the traveler's cash card, Lefler says. The victim enters his pin number but is unable to get cash or retrieve his card. He walks away, believing his card has been "eaten." The thieves, who obtained the pin number "shoulder surfing," retrieve the card and wipe out the bank account.
Here's another scam:
At the security checkpoint one of the thieves distracts the attention of a "mark" about to go through the metal detector by pointing at an airline ticket on the floor and asking the traveler if it belongs to him. Meanwhile, the crook's partner takes the traveler's carry-on item off the x-ray screening belt and walks away.
That's the way a prominent woman in Houston was recently relieved of a case containing half a million dollars in jewelry.
In a variation on that scam, a thief standing at a sidewalk food vendor's cart "accidentally" squirts mustard or ketchup on the mark's clothes. While the miscreant is apologizing for being so clumsy and helping wipe up the mess, a cohort walks off with the victim's ignored briefcase, purse or camera.
At this time of year, New York subway riders are continually warned by loudspeaker to beware of pickpockets and not to carry their wallets in their hip pockets.
In San Francisco, police inspector John Quill, who handles pickpocketing enforcement, says gangs of pickpockets, often well-dressed, work the city for a month or so and then move on.
San Francisco police recently arrested a pickpocket team - two men and a pregnant woman - outside Candlestick Park lifting wallets from people waiting on buses.
Out in the countryside, drug dealers, prostitutes and thieves often work out of highway rest stops.
In Oregon, state police and transportation officials have begun using retired volunteers to patrol rest stops on some weekends and major holiday periods.
The volunteers are outfitted with a uniform and a vehicle, but they get no pay.
In Virginia, where two people have been killed during robberies at rest stops in the past year, state police have also tightened security. Officers are often seen at rest stops handing out pamphlets with tips for travelers to avoid becoming victims.
American Express has prepared a free brochure entitled "Have a Safe Trip: Tips for the International Travelers."
Among his other tips, Lafler says, "Don't look or act like a 'ready' victim and the thieves are likely to move on to someone else."
 Load-Date: December 12, 1997

 

End of Document
