

Jockey Remembers The Fight, Not The Race
March 7, 1996, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 503 words
Byline: By ED SCHUYLER JR., AP Sports Writer
Body




Angel Cordero Jr., the great jockey-turned trainer, remembers Good Behaving, a colt he rode 25 years ago this Friday.
"I used to ride him for (trainer) Johnny Campo," Cordero recalled. "He was a come-from-behind horse."
Cordero, however, does not recall riding Good Behaving when the colt closed with a rush, won the Swift Stakes by 1 1/8 lengths and paid $ 11.20 before a crowd of 40,025 on opening day of the Aqueduct spring meeting March 8, 1971.
But he sure remembers being in a crowd of 20,455 screaming people that night at Madison Square Garden.
"I remember it was the most exciting fight I every watched," Cordero said. "I ate all my nails. I was sweating."
What Cordero watched was The Fight between Joe Frazier and Muhammad Ali for the heavyweight championship of the world.
"I thought Muhammad Ali would win," Cordero said.
Ali was magnificent in his third fight in four months following his 3 -year banishment from boxing for refusing military draft, but Smokin' Joe won, punctuating his victory with a 15th-round knockdown.
"Ali was my idol - he and Michael Jordan," Cordero said.
The size of flyweight or a bantamweight (112-118 pounds), at least when he was riding, Cordero certainly understands the mechanics of boxing much more than he does the aerodynamics of a slam dunk.
"My father used to manage fighters," the native of Puerto Rico said. "I've been going to fights since I was a little boy."
The 53-year-old Cordero grew up to be a Big Man in an exclusively small man's game - riding more than 7,000 winners and winning most of the major races in this country, including the Kentucky Derby three times.
As a star, of course, Cordero knew many of the most important people in racing - riding for and against them.
"I never wanted to meet anybody like I wanted to meet Muhammad Ali," Cordero said. "He was the most exciting man I ever met."
Cordero was exciting, too, with his aggressive riding style, and, like Ali, he also was flamboyant and controversial.
It wasn't until four years after The Fight that Cordero met Ali, who had become heavyweight champion for the second time by knocking George Foreman Oct. 30, 1974, at Kinshasa, Zaire.
"I was riding at Hialeah and he was training in Puerto Rico (for a forgettable defense against Jean Pierre Coopman at San Juan)," Cordero said. "So one day I flew to Puerto Rico after a morning workout.
"I paid $ 10 to get in to see Ali train. I met Jimmy Ellis (a former champion and a friend of Ali's who was working with him), and later he took me up to Ali's room."
Ellis told Ali, "I want to introduce you to another champion."
"You're a champion," Ali said, looking down at Cordero. "You're a champion?"
When Ali was told Cordero was a jockey, the native of Louisville, Ky., replied, "Did you ever ride in the Derby? Did you ever win?"
"Yes, on Cannonade last year (in the centennial Derby)," said Cordero, who also would win the Derby on Bold Forbes in 1976 and on Spend a Buck in 1987.
"Good luck," Cordero told Ali as he left.
"I don't need good luck," The Greatest said.
 Load-Date: March 7, 1996

 

End of Document
