

Kabila reportedly flees Kinshasa, rebels on the march
The Associated Press
August 14, 1998, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 824 words
Byline: By IAN STEWART, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KINSHASA, Congo
Body




President Laurent Kabila has fled Congo's embattled capital, a government official said today, raising fears the 14-month-old government may not survive a rebel advance on Kinshasa. But another official said he returned later in the day.
The former rebel leader, who ousted longtime dictator Mobutu Sese Seko in May 1997, was being driven from power with lightning speed by the same forces that helped him get there - the Rwandan leaders and Tutsi rebels in the eastern part of the country.
They are backed by a broad coalition of people disenchanted with Kabila, who they say has failed to make progress toward rebuilding a country wrecked by three decades of the corrupt Mobutu reign.
"The president is not in Kinshasa," the senior government adviser said on condition of anonymity. "I can't tell you any more than that."
But later, another top Congolese official, also speaking on condition of anonymity, said Kabila had returned to the capital and was "working like normal."
A Western diplomat in Paris, who refused to be further identified, said Kabila was in the southern city of Lubumbashi, his former rebel base, but had no information on his plans.
With rebel forces advancing on Kinshasa from the west, the jittery Congolese capital awoke today without electricity, radio, television or newspapers. Power was restored to some parts of the city in the early afternoon and state radio began broadcasting with a weakened signal.
"We call on the people to remain calm, the president of the republic and the government are doing everything to reverse this situation," the radio said in a statement, referring to the power outage.
The radio resumed its barrage of accusations against neighboring Rwanda and Uganda, which Kabila accuses of waging a war against Congo.
The city was bracing for the expected arrival of the fighters who launched a rebellion against Kabila earlier this month. Rumors and gossip fueled an uneasy sense of muffled panic. Thousands of people packed sidewalk shops and markets to buy extra provisions, anticipating what many consider the imminent fall of the capital.
With water cut off by the electricity outage, groups of women trod back and forth to the shores of the Congo River to fill basins with brown, polluted water for their families.
The power outage also silenced state-controlled television and radio - though later reports said state radio had returned intermittently. No newspapers were published today.
"This is the end," said Jean-Pierre Mwenge, standing amid a crowd of people searching for transport out of the city. "Now I'm alone and this will be the end."
Amid a rush of people trying to withdraw money, banks throughout the city closed to avoid a drain on reserves.
On Thursday, rebels reportedly claimed that they had captured one-third of the country. The rebels said some of their troops had advanced as far as Kasangalu, 18 miles southwest of the capital.
It was unclear today how much control Kabila continued to wield after fleeing the capital of Congo, known as Zaire until Kabila took over and changed its name back.
The rebellion began when Tutsi-led rebels closely tied to Rwanda fought government troops in the capital and opened up fronts in both the east and west of the country. Many of the rebels were the same soldiers who helped bring Kabila to power and oust Mobutu last year.
Congo accuses neighboring Rwanda and Uganda of masterminding the uprising. Both countries deny involvement.
Kabila's relations with his former allies have been deteriorating, and last month he expelled Rwandan soldiers from the country. Uganda and Rwanda have been angered by the Congolese president's failure to contain attacks on their territory by renegade groups based in eastern Congo.
The United States was preparing for the emergency evacuation of its citizens, while foreign airlines stopped service to Kinshasa.
Pentagon spokesman Kenneth Bacon said two Marine amphibious warships had been sent to the Atlantic waters off Congo in case they are needed to evacuate U.S. citizens. It will take nine or 10 days for the ships to get there.
France sent a plane to Kinshasa to pick up its nationals wishing to leave while Germany also strongly advised its citizens to depart.
A primary exit route across the Congo River to Brazzaville, the capital of neighboring Republic of Congo, was closed days ago.
On Thursday, Western diplomats and rebel spokesmen said the insurgent forces had captured the town of Inga, 135 miles from the capital, where the primary power transformer for Kinshasa is located. The rebels were reportedly responsible for the power outage in Kinshasa.
Rebel leaders in Goma in eastern Congo said Thursday the capital was now in their sights.
"The objective is Kinshasa. It should fall in the next few days, by the end of the week or by the end of the month for sure," said rebel commander Jean-Pierre Ondekane.
 
 ---
EDITOR'S NOTE - AP Correspondent Hrvoje Hranjski in Goma contributed to this report.
 
 Load-Date: August 14, 1998

 

End of Document
