

Kenyans see their own wildlife for the first time on a Christmas trip
The Associated Press
December 18, 1999, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 717 words
Byline: By CRAIG NELSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NAIROBI, Kenya
Body




All of his life, Samson Ouma has wanted to see a leopard, a cheetah and an elephant. Ouma was born in Kenya, renowned throughout the world for its exotic wildlife. Yet like most Kenyans, he has never seen any - except on television or in newspaper photos.
A million tourists poured into Kenya in 1998, spending up to $570 a day to snare the country's magnificent wildlife in the cross hairs of their cameras. Ouma earns $95 a month as a gardener at the British High Commissioner's residence.
A national park flocking with lion, cheetah and leopard lies five miles from the residence, but Ouma has never been there. He can't afford it.
It's not just the cost of renting a car for the day, $47, and the entrance fee of $1.35 that rankles Ouma. It's not even that in all of his 39 years, he's never witnessed a cheetah race across the African plain. What angers him most is the hijacking of his heritage.
"For tourists, the animals are more important than Kenyans. They think the wildlife belongs to the world," he says.
On a recent sunny afternoon, Ouma waits to board a bus in downtown Nairobi. In a burst of holiday spirit, the Kenya Museum Society is sponsoring an afternoon excursion to Nairobi National Park for the household staffs of its members.
Mary James, the high commissioner's wife, is sending Ouma, her cook, her laundry man and five other workmen to the park, at a cost of $4.70 each. Now the bus is late - "like most things in Kenya," Ouma says.
"They see us going off every other weekend to do these things, and they must wonder what it's all about," says James, lingering in the museum parking lot after dropping off her staff. "They know monkeys from the garden. They've seen a few snakes."
The bus finally sputters into motion, and soon it's under way with Ouma and scores of guards, gardeners, cooks and cleaners aboard. Ninety minutes later, it rolls into the 44-square-mile park.
Within a mile, three giraffe lope into view, bound for a patch of lush treetop foliage nearby. Ouma's eyes barely brighten. Spotting a cheetah and leopard remain his goal.
A dozen children who have joined their parents for the trip are less restrained. "Move! Move!" Job Okemwa's little brothers shout, waving their tiny arms like mad magicians. Job, 7, is more sparing, offering a one-word description of the lanky creatures. "Cool," he says.
Soon, however, a pall envelops the bus. For 1 1/2 hours, the grassy expanse is broken only by an occasional herd of impala and gazelle and three blinking ostrich. After a 20-minute stop at a riverside clearing, the bus resumes its winding course through the park. More giraffe. More impala. More grumbling. Still no leopard, lion or cheetah. "The driver should drive until tomorrow," one passenger grouses. Ouma's hands drop resignedly into his lap.
Suddenly, there's a shout and a stampede to one side of the bus. There, 150 feet away, is a leopard, lazily straddling the branch of an acacia tree, its front paws tucked under its chest.
The bus erupts in clapping and shrieks of glee. The tawny-furred cat turns diffidently to see what the commotion is about. The bus begins to move. Someone slaps the side of the bus in an ornery signal to the driver to stop. He brakes obediently.
For the first time, a smile creases Ouma's face. The leopard has enthralled him, melting away his bitterness. "I'm finally getting something back that belongs to me," he says. The bus eventually moves on, but the leopard sighting triggers a flood of giddiness and apparently, luck.
Two more leopards dart into the tall grass - but not until they've stood nearly 10 seconds along the dirt road, returning the wide-eyed stares of 54 pairs of eyes. Later, as dusk sets in, and the lights of the nearby Nairobi skyline blink on, three hulking black rhinos plod 300 feet away.
The bus soon passes the trio of giraffe and exits the park onto Langata Road, clogged with honking rush-hour traffic. Headlights of passing cars spray across the inside of the bus, yet Ouma and the rest of the passengers are glued to the windows, still scanning the horizon.
Ouma has to work on Christmas and New Year's Day. But in the week in between, he says he's going to borrow a car and take his three children to the park. "I want them to see the animals while they're still young," he says. "They belong to us."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY115-117
 Load-Date: December 19, 1999

 

End of Document
