

Lagos, a teeming megalopolis of 'the worst and the best'
The Associated Press
March 14, 1999, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1164 words
Byline: MORT ROSENBLUM, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: LAGOS, Nigeria
Body




"Worms!" declares a billboard pushing patent medicine on an expressway bridge into town. "Have a worm-free Birthday!" In Lagos, people take whatever pleasures they can.
Of all urban disaster zones on an overcrowded planet, Nigeria's megalopolis port may well take the title. If not, it's close enough.
In the scrapwood and crumbling dirt hovels clumped around reeking malarial swampland, intestinal parasites rank among the lesser of malignant surprises that life in Lagos might bring.
A population estimated anywhere between 7 million and 20 million lives in every situation from lush wealth to the barest forms of survival, and all must deal with their singular city.
"Lagos is the worst and the best," said Rapheal Ikubaje, an artist from the western city of Oshogbo, who enjoys visiting Lagos but would not live here on a bet.
At one extreme, when people lock their gates against bandits for all-night dancing or splurge on champagne-doused feasts unmatched anywhere else on a party-loving continent, some like it here a lot.
Mostly, however, life is at the other extreme.
Traffic is an obvious scourge, because rush hour seems to run from about 5 a.m. to not long after dark, when another scourge - referred to as "armed robbahs" - keeps down the number of motorists.
Beyond simple carjacking, gangs of thieves put nails into ripe fruit, which they toss onto the roadway. When drivers stop to change flat tires, they find themselves picked clean at gunpoint.
By day, the fear is burglars who loot while homeowners sit for hours on end behind smoke-belching buses, stalled in the "go-slows" that defy ordinary logic since fuel is all but impossible to find.
With most traffic banned on recent election days, yet one more curse was revealed in full glory: filth of amazing dimensions. Even Lagos' most committed boosters do not try to put a good face on it.
"Oh lord," Bola Tinubu, governor-elect of Lagos State, replied with a rueful sigh when asked where to begin attacking the city's problems. "First, I suppose, is to clear the refuse."
The garbage is so pervasive and noxious that people take a certain civic pride in it. Up to 100 15-ton trucks a day add to the biggest of a half dozen dumps, and that barely seems to make a dent.
"We have plans," Tinubu said in a brief interview, smiling owlishly but revealing no details. "We will turn this rubbish into wealth."
The root of most evil, people seem to agree, is endemic corruption that has twisted values, paralyzed effective government, crippled law and order, and drained away the funds needed for urgent problems.
At their headquarters across from the abandoned racecourse, the Catholic Bishops Conference of Nigeria declared in a four-page call to action: "Corruption has been institutionalized to the point where it almost passes for official policy in both the public and private sectors of our national life."
Nigeria's socioeconomic structure, its politics and even the church itself have been warped by "the Nigerian factor," a bittersweet street synonym for corruption, the bishops said.
On a national scale, the thievery is so great that just the initial efforts to recover money stolen during the recently ended military regime of the late Gen. Sani Abacha came up with $ 750 million.
In Lagos, which amounts to Nigeria's New York, Chicago and South Central Los Angeles rolled into one, the impact is staggering on the poorest who must bribe everyone from the taxman to the doctor.
Workmen steal power lines from the poor to supply the rich. One exposed water main is painted with the plaintive message: "Do not vandalize waterpipes. They create inconveniences." The "they," one is left to suppose, refers to vandal acts and not pipes.
The clergy, along with newly elected officials and a range of people interviewed, express a guarded hope that public reaction to past corruption may help diminish the problem.
"It will be better once people stop automatically respecting wealth and start asking where it comes from," said the Rev. George Ehusam, who helped draft the bishops' plea.
"In the psyche of our people is a saying, 'Fingers are not equal,"' he said. Were it not for this in-built fatalistic acceptance of imbalance, he added, "we'd all be eating each other alive."
Across a traffic-choked boulevard, Chinwe Nwakalor clerks at a travel agency, lucky to have a job despite her degree in political science. She dresses elegantly and squeaks by on a meager wage.
Much of what leaks away from the official economy goes toward the survival of extended families, she said. If some greedy people steal on their own account, others just do what they must to get by.
Still, even with all the city's problems, it is better to raise a child in Lagos than in an American or European city, she said.
"We are very rich in moral standards, richer than in the West," she said. "Here we care for relatives, people from our village. We keep our values, respect our traditions. That's how we survive."
To a degree. For the most part, in every corner of the megalopolis that sprawls across islands, isthmuses and chunks of mainland, Lagos people just roll with what comes, for better or worse.
For example, there is Bar Beach, a narrow strip of sand with a murderous undertow at the edge of Victoria Island, where diplomats huddle in compounds and many rich Nigerians live.
During the glory years of the 1960s, happy clumps of bathers spent Sundays on Bar Beach, drinking beer and grilling fresh fish.
At the start of the 1970s, Bar Beach was bloodied. Generals gathered a crowd for the execution of seven bandits as a warning - scarcely heeded - to soldiers demobilized after the Biafra war.
By the 1980s, it was just another fringe of greater Lagos: an open-air market, a long row of lean-to bars and squatter camps of human flotsam.
Today, Bar Beach is a safety valve, a surreal spot to let off steam and take in fresh air. And, as always, it is a reliable barometer measuring the mood of the city behind it.
At rickety thatch huts with names like Cafe de Paris, Tourist Joint and Nigeria Is Great, people while away the days downing Star beer and cowtail soup spiked with fiery red peppers.
On a recent afternoon, two law students in urban hip played eight ball on the fuchsia baize of an outdoor pool table on the sand. A skinny kid on a skinnier polo pony hovered over them to kibitz.
Street orphans sold peanuts. The odd tourist ventured past, repeatedly patting wallet pockets and purses for reassurance. Barbecued goat and marijuana scented the air.
The winner was Elekwachi Ukwu, 26, an Ibo who studies in northern Nigeria. He feels little of the past tension that pushed his ethnic group to civil war after massacres in the north. But he has no job.
"I guess more people need to get educated first - not just literate, but really educated - and then things will get better," Ukwu said.
He glanced at the Lagos skyline, under its habitual pall of smoke, and chalked his cue for a rematch. "I think things will get better," he said. "I pray they will."
 Load-Date: March 14, 1999

 

End of Document
