

Let the (University) Games - and scrambling - begin!
August 20, 1997, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 572 words
Byline: By HOWARD FENDRICH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CATANIA, Sicily
Body




Officials scrambled to smooth over organizational problems as the 19th edition of the World University Games, the first held in more than one city, got underway.
The games, seen as one last litmus tests of Italy's ability to handle big sporting events, run through Aug. 31 - five days before the IOC selects a host for the 2004 Olympics. Rome is one of five finalists in that vote.
"Let's hope that success here brings to Italy the first Summer Olympics of the new millennium," Interior Minister Giorgio Napolitano said at the opening ceremonies Tuesday as representative of the Italian government at Palermo's Favorita Stadium, filled to 38,000 capacity for the occasion.
On-the-field action picks up tonight with preliminary soccer matches, including the United States against the Czech Republic, Italy against Iran and Uruguay against Netherlands.
Women's gymnastics starts Friday, with Shannon Miller leading the U.S. team and making a return of sorts. In 1990, Miller won the all-around title at the Catania Cup junior competition. Seven years and seven Olympic medals later, she's back in the city for her first University Games - and possibly her final international appearance.
"Hopefully, I'll be remembered as someone who enjoyed the sport enough to stick around this long, someone who put in the effort and worked hard," Miller, 20, said.
Overwhelmed by the record number of participants, which is expected to reach 6,000, organizers have struggled to find adequate housing space. Original plans for the 500 billion lire ($ 275 million) budget called for construction of an Olympics-style athletes village, but that was never done.
"We are coping with the problems put in front of us and trying, in cooperation with the local committee, to face them," said Roch Campana, the secretary general of the International University Sports Federation.
Campana said organizers are trying to free hundreds of beds for competitors, and might be forced to increase the number of people in some rooms already occupied.
The South Africans staying in Catania, which will play host to the track and field competition next week, are among 2,000 people in a housing complex that normally caters to 1,500.
South Africa's soccer team arrived in Terrasini - one of 10 smaller towns used for events in addition to the three main cities of Messina, Palermo and Catania - one week ago, but was turned away from its hotel because the rooms were taken by tourists. The players were able to stay at another hotel about 45 miles away before returning four days later to their original destination.
The director of the United States delegation, Doug Ingram, said he faced initial problems with arranging transportation because of organizers' scheduling changes. But he said those have been ironed out, in part because some members of his delegation have been in Sicily for three weeks.
"One of our key advantages is that we've been here quite a while. Some smaller countries won't have that," Ingram said. With about 250 athletes, the U.S. contingent ranks second only to host Italy's 312 participants.
A lack of translators and communications breakdowns between the numerous sites are among other difficulties confronting officials.
"The organizing committee had problems and put off the solutions. In these final days, the organization has moved into emergency mode," said Rosolino Siculiana, president of the Sicilian branch of the Italian Athletics Federation.
 Load-Date: August 20, 1997

 

End of Document
