

Liberians Come Out of the Bush for Food Shipments
September 11, 1996, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 481 words
Byline: By TRISHA THOMAS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TUBMANBURG, Liberia
Body




Liberians isolated in the countryside for months by rebel fighting grasped Wednesday for food brought by aid workers, shoving handfuls of the uncooked wheat into their mouths.
For the third day, the United Nations and relief agencies delivered tons of food to the rural region north of the capital, Monrovia. Efforts to reach the northeastern region of Cape Mount Country were thwarted for seven months by fighting between rebel factions.
Reports from other parts of the West African country indicated an August cease-fire was shaky at best. A cease-fire verification mission to the southeastern port of Greenville was called off Wednesday because of disagreements between two rebel groups, the National Patriotic Front of Liberia and the Liberian Peace Council.
A spokesman for the front, Gen. Austine Clarke, said he could not guarantee the safety of the delegation, which included members of the West African peacekeeping forces and United Nations observers. He blamed rival rebels from the Liberian Peace Council.
"I am not stopping the delegation from flying into Greenville, but if the helicopter is hit in the air, don't blame the NPFL," he said.
In Guia Town, on the road to Tubmanburg, people began emerging from the bush when they learned U.N. relief trucks had arrived. They surrounded the trucks and when bags of bulgur wheat were opened, they grabbed handfuls and ate it uncooked.
"About 10 people have died since last week, children and old people. Young babies are dying day after day," said Varney Quaye, 28. He said about 250 people were still hiding in the bush, where they have been eating wild roots and leaves.
The United Nations and relief agencies reached Tubmanburg, 50 miles north of Monrovia, on Saturday for the first time since February. They found crowds of people dressed in rags and adults holding scrawny children as they pushed their way to receive high-protein biscuits. While they were exhausted from months of foraging for food in the woods, most of the adults did not appear to be in danger of starvation.
Relief officials estimate more than half the city's population of 35,000 is suffering from hunger.
"What we are experiencing is that people are coming every day by the hundreds," Tarek El Guindi, country director of the World Food Program, said Wednesday.
When the food convoy tried to continue further north to Cape Mount, a general from an Ulimo-J faction would not let it through, saying there was still fighting in the region. U.N. officials believe about 3,000 people are facing hunger in the area.
The August cease-fire signed by Liberia's warlords cleared the way for aid agencies to venture out of the capital. The cease-fire calls for immediate disarmament and elections by May 1997.
More than a dozen previous cease-fires have collapsed because of fighting among faction leaders. More than 150,000 people have died since the civil war began in 1989.
 Load-Date: September 11, 1996

 

End of Document
