

Libya Calling, But Will Tourists Heed the Invitation?
July 17, 1996, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 866 words
Byline: By MARIAM SAMI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TRIPOLI, Libya
Body




Some of the world's most stunning Roman and Byzantine ruins grace its coast, prehistoric paintings adorn hills and caves, and sun bathes pristine beaches year around.
Deep in its vast desert are spectacular vistas punctuated by oases legendary among the bedouins crossing the Sahara.
After years of depending on its oil, Libya wants to cash in on those wonders. It is trying to shed its international isolation with an ambitious campaign to advertise its heritage and natural beauty to visitors - a number it hopes will reach 1.5 million by the turn of the century.
But there's a snag. Airlines are barred by U.N. sanctions from serving the North African country. Its leader, Col. Moammar Gadhafi, is ostracized by the West. And just 85,000 tourists came in 1995.
Hope still springs eternal for some.
"Libya is looking forward to becoming a tourist country in the future," Gadhafi said during a recent visit to Egypt.
"Anyone who wants to work in tourism in Libya … or wants to build a hotel and tourist services, let him do it and it will be as if he was in Egypt," he promised Egyptian businessmen.
The campaign has already started, with a goal of bringing in $ 500 million a year by 2005 for an economy that now depends almost entirely on oil exports.
A new Tourism Ministry has produced high-quality books on Libya's antiquities and dozens of glossy posters advertising verdant corn fields swaying in the wind and camel caravans silhouetted against a setting sun.
"Libya: the Driving Force of Civilization," one poster reads against a backdrop of a Roman mosaic. Another promises - somewhat oddly - "Everything You Imagine, Everything You Can't Imagine."
"The people who come to us seek culture, peace and relaxation," said Boukhari Huda, who became Libya's first tourism minister in late 1995.
His ministry touts the Roman and Byzantine ruins at Sabratha and Leptis Magna, considered to be some of the best preserved in the world. Desert safaris are available in southern Libya, particularly around the famed oasis of Ghdames.
"It is a beautiful country and the people are very, very nice," Heinrich Opladen, a Swiss tourist, said as he stood in the lobby of Tripoli's five-star Al-Mahari hotel.
Another tourist at the hotel, Carlos Haddad of London, praised Libya's easy-going nature - no harassment by beggars and no fear of crime.
But the country, admittedly, has an image problem.
It is still on the U.S. State Department's list of nations that support terrorism, and the United Nations imposed sanctions in 1992 trying to force it to turn over two men wanted in the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am jetliner over Lockerbie, Scotland, that killed 270 people.
The United States bars its citizens from traveling to Libya, but a few thousand Americans are believed to still work in the Libyan oil fields and some do come as tourists.
Despite Libya's pariah status, European nations generally have no limitations on travel to Libya. Britain warns its citizens about travel difficulties and the lack of British diplomatic representation in Libya.
The U.N. sanctions ban air travel, forcing visitors to come by ferry from the island of Malta or overland from neighboring Tunisia and Egypt, both countries with booming tourist industries.
The quickest drive - from the Tunisian resort of Jerba - requires six hours over hot desert roads to Libya's capital, Tripoli.
Once there, transportation is still difficult in a country nearly five times larger than Germany.
Libya itself is a conservative Muslim country where alcohol is banned, making for an austere nightlife by Western standards. Tourists are advised to dress modestly. It is preferred that women cover their arms and legs, wearing loose dresses or pants. Those who appear in shorts or miniskirts can be harassed.
The government has asked for help from the World Tourism Organization, an intergovernmental group based in Madrid, Spain.
It paid the group $ 1 million this year to map tourist sites and help plan the building of hotels, including a proposal for luxury accommodations and a marina on a man-made peninsula off the Mediterranean coast. No site has been selected yet.
Hotels are a particular need.
Tripoli has only three big hotels, and they are aimed at well-to-do travelers, with nightly room rates of about $ 195. There are no hotels for midrange tourists. Backpackers can find rooms at small hotels.
In other cities, like Tobruk near the Egyptian border and the port of Benghazi, the hotel situation is even more bleak.
Travelers can save some money if they're willing to risk buying Libyan dinars on the illegal black market, where $ 1 brings about 2.5 dinars, compared to the official rate of $ 3 to 1 dinar. But major costs, such as bills at the main hotels, must be paid at the official exchange rate.
Libyan officials realize the country's isolation means it won't be making big money from tourism anytime soon.
They say they'll take it slowly, promoting safaris that do not require much from the government and that cater to tourists willing to go the extra mile - literally - to visit Libya.
"We don't want the tourist who will sit by the pool drinking beer," said Mohamed Abulhoul, director of the General Board of Tourism. "Libya is a special market."
 Load-Date: July 17, 1996

 

End of Document
