

Libyan leader on the charm offensive
The Associated Press
August 29, 2000, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 710 words
Byline: By HAMZA HENDAWI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




The style is the same - flamboyant. Female bodyguards. A colorful tent for an official residence. Unusual costumes. But Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi may have bid farewell to his revolutionary dreams of old, replacing them with a campaign to win over a skeptical West.
That undertaking got a boost when France and Germany acknowledged Libya's part in freeing six foreign hostages from the clutches of Muslim rebels in the Philippines - rare positive attention from the West for a country and leader more often accused of backing guerrillas, plotting terror attacks and meddling in affairs far from home.
Gadhafi "is seeking publicity," said Mary-Jane Deeb, a Washington-based Libya expert. "He wants to change his image and make everyone think of him as a man who is concerned with human rights and fighting terrorism.
"This is Libya's perception of what it is doing," she said, "but it is not necessarily the reality and it is not necessarily the end of the Libya we have all known for the past 30 years."
More than three decades into his authoritarian rule, Gadhafi may be finding it difficult to win the full trust of his neighbors and the international community after spending years and hundreds of millions of oil dollars to support "freedom fighters" in places as far afield as Africa, Ireland, southeast Asia and even the South Pacific.
Libya's first step toward international rehabilitation was made last year when Gadhafi agreed to hand over for trial two Libyans suspected in the 1988 bombing over Lockerbie, Scotland, of an American airliner. The bombing killed 270 people.
The surrender of the two suspects led to the suspension of U.N. sanctions imposed on Libya in 1992. Unilateral U.S. sanctions, however, remain in force and Libya is still on the State Department's list of countries suspected of supporting terrorism.
Libya, according to Deeb and Herman Cohen - a retired U.S. State Department official and a frequent traveler to Libya - has not been linked to any act of terrorism for up to five years.
"The United States is taking notice of all this," said Cohen. "The United States may be ready to normalize relations once the Lockerbie trial is over."
But according to reports by Western intelligence agencies, Libya may not be the caring and humane nation it wants the world to see it as.
The agencies charge that Libya is developing mass-destruction weapons and receiving North Korean assistance to improve the range of its missiles to deliver those weapons to targets in southern Europe. Gadhafi, who marks his 31st year in power on Friday, also has been courting the Chicago-based radical black Muslim leader Louis Farrakhan, whose militant views on American race relations and Jews render him a source of serious worry to U.S. authorities.
Despite such political concerns, most of the world's leading oil companies are now back in Libya, lured by 30 billion barrels of proven oil reserves. U.S. companies remain left out, barred by the U.S. sanctions.
But Secretary of State Madeleine Albright is known to be considering lifting the ban on Americans traveling to Libya following a visit by a team of U.S. officials to see whether the country was safe for Americans to visit and do business.
A statement issued Monday by the French Foreign Ministry acknowledged Libya's part in the release of the six hostages - though France accuses Libyan agents in the 1989 bombing of a French passenger jet that killed 170 people. German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder went a step further, expressing his country's gratitude and thanks to the North African nation.
The hostages released Sunday and Monday were from France, Germany and South Africa.
Libya insisted it gained the releases by promising development projects in the Philippines, not by paying ransom that could be used to buy arms or that could encourage more hostage-taking. But officials in the Philippines said Libya paid $1 million for each captive held by the Abu Sayyaf guerrillas.
Libya has long-standing ties with Muslim rebels in the mostly Catholic Philippines and has helped negotiate in previous kidnappings. It has helped build schools and mosques in the impoverished south, but has also been accused of training rebels from the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, the larger Muslim rebel group.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY109
 Load-Date: August 30, 2000

 

End of Document
