

Lizards and laptops: Welcome to the U.S. evacuation command post
March 28, 1997, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 762 words
Byline: By CANDICE HUGHES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BRAZZAVILLE, Congo
Body




In a sweltering tent on the edge of a lizard-infested African airstrip, rows of sweating U.S. military officers hunch over their laptop computers.
Welcome to the headquarters of the outfit that would rescue Americans from neighboring Zaire if things turn sour. Pull up a gray metal folding chair and sweat a while. Take a look around.
Inside this steamy hangar in Brazzaville you'll see all the accouterments of any busy office, everything from fax machines and printers to bulletin boards and in-and-out boxes.
The staff lawyer is tucked into a corner, murmuring into his field telephone. The doctor is around somewhere, probably handing out malaria pills or making sure everyone's drinking enough water. Equatorial Africa's climate is punishing; the staff weatherman says the humidity often exceeds the temperature. No one moves very fast here - except for these troops.
The joint task force began arriving in the Congo on Sunday from American bases in Italy. In less than 48 hours, the command center was up and running. You get on the Internet here or pick up your e-mail, or even watch CNN, thanks to the satellite dishes gazing skyward from the baking tarmac.
Huge U.S. Air Force cargo planes shuttled in and out all week, bringing in more people and supplies. Meanwhile, a second, smaller contingent was deploying at Libreville, Gabon, along with MH-53 helicopters and aircraft. By Thursday, there were as many U.S. troops in the region - about 500 - as there were Americans who might need evacuating from Zaire.
Zaire's capital, Kinshasa, is just across the river from Brazzaville. From a distance, it looks modern and prosperous. But the reality is a city ravaged by corruption, its economy near collapse.
Washington decided to send troops to Central Africa after rebels challenging the 31-year reign of Zaire's President Mobutu Sese Seko took the strategic city of Kisangani two weeks ago.
The rebel advance has been relatively bloodless; the ailing Mobutu's soldiers usually loot and run when the rebels get close - which is one reason the United States, France and Belgium deployed evacuation forces in Brazzaville. Britain sent two small assessment teams, but no troops.
All feared Mobutu's poorly paid army might go on a rampage in Kinshasa if the rebels got close - or if the government fell under the pressure of the seven-month civil war or 66-year-old Mobutu, who has prostate cancer, died.
About 7,000 Europeans live in Zaire and an evacuation could be a massive operation. But so far, none of the nightmare scenarios has materialized.
Peace talks look likely. Kinshasa's airport is open. The city is calm, though tense. But Zaire can be unpredictable.
"You'll sense a lot of frustration, people saying: 'Well, we're here. Now what? Maybe we got in too early.' But what's too early? You don't know," said Air Force Maj. Gen. Tad Oelstrom. "The best minds got together and decided this was the smart thing to do. So we did it."
The U.S. headquarters hums like a busy corporate office. Officers staff desks for intelligence, transportation, logistics, communications, public relations, acquisitions, personnel, planning and policy.
Special operations teams tucked into a tent under a rusting Congolese military helicopter are making plans to secure the evacuation zones. The "psyops" people are taping announcements in French - the local language - for broadcast over loudspeakers at evacuation zones.
Contract officers are scouring Brazzaville for sources of fuel and food and boats - the river once known as the Congo is 2 miles wide here and some evacuees might come out by water.
The groundwork for the American deployment started about a week before the first contingent, 28 people, including the commander, Maj. Gen. Ed Smith, got to Brazzaville.
By the time his plane landed, the site was lined up and a combat airfield team was on the tarmac with forklifts to unload the big C-17.
The command center is the brains of the operation. The muscle will arrive later - if there is an order to evacuate. A U.S. warship is en route to the region with Marines and more aircraft. Troops in Italy are on alert.
There's an old military saying: Amateurs talk tactics and professionals talk logistics. For the man who runs this forward command post, 38-year-old Master Sgt. Perry Doerr, it's an article of faith.
Doerr is a veteran of combat missions in Grenada and the Persian Gulf and the military's 1994 aid mission in nearby Rwanda.
"A lot of people will tell you this is half the battle - figuring out the logistics of it and figuring out how you're going to support it," he said.
 Load-Date: March 28, 1997

 

End of Document
