

Losing at the front, Zaire's president prints money - lots of it
April 21, 1997, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 524 words
Byline: By DIANNA CAHN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LUBUMBASHI, Zaire
Body




Rebels on a triumphant march through Zaire have discovered that President Mobutu Sese Seko still controls a potent weapon: the printing presses of the national mint.
In recent months, the faltering Mobutu regime flooded the Lubumbashi region with New Zaire bills in huge new denominations to pay off government debts. Lots of bills - even though the national treasury had no reserve to back them.
When anti-Mobutu rebels seized Zaire's second-largest city on April 11, they found it in throes of a massive currency crisis. The collapse of the New Zaire's value in Lubumbashi forced local prices out of reach for many.
For the rebels, seizing control of the currency has proved tougher than seizing control of the city.
Soon after taking Lubumbashi, the rebels tried to restore order to the local currency market by declaring Mobutu's new 500,000 and 1 million New Zaire notes worthless. Elsewhere in Zaire, no bills larger than 100,000 were accepted.
Residents left holding the worthless bills took to the streets in protest, jeering "Dollar, Dollar" at the rebel finance minister. Nearly all stores in the city closed down.
For many, even a few of the big bills represented most of their savings.
"It is like they killed me," moaned salesman Mbanga Gedone, waving 500 million in large New Zaire bills, worth $ 3,500 at the official rate and now - he feared - worthless. "And there are many who have a lot more than this. What are we going to do now?"
The panic forced the rebels to temporarily reinstate the big bills as legal tender Friday, although few people will now accept them.
"We took the decisions too fast. And we saw that we could get into big trouble," rebel leader Laurent Kabila admitted at a weekend rally. He urged stores to reopen, a plea few shopkeepers have heeded.
Just the same, the rebels say the mega-bills serve only to destabilize Lubumbashi's economy.
"That money is worthless. They have the illusion that they have money but they don't," said rebel finance minister Mawapanga Miwana Nanga.
Mobutu ordered the Zairian national mint, still under his control, to print the new bills to compensate miners pressing for back pay from the state-owned Gecamines mining company, a key employer in Lubumbashi.
The flood of large bills cut the value of the currency in Lubumbashi to 450,000 New Zaire to the dollar, three times the rate paid elsewhere. On Friday, authorities in Lubumbashi set a fixed rate of 140,000 New Zaire to the dollar.
Mawapanga said tough measures are needed to cool off inflation and bring the economy under control. But discontent appears to be growing, as an already impoverished people feel a new economic pinch.
Mobs showed up Thursday at the city's largest foreign exchange office, Speed Change, but were turned away. Earlier last week, Belgian owner Wim Dewulf had closed the exchange for three days after one man forced him at gunpoint to accept $ 1,700 worth of the mega-bills.
During the rally Saturday, Kabila told 12,000 supporters in Lubumbashi that prices had gone down in the more than half of Zaire now under rebel control.
The otherwise adoring crowd wasn't buying it.
"Not here! Not here!" they roared.
 Load-Date: April 21, 1997

 

End of Document
