

MADAGASCAR : Tourism threatens to outgrow the island's facilities
The Associated Press
November 1, 1999, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Travel News
Length: 745 words
Byline: By KATYA ROBINSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ILE SAINTE MARIE, Madagascar
Body




When you step out of the crowded airport on this exotic island , you are greeted by a rickety reception hut with gaping holes in the roof.
"Informations Hotels," a sign says.
But, no one is inside to talk about the hotels, despite the faded advertisements on the thatched walls.
Outside, the area has become an impromptu coconut market.
Still, most of the hotels and bungalows on this island 10 kilometers (6 miles) off Madagascar's mainland have been full in recent months. It's the peak of the whale-watching season
The scene dramatizes in miniature the state of tourism across Madagascar. The remote Indian Ocean island nation is enjoying a tourism boom, thanks to its natural attractions, from humpback whales and lemurs - a kind of primate found nowhere else - to unspoiled beaches and virgin rain forests.
But big infrastructure problems, such as a lack of welcome centers, limited eco-tourism facilities, horrendous roads and a dearth of hotel rooms - to name a few - threaten to halt further growth.
"The insufficient quantity and quality of tourism infrastructure, as well as the level of professionalism of some tourism operators, pose big obstacles to the tourism boom," Olivier Raveloarison, secretary general of the Tourism Ministry, told a recent national meeting on the state of the industry.
"Too much success could bring bad publicity," said a more blunt Gaston Randriamiakatra, director of the ministry's department of studies, programs and promotion. "If we are able to attract 500,000 tourists a year, but they are poorly received, it will be a catastrophe."
Tourism, a relatively recent phenomenon in Madagascar following the country's emergence from the socialist isolationism of the 1980s, has been an economic boon to the world's 13th poorest country. It's the second-biggest source of foreign currency, next to fishing.
The number of tourists doubled between 1994 and 1998, when a record 121,207 outsiders visited Madagascar. Most were from Europe, followed by the United States. A well-publicized cholera outbreak pushed the trend down by 4 percent in the first half of 1999, but tourism officials remain bullish. They project 350,000 visitors by the year 2005.
World Bank officials attribute much of the growth to the loosening of government control over aviation and the simplification of entry visa rules in recent years.
Now government officials are trying to continue the positive trend, establishing tourism promotion zones in an effort to attract foreign investment and targeting the growing international eco-tourism market.
"Eco-tourism is the future of Madagascar," Randriamiakatra said. "It rests with us to improve the facilities to welcome eco-tourists, like eco-lodges around protected areas and national parks."
That means a lot of building. Madagascar has fewer than 7,000 hotel rooms. Some big developments are planned, including a Club Med, but so far there are few lodges around the country's 44 national parks and protected areas. Constructing more requires the development of a broader infrastructure.
An example is the pristine national park on the Masoala peninsula in the northeast. The largest stretch of primary rain forest in the country, the park covers dramatic coastline and forested mountains. It is an ideal eco-tourism destination, but tough to develop.
"Eco-tourism development cannot take place independent of development in other fields - health infrastructure, education and training, transport, telecommunications, not to mention the traditional tourism infrastructure," says Matthew Hatchwell, country representative for the Wildlife Conservation Society, which is working with the government to manage the park.
Those developments must capitalize on Madagascar's world-renowned biodiversity without spoiling it, say environmentalists.
In addition, tourism development must benefit local people, say aid workers, or else impoverished families will encroach on the country's last forests in search of food and farm land. Wrong steps on either front could spell the end of Madagascar's biggest tourism attraction - its environment.
Optimistic tourism officials point to at least one alternative attraction. On June 21, 2001, people in southern Madagascar will see a total eclipse of the sun.
---
INFORMATION: Contact Maison du Tourisme de Madagascar (MTM), Place de lindependance, Antananarivo 101, Madagascar, B.P. 3224. Phone: (261-20) 22 351-78. Fax : (261-20) 22-325-37.
A helpful Web site is at www.madagascar-contacts.com. 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY416-NY417 of Nov. 1
 Load-Date: November 2, 1999

 

End of Document
