

Man arrested with explosives may have been trained in Pakistan; Desk: TOPS with 4 grafs, Algerian may have been trained in Pakistan where U.S. concern about security is high; SUBS 6th graf 'The U.S.'
The Associated Press
December 24, 1999, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 943 words
Byline: By LARRY MARGASAK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




An Algerian man arrested for allegedly trying to bring bomb-making materials into Washington state may have been trained in Afghanistan or Pakistan, federal authorities said today.
While U.S. investigators combed through new information from Canadian officials that indicates he was trained in the early 1990s in Afghanistan, The Associated Press learned separately that he may have been trained in Pakistan.
There are strong indications the Algerian had some connection to terrorists groups in that country, but there is little reason so far to link him to a terrorist network believed headed by Osama bin Laden, who is in Afghanistan, a senior U.S. official told the AP.
Concern about terrorist activities in neighboring Pakistan caused the State Department in August to ban all travel by American officials to the tribal areas of Pakistan's northwest frontier province, which lie outside the normal jurisdiction of the Pakistani government.
The U.S. investigators learned that the Canadian Security and Intelligence Service has been monitoring the activities of Ahmed Ressam for years, officials told The Associated Press on Thursday, speaking only on condition of anonymity.
The U.S. officials, familiar with progress of the investigation, said authorities were trying to determine whether Ressam, whose car allegedly contained nitroglycerin when he was stopped at Port Angeles, Wash., was part of a terrorist organization - including the network headed by reputed terrorism mastermind bin Laden.
Ressam pleaded innocent in Seattle on Wednesday to charges of transporting explosives, making false statements and smuggling.
Bin Laden, a Saudi exile, has lived in Afghanistan, and the officials said Canadian authorities believed Ressam received training there in the early 1990s before moving to Canada in 1994.
Meanwhile, Americans in neighboring Pakistan were urged by the State Department to be extra cautious. The department said there is serious concern for the safety and security of Americans throughout the country. They were told not to travel to the Khyber Pass, a favorite tourist attraction, and travel by U.S. officials there was severely limited.
Across the country in Vermont, prosecutors asserted Thursday that a woman arrested entering the country this week has ties to an alleged Algerian terrorist organization.
The Washington state and Vermont arrests followed the recent detention of 14 individuals in Jordan who were suspected of planning terrorist attacks on tourist sites and U.S. targets in the kingdom.
The 14 are believed to have ties to bin Laden, who is alleged by U.S. officials to have masterminded the bombing of two U.S. embassies in Africa last year.
U.S. authorities say bin Laden is communicating with his supporters and has issued calls for terrorists to strike Americans during the holidays.
"Bin Laden is from a wealthy family. He has independent money to buy the best communications (equipment) known and also weapons," Sen. Richard Shelby, chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, said in an interview Thursday.
Shelby, R-Ala., said a U.S. military attack "would be in order" if any terrorist group makes the "terrible mistake" of attacking Americans. He said U.S. intelligence is relentlessly pursuing bin Laden and "sooner or later, I believe our search and our diligence will pay off."
Shelby's Democratic counterpart on the intelligence panel, Sen. Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, cautioned that American officials risked "making a wider war" if they are not careful when publicly identifying possible terrorists.
"We take sides in regional conflicts, we are forward deployed, we are a very successful liberal democracy that tends to breed jealousy if not outright animosity," he said.
Since Ressam's arrest last week, the government has stepped up security at border crossings, federal buildings and airports. It also has urged caution for Americans worldwide during year-end celebrations, and the FBI warned again Thursday that Americans should watch for potential mail bombs.
U.S. officials said late Thursday they were pursuing numerous leads in many cities but had not substantiated any specific threats against any domestic sites. Nonetheless, the Energy Department was taking extra security precautions at its nuclear weapons facilities and other sites, Energy Secretary Bill Richardson said.
The U.S. attorney's office in Vermont said American intelligence has connected Lucia Garofalo, the Canadian woman arrested Sunday at a remote border outpost in that state, to the Algerian Islamic League.
Authorities traced Garofalo's cellular phone and car to an Algerian man living in Canada, Brahim Mahdi, who authorities said was a member of the Algerian Islamic League. Federal prosecutors in Vermont said the group's founder was Mourad Dhina, whom they described as an arms trafficker for terrorists.
Mahdi, in an interview in Montreal on Thursday, said he had no connection with terrorism. Dhina, a scientist living in Geneva, said the claims being made about him were "completely surreal."
The allegations were leveled during a hearing in federal court on whether to keep Ms. Garofalo, 35, and the Algerian man accompanying her, Bouabide Chamchi, 20, in jail. U.S. authorities first had said traces of explosives were detected in the car they were driving, but later said further checks had turned up nothing.
Chamchi, who was accused of trying to enter the country with a falsified French passport, was ordered held without bail because of the risk he might flee. Ms. Garofalo, who was accused of attempting to transport an illegal alien into the country, was being held without bail at least until her hearing resumes Dec. 30.
 Load-Date: December 25, 1999

 

End of Document
