

Mandela brings Burundi's civil war to spotlight at the UN
The Associated Press
January 19, 2000, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 597 words
Byline: By NICOLE WINFIELD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Nelson Mandela is bringing Burundi's civil war to the United Nations' spotlight as part of a new effort to revive peace talks and end a conflict that has left more than 200,000 people dead and tens of thousands in dire humanitarian straits.
Mandela is the featured speaker at an open meeting today of the Security Council, which is expected to adopt a resolution condemning a recent surge of violence in the small Central African nation that threatens to explode.
Burundi's civil war has been raging for six years, but it has not received the international attention of other conflicts - even those in Africa. Donor nations have provided only about 17 percent of the $83.6 million requested last year by U.N. agencies to provide basic humanitarian aid to Burundians.
Mandela, the former South African president, was appointed by African leaders in December to mediate Burundi's stalled peace talks and use his diplomatic skills, widely respected on the continent and elsewhere, to try to bring an end to the conflict.
U.S. Ambassador Richard Holbrooke, the current council president, invited Mandela to appear before ambassadors in today's session to highlight the volatile situation in the country and give impetus to the peace process.
In his first foray this weekend into the troubled peace process, the anti-apartheid champion upbraided negotiators for having stood by and dawdled while people were being killed.
"The daily slaughter of men, women and children is an indictment of every one of you," Mandela told regional leaders Sunday in Arusha, Tanzania, the site of the peace talks.
Fighting between Burundi's Hutu rebels and the Tutsi-dominated army has killed more than 200,000 people since 1993.
The majority of Burundi's 6.5 million people are Hutu, but Tutsis have dominated the government, the military and the economy since independence from Belgium in 1962.
Senior U.N. officials told reporters last week that, if unchecked, the fighting - which has been on the increase in recent months - could slide Burundi back into an era of large-scale killings seen in the country the mid-1990s.
In response to fears about the increase in violence in the capital, Bujumbura, Burundi's army has forced more than 320,000 people, mainly Hutu civilians, into 53 "regroupment" camps. The government hopes to clear the countryside of all but the Hutu insurgents, which it can then pursue freely.
The United Nations and human rights organizations have condemned the policy, which U.N. officials say clearly violates international humanitarian law.
The people herded into the camps are living in nearly inhumane conditions, with aid agencies only able to reach a fraction of the settlements, one senior official said. Malnutrition is rising and the death rate is "unacceptably high," the official said, speaking to a press conference on condition he not be identified.
A coalition of U.N. agencies and other organizations working in Burundi - including UNICEF, the World Bank and the Red Cross - issued a statement today expressing their "strong opposition" to the policy, which they said was being implemented without regard to the rights or well-being of those affected.
Secretary-General Kofi Annan was expected to address the issue in his remarks to the council, which is holding the open meeting as part of its month-long focus on Africa.
Burundi's U.N. ambassador, Marc Nteturuye, disputed the U.N. claims, telling a press conference that security had improved dramatically since the regroupment camps were established in October and claiming humanitarian access to the camps wasn't restricted.
 Load-Date: January 20, 2000

 

End of Document
