

Marines: Looking For The Few Good, Not The 'Truly Evil'
July 30, 1996, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 531 words
Byline: By SUSANNE M. SCHAFER, AP Military Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Marine Corps is screening new recruits to keep out the "truly evil," as it begins a tougher boot camp that combines harsh physical training with character building.
"This is not about making things easier. This is making things tougher," said Gen. Charles Krulak, the Marine commandant who has pushed the revised training and recruiting system.
The new boot camp includes forced marches, sleep deprivation, meager rations, teamwork exercises and moral conundrums. It also places greater emphasis on values and team work exercises, adding an entire week to basic training.
It is aimed at reducing problems such as the abduction and rape of a young girl by Marines in Okinawa, but also keeping men and women in the Corps who can deal with the puzzling types of conflict that have emerged in the post-Cold War era, officials said at a Pentagon briefing.
Maj. Gen. Jack Klimp, who is in charge of recruiting, said soldiers need a grounding in morals and ethics to make split-second decisions, whether they are on humanitarian missions or combat missions - or both at the same time.
He related the story of a Marine tank commander in Somalia out on patrol who saw an old tank turn its turret at his unit. That was a hostile act that would allow him to blow the tank away, but he held his fire - and a half-dozen children who had been playing inside the abandoned tank scrambled out.
"That's the kind of battlefield preparation (Marines need) and that's why we need this program," Klimp said.
The two-star general said he has observed several types of people who want to join the Marines - those who have no character problems and can easily adopt the rigorous Marine Corps ethic.
Some, who "have been damaged by society," and have been part of gangs or hate groups may prove in the end that they can be good Marines, he said.
"Our whole screening process … is designed to look at that group of people and determine who within that group we are willing to take a calculated risk on. Does this youngster have what it takes to complete the transformation and become a U.S. Marine? That may be the group we have the greatest impact on, if we can return that group to society as a better citizens," Klimp said.
The screening process is also designed to ferret out "those that I call truly evil, the bad folks that we are trying to keep out of the Marine Corps," Klimp added.
Col. Keith Holcomb, the director of training and education at the Marine Corps Combat Development Command, said the goal is emphasizing "the concept of total fitness - of body, mind, spirit and moral principles."
He said the new program adds a "Hell Week" near the end of basic training during which recruits will be allowed only four hours of sleep a night, skip some meals, and participate in night-time forced marches. It will be topped off by patriotic ceremonies, award presentations of the Marine emblem and a "Warriors Breakfast" with Marine combat veterans, all designed to build team spirit.
It will also toughen and extend the combat training given female Marines, he said.
About 40,000 to 45,000 Marine recruits go through basic training at the Marine Corps Recruit Depots at Parris Island, S.C., and San Diego each year.
 Load-Date: July 30, 1996

 

End of Document
