

Mobutu gone, Zairian troops move on the capital
May 17, 1997, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 876 words
Byline: By TINA SUSMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KINSHASA, Zaire
Body




Zairian rebels said they attacked the Kinshasa airport Saturday, a day after President Mobutu Sese Seko handed power to the shaky remains of his government and slipped out of the capital, reportedly headed for exile abroad.
A senior official at rebel headquarters in Lubumbashi said rebel troops were attacking the capital's airport, about 20 miles from downtown Kinshasa. The official, who requested anonymity, refused to comment further.
But several Western diplomats said they had no independent confirmation of rebels being at the airport. Sporadic gunfire was heard in downtown Kinshasa on Saturday.
Earlier, a Western diplomat said there were unconfirmed reports that a small group of rebels had arrived in the capital.
Mobutu's departure Friday effectively ended his nearly 32-year rule, during which he maintained close ties with the United States while reaping a personal fortune from Zaire's vast mineral riches. The dictator's furtive departure left the capital's dispirited defenders likely to melt away before the rebel army that has massed outside the city.
Meanwhile, one of the generals that advised Mobutu that they would not defend the capital and that he should leave was assassinated by a Zairian soldier, the diplomat said Saturday.
Gen. Marc Mahele Lieko Bokungu, a friend of Mobutu and army chief of staff, reportedly was among the Zairian generals who were trying to make contact with rebel leaders to arrange their entry into the city.
The diplomat, who refused to be further identified, said the soldier apparently accused Mahele of being a traitor and shot him at around midnight Friday during the general's visit to the presidential military complex.
Rebel leaders said Friday they intended to push on to Kinshasa - the last obstacle to their total control of Zaire. Some Mobutu allies, including the head of his presidential guard, were fleeing by boat to neighboring Congo.
"We're going to Kinshasa," declared Mwenze Kongolo, the rebel justice minister. "Pack your bags."
The rebel alliance has vowed to clean up corruption in Zaire and establish democracy, but rebel leader Laurent Kabila has resisted calls for quick elections, and his troops have been accused of massacring Rwandan refugees during their march across the country.
"We ask our population in all the country - specifically in Kinshasa - to stay in their houses, to be calm and not to do anything to jeopardize the situation in Kinshasa," rebel Foreign Minister Bizima Karaha said.
A government statement, read hastily by Mobutu's information minister at a news conference, asserted that Mobutu retained the title of president and that the government still assumed responsibility for defending the capital, maintaining order and negotiating with the rebel alliance.
But it said that as for the president, "Mr. Mobutu has decided to leave the capital, leaving to the government the responsibility of conducting national policy. … On a practical level, the head of state has stopped all involvement in the affairs of state."
The government said the constitution prevented Mobutu from turning over power directly to Kabila.
But rebel foreign minister Karaha, speaking in Lubumbashi, rejected that reasoning, and demanded an unconditional surrender.
"Their constitution … does not actually exist in this country," he said. The rebels "reject categorically those declarations of those irresponsible people in Kinshasa who do not want anything else than to see bloodshed in the capital, and they will be responsible for what might happen in that city."
The 66-year-old Mobutu, who is ill with prostate cancer, on Friday morning flew secretly from Kinshasa to his palace in the northern village of Gbadolite, 700 miles away, which he considers his hometown. Aides insisted he would return, but diplomatic sources in the capital said they expected Mobutu to arrive in the Moroccan capital of Rabat on Friday evening.
A Zairian minister said earlier Friday that Mobutu had left Kinshasa for a "short rest" at the palace.
Mobutu's decision followed a meeting Thursday night of his top generals, who afterward told the president they would not fight to defend the capital, Western diplomats in Kinshasa said.
"He's been told the realities of the situation by his own people, which is that they cannot and do not intend to defend the city, and by implication, him," said one diplomat, speaking on condition of anonymity.
Hours after Mobutu left, witnesses said they saw Gen. Nzimbi Ngbale, head of the presidential guard, flee Kinshasa for Brazzaville, Congo, in a boat crossing the river separating the two capitals.
The presidential guard, which numbers about 3,000, was the main enforcement tool during Mobutu's iron-fisted rule, and it had been seen as the only united force likely to fight in his defense. The tens of thousands of regular soldiers - underpaid and poorly equipped under Mobutu - have either fled or joined the rebels.
With Mobutu out of the city, military sources said there should be little resistance from soldiers long soured on his corrupt rule, clearing the way for a relatively peaceful and dramatically victorious entry by the rebels.
President Clinton welcomed the development, saying: "The U.S. position is clear: We want to see a transition to a genuine democracy."
 Load-Date: May 17, 1997

 

End of Document
