

Mother of all trials melts into theater of the absurd
The Associated Press
October 24, 1998, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 643 words
Byline: By ELAINE GANLEY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: FLEURY-MEROGIS, France
Body




It's the biggest French trial ever, and it was meant to deliver an unmistakable message: The state will not tolerate terrorism.
But the message has boomeranged.
To lawyers, defendants, and the French press, the prison gym where the trial is being held resembles less a courtroom than a theater of the absurd.
Most of the 138 defendants, accused of helping Islamic insurgents in Algeria, have refused to attend the proceedings. Most of the 70 defense lawyers walked out on the first day, saying the trial is nothing more than a "show."
Many defendants claim they are victims of circumstance, wrongly arrested because of family ties to sympathizers of Islamic militants.
Since defense attorneys walked out on Sept. 1 - the trial's first day - Judge Bruno Steinmann has presided over the nearly empty, cavernous gym beside the Fleury-Merogis Prison, nearly an hour's drive south of Paris. Police guards, on one day, made up almost a third of those present.
As the trial moved into its final phase last week, Paris' chief prosecutor called on boycotting lawyers to return. Prosecutor Jean-Pierre Dintilhac said that a verdict will be rendered with or without the presence of the defense.
Only 27 of the defendants - all arrested in police sweeps in 1994 and 1995 - remain in prison. But the tight security at the gym attests to the seriousness of the charges. Before entering, visitors are frisked in curtained booths down to their belts and shoes, which are checked inside and out.
Prosecutors contend the suspects made up three separate but overlapping networks to help the insurgency in Algeria, where violence since 1992 has left an estimated 75,000 people dead.
The defendants are charged with sending arms, money and medical supplies to fighters or providing documents and refuge for Muslim militants brought to France.
Prosecutors are asking for 10-year prison sentences against the three alleged network heads, and want another 68 defendants, most of them Algerians, to be banned from France forever.
Boycotting lawyers say they won't be part of a "show trial." The lawyers, with their clients' assent, decided they would not even deliver final arguments.
"We consider that the best defense is to do everything so that this trial has not a bit of legitimacy," attorney Stephan Maugendre said in an interview.
Maugendre's own client, Nacera Labsi, 47, says she is a suspect mainly because of her contacts with two nephews, both of whom are wanted in France.
"If there is someone in this room who can prove I took part in an act of terrorism, say so now," she pleaded recently, her voice trembling before the judge.
Protesting lawyers put forth a series of grievances ranging from the "undignified" courtroom to their inability to gain access to the 50,000-page court record, because it costs a prohibitive 70 cents per page. They also say the proceedings should be divided into at least three trials, one for each of the three networks.
Many claim their clients languished in jail before being charged. One defendant, who waited nearly four months to be questioned, gave birth while in detention. She was freed the day she was questioned.
"This started with a police sweep, then a phony investigation, now a judicial masquerade," said Mohamed Chalabi, one of the accused network leaders, in an outburst on the fourth day. "Stop wasting the taxpayers' money."
The trial is expected to close next week. The verdict is not likely for perhaps two months.
France has long been haunted by fears that the Islamic insurgency in Algeria, its former colony, could spill across the Mediterranean, as it did in 1995, when a series of bombings killed eight and injured 160.
The insurgency in Algeria erupted after the military-backed government canceled January 1992 elections to prevent a victory by the now-banned Islamic Salvation Front. More than 75,000 people have died in the violence.
 Load-Date: October 24, 1998

 

End of Document
