

Mubarak's bold plan to settle the Sinai takes shape
October 4, 1997, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 600 words
Byline: By JASPER MORTIMER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KANTARA DISTRICT, Egypt
Body




On Monday, Egypt's president is due to fly to this construction site on an otherwise desolate bank of the Suez Canal and press a button.
The ceremony should be short and simple, but its significance could be enormous for Egypt.
The irrigation project launched by President Hosni Mubarak is the most serious bid yet to lead Egyptians out of the Nile Valley, where 98 percent of Egypt's 62 million people live on just 5 percent of the country's land.
If all goes well, the button will open the gates to four tunnels under the Suez Canal. Water channeled through a 40-mile canal from the Nile River delta will rush through the tunnels and flow into another canal.
About half of that canal's 110-mile length has been completed. By the time it is scheduled to be finished - in 2003 - a network of channels will branch off this canal to irrigate 400,000 acres of desert.
But the Salaam project - the greening of the Sinai - is part of a bigger plan. Egyptians need to leave the Nile's crowded valley and delta where they've lived for thousands of years.
"Egypt has no hope except to move out of the valley," said Milad Hanna, a housing expert who served on a U.N. Development Program committee that assessed Salaam.
The planned migration into the desert has two levels: another project, known as the Toshka scheme, in southern Egypt eventually will be larger, but Salaam will be the first test.
A view of the land around Kantara gives an idea of the boldness of the Salaam plan, the biggest project of Mubarak's 16-year tenure. There is not a tree in sight, nor a blade of grass. Sand stretches as far as the eye can see, broken only by container ships steaming along the green-blue Suez Canal and cars on the adjacent highway.
Nevertheless, the demand was enormous when the government offered the first 32,000 acres, the portion reserved for small farms, for sale.
"We received more than 20,000 bids for only 1,000 plots," Ahmed Mazen, an adviser to the minister, told The Associated Press. The demand for large-scale farms and agro-industries was also high.
The government hopes to eventually move 750,000 people to Sinai. Previous schemes to settle the desert - notably those of President Gamal Abdel Nasser - also began with much enthusiasm and then faltered.
There are two chief views on whether the state will pull it off.
Hanna believes it will: "Most people are fed up with the valley. If there is any chance, people will move outside the valley, even if it entails (the risk) of being unsuccessful."
But Professor Donald Cole of the American University in Cairo is cautious: "The target of 750,000 people is ambitious and will probably be a long-term hope."
Cole, an anthropologist specializing in Egypt, said two of Nasser's schemes west of the delta were only beginning to take off now - after 20 to 30 years.
Before the government can expect any settlement, it has to supply the infrastructure. This part of Sinai has no paved roads, no schools, no shops.
Hanna believes the state has the personnel and ability to deliver.
Cole says the track record for providing infrastructure in desert development is good but that the lack of support services made life "extremely bleak" for the early settlers.
"It's one thing to build a school, but has the government thought about hiring school teachers and where they are going to live, and has anybody budgeted for it?"
Another question is whether the farmers will be sufficiently skilled to "green" the desert. Further, engineers who built the $ 60 million tunnels worry that Egypt's sluggish bureaucracy won't provide the funds for the equipment needed to maintain them.
 Load-Date: October 4, 1997

 

End of Document
