

Names In The Game Martina Hingis, George Foreman, French soccer and Shayne Corson and
The Associated Press
July 5, 2000, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 823 words
Dateline: GREEN BAY, Wis.
Body




Nancy Lopez might have to cancel an appearance at a golf tournament next month if she can't find a replacement for the nanny who cares for her three daughters.
"I was thinking we would get through the summer before she ever could take another job somewhere else, and it didn't work out that way," said Lopez, who lives in Georgia with husband Ray Knight, a former major league star.
"A nanny is pretty serious to me. I need somebody whom I can depend on and have to kind of break in and train before I let that person live with us, so I don't know what I'm going to do," she said.
The nanny has taken another job and might leave at the end of this week.
Lopez, a 43-year-old Hall of Famer, had gallbladder surgery in May and played in only six LPGA tournaments early this year.
She attended a charity exhibition this week at a new course at Egg Harbor on the Door Peninsula. She plans to return for the 54-hole ShopKo Great Lakes Classic in Green Bay Aug. 18-20.
---
ZURICH, Switzerland (AP) - Claudia Schiffer knows about soccer fields as well as fashion runways.
"I grew up with soccer," she said, adding that she had a soccer net at home as a child and followed the game.
The model is helping Germany in its bid to win the 2006 World Cup. The other candidates are South Africa, Morocco and England, with the winner to be announced Thursday.
Schiffer said she joined the bid effort "not just because I like soccer but to represent Germany."
"I've got a good feeling" about the bid, said Schiffer, who appeared with Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder and tennis star Boris Becker in an appearance at the German presentation to FIFA's executive committee.
---
ROME (AP) - The head of the Italian soccer federation assailed opposition leader and media tycoon Silvio Berlusconi for his harsh criticism that prompted the coach of Italy's national team to quit.
Coach Dino Zoff resigned Tuesday, two days after Italy's 2-1 overtime loss to France in the Euro 2000 final.
"Zoff's reaction was disproportionate, but Berlusconi's criticism was far too sour and not in tune with popular sentiments," Italian soccer federation president Luciano Nizzola said Wednesday.
Berlusconi, who owns the AC Milan soccer team, called Zoff's performance amateurish and the loss "dishonorable."
"If this continues, Berlusconi will want to choose Miss Italy next," said Oliviero Diliberto, former justice minister and leader of the Italian Communists.
---
GENEVA (AP) - Martina Hingis will assist the United Nations in a program to help Latin American street children.
The tennis star will meet with young victims of poverty, prostitution, pornography and drugs during a visit to Bogota, Colombia, on July 13-14.
Hingis is taking part in a program called Teams to End Poverty, which also has enlisted soccer stars Ronaldo and Zinedine Zidane and movie stars Omar Sharif, Gerard Depardieu and Jeanne Moreau.
Hingis, the top-seeded woman at Wimbledon, lost to Venus Williams in three sets Tuesday.
---
LINCOLN, Neb. (AP) - Former heavyweight champion George Foreman has donated $100,000 to a scholarship fund at the University of Nebraska Foundation.
Foreman made the gift in the name of Vada Kinman Oldfield, the late wife of Barney Oldfield, a retired Air Force colonel and public relations tycoon.
Foreman became acquainted with Barney Oldfield as a young man in Los Angeles and the two remain friends.
The Oldfields have given millions of dollars to various scholarship programs in Nebraska.
Barney Oldfield, 90, lives in Southern California. Vada Oldfield died last year at 88.
---
NYON, Switzerland (AP) - Another trophy for French soccer: the fair play award.
"The French national team provided conclusive evidence that success can be built on the principles of fair play," European soccer's governing body said Wednesday.
The French, the World Cup champions, won Euro 2000 on Sunday by beating Italy 2-1 in overtime.
The fair play award was based on, among other things, player and fan conduct.
The Netherlands was second and Spain third in the fair play ratings. England, which won the last fair play award in 1996, and Turkey were excluded from the rankings this year because of street violence involving their fans.
---
TORONTO (AP) - Shayne Corson and Gary Roberts have no-trade clauses in their contacts with the Toronto Maple Leafs, the agent for the two veterans confirmed Wednesday.
The two unrestricted free agents each signed three-year deals - Roberts for $8 million and Corson's is worth $6.75 million.
Corson had played for Montreal and Roberts for Carolina.
Agent Rick Curran said the no-trade clauses were important parts of the negotiations. Bill Watters, assistant to the Leafs' president, would not confirm or deny the no-trade clauses.
Curran said he had spoken to more than a dozen teams Saturday, with six to eight showing interest in Corson and Roberts.
Toronto had an edge because the two players wanted to be close to home. Roberts is from Toronto and Corson from Barrie, Ontario.
 Load-Date: July 6, 2000

 

End of Document
