

Names In The Game Daniels, Alex Ferguson
The Associated Press
March 28, 2000, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 772 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




CHICAGO (AP) - Pete Rose says he finds "confident, bright, intelligent" women attractive, especially Hillary Clinton, Elizabeth Dole and Barbara Walters.
In an interview for the May edition of Playboy magazine, Rose, who agreed to a lifetime ban from baseball in 1989 following an investigation of his gambling, also decried not being in ESPN's top 50 athletes of the century.
He wondered how swimmer Mark Spitz, who won seven gold medals at the 1972 Olympics, could have made the list.
"Mark Spitz? That guy worked two weeks! I worked 24 years," Rose said.
Rose, 59, said what he likes most in a woman "is the way she carries herself."
"I think Hillary Clinton is sexy. She gets better and better," he said. "The same goes for Dole's wife. I like (Texas Sen.) Kay Bailey Hutchison. I like Barbara Walters."
But baseball ranks right up there, too, for Rose.
"Playing baseball is as good as sex. The sixth game of the 1975 World Series against Boston was like sex. It don't get better than that."
Rose also had the answer to why one of Clinton's favorite teams - the Chicago Cubs - are perennial losers: Their fans don't care about winning.
"The Cubs have great fans, but I think the fans are partly responsible for that team's demise," he said. "Cubs fans have been through losing so long that they go to the game to have fun, sit in the bleachers, take their shirts off and look at the ivy."
---
LAUSANNE, Switzerland (AP) - Italian swimmer Vivana Susin has been banned from competition for four years after failing a drug test.
World swimming's governing body said Tuesday that Susin, a freestyler, was tested at the Vittel Cup at Lyon, France, Jan. 25. FINA said she was found to have a higher than acceptable ratio of testosterone to epitestosterone.
The decision to ban Susin was made by the FINA drug panel, and is effective immediately. Susin has the right to appeal to the Court of Arbitration for Sport.
---
NAIROBI, Kenya (AP) - Seven of Kenya's top runners, led by five-time world champion Paul Tergat, have called for the resignation of the Kenya Amateur Athletic Association board as well as the manager and coach of the cross country team.
At a news conference after their return from the March 20 World Cross Country Championships in Portugal, Tergat and his teammates said members of the KAAA, along with the manager and coach, had mistreated and insulted them.
"We were grilled like thugs," he said. "The organization (the KAAA) turned not only into dictators but also liars. It (the resignations) is the best thing."
Tergat, the cross country team captain, said the manager and the coach summoned the runners to a 1 a.m. meeting on the day of the 12-kilometer race and treated them "like criminals."
Tergat missed winning a record sixth world title in Portugal, finishing third, but the Kenyan team won the men's senior title.
Tergat said the problems started in Kenya during the selection process. The athletes were upset that they did not know which of the seven would be running until two hours before the race. Team competition is limited to six members per country.
KAAA chairman Isaiah Kiplagat said the association had not handled the situation badly.
---
SOUTH KINGSTOWN, R.I. (AP) - Point guard Dinno Daniels, who committed to Miami in January, has changed his mind and given an oral commitment to Rhode Island.
Daniels visited the Rhode Island campus last weekend and was swayed by a recommendation from his brother. Former UNLV guard Greedy Daniels knows former Rams star Cuttino Mobley, now with the Houston Rockets.
Daniels is one of the top junior college point guards in the country, averaging 17 points and 9 assists for Tyler College in Texas.
Daniels will graduate from Tyler on May 29.
---
LONDON (AP) - Manchester United's Alex Ferguson is the best soccer coach ever, according to a poll of British soccer bosses.
The survey, conducted by FourFourTwo magazine, asked 52 past and present managers to list their choices for the sport's top 20 coaches.
No. 1 was Ferguson, who has guided Manchester United to five Premier League titles in the past seven seasons.
Last season, Ferguson led United to an unprecedented triple - with triumphs in the Premier League, Football Association Cup and European Champions Cup.
Manchester United had gone without a league title for 26 years until Ferguson guided the club to the championship in 1993. The club's only Champions Cup triumph until Ferguson came along was in 1968.
Second in the poll was Liverpool's Bill Shankly, who built the club into a powerhouse in the 1960s and early '70s. Brian Clough, who led Nottingham Forest to successive European Cup triumphs in the 1980s, was third.
 Load-Date: March 29, 2000

 

End of Document
