

Names in the News
The Associated Press
October 21, 1999, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 842 words
Dateline: MIAMI
Body




The more Ricky Martin moved his hips, the more the thousands of cheering admirers roared.
The Latin pop star opened his North American tour Wednesday at Miami Arena by dancing on top of a silver convertible being driven in front of the stage.
At one point, he encouraged fans to shake their hips, too, saying anyone can do it: "It doesn't matter who you are, it doesn't matter where you come from."
Introducing the song "I Am Made of You," Martin discussed how he deals with the "energy and euphoria" of sudden stardom.
"My medicine is a higher power," he said.
Martin's solo career has soared since his eye-catching performance of "Livin' la Vida Loca" at the Grammy Awards last February. The song was the first single from his first English album, now a bestseller on the U.S. charts.
His tour is scheduled to wrap up in Cleveland on Dec. 6.
---
LONDON (AP) - A gold watch Winston Churchill once gave to a man who helped him escape from a prisoner-of-war camp during the Boer War has fetched $ 15,600 at auction.
The former British prime minister gave eight engraved pocket watches to the people who helped him flee Pretoria in December 1899. The watch sold by Spinks Auction House on Wednesday had belonged to mining engineer Daniel Dewsnap, whose relatives live in South Africa.
It was purchased by a South African private collector, the auction house said.
Two of the other seven watches are in museums, two are with the recipients' families and one was destroyed in a fire. The fate of the other two is unknown.
Churchill, who had run unsuccessfully for a parliamentary seat in Britain five months before, was working as a war correspondent in South Africa when he was captured by the Boers.
Dewsnap and seven others hid him in the bottom of a railway coal truck so he could flee to Mozambique. As Churchill made his escape, Dewsnap was said to have whispered, "They'll vote for you next time."
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - "Happy Days" actress Roz Kelly was placed on probation for firing a shotgun at a neighbor's home because she was angry about his car alarm.
After hearing results of a 90-day psychiatric exam, Superior Court Judge Darlene Schempp on Wednesday suspended a three-year prison term and placed Ms. Kelly on three years' probation.
Ms. Kelly, 57, who played Fonzie's biker girlfriend Pinky Tuscadero on "Happy Days," pleaded no contest to the charge in July. She had earlier pleaded innocent to firearms charges related to the November shooting.
As part of a plea bargain, the prosecution dropped charges that she also fired shotgun blasts into two parked cars, one of them with the offending alarm system.
Prosecutors say she fired into two cars and then smashed the window of a neighbor's home and fired a shotgun into the living room. The neighbor was not home at the time.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - As the daughter of civil rights leader, Donzaleigh Abernathy lived through turmoil and danger in the 1960s. Now she's reliving it.
The actress drew on her difficult family memories for a special episode of the Lifetime cable series "Any Day Now." The show airs Sunday.
"For every tear I ever shed on camera, I would go back in my (studio) trailer and shed 50," Ms. Abernathy said Wednesday.
The two-hour drama includes flashbacks to '60s Alabama, and Ms. Abernathy's character is put in a life-threatening situation by the fight against racism.
That is a familiar plight for the Abernathy family. Donzaleigh's father, the Rev. Ralph Abernathy Jr., shared 17 jail cells with the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr., and the family's home was bombed January 1957.
"My mother was in the house when it was bombed and the living room was pretty much blown away," Ms. Abernathy said. Every time "I said good-bye to my father, I didn't know if I would see him again."
Ms. Abernathy's family survived the bombing, and her father died a natural death in 1990.
After seeing the "Any Day Now" episode, "I said 'I'm just so tired of racism.' It hurts, it literally hurts. How nice it would be to go someplace and not have people judge you by the color of your skin, but for who you are," said Ms. Abernathy.
---
BIRMINGHAM, Ala. (AP) - Director Daniel Myrick, who helped make the low-budget blockbuster "The Blair Witch Project," says he doesn't want to be pigeonholed.
The film, co-directed by Myrick and Eduardo Sanchez, originally cost about $ 70,000. It has taken in about $ 140 million and only recently fell out of the box office top 20.
"Every producer in L.A. dusted off some old bad script and sent it to us" after the "Blair Witch" success, Myrick said. "But we didn't want to be pigeonholed into doing horror."
Myrick's fans greeted him Tuesday night during his appearance at the University of Alabama at Birmingham. He said he was unprepared for sudden fame.
"All of a sudden you're doing a photo shoot for Premiere magazine. The whole thing took us by surprise," he said.
Myrick and Sanchez are working on a film comedy called "Heart of Love," which Myrick called a cross between Monty Python and "Airplane," with a bit of "Saturday Night Live." They're also developing a TV show.
 Load-Date: October 21, 1999

 

End of Document
