

Names in the Game Prix, Bangladesh cricket and English soccer
The Associated Press
June 28, 2000, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 750 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




ZURICH, Switzerland (AP) - One week before a host country is chosen for the 2006 World Cup, European soccer's ruling body questioned England's chances of being awarded the showcase event.
"England's candidature has been weighed down since the outset," UEFA chief executive Gerhard Aigner told the Zurich newspaper Tagesanzeiger. "Germany submitted its bid in 1993 and the English suddenly popped up in January 1997."
FIFA, world soccer's governing body, will select a host July 6. Besides the two European bids, the other candidates are Brazil, Morocco and South Africa.
South Africa is considered the front-runner. English hopes were damaged after UEFA threatened to oust the national team from the European Championship because of violent fans. England was eliminated in the first round.
"When we made the expulsion threat we didn't for one minute think of the 2006 World Cup," Aigner said. But he repeated UEFA's criticism of the British government for failing to control drunken hooligans.
"The government managed to keep hooligans at bay when England hosted the 1996 European Championships thanks to a massive display of commitment," he said. "They should have done the same this time around instead of leaving the problem to the Netherlands and Belgium."
---
BALLYBUNION, Ireland (AP) - Jose Maria Olazabal might be spending more time on the U.S. tour next year.
"It would be easier traveling-wise for me to go to the States," said Olazabal, winner of the Masters in 1994 and 1999 among his five U.S. Tour titles. "I can make one trip to the West Coast and play five tournaments and virtually drive from tournament to tournament."
Olazabal, who begins play at the Irish Open on Thursday, said the change would be easier than playing European Tour events in Australia, South Africa and Malaysia.
The Spaniard added that he might play exclusively in the United States right up to the Masters in April.
---
DETROIT (AP) - Mayor Dennis Archer intends to meet with Detroit Grand Prix organizers to try to keep the annual CART race on Belle Isle.
Entertainment promoter Joe Nederlander has said he has a deal with the company to move the race to an oval speedway at the Michigan State fairgrounds in 2002.
Archer spokesman Greg Bowens said the mayor plans to meet with race organizers in New York in seven to 10 days.
CART officials have said the 2.36-mile temporary track on Belle Isle does not provide the facilities that the race needs. They have said they plan to find a new venue after 2001, when their contract with the city expires.
Many leaders and residents of nearby suburbs have protested plans for a fairgrounds race track, saying it would be too noisy.
---
DHAKA, Bangladesh (AP) - Bangladesh is now a member of cricket's elite, and for some fans that's the best thing to happen since the country gained independence from Pakistan 25 years ago.
"Now that we have test status, we will do everything to bring the World Cup home," Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina told thousands of fans at a rally Wednesday.
The International Cricket Council voted Monday to make Bangladesh a full test member.
After a night of street celebrations Monday, the government declared five days of national festivities.
"We don't get much to celebrate. This is the happiest hour of our nation," Hasina said.
---
LONDON (AP) - Former England soccer coach Terry Venables wants his old job back.
Venables, who coached England for 23 games between 1994 and 1996, said he would welcome a referendum on whether he should replace Kevin Keegan following England's failure to make the second round of the European Championship.
Venables left after coaching England to the semifinals of the Euro 96 tournament in England.
"I know there are still some people who are against me, but at the same time I keep hearing that I would be the people's choice," he told the Daily Mail. "If Tony Blair can hold a referendum on the single European currency, why not have one to pick the England coach?"
---
BOULDER, Colo. (AP) - Michael Johnson, the world record-holder and Olympic gold medalist in the 200 and 400 meters, has withdrawn from Friday's Golden Gala meet in Rome.
His manager, Brad Hunt, said Johnson pulled out because of contract problems. He said he had twice given organizers a deadline, the last on June 23, to settle a number of issues.
"When Michael returned from Oregon (over the weekend) and was informed that we were still waiting for final word from Rome, he made the decision that enough was enough, and that he would wait no more," Hunt said.
 Load-Date: June 29, 2000

 

End of Document
