

Names In The Game
January 17, 1996, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 804 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: IRVING, Texas
Body




Roxie Campanella says she was "overwhelmed" to learn that a cherished 1955 World Series pendant given to her by her late husband, Roy, was recovered by police.
"I was so happy, I can't really express my feelings," Mrs. Campanella, reached at her home in the Woodland Hills section of Los Angeles, said Wednesday. "I had no idea that I'd ever get it back."
She reported losing the pendant - a 14-karat gold heart-shaped pendant commemorating the Brooklyn Dodgers' 1955 World Series win - at Dallas Fort Worth International Airport on Dec. 2. The memento was with other jewelry in a locked, black vinyl case that Mrs. Campanella said she accidentally left at a ticket counter.
Acting on a pawn shop owner's tip, police recovered the treasure.
An 18-year-old woman and two men brought the pendant in Tuesday to see how much they could get for it, said pawn shop owner Vincent Santoscoy, who remembered reading news reports about the missing jewelry.
Irving police spokesman David Tull said the woman told officers she had been employed by a security company then under contract to an airline at the airport. She told police that someone had turned in the case and that she secretly took it home and picked the lock.
---
BLOEMFONTEIN, South Africa (AP) - A coup at home will not stop Sierra Leone's soccer team from playing at the African Nations' Cup, sport minister Sulaiman Banja Tejan-Sie II said Wednesday.
"The coup d'etat in Sierra Leone was merely a palace coup and everything else there remains as normal," he said in a statement.
Capt. Valentine Strasser was ousted as the nation's leader by other military officers Tuesday, six weeks before he planned elections to return Sierra Leone to civilian rule.
Team manager Alpham Koker said he was shocked by the news.
"The team members are obviously very upset and worried about their families, but they will continue to play their best," Koker said.
Sierra Leone plays Algeria in Bloemfontein on Thursday.
---
MANNHEIM, Germany (AP) - Prosecutors denied that they were planning to drop a tax evasion investigation Steffi Graf and said Wednesday they were going on with the case.
Mannheim prosecutor Peter Wechsung said a ZDF television report on Tuesday claiming the investigation would be dropped if Graf paid a fine of $ 3.4 million was "speculation."
The Hamburg-based based Bild newspaper, said Wednesday that in addition to the fine, Graf would also have to pay $ 17.4 million in back taxes.
Her father and former manager, Peter Graf, was arrested last summer on suspicion of failing to pay taxes on at least $ 30 million of her earnings between 1987 and 1992.
Wechsung said the investigation against Steffi Graf had to be carried through to determine if she was involved in any wrongdoing. So far, prosecutors have found no reason to arrest her.
While admitting he had talked with Steffi Graf's attorney, Wechsung said "in general we do not comment on what is discussed between the defense and prosecutors."
Graf is recovering from foot surgery and is not playing in the Australian Open, the first Grand Slam event of the year.
---
TORONTO (AP) - You've heard of two-sport professional athletes. How about two-sport coaches?
Bob O'Billovich, fired as coach of the Canadian Football League's Toronto Argonauts, has applied for a job with the Toronto Raptors of the NBA.
O'Billovich would like some sort of scouting position with the expansion team and hopes to meet with Raptor officials.
"A lot of people may not know this, but I've had an extensive career in basketball," O'Billovich told the Toronto Globe and Mail. "I went to the University of Montana on a basketball scholarship and I was the starting point guard there in 1960, '61 and '62, although I also played football and basketball there."
He was the head basketball coach in the late 1960s and early 1970s for Algonquin College, Carleton University and the University of Ottawa. He teams won two Canadian national basketball championships.
---
BOULDER, Colo. (AP) - Adam Bledsoe, the younger brother of New England Patriots quarterback Drew Bledsoe, has verbally committed to play football at Colorado.
The younger Bledsoe, also a quarterback, said he selected Colorado over Vanderbilt and Washington State - where Drew played - mainly because of coach Rick Neuheisel.
"He's one of the better quarterback coaches anywhere in the world, at least that's what I hear, " Adam Bledsoe said. "I talked to Troy Aikman and Kordell Stewart. They both said he was the best around."
Neuheisel coached Aikman, the Dallas Cowboys quarterback, at UCLA and tutored Stewart last year at Colorado. Stewart is a rookie with the Pittsburgh Steelers, and sometimes plays quarterback.
The 6-foot-5, 210-pound Bledsoe completed 95 of 172 passes for 1,281 yards last season, despite playing in a run-oriented offense at Eisenhower High School in Yakima, Wash.
 Load-Date: January 17, 1996

 

End of Document
