

Names In The Game
December 14, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 722 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




PORT HOOD, N.S. (AP) - NHL defenseman Al MacInnis has committed $100,000 toward upgrading the arena where he played as a youth.
The NHL Players Association Fund added another $150,000 to Port Hood Arena project.
The pledges by MacInnis, who plays for the St. Louis Blues, and the players association are conditional on government matching funds.
Rodney MacDonald, who represents the area in the Nova Scotia legislature, called the pledges "a tremendous contribution" that will strengthen the community's bid to get government assistance.
The local arena commission is looking for an additional $666,000 to complete the $1.2-million project.
MacInnis, the first Nova Scotian to win the Norris Trophy as the NHL's top defenseman, was born in Port Hood in 1963 and was a first-round pick of the Calgary Flames in 1981.
 
---
COPENHAGEN, Denmark (AP) - Former Danish soccer star Brian Laudrup, who retired in May after a 14-year career playing for some of the best teams in Europe, will make a comeback on an all-amateur team.
Laudrup, 31, will play for Hoersholm-Usseroed, which is five levels below the division of his last team, Ajax Amsterdam in the Netherlands.
Djennie Kier, the team's president, said that unspecified personal contacts - not a player contract - with Laudrup made it possible to convince the international goal scorer to play for Hoersholm.
"There is no contract involved at all. It will be for fun," Kier said Wednesday.
Laudrup, who will start in April when the new season begins, will play "just like the other players who have one purpose: win the games - as many as possible," Kier said.
In May, Laudrup quit Ajax Amsterdam and professional soccer for good because of a chronic tendon injury.
The Dane scored 21 goals in 82 games for the national team. His biggest World Cup thrill came two years ago in France, when Denmark upset Olympic champion Nigeria in the second round before losing to Brazil in the quarterfinals.
As a professional, Laudrup played for German team Bayern Munchen, Italian powerhouses Fiorentina and Milan and the former Scottish champion Glasgow Rangers. He then played with Chelsea of the English Premier League and Denmark's FC Copenhagen before finishing his career with Ajax Amsterdam.
---
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. (AP) - Robert Cameron Haughton, a member of one of harness racing's most successful families, was chosen to be the presiding judge of the Meadowlands 2001 harness meet.
"Cammie Haughton comes from an illustrious racing family and has gone on to make a name for himself as a racing official," said Chris McErlean, the racing commission's vice president and general manager.
Haughton, son of the late Hall of Fame trainer-driver William R. Haughton, has been a racing official since 1988. He served as a presiding judge for the New York State Racing and Wagering Board from 1997 to 2000, working the Yonkers, Monticello and Goshen Historic Track meets.
From 1989 to 1997, he was an associate judge on the New York harness circuit.
The New Jersey Racing Commission selected Haughton to fill the vacancy created by the departure of John Tomasello, who accepted a position with the New Jersey Sire Stakes Board.
---
STATESBORO, Ga. (AP) - Georgia Southern fullback Adrian Peterson, who has set more than a dozen Division I-AA rushing records, says he will return for his senior season.
"I'll be back next year. I'm having fun here, and we're winning. I'm in no hurry to go anywhere," Peterson told The Atlanta Journal-Constitution.
Georgia Southern (12-2) defends its national championship on Saturday when it plays Montana (13-1) in Chattanooga, Tenn.
The 5-foot-10, 212-pound Peterson has rushed for 7,218 yards and 91 touchdowns in 42 regular-season and playoff games, gaining more than 100 yards in each of them.
Some think the junior from Alachua, Fla., has played well enough to be selected in the NFL's 2001 draft.
Peterson said it would take something "very strange and powerful" over the next five or six months to lure him away from college.
Peterson, whose older brother Michael is a starting linebacker for the Indianapolis Colts, has discussed his future with family members, all of whom support his decision to play his senior year.
"We've talked about it, and Adrian is enjoying it at Georgia Southern," said Porter Peterson, Adrian's father. "Whatever he does, we're going to support him."
 Load-Date: December 15, 2000

 

End of Document
