

Names In The Game Ngconde Balfour, Wil Cordero, Ivan Quaranta
The Associated Press
May 23, 2000, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 823 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




EDMONTON (AP) - Glen Sather hasn't completely left the Edmonton Oilers after all.
Sather, who resigned Friday after 21 NHL seasons as GM and president of the Oilers, has agreed to stay on as a consultant until a new GM is named.
He will handle player contract negotiations until the end of June or until he finds new employment, the NHL club said Tuesday.
The New York Rangers, Phoenix Coyotes and Montreal Canadiens have all been mentioned as being interested in the 56-year-old Sather.
The Oilers need to sign 1998 first-round draft pick Michael Henrich before the June 1 deadline. Henrich can return to the Entry Draft if he doesn't sign.
 
---
SEATTLE (AP) - A former community college athletic director and basketball coach has been awarded more than $2 million in a racial discrimination case.
A King County Superior Court jury made the decision Monday in the case of Michael McGraw, who was fired by Green River Community College in 1988 after the school was cited by the Northwest Athletic Association of Community Colleges for violating conference rules.
McGraw's lawsuit, which went to trial May 3, said he was dismissed because he is black. He was awarded $1 million on his claim of defamation, $500,000 for racial bias and $506,375 for wrongful termination violating public policy, a total of $2,006,375.
"I feel very good about the verdict," he said. "I'm thrilled, certainly, of the vindication."
In a written statement, college officials said they were surprised and were considering an appeal.
Conference investigators said McGraw, the men's basketball coach, violated rules by letting one of the players stay at his house during the summer. Green River also was reprimanded because an ineligible player suited up for 11 nonconference games. As a result, the school was put on probation for three years and fined $2,000.
 
---
SALT LAKE CITY (AP) - A Salt Lake Olympics official accused of punching a pedestrian in the face during a road-rage confrontation has been arraigned.
Doug Arnot, the Salt Lake Organizing Committee's managing director of event operations, was charged with misdemeanor assault, accused of punching pedestrian Richard Van Orden of Salt Lake City in the face four times through the window of his car on March 29.
Defense attorney Greg Skordas said Monday prosecutors want to discuss a plea bargain before a June 1 hearing.
Arnot, 49, was driving through an intersection when he exchanged words with Van Orden, who was in the crosswalk, according to documents. Officers said Arnot made a U-turn and came back to confront Van Orden.
Van Orden has sued Arnot seeking unspecified compensation for medical costs and emotional distress.
 
---
CAPE TOWN, South Africa (AP) - Sports Minister Ngconde Balfour, pitting himself against his country's Olympic committee, said Tuesday that South Africa's predominantly white field hockey team should go to the Olympics.
South Africa's National Olympic Committee in February said the team would not be sent to the Sydney Olympics because of the disproportionate number of white players, and because the team has little chance of finishing among the top nine.
But Balfour, who is black, told Parliament that to exclude the team because of its racial makeup is unacceptable, and that athletes who had worked hard to qualify for the Olympics had to be given the opportunity to compete. The South African squad qualified for the Olympics by winning the All-Africa Games last year in Johannesburg.
 
---
MAYAGUEZ, Puerto Rico (AP) - A judge has awarded Pittsburgh Pirates player Wil Cordero the provisional custody of his two children, extending a temporary order issued when his wife was arrested on drug charges last week.
Judge Emilio Mulero made the ruling after watching a videotape that Cordero's lawyers alleged showed the outfielder's wife, Ana Berta Echevarria Morales, using drugs. The videotape was made by a private investigator from a house near Echevarria's home in Mayaguez.
Echevarria, 34, was arrested Wednesday after police allegedly found half a pound of marijuana in her home. Three others were arrested in the raid.
Cordero is in the midst of divorce proceedings with Echevarria. The order allows the children, ages 2 and 3, to live with him until a hearing following the divorce.
Cordero has two other children from previous relationships.
 
---
PADOVA, Italy (AP) - Ivan Quaranta won the long, but relatively flat, 10th stage of the Giro d'Italia Tuesday, breaking out of the pack at the final sprint.
Francesco Casagrande held on to the overall lead in the three-week race following his win in the first mountainous stage on Monday.
Quaranta, an Italian riding for the Mobilvetta Design team, won the 159.3-mile leg in a time of just over 6 hours, 48 minutes. He crossed the finish line in this northeastern city just ahead of Jan Svorada of the Czech Republic and Italian star sprinter Mario Cipollini.
A tough time trial is scheduled for Wednesday, followed by a rest day on Thursday.
 Load-Date: May 24, 2000

 

End of Document
