

Names In The Game
March 16, 1996, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 705 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: ST. CROIX, U.S. Virgin Islands
Body




Former World Boxing Association lightweight champion Livingstone Bramble has had enough.
Bramble said he will retire from boxing after a fight this summer in South Africa.
"I'm happy I can retire without my eyelids slit, nose to the side, lips split and cauliflower ears," Bramble said in an interview published Friday by the St. Croix Avis newspaper.
Bramble, a St. Croix resident, said he has become tired of boxing politics. He also said he was tired of fighting without a hometown advantage.
"You don't always get a decision when you win" by fighting in an opponent's hometown, he said.
Bramble won the WBA lightweight championship after knocking out Ray "Boom Boom" Mancini in June 1984. He defended his crown - again defeating Mancini in 1985 - before losing to Edwin Rosario in 1986.
Bramble won the North American Boxing Federation junior welterweight title in August 1989 with a technical knockout of Harold Brazier.
Bramble lost his last professional fight in November against Australian welterweight Shannan Taylor. He is scheduled to fight Gary Murray this summer in South Africa.
Bramble said he plans to promote and coach amateur boxers and pursue an acting career.
---
WASHINGTON (AP) - At least one person on Capitol Hill was glad to see the little guy come out ahead.
New Jersey Sen. Bill Bradley, who led Princeton to the Final Four in 1965, exulted Friday after his alma mater's upset victory over defending champion UCLA in the NCAA tournament.
Bradley, the MVP of the 1965 tournament despite a semifinal loss, credited Princeton's 43-41 first-round victory Thursday to Pete Carill's coaching and the importance of disciplined team play.
"It goes to show that coaching is important, and team players who as individuals could not match up can come together and come away victorious," Bradley said. "I was impressed with the character of the team."
The three-term Democrat said Princeton's slowdown style poses problems for opposing teams.
"The other team doesn't know what to expect," said Bradley, whose NBA career included two championships with the New York Knicks. "That's what happened to UCLA."
Bradley only saw parts of the game because the CBS affiliate in Washington showed the Georgia-Clemson game.
However, he saw the finish, capped by the Tigers' go-ahead backdoor layup by Gabe Lewullis with 3.9 seconds remaining.
"I was tremendously happy for Pete Carril, the university and the players," Bradley said. "This game was a moment they will remember all their lives."
---
WINDERMERE, Fla. (AP) - Donna McQueary-Ennis' has coached three Little League teams to titles. Now she faces a greater off-the-field challenge.
McQueary-Ennis, 45, is suing the president of the league for questioning her competence and insulting her during a game.
Larry McCoy, president of the Windermere Little League in which his son plays, hollered to the female coach that she would never coach again because "We'll have no more 'mommy ball,"' according to the suit.
McCoy has refused to let her coach the team, be an umpire or help on the field, she said.
"The things said were personally very hurtful. Enough is enough," McQueary-Ennis said. She and her husband, Michael Ennis, are seeking $ 15,000 in damages.
Also named in the lawsuit is McCoy's wife, Ann. The suit alleges that Ann McCoy told several people that Mrs. McQueary-Ennis "has been abusing my children."
Among some of McCoy's comments, according to the suit, were that the coach was "in over your head" and "Damn women can't pitch or hit to the kids."
Also listed as a defendant was Chip Ford, Little League district administrator. The suit states that Ford failed to keep a promise that McCoy would publicly apologize and retract his statements or be removed as a Little League official.
Since becoming a coach with the league in 1993, McQueary-Ennis said, her teams have finished first three times. In 1994, her team lost only one game. She coaches players ages 8 through 12.
She is the daughter of a baseball coach, has organized coaching clinics, written manuals for the league and established introductory sessions for participants.
"I'm not someone who's just tangentially involved and wanted to stomp my foot and shake my curls because my feelings were hurt," McQueary-Ennis said.
 Load-Date: March 16, 1996

 

End of Document
