

Names in the News
The Associated Press
June 10, 2000, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 802 words
Dateline: OLYMPIA, Wash.
Body




Addressing 1,300 college students about to receive degrees from his alma mater, cartoonist Matt Groening warned that real life won't be like an episode of "The Simpsons," his Emmy-winning animated series.
Instead, it will be more like "Survivor," the CBS endurance contest involving castaways on a rat-infested island.
"This is what real life is like. Sure you get a team, but you can't really trust them," Groening said Friday in an uproarious commencement address at The Evergreen State College.
"They will bicker with you. They will act like big babies. They will wash their underwear in the communal cooking pot. But you all have to stick together, at least until it's time to vote one of your teammates off the island.
"I guess what I'm trying to say is, maybe it's not too late to apply to grad school."
Students, who choose their commencement speaker each year, have been trying to get Groening to come for several years, but his schedule always conflicted. Groening graduated from the small liberal arts college in 1977.
---
MEREDITH, N.H. (AP) - An "Easy Rider" and a stunt rider will lead the Motorcycle Week parade from Meredith to the New Hampshire International Speedway in Loudon next weekend.
Peter Fonda, star of the 1969 movie "Easy Rider," and Robbie Knievel, son of motorcycle daredevil Evel Knievel and a thrill-jumper in his own right, will lead the parade June 18.
The parade marks the last official event of the 77th annual Motorcycle Week, which begins today and is expected to draw about 300,000 bikers from around the country.
---
LONDON (AP) - Showing the kids where granny used to work, Margaret Thatcher slipped into the spectators' gallery at the House of Commons with her son's children.
Lady Thatcher, one of the most recognizable politicians during her tenure as Conservative Party prime minister from 1979-90, drew scarcely a second glance from other spectators in the gallery above the debating chamber.
Dressed in a blue suit, one of her hallmarks in power, she pointed out to her grandchildren where she used to sit at the head of ranks of Tory legislators, taking on opponents in feisty debates.
Thatcher, 74, leaned close to Michael, 11, and Amanda Margaret, 7, apparently explaining what was going on.
The children and their father, Mark Thatcher, are visiting from Cape Town, South Africa, where Mark and his wife, Diane, moved to several years ago.
---
LAGUNA NIGUEL, Calif. (AP) - Former "Airwolf" star Jan-Michael Vincent could face jail time for allegedly violating his probation.
Vincent was arrested Jan. 19 after he was found rolling in the grass at a city park. His blood alcohol level was 0.27 percent, more than three times the state legal limit of 0.08 percent, Deputy District Attorney Michael Hernandez said.
In September, the actor pleaded guilty to three counts of public drunkenness and was placed on three years' probation with orders to refrain from drinking and to complete six months of rehabilitation.
Vincent, 55, was due in court Thursday for a progress report. His attorney, Sharon Wagner, appeared in court but Vincent wasn't there. Wagner has an unlisted phone number and the court and district attorney did not know how to contact her.
Superior Court Judge Gail Andler set a July 11 hearing on the probation violation.
Hernandez said he will ask the judge to sentence Vincent to at least six months in jail and order him to a locked drug and alcohol rehabilitation facility when the jail term is complete.
Vincent, who starred in the television series "Airwolf" in the 1980s, has been in and out of substance abuse programs over the last 15 years.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - A planned U.S. tour by Iraqi pop star Kazem El-Saher has been canceled because he and his band did not get security clearance in time, tour organizers said.
El-Saher, whose music is popular throughout the Arab world, would have been the first Arab musician to headline at Radio City Music Hall.
El-Saher and 19 members of his band - most of whom are Iraqis - were to fly to the United States from Amman, Jordan, where their visas were cleared, said Miles Copeland, chief executive officer of Los Angeles-based Mondo Melodia Records, which organized the tour.
However, the additional security clearance that the State Department requires for Iraqi citizens - including FBI and CIA checks - did not come through for the band in time, Copeland said Friday. Iraq is on the State Department's list of terrorist-sponsoring nations.
"They apologized for the delay but unfortunately it was too late," said Dawn Elder, vice president for Mondo Melodia. She said the company would try to schedule a performance for El-Saher at Carnegie Hall or Radio City in the fall.
El-Saher's latest CD, "El-Hob El-Mustahil" ("The Impossible Love"), based on a famous work by the late Syrian poet Nizar Qabbani, was released Wednesday.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY14 of Fonda and El-Saher
 Load-Date: June 11, 2000

 

End of Document
