

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
September 10, 1999, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 922 words
Dateline: GOLDEN VALLEY, Minn.
Body




Barry Sanders' surprise retirement from the Detroit Lions has spoiled the promotional plans of the company that makes Wheaties.
General Mills Inc. had planned to distribute about nine million Wheaties boxes to commemorate Sanders' quest to break the NFL's all-time rushing record. About 3 million boxes got out before Sanders retired in late July.
It was the first time that an athlete has retired while General Mills was marketing a new Wheaties box in the person's honor.
"It's the nature of the business," company spokesman Greg Zimprich said of the awkward timing.
General Mills will be keeping in touch with Sanders' agents in case he changes his mind and returns to football to chase the career rushing record held by retired Chicago Bears player Walter Payton.
As for the Wheaties boxes in national circulation with the theme "Fueling Barry Sanders' Run for the Record," people have been buying them, perhaps as a "quirky collector's item," Zimprich said.
---
MONZA, Italy (AP) - Brazilian soccer star Ronaldo can forget about trying Formula One racing.
The Brazilian forward, who is playing for Milan in the Italian League, had great difficulty Friday getting into the car of his countryman Rubens Barrichello, and then had an ever tougher time trying to get out.
Ronaldo, who was visiting the pits of some Formula One teams preparing for Sunday's Italian Grand Prix at Monza, said he did not envy the drivers.
The Milan Inter star said he was a fan of late Brazilian driver Ayrton Senna, "the greatest ever," and that he was rooting for Barrichello, who will drive for Ferrari next year.
---
JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) - It's unusual for a sitting president to testify in court, rarer still for one with the stature of Nelson Mandela, and downright unheard of when the judge accuses him of insolence. But that's what happened when he was president.
On Friday, Mandela won vindication when the nation's highest court ruled in his favor in a lengthy court battle over racism in white South Africa's national pastime, rugby.
The Constitutional Court said Mandela acted properly in setting up a commission two years ago to investigate racism and mismanagement in the South African Rugby Football Union. The panel overturned a lower court ruling that quashed the inquiry after rugby officials challenged it.
Few in the black majority follow rugby, preferring soccer, and many see the bruising sport as a symbol of apartheid oppression. But it has a passionate following among Afrikaners, the descendants of mainly Dutch settlers, who dominate the sport.
Many blacks were angered that Mandela was dragged into court as a witness. In his decision, Judge William de Villiers, named to the bench under apartheid rule, criticized Mandela's performance on the stand.
He cast doubt on Mandela's credibility, faulted him for hurling "unbridled insults" at the rugby lawyer cross-examining him and criticized Mandela's "overall demeanor."
The Constitutional Court, which includes one former Mandela lawyer and admirer came to Mandela's defense.
The then-president was "impatient, imperious, hurt, angry and even insulting." But his attitude was justified given the "circumstances in which he had been ordered to court and by the manner in which he was being cross-examined," the court said. And such reactions don't mean his testimony was "untruthful or unreliable."
---
SAO PAULO, Brazil (AP) - Sao Paulo goalie Roger could lose his job for doing some off-field work: Posing nude for a gay magazine.
"If the photos are published, Roger won't play for me on Sao Paulo again," team coach Paulo Cesar Carpegiani was quoted as saying. The club's press spokesman, Dirceo Cabral, confirmed the threat.
Carpegiani expressed concern that the photos would hurt the image of Sao Paulo, a three-time Brazilian national champion.
Roger, a reserve goalie whose contract with Sao Paulo runs through February 2001, said it was too late to stop the photos from release. He is scheduled to be on the cover of the October edition of G magazine.
He added that he had no regrets about accepting the offer.
"I don't see why I can't do the photos," Roger said in a TV interview. "Other players have done it, and one is defending the national team."
Vampeta, the Corinthians' midfielder, broke ground by posing nude for the magazine. His teammate Dinei also did, but Palmeiras prohibited its star forward Oseas from doing the same, reportedly at the insistence of its sponsor, Italian dairy giant Parmalat.
---
WINSTON-SALEM, N.C. (AP) - Wake Forest cross country runners whose coach quit in a battle with sports administrators have a new coach.
Bill Dellinger said Friday he was talked into taking over Wake Forest's men's cross country for this season only to help out a friend. Dellinger retired last year after 32 years of coaching track and cross country at Oregon, where he helped make distance-running champions of Steve Prefontaine, Alberto Salazar, and Mary Slaney.
The decision to move across the country for the fall season was in part a favor to Wake Forest associate athletic director Barbara Walker, who had been Dellinger's boss as Oregon's associate athletic director in charge of track and field.
The Demon Deacons also promoted Noel Ruebel from assistant coach to head track and field coach.
The jobs filled by Dellinger and Ruebel had been held by John Goodridge, who quit last week to protest the firing of his wife, the women's coach. Francie Goodridge, a former two-time Olympian, was let go this summer. The Goodridges had been coaches at Wake Forest for 15 years.
 Load-Date: September 10, 1999

 

End of Document
