

Names in the news
The Associated Press
April 19, 1999, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 659 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Although James Coburn has played the tough guy for most of his career, it took his role as a boozing, abusive father in "Affliction" to finally get the attention of the Academy of Arts and Sciences.
"I guess it's the first time I deserved the Oscar," Coburn says in the April 24 edition of TV Guide. Winning the Academy Award for best supporting actor was "a thrilling experience and it still hasn't set in," he added.
All the same, Coburn hasn't completely shaken his tough-as-nails persona.
He's currently filming a Hallmark Hall of Fame TV movie called "Atticus," in which he plays a father searching for answers about his son's mysterious death.
Coburn said he accepted the part on condition that "they get rid of the weepy stuff."
"If the audience wants to cry, let them cry," he said. "Let's not cry for them."
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Graham Nash has donated two works by American photographer Edward Steichen to the J. Paul Getty Museum.
Nash, one-third of Crosby, Stills and Nash, gave the museum a 1904 photo called "Wedding Self-Portrait," one of only three known prints from the negative, and an untitled 1930 picture of Steichen's grandchildren, the museum announced Saturday.
Nash and his wife, Susan, are photography enthusiasts.
---
PRETORIA, South Africa (AP) - The Three Tenors have conquered another corner of the globe.
Some 35,000 music lovers were on hand Sunday as Jose Carreras led off the trio's first African concert with the bittersweet "Lamento die Federico" from Cilea's "L'arlesiana."
Despair rang deep through Placido Domingo's rendition of "E lucevan le stelle" from Puccini's opera "Tosca."
But the effusive Luciano Pavarotti, the spirit behind the group that started performing nine years ago in Rome, held the heart of the audience.
"Pavarotti was magnificent, perfecto," said John Motsa, 23.
The main concert backer, Vodacom, intended the concert to celebrate the first five years of democracy in South Africa. The performance was held on the sloping lawn at the Union Buildings.
---
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - Judy Collins says just saying "no" is just not that easy.
The folk singer says the famous anti-drug campaign wrongly looks at drug and alcohol addiction as a character flaw.
"It assumes that those who are locked up because of it just didn't have the willpower to carry out their plan for the evening," Collins told The Tennessean in an interview published Sunday.
She said she knows from personal experience that addiction is not a choice and is often inherited.
Collins, a former alcoholic who has abstained from liquor and drugs for 20 years, said she began drinking as a 15-year-old to mask the shame and pain that her own father's alcoholism caused her.
Her only son, Clark, a drug addict and an alcoholic, killed himself in 1992.
"They have an illness," she said of addicts. "My desire is to talk about the public education about this disease and about how far short it falls."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - "Melrose Place" is going off the air this season, but some lucky fans may receive a special memento from the show - a vial of water taken from the pool of the famous TV apartment complex.
In its April 24 issue, TV Guide reports that crew members filled up jugs of water from the Melrose pool, the site of much cavorting among the show's characters.
Fox plans to fill hundreds of plastic vials and ship them to affiliates, radio stations and journalists for eventual distribution to fans.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Cross Helen Hunt with Paul Reiser and you get - Janeane Garofalo?
The comedian will appear as a grown-up version of Jamie and Paul Buchman's daughter, Mabel, on the final episode of "Mad About You."
Hunt, who plays Jamie, will direct the one-hour May 24 finale. After seven seasons on the show, Hunt tells the April 24 edition of TV Guide, "I wanted to be actively involved in the end rather that let it happen to me."
Hunt also wrote the story with Reiser, her co-star and co-executive producer, and with executive producer Victor Levin.
 Load-Date: April 19, 1999

 

End of Document
