

Names In The Game
January 23, 1997, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 661 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Evander Holyfield, the conqueror of Mike Tyson, is the Boxing Writers Association of America's Fighter of the Year for 1996.
Holyfield, who became a heavyweight champion for the third time when he stopped Tyson in the 11th round for the WBA title on Nov. 9, will receive the Edward J. Neil Award at the association's annual dinner sometime in April at New York. He received 75 of the 80 ballots cast.
Royce Feour of the Las Vegas Review-Journal won the Nat Fleischer Award for excellence in boxing journalism. This award is voted on by previous winners.
Other awards announced on Thursday were Angelo Dundee, who trained Muhammad Ali and Sugar Ray Leonard, the James J. Walker Award for long and meritorious service to boxing; and Don Turner, who works with Holyfield and WBO heavyweight champion Henry Akinwande, the John F.X. Condon Award as the year's top trainer.
 
 ---
LAS VEGAS (AP) - Former heavyweight Mike Tyson is backing down from his bid to keep a white tiger at his plush Las Vegas home, at least for now.
Tyson had appealed to the Clark County Commission to be allowed to keep a white Bengal tiger named Kenya at his home on Tomiyasu Lane, an area that includes million dollar homes.
Neighbors complained that housing the tiger would be inhumane, dangerous and inappropriate for the area.
Tyson representatives withdrew the request Wednesday, saying they would meet with neighbors to calm their fears, then reapply for a zoning permit.
 
 ---
NEW ORLEANS (AP) - Former New Orleans Saints coach Jim Mora has no interest in becoming an assistant, says new St. Louis Rams coach Dick Vermeil.
Vermeil he offered to make Mora assistant head coach and defensive coordinator during a telephone conversation Wednesday.
"He just said he wasn't going to be an assistant coach at this time," Vermeil said. "The only way he'd coach would be as a head coach. I appreciate that. I probably would have said the same thing."
Rams president John Shaw had referred to Mora as the favorite for the head coaching job when word surfaced of Vermeil's candidacy.
Vermeil told the New Orleans Times-Picayune that he called Mora to tell him of his hiring and offer the former Saints coach the No. 2 job.
Vermeil said Mora was "obviously a little disappointed" in not getting the job. Mora could not be reached for comment.
 
 ---
DENVER (AP) - Outraged Denver Broncos' fans can relax. Orange will remain a big part of the team's new uniforms, owner Pat Bowlen said.
"Orange will still be the predominant color," Bowlen said Wednesday. "We're a ways from being finalized. We're not abandoning orange by any stretch of the imagination."
Since a newspaper report last month that the team was considering a change to a navy blue, Chicago Bears-style jersey, upset fans have inundated the Broncos with complaints about the lack of traditional orange.
Bowlen denied that public opinion changed the team's uniform plans. He said the Broncos and NFL Properties, the league's marketing arm, still are designing the new uniform, and it won't look anything like the Bears' jersey.
David Wass, the Broncos' vice president of operations, expects the new uniforms to be unveiled within six weeks.
 
 ---
WORCESTER, Mass. (AP) - Church officials don't plan a no-huddle service at St. Paul's Cathedral on Sunday, but they will have an eye on the clock.
That's because Bishop Daniel P. Reilly's service consecrating and rededicating the renovated cathedral begins at 3 p.m. - and the Super Bowl gets under way at 6:18 p.m.
With the New England Patriots playing in the big game for the first time in a decade, church leaders know there might be some parishioners sneaking glances at their watches on Sunday.
"We promise to have everyone out in time for kickoff," the Rev. Richard F. Reidy, cathedral rector, told the Telegram & Gazette of Worcester.
The Rev. Robert K. Johnson, diocesan liturgist, said he has the ceremony timed to the minute and, barring an extra-long homily, football fans needn't fear missing any of the game.
 Load-Date: January 23, 1997

 

End of Document
