

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
May 29, 1999, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 841 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: WACO, Texas
Body




A donation to needy children in Africa kept Baylor pitcher Chad Hawkins from playing in Friday's opening game of the NCAA regional baseball tournament.
The problem was the source of the money - he won it in a pool on the NCAA basketball tournament.
Entering such a pool is construed as gambling, no matter how much he won, or what he did with the money.
A school-issued news release announcing the suspension said it was agreed upon "after cooperative discussions between the NCAA and Baylor officials."
"Baylor officials and the NCAA (were) satisfied that the infraction was an isolated incident," the release stated.
The wager was revealed Thursday in a Waco Tribune-Herald feature about the pitcher's charity work. His father, Charles Hawkins, mentioned that Chad had given away his pool winnings as an example of his son's good deeds.
In the same article, the senior Hawkins said Chad has invited homeless people to live in his Waco apartment, that he gave away a stereo he'd received as a gift and that he gave away a pair of $ 130 sunglasses to a child who mentioned that he liked them.
Hawkins (6-3, 3.26 ERA) is Baylor's No. 2 starter behind all-American Jason Jennings.
The junior right-hander has won three of his last four starts, including a 10-strikeout, complete-game effort against Missouri in the semifinals of the Big 12 tournament.
---
RALEIGH (AP) - Wendy Gebauer became the first woman to play in a regular men's outdoor pro soccer league game in the United States in the Raleigh Capital Express' 3-0 loss to Boston on Friday night.
Gebauer, a former U.S. national team forward, played the first 17 minutes of the second-division A-League match. Gebauer, who played for the Raleigh Wings women's team on Wednesday in a 2-1 loss to the Brazilian World Cup team, had limited touches but nearly assisted on an early scoring chance, finding Darren Warham in the slot. Warham's shot went just wide.
"It was a lot of fun being out there," said Gebauer, who admitted the appearance was little more than a publicity stunt. "It felt good when I got my first touch on the ball. I had realistic expectations and I knew I couldn't play as sophisticated as I do."
---
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) - Baseball Commissioner Bud Selig is "reviewing the entire file" of banned baseball legend Shoeless Joe Jackson, Sen. Tom Harkin said Friday.
Harkin, D-Iowa, wrote to Selig in March, asking the commissioner to reinstate Jackson to baseball, a move that would make him eligible for the Baseball Hall of Fame.
Harkin became interested in the 75-year-old case after the movie "Field of Dreams," in which Jackson is a central character, was filmed in his state. He asked Selig look at the records again and on Friday, he released the response to his request.
In New York, a spokesman for the commissioner could not confirm that Selig was conducting an official review.
In 1920, Jackson and seven other members of the Chicago White Sox were charged with accepting bribes to throw the 1919 World Series against the Cincinnati Reds.
Jackson was banned from baseball by commissioner Kenesaw Mountain Landis, even though a Chicago jury later acquitted him of any wrongdoing in the scandal. Despite that acquittal, Jackson was never reinstated to the game.
In his letter, Selig said the review likely would be lengthy because of the amount of time that has elapsed since the incident.
"The file is indeed very lengthy and much of it is now over 75 years old," Selig wrote.
Jackson, who died in 1951, spent 13 years in the major leagues and batted .356, the third highest career figure in baseball history.
---
SEATTLE (AP) - University of Washington football players, accused of trashing a fraternity house, have agreed to pay for the damage, coach Rick Neuheisel said Friday.
Neuheisel said he called a team meeting to discuss the damage done to the Tau Kappa Epsilon house last Saturday.
"I called the team to meet and gave them the idea that a meeting was necessary," Neuheisel said. "I was there at the beginning and then stepped aside. The football team is going to collect the money from amongst themselves."
Discussing the matter publicly for the first time, Neuheisel acknowledged that some players took part in the disturbance that caused an estimated $ 4,400 in damages to the TKE house, but said he had no idea how many players may have been actively involved.
"There were some football players there that had no part in the ransacking," he said. "I'm unclear as to what level of participation we had. I just know that when people say 'football players' they're talking about all of us."
A number of uninvited people were turned away from a private party at the TKE house Saturday, resulting in a fight in which two windows were reported broken. TKE members told police that early Sunday, 10 or more intruders, some of which they identified as football players, entered the house and broke windows and chairs.
Two TKE members said they were roughed up when they came downstairs to check on the disturbance. Names of any football players allegedly involved have not been made public.
 Load-Date: May 29, 1999

 

End of Document
