

Names in the Game Rusedski, Drew Bledsoe and Virginia Tech
The Associated Press
July 12, 2000, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 805 words
Dateline: ROME
Body




Ben Johnson made an unexpected dash - for a pickpocket who stole his wallet. The pickpocket was faster.
"Everything happened too fast," the star sprinter said Wednesday a few hours after he was robbed. He said he lost about $7,000 in cash and various documents.
Johnson, who was stripped of the 100-meter Olympic title in 1988 for drug use, was making a stopover in Rome after working in Libya as a personal trainer for one of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi's sons.
Johnson said he was about to step into a currency exchange at one end of the posh Via Veneto when he was approached by a young girl and a woman.
He said the girl pulled his arm down and the woman lifted his wallet from a side pants pocket, sliding it into a newspaper.
"When I realized, 15 seconds later, that my wallet was gone, the woman had disappeared," he said.
The runner grabbed the girl and someone in the currency exchange called police.
Police spokesman Maurizio Scandale said the girl was 10 years old, a member of the 6,000-strong community of Rome's Gypsies.
Johnson said he looked at several mug shots but he could not identify the woman.
---
PONTIAC, Mich. (AP) - Charlie Batch's broken right leg might heal in time for him to open the season at quarterback for the Detroit Lions.
"Based on our last conversation with the doctors, there's certainly a chance," coach Bobby Ross said. "They give you a span of eight to 12 weeks. I think there's certainly a good chance."
Batch broke his leg when he caught his foot in the turf during a June 5 workout and had surgery June 12.
Mike Tomczak, signed from Pittsburgh as a free agent, will be Detroit's No. 1 quarterback while Batch is sidelined.
The Lions open the regular season Sept. 3 against New Orleans.
---
SILVER SPRING, Md. (AP) - The old underhand, 3-point, off-the-backboard shot from the right wing gets 'em every time.
At least, it got Steve Francis.
Francis, the Houston Rockets' forward and former University of Maryland star, missed the shot Wednesday and lost in the championship round of a promotion to determine the "World's Greatest Trick Shooter."
The tournament was played in the format of the game "HORSE." The letters "SANDBOX" were used to represent the sponsor, Sandbox.com.
Francis did some whirling, twirling, between-the-legs and behind-the-back moves in the final against Tommy "Swoopin"' Starkes, 38, from New York. Both players had reached "O" when Starkes, a former member of the Harlem Wizards touring team, banked in the 3-point underhander.
"I was kind of nervous when it was my turn to shoot it," Francis said. "The guy I was playing against, he was definitely good."
---
LONDON (AP) - Greg Rusedski, whose first-round loss at Wimbledon marked the latest setback in his slumping career, has parted with Dutch coach Sven Groeneveld.
Groeneveld has coached the Canadian-born British player for two years, but the two decided to split after the Wimbledon defeat. Rusedski was beaten by Vince Spadea, who had lost a record 21 straight matches until then.
"We have achieved some excellent results together but both feel that the time is right to move on," Rusedski said Wednesday. "This is a mutual decision and we shall remain the best of friends."
Groeneveld said he is confident Rusedski will play "the kind of tennis that has consistently kept Greg among the world's best."
Rusedski's best Grand Slam result was second place at the 1997 U.S. Open. He holds the record for the fastest serve, 149 mph.
---
OROFINO, Idaho (AP) - New England Patriots quarterback Drew Bledsoe has seen life behind bars.
"Now, I am definitely not excited about being in here," the New England Patriots' quarterback said Tuesday after touring the Idaho State Correctional Institution.
He was with his father, Mac, in an effort to improve the parenting skills of inmates and help them break the generational cycle of crime.
Mac Bledsoe is the president of the Drew Bledsoe Foundation, which has produced a video series called "Parenting With Dignity."
More than 200 inmates have completed the program at the prison in the past 15 months, education program manager Jim Rehder said.
Mac Bledsoe estimates up to a million parents have been educated through the 3-year-old program.
---
BLACKSBURG, Va. (AP) - Virginia Tech has hooked up with Wood Brothers Racing for a Winston Cup race.
Elliott Sadler's car will feature the Virginia Tech logo on the hood and a scowling Hokie Bird mascot on rear panels for the Chevrolet Monte Carlo 400 on Sept. 9 at Richmond International Raceway. Sadler's No. 21 Ford Taurus is usually sponsored by Citgo.
The school paid $5,000 for the deal and will receive 8 percent of all revenues for the sale of hats, T-shirts and other merchandise bearing the Hokie design.
The university expects to receive $75,000-$100,000 from those sales. The money will all go into Virginia Tech's general scholarship fund.
 Load-Date: July 13, 2000

 

End of Document
