

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
September 15, 1998, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 688 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Muhammad Ali traded a pair of red boxing gloves for a small gold dove Tuesday when he was honored as a United Nations Messenger of Peace.
The gloves are "a symbolism on Muhammad's part because everything is a struggle," Ali's wife Lonnie told U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan as she presented him with the autographed gloves inscribed "1960 Olympic Gold Medalist."
Ali's wife serves as a spokeswoman for the former heavyweight champion, who is afflicted with Parkinson's syndrome.
Annan pinned a small gold dove onto Ali's lapel and presented him with a videotape of Ali's 1979 speech before the United Nations in opposition to apartheid in South Africa.
Annan also gave Ali a citation noting that through the athlete's "contributions to sports and human rights, the message of peace, harmony and human dignity will resound through the nations."
Annan, who boxed as a young man, said he had no wish to spar with Ali.
"I don't want to take advantage," he said. "He's retired. I am still in action."
---
ATLANTA (AP) - Tiger Woods helped open a new youth golf course where a crime-ridden housing project once sat.
Wood and 10 young golfers hit ceremonial drives to open the first nine holes of the Charlie Yates Golf Course, which will be the home course for the East Lake Junior Golf Academy.
"I always say I want golf to look like America," said Woods, 22. "And you know what? We're here. Look at us. This is what it's all about."
The course is named for Charlie Yates, the 85-year-old former British Amateur champion who is president of the East Lake Golf Club.
The youth course and the East Lake Golf Club are located at what once was East Lake Meadows, a failed housing project in east Atlanta. Nine more holes will be added to the youth course later.
Architect Rees Jones designed the academy's course without a fee.
---
COLUMBUS, Ohio (AP) - Tammie Green, who is six months pregnant, doesn't mind limiting her playing time in the Solheim Cup.
"In fact, I think everybody else will be kind of hoping they only get to play 18 a day," said Green, whose restriction was ordered by team captain Judy Rankin. "This is a tough course to walk."
The three-day Solheim Cup begins Friday at the long and hilly Muirfield Village Golf Club in the suburb of Dublin, also the home of the Memorial Tournament on the PGA Tour.
The first two days of the Solheim are team events of 18 holes each morning and afternoon. The team captains decide how often they use a player.
All 12 members of each team play the singles matches on Sunday.
"My weight shifts a little bit now and then, depending on what side the baby's on. It's a little different, but I've been playing well," Green said.
Rankin doesn't expect the course to trouble the 38-year-old Green.
"She's one of those people who is very steady and solid, and I think that's going to play well at Muirfield Village," Rankin said.
---
DES MOINES, Iowa (AP) - A jury has convicted a former Iowa State cross country coach and his wife of filing false income tax statements.
Bill and Karen Bergan were convicted Monday of hiding about $ 220,000 in income from a family business from 1992 through 1994.
Judge Harold Vietor set sentencing for Dec. 18. The Bergans each face up to three years in prison and $ 250,000 in fines on each of the three accounts.
Assistant U.S. attorney Andrew Kahl declined to say whether the government would seek prison time for either of the two.
"My wife and I did as good of a job as we could, and when we found out these mistakes, we reported it to the Internal Revenue Service," Bergan testified last week.
They were charged with conspiring to file false tax returns and hiding about $ 360,000 in income generated from a family sports and video mail-order business.
Bergan retired as ISU coach in 1996 after leading the Cyclones to 10 Big Eight team titles and the 1989 and 1994 NCAA championships.
In his testimony, Bergan acknowledged income from the sale of licensing agreements as well as from the sale of videos and books had not been included in the couple's tax returns. But Bergan said it was the result of their unfamiliarity with bookkeeping practices and a faulty computer program.
 Load-Date: September 15, 1998

 

End of Document
