

Names In The Game shirts, Hansie Cronje, Rich Young
The Associated Press
July 30, 2000, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 739 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




TOKYO (AP) - Nigel Wilson hit a two-run home run as the Nippon Ham Fighters beat the Chiba Lotte Marines 8-1 in Japanese baseball.
Wilson, formerly with the Cleveland Indians, has 20 homers this season.
---
BLACKBURN, England (AP) - After launching a crackdown on bad behavior just four days ago, the Football Association's disciplinary chiefs found themselves poised to enforce the new rules Sunday following a 12-man brawl in Blackburn's exhibition game with Everton.
The committee is still awaiting referee Eddie Wolstenholme's report before deciding on its action.
Everton's Danish midfielder, Thomas Gravesen, was ejected for a wild tackle on Rovers captain Garry Flitcroft. Blackburn striker Nathan Blake escaped with a yellow card after allegedly throwing a punch at Gravesen.
---
BRUSSELS, Belgium (AP) - Dutch soccer hooligans clashed with security staff, police and rival fans after traveling to Belgium for preseason exhibition games, Belgian television reported Sunday. Four stadium ushers were injured and 16 fans detained by police.
The stewards were beaten by a group of over 20 Ajax Amsterdam supporters at a match with Standard Liege Saturday evening, officials said. Liege police commissioner Francois Lovenfosse said some hooligans wielded iron bars.
"I've never seen violence like that from the Dutch," Lovenfosse told RTL-TVI television.
---
MANCHESTER, England (AP) - Manchester United said Sunday that its players would get new high-tech, low-sweat jerseys to try to improve the team's performance.
The shirt, to be released Tuesday, provides the body with its own air conditioning system, putting the players ahead of the game, manufacturers say.
Overheating or cooling too quickly can hinder a player's performance, but the new shirt, developed by Umbro and Woolmark at a cost of $2.25 million, has a built-in "vapor management system," which helps maintain a stable temperature.
This allows the muscles of players to work at higher levels of intensity, according to the makers.
---
LONDON (AP) - Former South African cricket captain Hansie Cronje has hired a leading London public relations expert to help cash in on his fall from grace, a newspaper reported Sunday.
The Sunday Times said Max Clifford, who has represented Harrods boss Mohamed al-Fayed among others, confirmed he was promoting Cronje and was pursuing interview and book deals. He was also considering approaches from international scriptwriters to make a film about the disgraced cricketer.
Cronje's admission that he accepted illicit payments from gamblers sparked South Africa's biggest sports scandal and prompted the government to investigate cricket corruption.
In testimony before the inquiry, Cronje, once one of the country's most popular sports figures, confessed to "an unfortunate love of money" and admitted to taking about $100,000 in exchange for match information, but denied ever throwing a match.
Clifford told the Sunday Times his involvement with Cronje was "not about the money," but about setting the record straight.
"He's not a child molester or a murderer. All he did was rip off crooked bookmakers," Clifford said.
---
COLORADO SPRINGS, Colo. (AP) - Rich Young is hoping to repeat the major role he played in the 1998 Winter Olympics in Nagano, Japan - arbitrating legal matters, including accusations of drug use.
Young, a lawyer who specializes in doping, will be among 12 international arbitrators who will hear cases stemming from the Summer Games in Sydney.
During the Nagano Winter Games, Young was on a similar panel that reinstated the gold medal of Ross Rebagliati, a Canadian snowboarder who tested positive for marijuana and was stripped of his victory by the International Olympic Committee. The snowboarder said he inhaled secondhand smoke from other people.
"Our decision turned out to be pretty simple, and it had nothing to do with marijuana being good or bad, or whether you could test positive for it by inhaling secondhand smoke," Young said. "IOC rules at the time said they would punish for marijuana only if the international federation (of an athlete's sport) treated it as a doping offense, as a prohibited substance."
At the time, marijuana was not a prohibited substance under snowboard federation rules, so the arbitrators restored the medal.
Young has served on numerous anti-doping panels and task forces connected to the U.S. Olympic Committee, the IOC and several international federations governing various sports.
 Load-Date: July 31, 2000

 

End of Document
