

Names In The Game
February 4, 1996, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 724 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Severiano Ballesteros will be Europe's team captain when it defends the Ryder Cup next year, a newspaper report said Sunday.
But he'd rather play than watch.
Although the PGA European Tour hasn't officially announced that the Spaniard will replace Bernard Gallacher for the first Ryder Cup to take place in Spain, the Sunday Telegraph said Ballesteros had accepted an invitation to lead the team against the United States at Valderrama.
"Everyone has asked me to be captain," he was quoted as saying. "The Ryder Cup committee have talked to me about it. My problem is that I want everything.
"I want to be captain; I want to be player; I want to win. But I will accept the captaincy, it will be a very proud moment for me."
Since Arnold Palmer doubled up as player and captain of the U.S. team in 1963, the role of Ryder Cup captain has been as a non-player for both sides.
 
 ---
JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) - President Nelson Mandela, who has used sports break down racial barriers after apartheid ended, kissed the trophy after South Africa won the African Cup of Nations soccer tournament.
He was not alone in his glee. Political rivals displayed rare harmony. Newspaper headlines proclaimed the nation a champion and celebrants danced and drank into the early-morning hours of Sunday.
South Africa beat Tunisia 2-0 Saturday. The victory came in first African Cup open to South Africa since apartheid ended.
"They provided a model of unity and determination for all South Africans to emulate as we advance our all-important project of nation building," Mandela's African National Congress said in a statement of congratulations."
The rival Inkatha Freedom Party, still fighting with the ANC over control of the traditional Zulu homeland, also praised the team for making South Africans "proud of who they are."
"Sport is uniting South Africans of all persuasions," said the statement from the Zulu nationalist group.
Police reported several stabbings and shootings amid the celebrations throughout the country. Drunkenness and criminals taking advantage of the cover provided by the festivities were considered the main causes.
 
 ---
Chinese President Opens Asian Winter Games
HARBIN, China (AP) - Chinese President Jiang Zemin opened Asia's biggest Winter Games on Sunday night. They are the first held outside Japan.
There was extra applause from the some 6,000 spectators at the opening ceremony spectators for the delegations from Taiwan and Hong Kong, both of which have had political tensions with China.
Hong Kong, a British colony, returns to Chinese rule next year. It has been at odds with Beijing over moves to expand democracy in the territory in the meantime. Beijing considers Taiwan a renegade province, but accepts its participation in international sports events under the name "Chinese Taipei."
Competition for 43 gold medals begins Monday among more than 460 athletes from 16 nations and territories. A delegation from Macao also marched in the opening ceremony, but the Portuguese colony - due to return to Chinese rule in 1999 - has entered no athletes.
At Sunday's ceremonies, Kuwait's Sheikh Ahmad Al-Fahad Al-Sabah, president of the Olympic Council of Asia, thanked Harbin for preparing in just two years to take over the third Asian Winter Games.
The expansion of the games, he added, "demonstrates the rapid progress of Asian winter sports."
 
 ---
BIRMINGHAM, England (AP) - Olympic hurdles champion Sally Gunnell is happy that her comeback from a heel injury went well over the weekend even if it didn't result in victory.
Gunnell ran a half-second faster than she expected, but still finished second to Melanie Neef on Sunday as she continued her comeback at the British AAA indoor track championship.
After 18 months out of action because of an injury that required surgery, the Olympic 400 meters hurdles champion ran three times over 400 flat in two days competition at the National Indoor Arena and was delighted with her performance.
"I could not have asked for more," said Gunnell, whose 53.07 seconds in the final compared with 52.50 seconds by Neef. "It's given me just the confidence boost I need.
"I was worried I may be pushing myself by doing three rounds and that I could blow up. The foot was a bit sore after the first two rounds yesterday but I did not feel it at all in the final. I'm so glad to be back and in good shape."
 Load-Date: February 4, 1996

 

End of Document
