

Names In The Game
February 7, 1997, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 744 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: OXFORD, Ohio
Body




The Redskins of Miami University would become the Red Hawks if the school's president has his way.
James Garland recommended Red Hawks to the state school's board of trustees, selecting the name from among hundreds that were submitted.
Miami's board decided last fall to drop "Redskins," the nickname that has been used for more than 60 years. The Oklahoma-based Miami Tribe, for which the university is named, had asked the school to discontinue use of the name because some perceive it as a racial slur against American Indians.
A group of alumni sued Wednesday to try and stop the name change. But a judge refused the group's request for an immediate court order to stop the process.
"The red hawk, or red-tailed hawk, is a predator. It is a dominant species, it's been pointed out to me, unlike wimp birds like the cardinal," Garland said. "It has a reputation for being fierce, strong, soaring."
But the trustees were not convinced. Divided over the issue of whether to dump the politically unpopular Redskins, voted 6-2 to delay a decision until their next meeting on April 18.
---
JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) - Ernie Els of South Africa said Friday he would join the PGA European Tour this year, making him the only active golfer to belong to three professional tours at the same time.
Els, 27, already belongs to the PGA Tour in the United States and the South African PGA tour. The winner of the 1994 U.S. Open is the fourth-ranked player in the world.
"My international career started in Europe and I will be playing in more tournaments there this year," said Els, who is defending his title at the South African Open this week. "It is a great honor to be a member of three tours and as I see it, this is the start of a global trend in golf with worldwide television coverage of all the tours."
Els must play a minimum of 15 tournaments on the U.S. tour this year to keep his playing privileges and needs seven events on the European tour to keep his card there.
Ken Schofield, executive director of the PGA European Tour, called Els' addition to the circuit "superb news."
"We have followed his progress closely and see his membership as a major boost for European golf and for our players who respect him as a player and as a person," Schofield said.
---
GALVESTON, Texas (AP) - A Galveston entrepreneur has agreed to change the name of his restaurant to avoid a costly legal battle with Houston Rockets coach Rudy Tomjanovich.
Rudy Teichman agreed to drop the "T" from the name of his new restaurant, Rudy T & Paco, after Tomjanovich threatened to sue over trademark infringement.
Tomjanovich sells neckties and endorses beer and a Mexican fastfood restaurant chain under his registered trademark nickname, Rudy T.
The Galveston restaurant will now be known as Rudy & Paco, according to an agreement reached with U.S. District Judge Samuel Kent.
Teichman, a former Galveston city councilman and owner of a marine salvage company, reluctantly agreed to the name change.
"I can't say I'm happy about it, but I'm not going to spend $ 50-$ 60,000 to keep my name," he said, estimating what a court battle would cost him.
"I'm happy," said Sophie Tomjanovich, the coach's wife, who participated in the negotiations.
The Rockets coach will cover part of the cost of changing the name of the restaurant, which opened New Year's Eve.
---
LONDON (AP) - Kevin Keegan has finally revealed what led him to quit as manager of Premier League club Newcastle - not a humiliating defeat, but a spectacular victory.
In his first in-depth interview since his surprise resignation a month ago, Keegan told the Sun newspaper that Newcastle's 7-1 win over Tottenham on Dec. 28 convincved him it was time to get out.
"It was the expression on the face of Tottenham manager Gerry Francis, a man I like and respect a great deal," he said. "The elation of winning suddenly meant nothing when I looked at him and thought, 'Oh no, how must he be feeling inside?'
"This was the man I succeeded as captain of the England team, a terrific manager who didn't deserve what he had to contend with that afternoon.
"I wanted to go up and give him a cuddle. I went straight home. And I knew that was it."
Keegan said the Tottenham result was not the only reason for hs decision to quit.
"But what that day did was confirm the feeling that had been growing inside me for some time," he said. "I discovered in five years with Newcastle that the elation of winning is never as great as the disappointment of losing."
 Load-Date: February 7, 1997

 

End of Document
