

Names In The Game Award Finalists, Mike Ditka, Anna Kournikova, Chicago Marathoners
The Associated Press
May 1, 2000, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 794 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




BLOOMINGTON, Ind. (AP) - The Duany family has a new home, thanks to Habitat for Humanity and the Boy Scouts.
The Duanys fled Sudan shortly before civil war broke out in that country in 1983. They lived in London for two years before Wal Duany, a former prime minister of Sudan, came to Indiana to finish his postgraduate studies at Indiana University.
Eldest son Duany Duany played on Wisconsin's NCAA Final Four team this year. Another son and two daughters also played Division I basketball this season.
"When we left Sudan, we didn't know where we were going," their mother, Julia Duany, said Sunday after taking possession of the new home. "We came to Bloomington intending to stay two years until things calmed down in Sudan and then we'd go back. We are still on the road, but standing on this porch today, I think my journey is becoming shorter."
More than 200 Scouts and their families helped build the three-bedroom house since last November.
---
WEST LAFAYETTE, Ind. (AP) - Mike Turner, a four-time Big Ten triple jump champion, will compete one more time at Purdue, more than a year after an accident almost cost him his right leg.
Turner, who underwent eight operations, will take part in a special exhibition 400-meter run Sunday against team captains from other Purdue sports, including football quarterback Drew Brees.
"During my recovery, many felt I would lose my leg," Turner said. "I am glad that I still have my limb and can get into that competitive mode again. I am ready to feel that rush that athletes feel before every event."
Turner, who holds the Purdue triple jump record of 53 feet, 9 3/4 inches, injured his leg during practice April 1, 1999.
As he left the takeoff board, he fell face-first toward the sand. In bringing down his right foot, the knee hyperextended, he tore ligaments and severed an artery and one of the main nerves leading from the knee.
Impaired circulation caused him to lose most of the muscle on the outside of his leg. He now wears a brace on the leg.
---
ST. PETERSBURG, Fla. (AP) - On Father's Day, a lucky minor league baseball fan will give dad a big surprise, batting practice against Hall of Fame pitcher Nolan Ryan.
Thanks to a "Why Dad is My Hero" essay contest, the winner will receive a visit from contest officials on June 18, as well as a call from Ryan. He will be invited to take batting practice against the strikeout king and be Ryan's guest at a Round Rock Express game. Ryan is a part-owner of the minor league team.
---
TORONTO (AP) - Pavel Bure of the Florida Panthers, Jaromir Jagr of the Pittsburgh Penguins and Chris Pronger of the St. Louis Blues are finalists for the Lester B. Pearson Award.
The award is given by the NHL Players Association to the outstanding player during the regular season as voted by the players. The award will be presented at the Hockey Hall of Fame on June 16.
Bure led the NHL in goals with 58 and finished with 94 points, only two behind Jagr, the league leader. Jagr, last year's Pearson winner, had 42 goals and 54 assists, despite missing 19 games with injuries, in winning his third straight scoring title.
Pronger is seeking to become the first defenseman to win the award since Bobby Orr of the Boston Bruins in 1975.
---
SOUTH BEND, Ind. (AP) - Mike Ditka still knows how to draw a crowd.
The fired New Orleans Saints coach will speak at the May 25 KeyBank Gridiron Legends Luncheon, which was moved Monday from the College Football Hall of Fame to the Century Center because of an expected increase in attendance.
The Gridiron Legends series normally is held at the Hall of Fame, and would accommodate about 250 people. The Convention Hall will seat up to 1,000. As of Monday, more than 500 tickets had been sold.
Ditka, a member of the College Hall of Fame since 1986, was fired by the Saints after three years as coach. In February, he was hired by CBS-TV as an analyst for "The NFL Today."
---
MAHWAH, N.J. (AP) - Anna Kournikova has committed to play in the A&P Tennis Classic for a second straight year. The tournament begins July 16.
The 18-year-old Russian lost in the first round to Amanda Coetzer last year, after which she was treated for severe dehydration. In 1998, she withdrew because of a thumb injury.
Kournikova is ranked 14th but has not yet won a tournament on the WTA Tour.
---
CHICAGO (AP) - Libbie Hickman, the top-ranked American women's distance runner in 1999, and No. 3 Kristy Johnson intend to run in the Chicago Marathon on Oct. 22.
They will be joined by four other top women distance runners - Susannah Beck, Liz Wilson, Linda Somers-Smith and Ann Schaefers-Coles.
The group represents five of the top eight finishers at the 2000 women's U.S. Olympic marathon trials. Johnston was second, Beck fourth, Wilson fifth, Schaefers-Coles sixth and Hickman eighth.
 Load-Date: May 2, 2000

 

End of Document
