

Names In The Game
August 29, 1996, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 821 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Brooke Shields says she and Andre Agassi will be married in the near future.
"We haven't set a date, but we will not be one of those perpetually engaged couples," Shields said in an interview for Sunday's Parade magazine.
Shields is a fixture at her fiancee's matches - although that could change due to her other recent commitment, a new NBC television series, "Suddenly Susan."
 
 LINCOLN, Neb. (AP) - Former Nebraska linebacker Trev Alberts hopes to put his beloved Cornhuskers on the racing circuit.
Alberts plans to sponsor two stock cars for the 1997 NASCAR Winston Cup racing season. The cars will be painted in Nebraska red.
"I guess the longer I've been out of the university, the more I've realized how much it has given to me and my future," said Alberts, now is a linebacker for the Indianapolis Colts.
Nebraska athletic director Bill Byrne said the university will benefit from proceeds generated by the sale of racing merchandise. He said licensed NASCAR products generate more revenue than professional baseball or football items.
The proceeds will be divided between academic scholarships and the athletic department, said chancellor James Moeser.
 
 HARARE, Zimbabwe (AP) - Zimbabwean goalkeeper Bruce Grobbelaar, one of three players facing match-fixing allegations in England, will coach the national soccer team for its next two international matches.
The former Liverpool and Southampton goalkeeper accepted a temporary coaching contract for matches against Tanzania on Sept. 29 and Sudan on Oct. 5, Zimbabwe Football Association spokesman Vincent Pamire said Thursday.
Grobbelaar, 38, released by Southampton in May, recently signed with the English Second Division team Plymouth Argyle.
Grobbelaar, the only white player on Zimbabwe's national team for several years, has retained the fierce loyalty of black players and fans throughout the match-fixing controversy.
---
DENVER (AP) - Cincinnati Reds owner Marge Schott thinks the federal government ought to be more concerned about teen drug abuse than teen smoking.
In an interview broadcast on KOA radio Thursday, Schott said authorities should "concentrate on crack, dope, knives and guns."
"If I had a child, not that you want kids to smoke, I think rather than drugs I'd rather see them smoke," she said. "We smoked a peace pipe with the Indians, right?"
Schott was in Denver Wednesday to examine Coors Field as a possible model for a new stadium in Cincinnati.
In June, Schott agreed to baseball's mandate that she give up day-to-day control of the team for 2 years.
She said her Denver stadium visit was the first she had made out of Cincinnati in a long time.
"We're supposed to be building a new stadium and it's good to see what other people have done," she said. "You have to get ideas."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Movie Magic is coming to New York.
An 11-screen Magic Johnson Theater will anchor an $ 80 million retail and entertainment complex in the Jamaica section - the first movie theater in the predominantly black neighborhood in more than 50 years, city officials announced Thursday.
"I am excited about bringing the theaters to Queens," said Johnson, the retired Los Angeles Lakers star. "This is an under-served area that we feel has great potential for success."
Johnson founded his company, a partnership with Sony Retail Entertainment, to develop first-run movie theaters in minority neighborhoods. Last year, he opened his first theater in the Crenshaw section of Los Angeles; it has since become one of the highest-grossing Sony theaters in the country.
Johnson plans to open additional theaters in Atlanta and Houston.
---
SARATOGA SPRINGS, N.Y. (AP) - Equine artist Jenness Cortez is suing representatives of the owner of Cigar over the right to depict the thoroughbred.
"Allen Paulson has declared war on artists," Cortez said at a news conference Thursday.
Cortez is joined in the suit by artist Fred Stone and Peter Canzone, an art dealer. Their lawsuit, filed in federal district court in Albany, seeks $ 1 million in punitive damages.
Curtis Management Group, hired by Paulson to manage the marketing and licensing rights to Cigar, filed a lawsuit against Cortez in Indiana earlier this month. CMG claims that Paulson has the right to control any artistic images of the thoroughbred, currently the sport's biggest draw.
Cortez said CMG is waging a campaign of threats and intimidation against artists who depict Cigar.
"War has been declared on the right to free expression," Cortez said at Empire State College in Saratoga Springs, where a collection of her work wass on display down the street from Saratoga Race Course.
In July, a federal judge dismissed most of the claims brought against Cortez last year by the New York Racing Association, the non-profit owner and operator of Saratoga and two New York City race tracks. The trademark infringement lawsuit against Cortez claimed she owed NYRA royalties from sales of paintings depicting its tracks and horses.
 Load-Date: August 29, 1996

 

End of Document
