

Names in the News
June 27, 1997, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 754 words
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




"The Double" continues to bring trouble for John Travolta.
The actor asked a judge to dismiss a breach of contract lawsuit brought by two movie companies when he dropped out of the Roman Polanski film "The Double." Superior Court Judge Kurt Lewin didn't immediately rule Thursday, but left little doubt how he would rule.
"This trial, as far as I'm concerned, is going forward on July 14 and the chips will fall where they may," Lewin said at a hearing.
Travolta had replaced Anthony Hopkins in the starring role last year.
Liteoffer Ltd. and Mandalay Entertainment sued Travolta, claiming he demanded screenplay rewrites without Polanski's knowledge.
Travolta's lawyer, Bert Fields, said the actor didn't sign a contract and had only agreed to a $ 17 million salary with screenplay approval.
"The Double" was never was made. Polanski had tried unsuccessfully to get Sean Penn, Robert De Niro or Al Pacino to step in for Travolta.
---
ROANOKE, Va. (AP) - As American Red Cross president, Elizabeth Dole has stood with bombing victims outside the Oklahoma City federal building and stepped over bodies at a Rwandan refugee camp.
But what choked her up Thursday was describing a staff member's visit with a Cambodian woman who lost her legs in a land mine explosion.
"For 15 years, this woman had been pulling herself along with just her arms," Mrs. Dole said. "When she sat in that wheelchair, she told us, 'For the first time, I can see my children at their level."'
"Isn't that incredible?" Mrs. Dole said, her voice cracking as she told the story during a chapter meeting here.
Mrs. Dole is raising money to help land mine victims, remove deployed land mines and ban their future use.
The Red Cross estimated that 120 million unexploded land mines remain buried in more than 70 countries. The agency helps victims by providing them with prosthetic devices, wheelchairs and canes.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - "Politically Incorrect" or not, ABC is bringing its late-night talk show with Bill Maher to prime time next month.
A half-hour live edition of the show will air beginning at 10 p.m., followed by another half hour of highlights from past shows, the network said Thursday. It will air each Thursday from July 10 through July 31.
"Politically Incorrect" also will continue to air in its regular time slot after "Nightline."
"We think that Bill and 'Politically Incorrect' are two of the best-kept secrets on television, and this is a way to introduce both his unique brand of humor and the show's topical edge to a much broader audience," ABC Entertainment President Jamie Tarses said.
The prime-time version of "Politically Incorrect" will compete with "ER" on NBC. While that drama is one of television's top-rated shows, it loses much of its audience with repeat episodes.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - FloJo muscled in on the "Body by Jake" and came away the winner.
Florence Griffith Joyner was being nudged off the President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports to make room for the appointment of Jake Steinfeld. But the decorated Olympic sprinter would have none of that.
She pleaded with President Clinton and got the decision reversed Thursday.
"The energy and enthusiasm that FloJo showed in wanting to remain a member is compelling enough for her to remain," White House spokesman Mike McCurry said.
Steinfeld, a celebrity fitness trainer, donated $ 100,000 to the Democratic National Committee last fall.
White House officials said Steinfeld would wait until someone else leaves the 20-member council on which Griffith Joyner is co-chair.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Say Walter Matthau and you think of the buddy movies "The Odd Couple" and "Grumpy Old Men." But it's Matthau's family life that's getting the accolades.
The Academy Award-winning actor, his wife and son will receive the American Film Institute Associates' new Platinum Circle Award, honoring an entire family's contributions to the arts.
"We believe this kind of tribute has been missing in the creative community and that it will quickly grow to become a highly successful annual event," said Helene Tobias, president of the organization.
Matthau, 76, has appeared in 60 movies and 23 plays in a career spanning more than half a century. His latest film, "Out to Sea," is to be released later this year.
Matthau wife, Carol, wrote "The Secret in the Daisy" in 1960 and "Among the Porcupines" last year. His 32-year-old son Charles directed and produced "The Grass Harp," starring Jack Lemmon, Roddy McDowell and Sissy Spacek.
Ann-Margaret will present the award to the Matthaus on Sept. 18.
 Load-Date: June 27, 1997

 

End of Document
