

Names In The Game Susan O'Neill, Tom Donahoe, Mark James, Jim Fanning, George Best.
The Associated Press
March 13, 2000, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 735 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




CAPE TOWN, South Africa (AP) - Nelson Mandela is strongly supporting South Africa's bid to play host to the 2006 soccer World Cup.
Representatives from world soccer's governing body, FIFA, are touring the country to assess the bid. The former president told the delegates Monday he was wholeheartedly behind the bid.
"Mr. Mandela told them that hosting the event would be a focal point for the youth of this country," South African sports minister Ngconde Balfour said. "It would serve to unify the people of South Africa in a way which is impossible to overstate."
FIFA already has inspected the other candidates - England, Germany, Morocco and Brazil. The bid winner will be announced in July.
 
---
ATLANTA (AP) - Cincinnati's Kenyon Martin and Tennessee's Tamika Catchings have been selected the Naismith College Basketball Players of the Year.
The Atlanta Tipoff Club also chose Stanford's Mike Montgomery and Connecticut women's coach Geno Auriemma as Naismith Coaches of the Year.
Martin averaged 19.5 points and 10.0 rebounds before breaking a leg in the Conference USA tournament last week. Catchings averaged 15.5 points, 7.5 rebounds, 2.7 assists and 2.6 steals in leading Tennessee to its third straight Southeastern Conference women's title.
Montgomery guided Stanford to a 25-2 record, its sixth consecutive 20-victory season. Auriemma has a 387-95 record in 15 season at UConn.
 
---
SYDNEY, Australia (AP) - Swimmer Susan O'Neill, seeking to become Australia's first female International Olympic Committee member, was nominated Monday for a seat on the IOC's Athletes' Commission.
Eight berths on the IOC commission will be up for grabs at the Sydney Olympics, where the 10,200 competing athletes are eligible to vote.
O'Neill won the 200-meter butterfly at Atlanta.
As part of the reform process agreed late last year in the wake of the Salt Lake City scandal, the IOC voted to include 15 active athletes as members.
The IOC Athletes' Commission includes eight elected summer sports athletes, four from the winter sports and seven appointed by IOC president Juan Antonio Samaranch.
 
---
PITTSBURGH (AP) - Tom Donahoe will not work temporarily for the Miami Dolphins as a draft consultant because the Pittsburgh Steelers apparently are concerned he might pass on information gathered for them.
Donahoe, who is not employed by any NFL team, has asked the league to clarify what work he can do while still under contract to the Steelers.
Donahoe resigned under pressure as the Steelers' director of football operations Jan. 13, but the Steelers are paying his estimated $450,000 salary this year.
Donahoe left following a 6-10 season and disagreements with coach Bill Cowher over personnel matters. At the end of the season, both Donahoe and Cowher offered their resignations. Cowher kept his job.
After leaving the Steelers, Donahoe rejected an offer to head the Dolphins' player personnel department, a job that would have paid him less than he made in Pittsburgh. But he agreed to work with the Dolphins as a draft consultant during the next month.
---
LONDON (AP) - Former European Ryder Cup captain Mark James has rejected a chance to play in the inaugural Seve Ballesteros Trophy next month in England.
The Ryder Cup-like match pits a British and Irish team against the top European players on April 14-16 at the Sunningdale Golf Club for a purse of $2.4 million.
James, who won't begin his season until two weeks after the Ballesteros Trophy, turned down a place on Colin Montgomerie's 10-man Britain and Ireland team.
---
ST. MARY'S, Ontario (AP) - Former Montreal Expos general manager Jim Fanning will be inducted into the Canadian Baseball Hall of Fame.
Fanning, who guided the Expos to their only playoff appearance in 1981, will be inducted June 24.
In 25 years with Montreal, Fanning also was vice president of scouting and development programs and signed players such as Larry Walker, Andres Galarraga and Randy Johnson.
---
LONDON (AP) - Former soccer star George Best's condition is improving and he hopes to be released from a hospital Thursday.
The former Manchester United player, a heavy drinker, was hospitalized Wednesday with a liver condition.
On Sunday, Best watched sports on television from his bed.
"He's been sitting up and chatting," his personal assistant, Phil Hughes, said. "He's looking and feeling a lot better."
Best's wife, Alex, visited him over the weekend and said, he was "doing very well."
 Load-Date: March 14, 2000

 

End of Document
