

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
September 7, 1998, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 863 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: DEEP RIVER, Conn.
Body




Paul Hopkins vividly recalls a pitch he threw to Babe Ruth 71 years ago.
It was a 3-2 curve ball with the bases loaded. Ruth hit it for a home run at Yankee Stadium in front of about 20,000 fans Sept. 29, 1927.
It was Ruth's 59th homer of the season, tying the home run record he had set in 1921.
Hopkins was pitching for the Washington Senators and Ruth was with the New York Yankees.
The 94-year-old Hopkins watched Roger Maris top Ruth's record in 1961 and now is watching Mark McGwire, who has tied Maris' mark of 61.
Hopkins recalls that after the game, Hopkins wanted Ruth to sign a baseball, but New York manager Miller Huggins wouldn't let him into the Yankees clubhouse.
Hopkins eventually got a clubhouse boy to get the autograph for him. He keeps baseball memorabilia at his home, including a ball marked "pitched … to Babe Ruth," encased in plastic, in front of a commemorative plate of Ruth hitting a homer.
 
LONDON (AP) - Tiger Woods will join Mark O'Meara, Vijay Singh and Ernie Els in the field for next month's World Match Play Championship.
Woods, who will partner O'Meara on the U.S. team at the Dunhill Cup at St. Andrew's the previous week, was confirmed as a starter Monday for the World Match Play.
The quartet will headline an elite field of 12 for the four-day event Oct. 15-18 at Wentworth.
Woods, O'Meara, winner of the British Open and Masters, and Singh, defending World Match Play champion and winner of the PGA, are expected to be among the top four seeds who qualify automatically into the second round of the tournament.
Els is a three-time World Match Play champion who was beaten by Singh in last year's final.
 
WINDHOEK, Namibia (AP) - Insulted by his prime minister's remarks, Namibian Frankie Fredericks has become the latest world-class sprinter to withdraw from the Commonwealth Games.
Fredericks said a comparison that Prime Minister Hage Geingob drew between the athlete and boxer Harry Simon had "dulled" his desire to represent Namibia at the Games, which begin Wednesday in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
Geingob was quoted at a WBO championship fight last month in Johannesburg, South Africa, as saying that Simon had outclassed Fredericks by winning the super welterweight title.
"Frank is a world-class sprinter, but he doesn't have a gold from Olympics yet," Geingob said. "By way of being Namibian heroes, they will rank about the same, but Harry is a world champion."
Geingob stood by his remarks in a statement released Monday.
Fredericks, the silver medalist in the 100 and 200 meters in the past two Olympics, was Namibia's only hope for a Commonwealth medal. He is the defending champion in the 200.
"The unfair comparison drawn between myself and Harry Simon has come as a great disappointment," Fredericks' statement said. "When … after 10 years of dedicated training and tiring travel worldwide, my achievements are linked solely to not winning gold at the Olympic Games, I am compelled to take stock of my situation."
Canada's Donovan Bailey, the Olympic 100-meter champion and world record-holder, countryman Bruny Surin and Trinidad's Ato Boldon, the world 200 champion, previously said they would not participate.
 
MILTON KEYNES, England (AP) - Formula One driver Johnny Herbert is leaving Sauber to team with British-based Stewart-Ford starting next season.
The Briton has agreed to a two-year deal with Stewart-Ford, team boss Jackie Stewart said Monday.
"As a British team, it's nice for us to have a British driver who has so much experience," Stewart said.
Herbert, a veteran of 126 Grand Prix races, made his Formula One debut with Benetton Ford in 1989 and moved to Tyrrell-Cosworth later in the season. He also drove for Lotus and Ligier before joining Sauber in 1996.
His most successful season was in 1995, when he won the British and Italian Grand Prix and finished third in Japan en route to claiming fourth place in the World Drivers' Championship.
 
NEW YORK (AP) - While NBA players await a decision on the lockout, they are participating in exhibition games.
One game to be held Wednesday night at Madison Square Garden is the New York All-Star Classic, matching the New York All-Stars against the NBA All-Stars.
The New York team will include Stephon Marbury, Jayson Williams, Mark Jackson, Kenny Anderson, Charles Oakley, Anthony Mason, Sam Cassell, Kerry Kittles, Chris Gatling, Malik Sealy and Felipe Lopez.
The NBA All-Stars will be comprised of Kevin Garnett, Antonio McDyess, Vin Baker, Steve Smith, Jerry Stackhouse, Antonio Davis, Dale Davis, Jalen Rose, Theo Ratliff, Jerome Willians and Vince Carter.
The coaches will be Hall of Famers - Willis Reed for the New York team and Dave DeBusschere for the NBA All-Stars.
The game will benefit Wheelchair Charities, Inc.
 
TAMPA, Fla. (AP) - Tampa Bay Buccaneers linebacker Hardy Nickerson is donating $ 25,000 to Seminole Presbyterian School to start a scholar-athlete scholarship program for black students.
Nickerson will present the school with the check Tuesday.
The program will provide for full academic tuition and is available for students in grades 9-12. The scholarships are designed for financially disadvantaged students who desire to play sports while excelling academically.
 Load-Date: September 7, 1998

 

End of Document
