

Names in the News
The Associated Press
August 9, 1999, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 644 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Dennis Rodman doesn't appear to be too happy with his new wrestling gig.
The former basketball bad boy, who was let go by the Los Angeles Lakers, signed a one-year contract in June with World Championship Wrestling.
"It's money; that's all I'll say," Rodman told TV Guide in its August 8 issue. The tattooed athlete wondered why he had to wrestle at all.
"I just wanna show up," he told the magazine.
The WCW is putting Rodman in the ring with star wrestlers Hollywood Hogan and Sting while touring around the country for the next five weeks.
While still playing basketball, Rodman entered the wrestling ring for several pay-per-view shows in 1997 and '98.
---
MIAMI BEACH, Fla. (AP) - The palatial villa that was home to fashion designer Gianni Versace is on the market.
The asking price for the 12-bedroom, 13 bath mansion in Miami's trendy South Beach is $ 25 million.
Survivors of the slain fashion mogul had owned the 13,250 square-foot Mediterranean-style palazzo across from the Atlantic Ocean since Andrew Cunanan shot Versace to death at the house's gate two years ago.
"It's a fantastic residence, but the family focus has shifted and the South Beach house is underutilized," Versace family spokesman Lou Colasuonno said Friday.
"The family is based in Milan, and when they are in the United States, most of the time is spent in New York," he said. "That's why they are selling."
The villa was filled with ornate antiques and exotic art, including paintings of scenes from ancient Greece and the busts of historical figures from Italian dictator Benito Mussolini to Chinese sage Confucius. Whether the furniture and art will be sold with the home wasn't disclosed.
---
MILWAUKEE (AP) - Captain Panaka took time out from fighting the Phantom Menace to sign autographs at the 1999 Gen Con Game Fair, a convention for science fiction and fantasy game fans.
Captain Panaka actually is Hugh Quarshie, who played the head of Naboo's Royal Security Forces in the George Lucas film "Star Wars: Episode One - The Phantom Menace."
The character had to protect Queen Amidala from the likes of such villains as Darth Maul and Rune Haako in the film. Quarshie said he enjoyed being "part of somebody's dreamscape."
Born in Ghana but raised in England, Quarshie acted in the Royal Shakespeare Company, along with television and movies, before he signed on with the 'Star Wars' prequel.
"You can say I was quite pleased," Quarshie said Sunday. "I was elated, of course. It's a kind of a rare opportunity."
Quarshie called the Star Wars movies "a modern legend" that has entered into the subconscious of millions of people. He said he's not surprised by all the hype.
"There's been this long wait for the next 'Star Wars,"' Quarshie said. "It's not quite on the level of the second coming - I suppose it is for some people."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Foul-mouthed, opinionated, too shocking for prime time - Lenny Bruce has been called them all.
Now an exhibit at the Museum of Television and Radio is honoring the comedian as one of the foremost personalities and provocateurs of the 20th century.
"Two Five Letter Words: Lenny Bruce" features the complete collection of the comedian's television appearances. There's his vaudeville act on "Arthur Godfrey and Friends" in 1949; his constitutional rights activism on the Steve Allen show; and his odd clowning on Canada's "Close Up!" in 1964.
"The liberal press wrote that Bruce represented a new approach to comedy, but the conservative press wrote him off as a waste of time," said writer Nat Hentoff, whose interview with Bruce is included in the exhibit.
The comic was hounded by authorities for his political and social satire and his use of obscenity.
"He wanted to push the rules but he was clearly aware of his limits, and that didn't necessarily stop him," Robert Batscha, president of the museum, said Saturday.
The exhibit continues until Oct. 3.
 Load-Date: August 9, 1999

 

End of Document
