

Names in the News
The Associated Press
July 30, 1998, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 778 words
Dateline: CHICAGO
Body




The Rev. Jesse Jackson has been released from a hospital where was treated for a severe bronchial asthma attack that left him on the verge of respiratory failure.
"I came here to get recharged," Jackson said Wednesday at Doctors Hospital of Hyde Park. He conceded that he has agreed to cut back on his activities.
Dr. Elsie Walker, an internist and president of the hospital's medical staff, said Jackson, 56, was close to respiratory failure when he arrived at the hospital Saturday night. She said Jackson's lungs were able to take in only 60 percent of the normal levels of oxygen when he came to the emergency room.
Jackson said he had been feeling ill before a four-day trip to Liberia as U.S. special envoy to Africa and was feeling worse when he returned July 21.
Jackson, a two-time presidential candidate, said he got encouraging telephone messages from many people, including President Clinton, Vice President Al Gore, Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley and several African heads of state.
---
ATLANTA (AP) - Those who remember John Glenn's trip into space in 1962 will have a familiar voice to guide them when the Ohio Senator returns to space in October.
Walter Cronkite will be in the studio to help cover the event in a reunion of sorts. Cronkite was in the anchor's chair for CBS when Glenn became the first American to orbit the Earth 36 years ago.
Cronkite, 81, will join CNN reporter John Holliman at Kennedy Space Center on Oct. 29 as the 77-year-old Glenn, one of the seven original Mercury astronauts, begins a nine-day mission aboard the space shuttle as the central subject in an aging study.
"I'm thrilled at the opportunity to be live again," Cronkite said. "It will carry me back about as far as it carries Glenn back."
Cronkite, who retired as CBS anchor in 1981, covered the manned space program from its 1961 inception, when the late Alan Shepard became the first American in space. He anchored newscasts of every Mercury, Gemini and Apollo mission when networks provided minute-by-minute coverage of the first walk in space, the first trip around the moon and the first moon landing.
"John Glenn and I are old friends," Cronkite said. "I told him if they wanted to test an older guy in space, I ought to go. Or I could go with him, play canasta up there."
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Inc. has tightened its grip on the James Bond film franchise.
A preliminary injunction ordering Sony Entertainment Corp. to halt work on its own 007 thriller was signed Wednesday by U.S. District Judge Edward Rafeedie. It prohibits Sony from developing the film until MGM's copyright infringement lawsuit is resolved.
The case is scheduled to go to trial Dec. 15.
"We're going to prove Sony is a corporate predator," MGM attorney Pierce O'Donnell said. "We're going to seek millions upon millions of dollars in damages."
MGM showed that it owns U.S. film and television rights for all Bond novels written by Ian Fleming, Rafeedie wrote. The injunction bars Sony from working on a Bond film or seeking agreements with Hollywood talent or advertisers for a Bond movie.
Sony attorney David Steuber said he likely would appeal the decision. He said it was possible that work could go on outside the United States.
---
EDGARTOWN, Mass. (AP) - There is insufficient evidence for a Martha's Vineyard resident to bring an assault and battery charge against James Belushi, a clerk magistrate ruled.
However, the magistrate, Thomas Teller, ruled Wednesday that a complaint of criminal trespassing could be brought against Franz Guest III over a June 28 incident on a Chilmark beach.
Police said Belushi, a summer resident of the Vineyard, asked Guest to leave the beach, saying he was walking on private property.
But Guest, a a year-round resident, claimed he was in the intertidal zone, a public area between high- and low-tide marks. He told police Belushi shoved him and said mockingly, "look at that, he assaulted me."
Guest filed an assault and battery complaint and Belushi countered with the trespassing complaint. Both men are to return to court Aug. 5.
---
MIAMI BEACH, Fla. (AP) - More than two decades after Barry, Robin and Maurice Gibb gave disco fans the fever, the Bee Gees are stayin' alive for "One Night Only."
The brothers announced the release of their new live album Wednesday, commemorating 30 years of hits. "One Night Only," recorded at their only U.S. concert last year, is due in stores Sept. 7.
"We have to make music we love," Robin Gibb said. "If you do something you love other people might latch on to it."
The brothers were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1997. Their last album, "Still Waters," sold more than 4 million copies worldwide.
 Load-Date: July 30, 1998

 

End of Document
