

Names In The Game
June 24, 1997, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 643 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: DONCASTER, England
Body



Prince Naseem escapes car crash without injury
 World featherweight champion Prince Naseem Hamed walked away uninjured but the $ 163,000 Ferrari sports car he was test driving reportedly was wrecked early Tuesday.
"A Ferrari hit a traffic island," said a spokeswoman for South Yorkshire police."We are treating this like any other non-injury crash."
Moments after the accident, which happened at about 1 a.m., Hamed's bodyguards, driving a Vauxhall Nova, crashed into a miniubus in the same traffic circle.
No one was hurt in that crash.
Hamed, who is scheduled to defend his WBO and IBF world featherweight titles at London's Wembley Arena on July 19, had been back on the road only for six weeks after serving a 12-month ban for speeding.
The Ferrari F355 was on loan from a car dealer.
Hamed owns a fleet of luxury cars which includes a Porsche and a $ 326,000 Aston Martin.
---
PAWLEYS ISLAND, S.C. (AP) - The Grand Strand, well known for its alligators, is getting a Shark.
Greg Norman was chosen Tuesday as the designer for a private golf course to be built at Litchfield Beach. The Reserve Golf Club will be Norman's first course in the Carolinas.
The Australian golfer, who lives in Florida, will visit the area next month to start design work. The course, to be built on an 800-acre undeveloped tract in Willbrook Plantation, will have to work around several protected wetlands.
Besides the 18-hole course, the club will feature a practice facility and a large clubhouse.
The course is expected to open in the fall of 1998.
Norman designed the Sugarloaf Country Club in Atlanta, which was the site of this year's BellSouth Classic.
---
KAMPALA, Uganda (AP) - The only Ugandan athlete ever to win a gold medal at the Olympics will be given a state funeral with the national flag flying at half staff later this week.
John Akii-Bua, who set a world record in the 400 meters hurdles at the 1972 Munich Games, died Friday at Mulago hospital. He was 47. The cause of death was not announced. A widower, Akii-Bua is survived by 11 children.
Akii-Bua's time of 47.87 seconds was the first below 48 seconds and remains an African record.
Akii-Bua did not defend his title at the 1976 Montreal Olympics because of a boycott by African nations to protest the presence of South Africa, which then had a racial segregation policy of apartheid.
Akii-Bua fled Uganda to escape violence unleashed by Idi Amin Dada in late 1972 but returned after the dictator's ouster in 1979 and joined the police force.
On Tuesday, Akii-Bua's body lay in state in the parliament building for viewing by members of public, politicians and diplomats.
The body will taken to his home village, Abako, for the funeral and burial Thursday.
---
ST. LOUIS (AP) - The Sporting News picked Denver as this year's top sports city in North America.
The publication said its editors agonized for several months, conducting an exhaustive study of every U.S. and Canadian city with a major league or NCAA Division I team.
Denver took first place on the basis of the success and fan support for the NHL Avalanche, baseball's Rockies, the NFL's Broncos and the NBA's Nuggets.
A close second and third were Dallas-Fort Worth and Miami.
---
CAGLIARI, Sardinia (AP) - Uruguayan soccer stars Daniel Fonseca, Enzo Francescoli and Jose Herrera were acquitted Tuesday in a tax evasion trial also involving the president of their former Italian club, Cagliari.
The three Uruguayan players, for whom the prosecution had asked four months in jail were not present when the court decisions were announced, the Italian news agency AGI reported.
Fonseca and Herrera, who joined Cagliari in the early 90s, still play in Italy with AS Roma and Atalanta, respectively. Francescoli plays for River Plate of Buenos Aires.
The three Uruguayans, and Cagliari president Massimo Cellino, had been charged in a tax evasion scheme involving $ 7 million.
 Load-Date: June 24, 1997

 

End of Document
