

Names In The Game
April 1, 1996, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 527 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: PERUGIA, Italy
Body




Gianfranco Rosi says not only in he going to fight again, now that his drug-related suspension was overturned, he vows he is going to regain his WBO super welterweight title.
"I'm certain that WBO will give me the chance to challenge champion Bronco Mc Kart," Rosi said. "My final goal is to fight Terry Norris for the title unification."
Norris holds the WBC and IBF super-welterweight titles.
Rosi, 38, said he kept in shape by training every day since his suspension by the Italian boxing federation last spring.
Rosi was stripped of his title and suspended for two years for testing positive for a banned substance after successfully defending his WBO title against Vernon Phillips last May 17.
Italy's highest court overturned Rosi's suspension on the grounds the drug taken by the Italian fighter on a doctor advice was not intended to enhance his performance but to protect his health.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Shaquille O'Neal has been on countless magazine covers, but the latest may be a first.
The Orlando Magic star is the on the cover of Motorboating & Sailing, behind the wheel of his new 23-foot Regal Venture motorboat.
Shaq said what he likes best about the boat is its 56-mph top speed.
"I like to go fast," he said.
---
LONDON (AP) - The only marathon runner to twice get inside 2 hours, 8 minutes will not compete at this summer's Olympics in Atlanta.
Vincent Rousseau said Monday he made that decision four years ago after the saw how the heat in Barcelona had so many athletes struggling at the 1992 Olympic marathon.
"I accept my limitations," said the 33-year-old Belgian, who forfeited his appearance money for leaving the starting line two minutes before last year's Rotterdam marathon because it was too hot.
"These conditions can break you. You must learn to live with your body," said Rousseau, who ran 2:07.51 at the 1994 Rotterdam marathon, the fastest for six years, and 2:07.20 in Berlin last year, finishing second to Kenya's Sammy Lelei.
Rousseau, who has entered the London Marathon April 17, entered his first at Rotterdam in 1993 as a pacemaker and won the World Half Marathon title along the way.
The Belgian, who also has won marathons at Rheims, France, and Brussels, now tackles the London race for the first time. The temperature is unlikely to get above 62 degrees, which is the figure Rousseau uses as his breakoff point.
---
SAN FRANCISCO (AP) - Calamari will be the lineup at Giants games at 3Com Park this season.
The Italian-style seafoood is one of more than two dozen new food items and drinks on the menu.
The others include grilled ahi, lime-scented pork and tomatillo chili, fajita salad, chicken breast and corn chili in a cumin-infused broth.
A panel of the Recreation and Park Commission will meet this Thursday to approve prices for the new items, which range from $ 3.50 for corn dog bites to $ 6.75 for the calamari
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Unbridled's Song arrived at Aqueduct Monday to begin preparing for the Wood Memorial on April 13, in which he is the likely favorite.
The colt won the Breeders' Cup Juvenile last year and was the impressive winner of the Florida Derby in his most recent start.
He is among the Kentucky Derby favorites.
 Load-Date: April 1, 1996

 

End of Document
