

Names In The Game
June 23, 1996, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 543 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: CHEJU-DO, South Korea
Body




Sweating under Sunday's midday sun, the leaders of Japan and South Korea grinned widely, holding high the symbol of their newfound friendship: soccer balls.
Soccer was the star throughout a two-day summit between Japanese Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto and South Korean President Kim Young-sam, who agreed to work together for regional peace and deepen friendly ties through cultural and other exchanges.
Outside a seaside hotel overlooking the narrow strait that separates their countries, the leaders exchanged soccer balls as a symbol of cooperation and lauded the opportunity to improve ties through sports.
After a bitter two-year bidding war, the historical rivals were chosen three weeks ago as co-hosts for the 2002 soccer World Cup.
"With the joint hosting of the World Cup as the impetus, I feel reassured that we agreed to increase our friendly ties through close cooperation," Hashimoto said at a news conference with Kim.
The South Korean leader called the co-host decision "desirable," and said they agreed to cooperate to make the finals the most successful in history.
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Saudi Arabia's Olympic soccer team arrived in New York Sunday and immediately left for Absecon, N.J., where it will train for the Atlanta games.
The Saudis will play four exhibition matches against national teams headed for the Olympics from other nations. The schedule includes the United States June 30 at Oneonta, N.Y.; Trinidad & Tobago July 7 at Stockton College in Pomona, N.J.; Nigeria at Stockton July 9, and South Korea at George Washington University July 14.
In addition, the Saudis will play the New York-New Jersey Stallions June 26 at Stockton, and a South Jersey all-star amateur team July 4 at Stockton.
 
INDIANAPOLIS (AP) - A.J. Zapp, a senior first baseman from Center Grove High School taken in the first round of the Major League draft, plans to sign a minor league contract with the Atlanta Braves Monday.
Zapp, the 27th pick overall, hoped a deal would be worked out so he could officially sign the contract Monday in the administrative offices of the school.
Terms of the deal haven't been disclosed, but Zapp can expect a lucrative signing bonus. In last year's draft, the players chosen 26th through 28th received bonuses of $ 500,000.
"… When you get drafted in the first round, the financial aspects can be difficult to walk away from," Zapp said after Center Grove lost 12-7 to eventual state champion Jasper in the semifinals of the state high school tournament Saturday.
When Zapp signs, he will have 48 hours to report to the Braves' rookie team in West Palm Beach, Fla. He hit .523 with 16 home runs and 51 RBI this season.
 
ATLANTA (AP) - Distance runners Mark and Gwyn Coogan both tried to make the Olympic team. Only Mark succeeded, finishing second in the marathon trials.
His wife missed the women's marathon team by only one place, finishing fourth, then dropped out with four laps remaining in the 10,000-meter trials.
"This whole spring, I had two scenarios in my mind," Gwyn said. "One, I would join my husband on the Olympic team and I would run in the Games with him.
"The other is that I would join him by waving the flag as he goes by in the marathon.
"I guess I've accepted the second scenario. I'm going to be waving the flag."
 Load-Date: June 23, 1996

 

End of Document
