

Names in the News
The Associated Press
July 24, 1998, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 725 words
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Actor Danny Glover put aside all his lethal weapons during recent visits to Namibia and South Africa as a United Nations goodwill ambassador.
"These are two countries that are dealing with inequities that have accumulated over 300 years," Glover said Thursday. "When I see them now, I feel it remarkable."
Glover, who starred in the 1987 HBO movie "Mandela," also got a chance to visit with South African President Nelson Mandela, who celebrated his 80th birthday during Glover's visit last week.
As a goodwill ambassador, the co-star of the "Lethal Weapon" series is helping spread the message that people can organize themselves to improve their lives.
Glover also said his mission is to spread "tolerance and understanding and compassion for what has happened in the past, and what the past is."
---
CHAPEL HILL, N.C. (AP) - Who has the guts to talk trash to Michael Jordan? Could it be the very town where he began his road to glory?
The Chicago Bulls superstar's plan to lease space for a third restaurant has been stymied by the unresolved issue of what to do with the building's garbage.
Trouble arose when local authorities and neighbors couldn't agree with a developer on where to put the proposed restaurant's trash bin. Neighbors insisted the garbage truck couldn't cut through their property during pickups; the town said there couldn't be a restaurant without the bin.
The proposed restaurant would be the anchor tenant of a 40,000-square-foot complex across the street from the University of North Carolina, which won one of its national basketball titles with Jordan.
Jordan already has restaurants in Chicago and New York.
---
HASTINGS, Neb. (AP) - Country western singer Faith Hill welcomed a special guest during a recent gig: her daughter.
Gracie, 18 months old, joined her during band introductions, drawing oohs and aahs from the crowd. And Hill is expecting another child soon.
"Thanks for being so sweet to welcome an eight and a half - ooh - almost nine-month pregnant woman," Hill told 4,000 fans gathered Wednesday.
Hill performed some of her biggest hits, including "The Hard Way," "Take Me as I Am," "It Matters to Me" and "This Kiss."
Hill left the stage with her arm around her daughter and carrying a sign reading "I'm you're No. 1 fan."
---
ALBANY, N.Y. (AP) - Al "Grandpa Munster" Lewis lashed out at his political opponents but saved a few taunts for some of his supporters during a campaign stop.
The actor-activist and current Green Party candidate for governor of New York took swipes Thursday at current "Gov. George 'Potatohead' Pataki" and New York "Sen. Alfonse 'Pothole' D'Amato."
"I hope nobody gets offended. And if you do, that's your problem, it ain't mine," said the 88-year-old who is best known for playing the role of Grandpa in the 1960s television series "The Munsters."
"I appeal to the largest block of voters in the state of New York," he said. "It's the embarrassing number of 60 percent who don't vote. There is no industrialized country in the world that has that embarrassing figure."
Lewis said the reason Americans don't vote is because they believe that without the cash to make big political contributions, their interests won't be represented.
"Instinctively they know," he said. "Their reaction is simple: 'The hell with it. Honey, give me a beer and let's watch the Giants play the Packers."'
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - A Superior Court judge refused to allow the former nanny of Bruce Willis and Demi Moore to pursue her lawsuit against the celebrities in California court.
Judge Irving Feffer said Thursday he would not overrule two earlier rulings that the case be heard in Idaho, where Moore and Willis, who recently announced they were separating, maintain a residence.
Kim Tannahill filed a lawsuit Feb. 2 in California, alleging she was denied overtime pay, physically threatened and verbally abused while serving as caretaker to the couple's three children. She also filed a federal lawsuit claiming labor violations.
Willis and Moore countered by filing a suit in Idaho, claiming Tannahill stole money, defamed the couple and breached a confidentiality agreement.
Ms. Tannahill lost a legal bid to dismiss the Idaho suit. She is appealing that ruling. She also is appealing the recent dismissal of her federal suit.
Pending the outcome of the appeals, Feffer said he could not allow Tannahill's case to proceed.
 Load-Date: July 24, 1998

 

End of Document
