

Names In The Game
August 30, 1997, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 692 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




Bicycles belonging to Shaquille O'Neal, Wayne Gretzky, Martina Navratilova, Bill Walton, Mario Andretti, Greg Louganis and Greg LeMond will among those going to the highest bidder at a celebrity bike auction Wednesday.
The proceeds will benefit World T.E.A.M. Sports, a non-profit organization based in Charlotte, N.C., which seeks to showcase the capabilities of people with disabilities, and the Christopher Reeve Foundation.
Bikes belonging to Madonna, Robin Williams and Elizabeth Taylor also will be available in the silent auction to be held at the Petersen Automotive Museum.
LeMond and fellow cyclist Lance Armstrong will be among the co-hosts of the event along with Reeve.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Dikembe Mutombo of the Atlanta Hawks, Dale Davis of the Indiana Pacers, Chris Whitney of the Washington Wizards and Orlando Magic assistant coach Tree Rollins leave Tuesday for an NBA-backed tour of South Africa.
Mwadi Mabika of the Los Angeles Sparks will represent the WNBA on the 10-day trip which will youth basketball clinics featuring drills and motivational speeches.
It will be Mabika's first trip back to Africa since she left Congo, formerly Zaire, in April.
She had a difficult time getting out of her country to attend WNBA pre season camp until Mutombo, also from Congo, appealed to government officials on her behalf.
This will be Mutombo's third NBA trip to Africa.
The tour will include stops in Cape Town, Durban and Johannesburg.
---
RICHMOND, Va. (AP) - Chuck Norris is flying from Russia to Richmond hoping to see his son, Eric Norris, drive in the Virginia Is For Lovers 200 Thursday night.
The race at Richmond International Speedway is part of the NASCAR Craftsman Truck Series.
Eric Norris is one of 59 entered for the race. Only 36 can start. The field will be whittled Thursday afternoon, and Chuck Norris plans on being there to see his son make his try.
Eric is stunt coordinator for the television series "Walker, Texas Ranger" starring his father, who has been in Russia taping episodes.
---
CAIRO, Egypt (AP) - A copyright dispute over a mascot inspired by Egypt's best-known pharaoh, King Tut, hangs over soccer's under-17 world championship that begins this week.
Mohammed Abdel-Aziz Taaeb, the artist who drew the mascot, went on a "fast-unto-death" Wednesday, claiming the drawing was stolen from him after he was beaten and tortured.
"I will either die or get my rights," said Taeeb, who turned 28 the day before he began his hunger strike.
The mascot is a cartoon of Tutankhamun, the 14th century B.C. pharaoh whose tomb full of gold relics was discovered in 1922. A series of deaths among the tomb's visitors was responsible for the myth of the "curse of Tutankhamun."
The drawing shows Tut wearing Pharaonic headgear and thong sandals while kicking a soccer ball.
Tutankhamun is treated as national symbol of Egypt, and the controversy is given major coverage by the media. It is reportedly even being discussed in President Hosni Mubarak's office.
FIFA, the governing body of world soccer, and the Egyptian soccer association have refused to consider Taaeb's claims.
"We don't have any relations with Taeeb, and we are not responsible" for his problems, said Hisham Azmy, an Egyptian member of the committee for FIFA youth competitions.
The mascot for the tournament was approved by FIFA, which received it from the soccer association, which said it bought the drawing from an advertising company.
"All doors have been closed for me. This is the only way out," said Taeeb in a statement through copyright lawyer Yousef Sharif.
---
ORLANDO, Fla. (AP) - Woman boxer Shannon Hall traveled to New York for her first and, so far, only professional fight. She won it, at Madison Square Garden in March.
On Friday, Hall learned that the Kung Fu Championships were being held Sunday night in Orlando, where she lives. She decided to go, not as a spectator, but a contestant.
Hall challenged woman kick boxing champion Tara McDonald. Promoters obviously were intrigued at the prospect, so McDonald accepted.
That left McDonald's opponent, Mizpah Cuaresma, without an opponent for the undercard fight.
The program will be carried on pay-per-view television
 Load-Date: August 30, 1997

 

End of Document
