

Names In The Game Armstrong, Roger Staubach and Colin Montgomerie.
The Associated Press
December 6, 1999, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 906 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




COMISO, Sicily (AP) - Muhammad Ali was a hit in Sicily.
The former heavyweight champion was awarded honorary citizenship of the southern Sicily town of Comiso on Monday.
Ali, who often tours the globe as an envoy for peace, was on the island for a conference on peace talks for the east African nation of Burundi.
He attended a brief town hall ceremony in the town of about 25,000 people. A few hundred fans greeted Ali, who responded by throwing phantom punches.
The conference, "Prospects for peace and solidarity in Burundi," brought together representatives of rival forces to sign a document vowing to respect the neutrality of schools and hospitals in Burundi's civil war.
Fighting between government forces and Hutu rebels has killed more than 200,000 people since 1993.
---
LAS VEGAS (AP) - Nevada boxing officials aren't the only ones who want Mike Tyson to fight elsewhere. Most residents don't want him here, either.
Six out of 10 Las Vegas residents said in a recent poll that they are opposed to Tyson fighting in their city again. But Tyson's promoter dismissed the poll results.
"Certainly, this poll, whether the results came out in Mike's behalf or not, will have no effect on whether or when Mike fights in Nevada again," said Dan Goossen of America Presents.
The survey, conducted by Mason-Dixon Polling on Nov. 22-23 and Nov. 29-Dec. 1, asked 632 registered voters what they thought of Tyson returning to the ring in Las Vegas.
Of those polled, 59 percent were opposed to his return, while 28 percent said they would support allowing him to box here. Another 13 percent were undecided. The survey's margin of error is plus or minus 5.7 percent.
Tyson was told by the Nevada Athletic Commission that it might be better if he fought elsewhere in the near future after he hit Orlin Norris after the bell rang to end the first round of their fight last Oct. 23 fight at the MGM Grand hotel-casino.
The premature end to the fight followed Tyson's biting of Evander Holyfield's ears in the same ring in 1997, and his admission that he tried to break Francois Botha's arm during their fight last Jan. 16.
---
LAUSANNE, Switzerland (AP) - Steffi Graf, winner of 22 Grand Slam titles and the 1988 OIympic champion, received the Olympic movement's highest honor Monday.
International Olympic Committee president Juan Antonio Samaranch presented Graf with the Olympic order, praising her as an "outstanding example of fair play."
"She gave to us - to all the players in the world - a lesson in how athletes must behave in sport," Samaranch said.
Graf, who retired in August, said it was "a very proud moment for me."
"I felt very fortunate in 1984 when tennis came back" to the Olympics, she said.
Tennis was a demonstration sport that year. Graf won the gold medal in Seoul in 1988, when tennis became a medal sport again after 60 years.
The Olympic order is awarded by the IOC to recognize "those persons who have illustrated the Olympic ideal through their actions, have achieved remarkable merit in the sporting world or have rendered outstanding services to the Olympic cause."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Tour de France winner Lance Armstrong, U.S. Open champion Serena Williams and five track and field athletes who set world records are among the 10 finalists for the 2000 Jesse Owens International Trophy.
This year, Armstrong capped a remarkable comeback from cancer by winning cycling's most prestigious event. Williams won the major tennis event in the United States in only her second year as a pro.
The track athletes are runners Maurice Greene, Michael Johnson, Hicham El Guerrouj and Khalid Khannouchi, and decathlete Thomas Dvorak .
Others nominated were cyclist Felicia Ballanger, and swimmers Penny Heyns and Ian Thorpe.
The winner will be honored Feb. 10.
---
INDIANAPOLIS (AP) - Hall of Fame quarterback Roger Staubach will receive the NCAA's Theodore Roosevelt Award at the organization's convention Jan. 9 in San Diego.
The award is presented each year to a former college athlete who has continued to promote fitness and sport.
Staubach, who won the Heisman Trophy at Navy in 1961, played 11 seasons with the Dallas Cowboys following active duty in the Navy. He led the Cowboys to two Super Bowl victories, led the league in passing four times, was a Pro Bowl selection five times and the NFL's MVP in 1971.
Since 1981, he has been chairman and chief executive office of The Staubach Co., a real estate strategy and services firm. He also has been active on the boards of many business and community organizations, including the United Way of America, the Salvation Army and the Children's Scholarship Fund.
---
VIRGINIA WATER, England (AP) - Scotland's Colin Montgomerie was selected Monday as European golfer of the year for a record fourth time.
A panel of golf writers and broadcasters selected Montgomerie over Spanish teen-age sensation Sergio Garcia, British Open champion Paul Lawrie, Masters winner Jose Maria Olazabal and Miguel Angel Jimenez.
The 36-year-old Montgomerie topped the European money list for a record seventh consecutive year, earning $2.08 million. He won six tournaments, including the World Match Play Championship.
But the panel cited Montgomerie in particular for his "statesmanlike role" at the Ryder Cup in Brookline, Mass., in September. Despite facing incessant heckling by U.S. fans, Montgomerie kept his cool and won 3 1/2 out of a possible 5 points as the Europeans lost the Cup in a dramatic American comeback.
 Load-Date: December 7, 1999

 

End of Document
