

Names In The Game
August 5, 1997, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 633 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: SALEM, Conn.
Body




Rachel Robinson, whose book-signing in the town where she lives was marred by a racial incident, has been celebrated as a role model by local officials.
Robinson, widow of Jackie Robinson, who broke Major League Baseball's color barrier, accepted a proclamation Monday from the Board of Selectmen, the town's governing body.
"Rachel Robinson has provided an effective role model for the town of Salem, especially for its young people," the proclamation read. "She has taught all of us important lessons of tolerance, understanding, graciousness and dignity even under adverse circumstances."
The selectmen said the honor was not related to an incident May 8, when a boy was accused of scribbling a racial slur outside a school where Robinson was signing copies of a book about her husband.
The selectmen said they wanted to thank Robinson for the book signing and for opening her home to Salem schoolchildren.
In accepting the award, Robinson recalled fond memories of her first visit to Town Hall when she moved to Salem 11 years ago.
"I have adopted the town and feel adopted by it," Robinson said. "It is the best of small towns."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - New Jersey Nets vice president Willis Reed will help open the U.S. Youth Games on Friday, along with Mayor Rudolph Giuliani.
The athletes from major cities around country will range in age from 11-15, but Reed knows one day some of them might be a candidate for the NBA.
Among those who once played in the youth games are NBA stars Patrick Ewing, Kenny Anderson and Muggsy Bogues.
In addition to basketball, the events include track, golf, swimming, tennis, soccer and bowling.
---
CAPE TOWN, South Africa (AP) - Long-distance runner Haile Gebrselassie of Ethiopia has endorsed Cape Town's bid for the 2004 Olympics.
Carl Lewis is campaigning for Stockholm.
Gebrselassie's endorsement was timed to coincide with the runner's race Wednesday in the 10,000-meter final at the World Championships in Athens.
The Ethiopian runner holds the world record in both the 5,000 and 10,000.
"I share President Nelson Mandela's view that staging the Olympic Games in Cape Town would signal the start of an African Renaissance," he said. "Africa and its sportspersons have competed all over the world. We want the Olympic Games on our continent, and we want it now."
Meanwhile, Mandela continued his personal campaign Tuesday to get the bid, telling visiting IOC members in Pretoria that a vote for Cape Town is a vote for democracy.
"We deserve a thank you for showing the world how problems of a country can be solved without bloodshed and without frightening minorities," Mandela told the committee.
Mandela told reporters he reassured committee members from Switzerland, Cuba, India, Spain and South Korea - the last in a series of delegates who have visited over the past months - that South Africa's economy is sound.
Cape Town is considered a sentimental choice but likely to lose out to Rome. Other finalists, in addition to Stockholm, are Athens and Buenos Aires, Argentina.
---
MEDFORD, Ore. (AP) - When Don Gifford knocked a 303-yard drive onto the green of the par-4 fourth hole at Stone Ridge Golf Club, he wasn't sure the ball had gone in the cup.
"I asked my partners, 'Did that go in?"' the 43-year-old truck driver said after shooting his second hole-in-one in 16 years of golfing. "They didn't think so, but the guys on the green finally let us know."
"It's blind luck," said Gifford of his ace. "You've got to shoot the shot, but everything has got to be perfect. You could stand there and hit a million shots and not come close."
As long as the shot was, it didn't measure up to the longest on record. The Guinness Book of Records lists Shawn Lynch's hole in one of July 24, 1995. It was 496 yards on the dogleg 17th hole at Teign Valley Golf Club in Exeter England.
 Load-Date: August 5, 1997

 

End of Document
