

Names In The Game
October 27, 1996, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 574 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body



Contains items on Joe DiMaggio, IOC Official, Anthony Dorsett, Scott Brumfield
 Joe DiMaggio, the New York Yankees' Hall of Fame outfielder, didn't get upset often on the field. He did lose his cool, however, during Game 6 of the 1947 World Series, after Brooklyn Dodgers outfielder Al Gionfriddo robbed him of an extra-base hit.
"You can blame the whole thing on the Dodger manager, Burt Shotton," DiMaggio said. "When I came to the plate, Shotton called time and replaced the left fielder, Eddie Miksis, who was having trouble fielding balls, with Gionfriddo.
"I tagged one real good and I'm sure it's out of the park. I'm headed for second when I see Gionfriddo catch up with the ball. I was shocked - he caught it!
"Now you know why I kicked the dirt. That catch did it."
 
ATHENS, Greece (AP) - An International Olympic Committee official said Sunday his commission was not intimidated by the Greek president's threat to never again bid for an Olympiad if Athens failed to get the 2004 Games.
Thomas Bach, chairman of the 19-member IOC Study and Evaluation Commission, made the statement at a news conference two days after President Costis Stephanopoulos made the stinging comment.
"It was a personal remark of the President … but it will not influence our opinion," said Bach, a German lawyer and former fencing gold medalist, at the end of a three-day working visit.
Athens was the seventh stop in the IOC inspection teams' tour of 11 candidate cities vying to host the 2004 Games.
Bach refused to comment on the Commission's review of the Athens presentation but referred to a three-point list of what he described as positive impressions.
These included Athens' "highly creative cultural program," and strong backings from the government, opposition parties and the Greek people to hold the Olympics.
Organizers boast the Athens bid enjoys the overwhelming support of the Athens people and that 75 percent of the athletic facilities are ready to host an Olympiad. Bach did not mention anything about Athens' sports or other infrastructure.
Greece wasnted to win the bidding for the 1996 Summer Olympics, the 100th anniversary of the Games which began in Athens. Poor infrastructure, however, led the IOC to give the Games to Atlanta. Athens' loss triggered public outcry.
It was not until this year that Greece set aside its grievous grudge and bid to host the 2004 Olympics in Athens.
The IOC Evaluation Commission will visit San Juan, Puerto Rico, Buenos Aires, Argentina, and Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in November. The tour will end in Cape Town, South Africa, Dec. 15. The host city will be selected Sept. 5, 1997.
 
HOUSTON (AP) - If rookie cornerback Anthony Dorsett of the Houston Oilers can score one touchdown this season, he and his father, Hall of Famer Tony Dorsett, would become the NFL's all-time father-son scoring leaders.
Tony Dorsett, a former star running back, accounted for 546 points.
The all-time leaders are the Howfields - Bobby and Ian - with a combined 551 points.
 
CINCINNATI (AP) - Cincinnati Bengals guard Scott Brumfield lives in the little town of Spanish Fork, Utah, and takes several of his big-city teammates camping during the offseason.
One of the delicacies of the trips is rattlesnake.
"When you're in the desert," Brumfield said, "you take the skin off, clean it, wrap it in aluminum foil with onions and stuff like that and throw it in the coals. It's just like a chicken nugget.
"It's not my favorite, but it's not bad."
 Load-Date: October 27, 1996

 

End of Document
