

Names in the News
May 4, 1996, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 711 words
Byline: Letterman, Taylor, Poitier
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




David Letterman says he's traded his trademark stogies for another vice: overeating.
"I gave up smoking cigars about two months ago, and ever since then all I am is hungry," the "Late Show" host said recently. "All I want to do is eat. I just want to eat now. I can hardly wait to get off the phone."
He figures he put on about 5 pounds on a recent visit to San Francisco to prepare for the show's broadcasts there next week.
Still, says Letterman, his new food infatuation beats smoking.
"I was smoking like 20 a day," he said. "That's the problem … I can't do anything in moderation. It's all a million miles an hour or nothing."
---
MYRTLE BEACH, S.C. (AP) - Lawrence Taylor was arrested for trying to buy $ 100 worth of crack cocaine in a sting operation, police said.
The 37-year-old retired New York Giants linebacker was charged Friday with intent to possess crack cocaine and released after paying a $ 5,000 bond, said Hugh Munn, a spokesman for the State Law Enforcement Division.
Taylor, in town for a celebrity golf tournament, was among 18 people arrested, Munn said.
Taylor said personal problems led to his arrest, which was part of a state, county and local sting operation.
"In New York, they are calling me dead-beat dad," he told The Sun News of Myrtle Beach. "Nobody loves their kids more than I do. My whole world seems like it's in the (toilet). Well, it's going to be in the (toilet) now."
Taylor led the Giants to two Super Bowl titles before retiring in 1994.
In 1988, he was suspended for four games by the NFL for violating its substance abuse policy. Taylor also underwent rehabilitation for a cocaine problem in 1986.
---
PETALUMA, Calif. (AP) - Location, location, location: That's exactly what horror filmmaker Wes Craven is seeking for his next frightfest.
Craven had planned to shoot scenes from "Scary Movie" at a Santa Rosa school, but officials axed those plans after reading the script, which contains profanity and violence.
Now Craven has his sights set on an 85-year-old school administration building in neighboring Petaluma. Officials there are expected to decide by next weekend whether he can use the site.
"We're hoping not to create a furor like last time," said Eric Klosterman, location manager for Craven's Frightmare Inc.
"Scary Movie" will star Drew Barrymore and Courteney Cox. Craven's other films include "Nightmare on Elm Street" and "The People Under the Stairs."
---
CAPE TOWN, South Africa (AP) - Sidney Poitier didn't have to think twice about signing on to portray South African President Nelson Mandela.
"First the thrill was to have been offered the role," Poitier, 69, said Friday. "And accepting it was never a question. For me, it was how the character was fashioned from this extraordinary life."
Michael Caine will co-star as F.W. de Klerk, the leader of the white government that negotiated with Mandela to bring about the nation's first all-race election in 1994.
Production begins next week on the Showtime movie, tentatively titled "One Man, One Vote."
Poitier, whose film credits include "Guess Who's Coming To Dinner," won an Oscar for "Lilies of the Field."
---
COLUMBUS, Ohio (AP) - Art Linkletter says he still enjoys watching the tube, even if some some of the fare is in poor taste.
His favorites? "Seinfeld" and "Frasier," the NBC comedies.
Still, today's daytime talk shows are too focused on "trashing dysfunctional families," said Linkletter, the Emmy-winning host of several shows in the 1960s and '70s, including "People Are Funny."
"It lowers and coarsens the whole cultural attitude," said Linkletter, 84, who was in town to speak at a conference on aging.
---
WEST PALM BEACH, Fla. (AP) - It'll be a double blast from the past when The Doobie Brothers open Lynyrd Skynyrd's nationwide tour.
Guitarist Gary Rossington, the only original member of Lynyrd Skynyrd who will be playing Thursday at the Coral Sky Amphitheatre, said the new group is keeping alive the band's classic rock, blues and country roots.
"It sounds like the Lynyrd Skynyrd band, but it is a new time and a new group," he said.
Lynyrd Skynyrd recently released "Endangered Species" and plans to be back in the studio next year to record a new album.
Among The Doobie Brothers' top hits was "What a Fool Believes" from the album, "Minute by Minute."
 Load-Date: May 4, 1996

 

End of Document
