

Names in the Game Diana, Mike Piazza and Andruw Jones, Sergei Yuran and U.S. junior
The Associated Press
December 2, 1999, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 945 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




SOUTHINGTON, Ohio (AP) - Paul Monea, the man behind those Tae-Bo exercise infomercials, paid $1.3 million for boxer Mike Tyson's 62-acre estate in Trumbull County.
Monea bought the 25,000-square-foot home last week, according to Ed Zamarelli, Tyson's real estate agent.
The house has six to eight bedrooms, a pool room of 10,000 square feet, a regulation-size NBA court and a theater room decorated in zebra-striped carpeting.
Tyson, who bought the property in 1989 for $305,000, originally asked $2.2 million for the property, located about 40 miles southeast of Cleveland.
Zamarelli did not know if Monea plans to move into the house or use it only for entertaining.
The Tae-Bo videos rank among the nation's top-selling videos. Other Monea products have included art works and kitchen gadgets.
---
SUN CITY, South Africa (AP) - Spanish 19-year-old Sergio Garcia picked former Nick Faldo caddie Fanny Sunesson to carry his bag beginning Dec. 29 at Scottsdale, Ariz.
Garcia, who is playing the first round of the Million Dollar Challenge on Thursday in South Africa, was reported to have had 30 applicants for the job.
Jerry Higginbotham, fired a month ago by Garcia, has said the young Spaniard still has a lot of growing up to do. In October's World Match Play Championship in England, he took off his golf shoe and hurled it down the fairway after slipping and hitting a poor tee shot.
---
BRANTFORD, Ontario (AP) - Brantford's Jimmy MacNeil has glided to a smooth win in the Zamboni Driver of the Year contest.
In fact, you could say he cleaned up.
Just before the final votes rolled in during the wee hours this morning MacNeil - known as The Iceman - topped the voting with 177,560 votes.
His nearest rival, Detroit's Al Sobotka, had 97,265.
It's a poignant victory for the humble 38-year-old who credits everyone but himself for the overwhelming win.
Sobotka resurfaces the rink for the Red Wings, while MacNeil smooths the ice for a church hockey league.
The contest, started as a publicity stunt to highlight Zamboni's 50th anniversary, developed a life of its own, said Cathy Zamboni, who's been involved in the Web site election since its beginning.
At one point, ballot-stuffing by computer buffs nearly cost the Canadian candidate about 140,000 votes, leading Zamboni to put in a much more rigorous voting system that asks for e-mail addresses before votes were confirmed.
The winner of the contest will drive the Zamboni at the NHL All-Star game in Toronto Feb. 6.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Countess Diana, the 1997 Eclipse Award-winning juvenile filly, was consigned to the Keeneland January horse sale by owner Richard Kaster.
While racing in the Kaster's colors, Countess Diana earned $1,117,816, with 14 firsts, seven seconds and two third. She is not expected to race again before the sale.
---
STAMFORD, Conn. (AP) - Mike Piazza of the New York Mets, Andruw Jones of the Atlanta Braves and Larry Walker of the Colorado Rockies are among 25 major leaguers scheduled to play Jan. 9 in the Pepsi All-Star softball game at Cathedral City, Calif.
Proceeds from the game benefit the Juvenile Diabetes Foundation, which has received about $900,000 from past games. The AL won 34-28 last year and leads the series 12-6.
Also playing are Tony Clark of the Tigers, Shawn Green and Eric Karros of the Dodgers, Omar Vizquel of the Indians, Brian Jordan of the Braves and free agent Greg Vaughn.
---
OPORTO, Portugal (AP) - Russian soccer player Sergei Yuran was sentenced in absentia Thursday to a year in prison for manslaughter for a a 1994 car crash in which a man died. But he won't serve time because the crime falls under an amnesty decree.
Yuran was order to pay $15,100 in compensation to the victim's parents, TSF radio said. The compensation will be paid by Yuran's insurance company, according to TSF.
The prison sentence was waived under a pardon approved earlier this year in Parliament. The pardon, to mark the 25th anniversary of Portugal's revolution, covered some crimes committed before March 25, 1999.
Yuran, who no longer lives in Portugal, was playing for FC Porto at the time of the crash. He was driving his Mercedes when it smashed into another car shortly before dawn. The driver of the car died later in hospital of multiple injuries.
An autopsy on the dead man, 35-year-old doctor Angelo de Jesus Oliveira, found he had more than the legal limit of alcohol in his blood.
---
COLORADO SPRINGS, Colo. (AP) - The roster for the U.S. junior hockey team includes seven returning players from the team that finished seventh at the world junior tournament in Winnipeg in January.
The lineup, released Wednesday, has only one Canadian Hockey League player - Drummondville Voltigeurs goaltender Pascal Sauve, son of former Buffalo Sabres goaltender Bob Sauve, whose hometown is Buffalo, N.Y. The rest are all from college.
The seven returning players from last year's team, which beat Canada en route to a 3-4 record, are defenseman Jeff Jillson (San Jose), forward Barrett Heisten (Buffalo), forward Andy Hilbert, defenseman Doug Janik (Buffalo), defenseman Jordan Leopold (Anaheim), forward Adam Hall (Nashville) and forward Matt Doman (Calgary).
---
TORONTO (AP) - The man who popularized the goalie mask has been voted the NHL's all-time greatest goalie.
Jacques Plante, who won seven Vezina Trophies and six Stanley Cups, is ranked No. 1 by Goalies' World, a Quebec City-based magazine.
Plante, who died in 1986, edged Glenn Hall in a complicated computer formula, followed by Terry Sawchuk, Patrick Roy and Ken Dryden.
Dominik Hasek was No. 6, followed by Bill Durnan, Tony Esposito, Turk Broda and Tiny Thompson.
The list is in the December-January issue, which was released Thursday.
 Load-Date: December 3, 1999

 

End of Document
