

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
October 12, 1998, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 555 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body




West Ham striker John Hartson was charged Monday with misconduct by the Football Association for kicking teammate Eyal Berkovic in the head during practice.
The Welsh international was fined $ 17,000 by West Ham last week. After a review of the video that shows Hartson kicking Berkovic in the face, the F.A. decided to charge him with misconduct. Hartson has 14 days to respond to the charge.
The assault sparked outrage last week when a series of photographs in the Mirror showed Hartson kicking Berkovic.
Berkovic, an Israeli international, was quoted as saying he was in agony and was unable to eat for two days. He also said he was considering leaving West Ham because he could not "forgive and forget."
"If my head was a ball it would have been (kicked into) the top corner of the net," Berkovic said.
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Val Ackerman, president of the WNBA, has been named Female Sports Executive of the Year by Street & Smith's SportsBusiness Journal Magazine.
Ackerman has headed the women's basketball league since its inception two years ago. Teams are averaging more than 10,000 fans per game.
Ackerman received 25.7 percent of the vote in the poll conducted for the magazine by Taylor Nelson Sofres Intersearch. Susan O'Malley, president of Washington Sports and Entertainment, was second followed by Donna Lopiano, director of the Women's Sports Foundation.
 
EDINBURGH, Scotland (AP) - Veteran Scottish goalkeeper Jim Leighton retired from international soccer Monday, two days after Scotland's come-from-behind 3-2 Euro 2000 win over Estonia.
Leighton, who turned 40 just days after Scotland's World Cup campaign ended with a 3-0 loss to Morocco, is the most experienced Scottish goalkeeper with 91 international matches to his credit.
Leighton became the first Scot to appear in four World Cups when he was selected for the 1998 tournament. He played in all of Scotland's first-round World Cup matches, including a 2-1 loss to Brazil, a 1-1 tie with Norway and the loss to Morocco.
Leighton made his Scottish league debut with Aberdeen in 1978.
 
NEW YORK (AP) - German Silva of Mexico, winner of the New York City Marathon in 1994 and 1995, will compete in the 29th running of the event on Nov. 1.
The 30-year-old Silva won his two marathons by a total of seven seconds. After passing on the 1996 race, he registered his fastest time in the event last year, finishing fifth in 2:10:19.
 
COLORADO SPRINGS, Colo. (AP) - Tennis player Lindsay Davenport and freestyle wrestler Sammie Henson are the United States Olympic Committee choices as September athletes of the month.
Davenport became the first American-born player to win the women's singles title at the U.S. Open, her first Grand Slam championship, and moved up to No. 1 in the rankings.
Henson was the lone U.S. gold medalist in the World Freestyle Wrestling Championships.
 
LONDON (AP) - English soccer star Paul Gascoigne has been admitted to a drug and alcohol clinic at the behest of Middlesbrough manager Bryan Robson.
Gascoigne's latest attempt to overcome his well publicized drinking problem was on the front pages of every national tabloid Monday.
The 31-year-old Gascoigne was admitted to the Priory Clinic in London over the weekend.
Gascoigne was dropped from the English national team on the eve of the World Cup following reports of his drunken binges in nightclubs.
 Load-Date: October 12, 1998

 

End of Document
