

Names in the News
The Associated Press
May 31, 2000, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 872 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Patrick Stewart, who currently stars in the Broadway play "The Ride Down Mt. Morgan," has apologized to the play's producers for criticizing them to the audience.
The Shubert Organization confirmed Tuesday that they received a written apology last week, but declined to make it public. The apology was accepted, they said.
During curtain calls at both matinee and evening performances at the Ambassador Theater on April 29, Stewart angrily said the show's producers had failed to promote the play sufficiently, which, he said, made him feel "frustrated and helpless."
Gerald Schoenfeld, chairman of the Shubert Organization, said nearly $1 million had been spent in advertising, direct mail and discount coupons. A complaint against Stewart was filed May 2 with Actors' Equity, where a grievance committee ruled that he should make a formal written apology to the producers.
Stewart, who did not appeal the ruling, is perhaps best known for portraying Capt. Jean-Luc Picard in television's "Star Trek: The Next Generation."
---
UNITED NATIONS (AP) - Jane Fonda has finished a documentary she began after visiting Nigeria to see the challenges facing adolescent girls in Africa's most populous country.
"Realities of Girls' Lives: How We Can Act Now" was shown Tuesday night to more than 300 diplomats, women's activists and delegates to next week's follow-up meeting to the 1995 women's conference in Beijing.
Fonda said U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan encouraged her three months ago "to get involved" with the upcoming conference. She said the International Women's Health Coalition suggested she make a film about grassroots women's advocacy programs in Nigeria.
The documentary, narrated by Fonda, describes the poverty that most girls in Nigeria live with, the double-standards they confront on sexual matters, the high teen pregnancy and abortion rates and abuse they face.
"I work with adolescent girls in the U.S. state of Georgia and while their circumstances may be different, the problems that diminish girls there are also problems for girls everywhere in the world," Fonda says.
The grassroots groups, Fonda said afterwards, have been asked by the Nigerian government to develop a sex education curriculum for schools.
The Beijing platform set a goal of achieving full equality between women and men. It spelled out objectives in a dozen areas, including ensuring the right of women to decide matters of sexual and reproductive health.
"At its heart, the Beijing platform is about human rights, alleviation of poverty, and better lives for all the peoples of the world," Annan told the crowd. "Over the past five years, progress has been made, but we still have a long way to go."
---
MALIBU, Calif. (AP) - A man accused of drunken driving in an accident that injured Pierce Brosnan's 16-year-old son has pleaded innocent.
James P. Hall, 19, entered the plea Tuesday.
Sean Brosnan was one of six people riding in Hall's sport utility vehicle April 22 when he sustained a broken pelvis and ruptured bladder in the accident. Hall told police he swerved to avoid a rock, and the car tumbled down a 200-foot embankment.
Brosnan, best known for his three James Bond movies, has postponed his wedding to "Entertainment Tonight" correspondent Keely Shaye Smith until his son recovers.
---
BALTIMORE (AP) - Elian Gonzalez and his family played tourists at the city's Inner Harbor, spending a few hours at the National Aquarium.
The 6-year-old boy, his father, stepmother and a small entourage that included a handful of federal marshals arrived at the aquarium Tuesday afternoon for a tour, Baltimore television station WNUV reported.
A family friend also confirmed that they visited the aquarium. Aquarium officials did not return a telephone call by The Associated Press seeking comment.
Elian has been staying in Washington as he awaits a court decision on whether he should be allowed to have a political asylum hearing. His father wishes to return with Elian to Cuba, while his Miami relatives want him to remain in the United States.
Elian was rescued at sea in November after a boat accident claimed the life of his mother and others trying to reach the United States. He spent five months with relatives in Miami before federal agents seized him in a raid and delivered him to his father.
---
HOUSTON (AP) - Eddie Van Halen is scheduled to begin outpatient treatment at a noted cancer center, though hospital officials say he does not have cancer.
The guitarist, who co-founded the rock band that bears his name, visited the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston last Thursday and will begin preventative treatment there, according to the band's Web site.
Hospital spokeswoman Jane Brust said Van Halen does not have cancer and has not had it. He will be treated as part of an outpatient clinical trial to prevent tongue cancer, and may have some risk factors for that type of disease, Brust said.
Van Halen has been a longtime smoker.
Van Halen, who is married to actress Valerie Bertinelli, co-founded the band in 1974 with his older brother, Alex, on drums, bass player Michael Anthony and singer David Lee Roth.
Their 1978 debut album sold more than 10 million copies and they had another big hit in 1984 with the album "1984."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY14 of Stewart, Brosnan
 Load-Date: June 1, 2000

 

End of Document
