

Names In The Game MacLeod, John Smoltz, Alexei Yashin, Charlotte Hornets, Maple Leaf
The Associated Press
May 26, 2000, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 902 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




WASHINGTON (AP) - Former Dodgers manager Tommy Lasorda has a good reason why he never voted for President Clinton.
"I'm a Republican, my father was a Republican and his father was a Republican," Lasorda said Thursday night at a dinner, where he was master of ceremonies. "So someone once asked me, 'If your father was a thief and his father was a thief, would that make you a thief?' I said, that would make me a Democrat."
Moments later, President Clinton walked to the podium. If he knew of Lasorda's dig, he didn't let on.
"I'd like to recognize one of my heroes since I was a kid - Tommy Lasorda," he said.
---
MONTE CARLO, Monaco (AP) - Lance Armstrong, Pele and the Manchester United soccer team were among those honored at the first Laureus Sports Awards.
The awards, which honor the most distinguished athletes in a variety of sports, were announced at a star-studded grouping of celebrities, athletes and royalty at the Sporting Club of Monaco Thursday night.
Among those who received gold trophies designed by Cartier were Tiger Woods and Marion Jones for best male and female athletes.
Armstrong, who returned to cycling last year after a bout with testicular cancer, was honored for the "Best Comeback."
Manchester United was honored as "Best Team of the Year," Pele was cited for his distinguished career in soccer, and Australian marathoner Louise Sauvage was honored as "Best Handicapped Athlete." Spanish golfer Sergio Garcia was cited as the "Best Young Hopeful."
The ceremony drew actors Sylvestor Stallone and David Hasselhoff and sports stars such as gymnast Nadia Comaneci, cyclist Greg Lemond and tennis stars Monica Seles and Venus Williams.
Prince Albert and Princess Stephanie of Monaco and former South African President Nelson Mandela also were among the guests.
 
---
PHOENIX (AP) - John MacLeod, former Phoenix Suns head coach who returned this season as an assistant, is gone again.
MacLeod told The Arizona Republic he has left the Suns to look for another NBA head coaching position.
"There are some jobs open, and this signals the fact that I'm clear and free to pursue other opportunities," he said.
He said he hadn't been contacted by any team, "but I think it's important that people know you're available and what your intentions are."
MacLeod, who coached the Suns for 13 years, returned in December for a one-year deal after Scott Skiles, who had been an assistant, became head coach when Danny Ainge resigned.
MacLeod coached the Suns from 1973 until midway through the 1986-87 season, compiling a 579-543 record. He later coached the Dallas Mavericks and New York Knicks and has an overall NBA record of 707-657.
---
ALPHARETTA, Ga. (AP) - Atlanta Braves pitcher John Smoltz was disappointed after he and other members of the Mount Pisgah Christian School board were removed. Now, he hopes to start a new school.
The Alpharetta school's entire board, which includes Smoltz and comedian Jeff Foxworthy, was ousted May 17 by Mount Pisgah United Methodist Church leadership. The church said the board members wanted too much autonomy.
Smoltz has devoted much time to the school.
"What drives me now is the vision of potentially building another school," he said.
The goal is to open the proposed school by 2001.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Alexei Yashin's arbitration hearing will resume Tuesday at the Corel Center in Ottawa - where he last played for the Senators in the spring of 1999.
"We had to agree to it," Yashin's agent, Mark Gandler, said Friday. "It's the right place to have it."
Yashin, suspended for the season by the Senators Nov. 7 for failing to honor his contract, claims he should be a restricted free agent with compensation July 1, when his five-year contract expires.
The NHL and the Senators contend the Russian star still owes them one season at the $3.6 million he would have earned this season.
A decision from arbitrator Lawrence Holden could take up to 30 days after the final hearing.
---
CHARLOTTE, N.C. (AP) - The Charlotte Hornets can start building a new arena this summer with a bank loan or other interim financing to carry the project until the county and state contribute, co-owner Ray Wooldridge said.
Arena financing experts said the idea is unorthodox and risky. Charlotte's mayor rejected the concept.
Wooldridge said he will try to persuade the city to help pay for the $250 million downtown project without commitments from the state and county, which have been considered key partners in any public funding arrangement. He hopes to break ground Aug. 1, with or without the county and state money lined up.
Wooldridge has said the Hornets are losing nearly $1 million a month at their current home, the Charlotte Coliseum. A new arena, with luxury seating, would generate the revenue to keep the Hornets financially competitive in the NBA.
 
---
TORONTO (AP) - The Toronto Maple Leafs probably won't leave Maple Leaf Gardens after all.
Maple Leaf Sports and Entertainment Ltd., reportedly has two parties interested in buying the Leafs' home of 68 years and is on the verge of entering an agreement in which the team would retain the ice surface and use it as their permanent practice facility.
Under the agreement, expected to be announced shortly, the rink portion would be trimmed to about 4,000 seats and be used as the practice rink and the St. Michael's Majors Ontario Hockey League team. The remainder of the historic building would be redeveloped into condominiums and shops.
 Load-Date: May 27, 2000

 

End of Document
