

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
June 23, 1999, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 609 words
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




Oscar De La Hoya is taking singing lessons and has signed a record deal with EMI Latin Records.
The WBC welterweight champion has been pursued by record companies since he sang last year on the Univision TV show "Cristina," Daily Variety reported Wednesday.
De La Hoya will be featured on Spanish- and English-language albums. He has been getting singing lessons.
---
ST. LOUIS (AP) - The Mark McGwire baseball frenzy may not be over yet.
A sports agent is offering $ 100,000 up front to the fan who catches McGwire's 500th career home run.
And that's just an advance. The ball would be auctioned off in October, and the fan would get the remainder of the money within weeks.
"The total amount eventually paid to the fan could be substantially higher because this baseball may be one of the most valuable ever sold," said Michael Barnes, president of St. Louis-based Collectors Universe One-Of-a-Kind Inc., the world's largest provider of collectibles grading and authentication.
Barnes last year was involved in the sale of McGwire's record-setting 70th home run ball as well as other high-priced balls hit by McGwire and Sammy Sosa.
The 70th home run ball sold for $ 3 million at a public auction last January.
The St. Louis Cardinals slugger needs 21 home runs to reach 500 for his career.
---
MONROVIA, Liberia (AP) - After being acclaimed soccer's world, European and African player of the year, George Weah can now add "Dr." to his list of titles.
Weah, the most famous athlete to emerge from Liberia, Wednesday was awarded an honorary philosophy doctorate in "civic and community relations" from A.M.E. Zion University in the capital, Monrovia.
During a ceremony at the university, administrators lauded Weah for his contribution to sports and humanitarian causes in the West African country, which is still recovering from a civil war.
For several years, Weah bankrolled and and organized Liberia's national soccer team, and is the team captain and key player.
A larger-than-life statue of the player is one of the few monuments in the city that was untouched by seven-year Liberian civil war, which ended in 1996.
---
SAN DIEGO (AP) - A former San Diego Padres catcher will be catching more than baseballs in his new job. He'll be catching criminals.
Dan Walters will graduate from the police academy Friday and become a police officer, a job he says he has always wanted because of the opportunity to make a difference.
"Becoming a cop is something I have had in the back of my mind, even while playing," said Walters, who grew up in Santee, a rural community just east of San Diego.
Walters, a Padres starter in 1992 and 1993, ended his baseball career in 1996 because he severely injured his back diving for a ball in a spring training drill. He had been playing professional baseball since 1984, when he signed with the Houston Astros after graduating from high school.
---
PINEHURST, N.C. (AP) - State officials knew the highway signs pointing the way to the U.S. Open would be hot souvenirs, so they put bolted them down with special, "theft-proof" rivets.
The rivets only made stealing the signs that much more of a challenge. Half of them, about 125, were stolen.
Where the thieves couldn't separate signs from poles, they took both.
"In some places they took the sign and left the arrow" pointing to Pinehurst, said Johnny Coleman, traffic services supervisor in Mecklenburg and Cabarrus counties. "If they want them, they get them."
On Tuesday, state crews were taking down the signs that survived the souvenir-hunting onslaught. They will be sold to the highest bidders.
One man caught Saturday with six signs in his pickup was charged with stealing state property.
 Load-Date: June 23, 1999

 

End of Document
