

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
September 13, 1998, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 668 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: TUSCALOOSA, Ala.
Body




So where was Shaun Alexander last year?
Finally Alabama's premier tailback, Alexander has scored eight of the Crimson Tide's nine touchdowns this season while helping his team to a 2-0 record and a debut Sunday at No. 24 in The Associated Press Top 25 poll.
His play has left some wondering just what could have been if Alexander had been utilized more in last year's dismal 4-7 season.
"I think I could have helped our offense," Alexander said. "You never want to wait to play."
But he did wait, sharing playing time last year with seniors Dennis Riddle and Curtis Alexander in an ineffective three-back rotation, as the Tide finished with its worst record since 1957.
Now with Riddle and Curtis Alexander gone, Alabama coach Mike DuBose made Shaun Alexander his primary back this season and promised him 25-30 carries a game.
The results have been sensational. Alexander rushed for 115 yards and a school-record five touchdowns in a season-opening win over Brigham Young, then backed it up Saturday with a 206-yard performance and three scores in a 32-7 win over Vanderbilt.
 
JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) - Namibia's Frankie Fredericks, the 100- and 200-meter silver medalist at the last two Olympics, is reconsidering about running at the Commonwealth Games.
Fredericks said if someone from his government contacts him to discuss a comment that had insulted him, he might change his mind.
"I love my country, if they would just talk to me," Fredericks said Sunday after winning the 200 sprint in 19.97 seconds at the World Cup.
Fredericks had said he would skip the Commonwealth Games in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, because he was angered after Prime Minister Hage Geingob said Namibian boxer Harry Simon outdid the sprinter by winning the super welterweight title.
Fredericks is Namibia's only hope for a medal at the Commonwealth Games.
 
CALGARY, Alberta (AP) - Negotiations are over if the Calgary Flames and Theoren Fleury do not strike an agreement by the start of the NHL season, the team's franchise player said.
Fleury has set a deadline of Oct. 9 to sign a contract extension with the team.
"It's not going to become a distraction, because it's not going to drag on through the season," he said. "If we can't get something done by the start of the season, then we'll leave it … until whenever."
Fleury is entering the fourth year of a five-year, $ 12-million contract signed in September 1995 and will earn $ 2.4 million this season.
The urgency in signing Fleury to an extension stems from the fact that the fifth year of the deal, worth $ 2.8 million, is at his option.
That means Fleury can terminate the contract in July and become an unrestricted free agent, which frees him to shop himself to any NHL team.
Fleury, his agent Don Baizley and Flames general manager Al Coates refuse to discuss the monetary figures involved in the negotiations, but sources close to the discussions say Fleury has consistently rejected proposals of an average of $ 4 million a season.
There are two reasons for his reluctance. One is Fleury's insistence on seeking his elusive "market value." The other, larger obstacle, is that under terms of the collective bargaining agreement, the Flames cannot offer Fleury a no-trade clause in his contract until he turns 31 next June 29.
If Fleury re-signs with Calgary, he could be settling for considerably less than he could earn with other, richer NHL franchises.
As a result, Fleury is trying to get assurances from the Flames that if he signs with Calgary, he'll stay in Calgary.
 
FRANKFURT, Germany (AP) - Oliver Bierhoff, the AC Milan striker and new German captain, has been chosen Germany's Player of the Year for the 1997-98 season.
Bierhoff, the leading scorer in the Italian league last season with 27 goals for Udinese, got 501 votes in a poll of sports writers conducted for the soccer magazine Kicker.
Lothar Matthaeus of Bayern Munich was second with 196 votes. Olaf Marschall, the striker who helped Kaiserslautern win the Bundesliga title last season, was third with 107 votes.
 Load-Date: September 13, 1998

 

End of Document
