

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
June 28, 1999, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 534 words
Dateline: BARCELONA, Spain
Body




Five-time Tour de France champion Miguel Indurain says the doping scandals haunting international cycling would discourage him from taking part in the Tour were he still racing.
"It takes too much hard work to build up a reputation in sport to risk ruining it in 15 seconds," said Indurain, who retired in 1997. "Unless you have clear guarantees, it is better not to knock on the devil's door."
The controversy over the use of performance-enhancing drugs in cycling's most grueling events broke in last year's Tour. It simmered through the year before boiling over again last month with the expulsion of cycling ace Marco Pantani.
"The riders are under huge pressure, the whole world is on top of them, including the police, as well as the normal tension of the race," Indurain told Europa Press.
With this year's Tour only a week away, several of cycling's major figures have said they will not participate in what used to be the sport's premier event.
"This is a very complicated situation," Indurain said.
---
SILVERSTONE, England (AP) - Damon Hill's Jordan team wants him to make a decision about his future as soon as possible.
The 1996 Formula One champion has said he is retiring after this season.
But after crashing out of the French Grand Prix on the 31st lap Sunday, Hill said he might quit before the British Grand Prix at Silverstone on July 11.
The 38-year-old Briton, with 11 career GP victories, said he wanted to return to his home in Dublin, Ireland, and discuss his future with his wife.
Jordan team officials hope for a decision within the next day or so to allow them to begin preparations for the race.
---
ROME (AP) - Maurice Greene, who broke the world record for 100 meters earlier this month, will run in the Golden Gala meet on July 7.
Greene, the 100 world champion, shattered the old mark for the sport's glamour event by clocking 9.79 seconds at the Olympic Stadium in Athens, Greece, on June 16. He also won the 200 meters last Sunday at the USA Outdoor Track and Field Championships in Eugene, Ore.
Organizers also announced Monday that world 200-meter champion Ato Boldon also will run.
Others to compete are women's 100 world champion Marion Jones, who'll run the 200, and world record holders Kim Batten, in the women's 400 hurdles, and Kenya's Bernard Barmasai, in the 3,000 steeplechase.
---
MANCHESTER, England (AP) - Police will not prosecute Manchester United captain Roy Keane, arrested last month for allegedly assaulting a woman in a Manchester bar.
A spokesman for Greater Manchester Police on Monday said that following a complete investigation by government prosecutors, police had decided not to prosecute Keane.
"Written advice has been received from the prosecutors, and following full consideration of all the facts, no further action will be taken," he said. "All parties have been informed."
Keane, also the captain of the Irish national team, was celebrating United's premiership title with teammates Dwight Yorke, Andy Cole and David Beckham on May 17 when the alleged assault occurred.
The 27-year-old midfielder was arrested and spent the night in custody. Police were called to the cafe bar to investigate a complaint by a woman who said Keane kicked her and injured her.
 Load-Date: June 29, 1999

 

End of Document
