

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
October 15, 2000, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 754 words
Dateline: MIAMI
Body




Before a cheering, dancing audience, Tom Lasorda saluted South Florida's Cuban community in a ceremony marking one of the big upsets at the Sydney Olympics.
"People don't know what the Cuban exiles went through," Lasorda said at a downtown ballroom Saturday night. "They don't have any idea what they had to go through to be rejuvenated again."
The longtime manager of the Los Angeles Dodgers dedicated the U.S. baseball team's 4-0 victory over Cuba to Cuban exiles. His team of mostly minor leaguers produced the first U.S. gold medal in the sport since baseball joined the Olympics in 1992. Both previous golds had gone to Cuba.
Lasorda, whose parents emigrated from Italy, said he understood the difficulties of building a life in a new country.
"You came over," he said. "You took whatever jobs you could to survive. But in your hearts you knew you came to a country where you could be free."
Top Cuban-American officials, entrepreneurs and entertainers attended the event, including Miami Mayor Joe Carollo, Florida Marlins owner John Henry and singer Celia Cruz.
---
ORLANDO, Fla. (AP) - Lenny Krayzelburg, who won three gold medals for the United States at the Sydney Olympics, was honored as swimmer of the year for the second straight year.
Misty Hyman's victory in the 200 butterfly in Sydney was voted the performance of the year, and Richard Quick was voted coach of the year, USA Swimming announced Saturday.
Krayzelburg won the 100- and 200-meter backstroke and was on the record-breaking 400 medley relay team.
Hyman beat heavily favored Susie O'Neill of Australia, bettering Mary T. Meagher's long-standing American record and falling just .07 seconds short of the world record.
Quick, a four-time Olympic coach, was also the U.S. coach at the 1996 Atlanta Games.
---
BEIJING (AP) - Kenya's Ndereva Nelson won the Beijing Marathon for the second time Sunday, and China's Wei Yanan set a course record in capturing the women's race.
Nelson won in 2:13:52, slower than his personal best of 2:10:37 when he won this race in 1996.
A total 13,400 runners competed on the new course, which started in Tiananmen Square and finished in a stadium outside the capital.
China's Hu Gangjun, a three-time winner, placed second in 2:14:01. Zhan Donglin, also of China, was third in 2:14:06.
China took the top three spots among the women. Wei, a 19-year-old college student, was timed in 2:26:34, the fastest female time since the inaugural race in 1981.
---
LONDON (AP) - Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson wants Terry Venables to succeed Kevin Keegan as coach of England's national soccer team.
Ferguson, in an interview in Sunday's News of the World, dismissed the need to hire a foreigner.
"The next England manager should meet three vital requirements: He needs to be English, he needs top-quality experience and his name should be Terry Venables," Ferguson said.
Venables led England to the semifinals of the 1996 European championship but was forced out because of his business dealings.
Keegan quit after a 1-0 loss to Germany in a World Cup qualifier at Wembley on Oct. 7.
---
DUNDEE, Scotland (AP) - Scottish soccer authorities are investigating a report that the chairman of winless Dundee United hit a reporter after a game.
Jim McLean resigned after Saturday's game and could be fined, suspended or expelled by the Scottish Football Association.
McLean reportedly hit a BBC Scotland reporter after Dundee United's 4-0 loss Saturday to Hearts. United has not won after 11 games and is last in Scotland's Premier League.
The SFA is to comment this week.
---
MOTEGI, Japan (AP) - Kenny Roberts Jr., who won motorcycling's world championship last week, captured the Pacific Grand Prix on Sunday.
The rider from Modesto, Calif., led from start to finish in the 25-lap 500cc race.
"The bike was so good I think it could have won without me," he said.
Roberts, who rides for Suzuki, was followed by Honda's Valentino Rossi, who placed second ahead of fellow Italian Max Biaggi.
Roberts' father, known as King Kenny, won the 500cc world champion title for three consecutive years from 1978.
---
CHIBA, Japan (AP) - Naomichi "Joe" Ozaki, the youngest of Japan's golfing Ozaki brothers, won the $1.1 million Japan Open for the second straight year Sunday, his first victory of the season.
He beat Taiwan's Lin Keng-chi by a stroke, closing with a 1-over-par-72 for a total of 3-under 281.
The 44-year-old Ozaki won for the 29th time in his career. Jumbo Ozaki, the eldest of the brothers and a five-time Japan Open winner, shot a 71 and tied for fifth.
 Load-Date: October 16, 2000

 

End of Document
