

Names in the News
The Associated Press
February 4, 2000, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 788 words
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Miss Universe has been focusing on AIDS prevention during her reign and now she's taking a new job: goodwill ambassador for the U.N. Population Fund in her home country of Botswana.
Mpule Kwelagobe will work to improve adolescent reproductive health services, and combat high levels of teen pregnancy as well as transmission of the virus that causes AIDS, the Population Fund announced Thursday.
Botswana, in southern Africa, has one of the world's highest infection rates for AIDS and HIV. Nearly one in four adults has the virus, according to the United Nations.
"She has a tremendous potential to influence young people in the region who are the most common victims of HIV/AIDS," said Corrie Shanahan, spokeswoman for the Population Fund. "She is a force for hope and optimism in these difficult times."
Kwelagobe, 20, is the first person from Botswana to be crowned Miss Universe. She won the honor in May.
---
ST. PAUL, Minn. (AP) - Charlie Brown, Linus, Lucy, Snoopy and the rest of the "Peanuts" gang could soon be popping up around the state Capitol.
Mayor Norm Coleman enthusiastically previewed a proposal Wednesday that envisions a series of large "Peanuts" character sculptures, designed as a tribute to hometown cartoonist Charles Schulz.
Schulz, 77, was diagnosed with colon cancer in November and recently announced his retirement after nearly 50 years of drawing his beloved comic strip.
The Fiberglas sculptures would be patterned after Chicago's "Cows on Parade" promotion last year, featuring dozens of colorfully painted statues that drew national attention.
Coleman said the city's art community could paint the statues. Later, the works could be auctioned to area businesses, with the proceeds going to charity. The statues could then be put on permanent display at area companies.
Details that would need to be worked out for the proposal include securing financing and getting permission to use the copyrighted characters.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - The Tony Awards show has its host back.
Rosie O'Donnell, who was host of the show in 1997 and 1998 but was unable to take part last year because of scheduling conflicts, said she's "thrilled and delighted" to be back.
"It's a great year on Broadway and we intend to entertain television audiences with Broadway's best," she said Thursday.
O'Donnell, a booster of New York theater on her daytime talk show, was credited with increasing the show's ratings 48 percent in 1997 - the highest level in a decade.
The three-hour awards program will be telecast live Sunday, June 4, from Radio City Music Hall. PBS stations will carry the first hour of awards, while CBS will take over the final two hours.
The Tonys are presented by the League of American Theaters and Producers and the American Theater Wing. Nominations will be announced May 8.
---
SAN ANTONIO (AP) - A musical that will open here next month is the latest tribute to slain Tejano singer Selena.
"Selena Forever" will feature 35 singers, actors, dancers and musicians, and nearly 30 songs - 10 of them songs Selena performed. The other songs are a mix of Latin pop and Tejano.
The show is scheduled to open on March 21. One of the first five shows will be in Corpus Christi, home of the slain singer.
"We're tapping into a different public here," Fernando Rivas, who composed the score, told the Corpus Christi Caller-Times. "It's a Latino mindset, but I'm hoping the Anglo world will find this good. I'm hoping it will cross over."
Two San Antonio women - Rebecca Valadez, 21, and Veronica Vasquez, 24 - will share the lead role. Eleven-year-old Denise Stefanie Gonzalez, of Los Angeles, will play the role of Selena as a child.
Selena Quintanilla-Perez was 23 when she was shot to death in a Corpus Christi motel room on March 31, 1995. Yolanda Saldivar, who had been president of Selena's fan club, is serving a life sentence for the murder.
---
NORWICH, Conn. (AP) - Rock star Rick Derringer was freed from jail after presenting a judge with proof that he is up to date in his child support payments, his lawyer said.
Derringer, best known for the hits "Hang on Sloopy" and "Rock and Roll Hoochie Koo" was jailed on Monday, after his ex-wife Dyan claimed he was more than $5,000 behind in support payments for their 9-year-old daughter.
The Derringers, who live in Colchester, have been divorced since Sept. 22.
During a court appearance Thursday, Derringer presented canceled checks showing he has paid his child support in full, said his attorney, Dado Coric.
"What you have here is an underlying custody fight between Rick and his ex-wife," Coric said. "When people are not truthful the system glitches a little bit."
Dyan Derringer has an unlisted phone number. Calls to her attorney, Charles J. Irving, went unanswered Thursday.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY14 of Miss Universe, O'Donnell
 Load-Date: February 5, 2000

 

End of Document
