

Names in the News
The Associated Press
September 19, 1998, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 789 words
Dateline: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.
Body




South African President Nelson Mandela's honorary law degree from Harvard puts him in heady company.
Mandela, 80, is one of only three people to receive an honorary degree from Harvard at a time other than the university's commencement exercises. The others were George Washington in 1776 and Winston Churchill in 1943.
The honor "holds great symbolic significance to the mind and to the future memory of this great American institution - the name of an African is now added to those two illustrious leaders," Mandela said to a standing ovation of more than 8,000 people in Harvard Yard on Friday.
Mandela, who spent 27 years in prison in a fight against apartheid and won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1993, accepted the degree and then called for an end to economic disparities worldwide.
Where there is hunger and suffering, "talk of democracy … can ring hollow and erode confidence in exactly those values we seek to promote," Mandela told the crowd.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - If talk is cheap, no one told Oprah Winfrey: With an estimated $ 550 million in assets, she tops Essence's list of the nation's wealthiest African-American women.
Following the talk show host on the October issue's list is Sheila Crump Johnson, who with her husband, Robert, launched Black Entertainment Television. Her estimated net worth is $ 210 million.
Camille Cosby, wife of entertainer Bill Cosby, is third with estimated assets of $ 170 million. That includes almost half of the estimated Cosby fortune of $ 325 million and income from her production company, C&J Productions.
Rounding out the top five are Eileen Norton, director of the Norton Family Foundation and the wife of Peter Norton, the creator of the software firm Norton Utilities, worth $ 150 million; and Eunice Johnson, wife and partner of Johnson Publishing Co. founder John H. Johnson, worth $ 100 million.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - "Planet of the Apes" star Roddy McDowall has cancer, Daily Variety reported.
McDowall was said to be resting and unable to come to the telephone when columnist Army Archerd called to wish him a happy 70th birthday. Archerd was told the actor was terminally ill with cancer but there was no elaboration, the columnist wrote Friday.
McDowall's agent Craig Shapiro issued a terse "no comment." Telephone calls to the actor's home rang unanswered. McDowall's birthday was Thursday.
McDowall also appeared in "Escape from the Planet of the Apes" in 1971, "Conquest of the Planet of The Apes" 1972 and "Battle for the Planet of the Apes" in 1973, as well as in the short-lived television series.
His film credits include John Ford's 1941 classic "How Green Was My Valley" and the 1943 movies "Lassie Come Home" and "My Friend Flicka."
---
BUFFALO, N.Y. (AP) - Garth Brooks is a friend in just the right place for helping the state's attorney general run ticket scalpers out of business.
Attorney General Dennis Vacco has asked the country music star to speak out against scalpers amid reports that concert tickets are being sold at more than three times their face value.
Brooks, who has spoken out before against scalping, is to perform six sold-out shows in Buffalo later this month.
The shows are a testament to Brooks' popularity, Vacco wrote to Brooks in a letter released Friday.
They also are "a warning flag that the unprecedented demand for Garth Brooks concert tickets will re-energize the persistent problem of illegal ticket scalping for popular events," Vacco wrote.
State law prohibits reselling tickets for more than $ 5 or 10 percent above face value. Brooks, whose hits include "Friends in Low Places," hasn't seen the letter because he is on tour, a spokeswoman said.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Kato Kaelin's libel lawsuit is back on track against a man who told a radio interviewer that Kaelin admitted helping O.J. Simpson hide bloody clothing.
The 2nd District Court of Appeal on Thursday reinstated Kaelin's lawsuit against Klein Al'n over remarks he made to a radio interviewer in 1995. A Superior Court judge had dismissed the suit.
Al'n said he ran into a shaky Kaelin a few days after the June 1994 slashing deaths of Nicole Brown Simpson and friend Ron Goldman at Simpson's estate, and that Kaelin admitted helping Simpson hide bloody clothing inside a trash bag.
Kaelin, who at the time of the killings was a guest at Simpson's estate, lost "significant chances for employment" as a result of the remarks - which he says were false - and a subsequent Globe tabloid article, Kaelin lawyer Gary Bostwick said Friday.
"People started shouting at him, talking about him in public near him, about the fact that he'd helped a murderer," Bostwick said.
Al'n lawyer Shannon Emrick said he had corroborating evidence and that she's confident of winning if the case goes to trial.
 Load-Date: September 19, 1998

 

End of Document
