

Names In The Game Ron Dayne, Amos Zereoue, Beckenbauer, Michael Long, Dan Snyder,
The Associated Press
January 5, 2000, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 881 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




NEW YORK (AP) - NFL commissioner Paul Tagliabue will celebrate the start of the playoffs by ringing the closing bell at the New York Stock Exchange on Thursday, along with four Super Bowl stars.
Joining Tagliabue will be Emerson Boozer and John Dockery from the 1969 New York Jets, Harry Carson from the 1987 New York Giants and Sean Landeta from the '87 and '91 Giants.
---
FRANKFURT, Germany (AP) - Pele has been voted player of the 20th century, ahead of Johan Cruyff and Franz Beckenbauer in a survey of soccer historians.
The former Brazilian star received 1,705 points, while Cruyff, the ex-Dutch star, got 1,303 points in the poll by the International Federation of Football History and Statistics. Beckenbauer, the former German great, was third with 1,228 points.
"I think the poll has the right winner," Cruyff said. "Surely it was decisive that Pele won three World Cup titles."
The late Lev Yashin of Russia was voted the century's top goalkeeper.
Mia Hamm led the top women players of 1999, followed by another American, Michelle Akers.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Tour de France winner Lance Armstrong and track stars Hicham el Guerrouj of Morocco and Maurice Greene are finalists for the 2000 Jesse Owens International Trophy Award.
Armstrong completed his return from testicular cancer, which spread to his lungs, abdomen and brain, by winning the 1999 tour.
El Guerrouj won the 1,500 meters at the 1999 World Championships at Seville, Spain, and set the world mile record of 3 minutes, 43.13 seconds at Rome. Greene set the world 100-meter record of 9.79 at Athens, Greece, and won gold medals in the 100 and 200 plus the 400 relay at the World Championships.
The winner, chosen by an international panel, will be announced Feb. 10.
---
MILWAUKEE (AP) - Heisman Trophy winner Ron Dayne has signed a contract with Sports Marketing & Management Group of Milwaukee to manage his off-the-field career.
The firm will handle endorsements, appearances and other marketing efforts for the Wisconsin running back.
Company president Joe Sweeney said it has been working on several contracts for Dayne, including a shoe deal, an appearance on a cereal box and some memorabilia agreements.
---
PITTSBURGH (AP) - Pittsburgh Steelers rookie running back Amos Zereoue probably will participate in a special program for first-time, nonviolent offenders to clear his record of a drunken driving charge.
Zereoue was arraigned Tuesday on a drunken driving charge filed after he was pulled over by police in suburban Pittsburgh on Sept. 28 for running a stop sign.
In October, Zereoue waived his right to a preliminary hearing. Del Greco said Zereoue will seek admission into the Accelerated Rehabilitative Disposition program, in which first-time offenders can clear their record if they complete probation and other court-ordered programs.
Police say Zereoue failed a field-sobriety test. Other tests showed that his blood-alcohol content was 0.16 percent, above Pennsylvania's legal limit for drivers of 0.10.
---
FRANKFURT, Germany (AP) - Franz Beckenbauer has criticized the new format of the Champions League, urging earlier kickoff times and a reduction of games available on free TV.
"It can't go on like this," Beckenbauer said. "More games belong to pay-per-view television. Who is interested, he pays."
Beckenbauer, the former German star, is a vice-president of the German soccer federation and chairman of Bayern Munich, the Bundesliga champion and one of the big European clubs whose demands for more money led UEFA to create the expanded Champions League.
He also said Champions League games should be played every two weeks. Weekly games lead to a soccer saturation, Beckenbauer said.
---
SYDNEY, Australia (AP) - New Zealand pro golfer Michael Long will not defend his title in the Greg Norman Classic next month after injuring his neck while bodysurfing last week.
"I was trying to get over a wave and got flipped over," Long said. "My head hit the bottom and I thought, 'What have I done here?' "
Doctors said he narrowly escaped permanent damage.
Long will miss the remainder of this season's Australasian PGA Tour.
---
LANDOVER, Md. (AP) - Hundreds of Washington Redskins fans spent the night at Fedex Field Tuesday for a chance to grab cheap seats for the team's first playoff game in seven years.
But they didn't have to wait in the cold. Team owner Dan Snyder allowed them into the enclosed, posh club level and ordered that a concession stand be opened to serve them.
"We had big-screen televisions, a comfortable couch and it was warm," said Tammy Souder, who was No. 3 in line. "This was much better than camping on the parking lot."
The team made 5,000 tickets available to nonseason ticket holders for Saturday's NFC first-round playoff game against the Detroit Lions.
---
PITTSBURGH (AP) - Mario Lemieux, already a member of the Hockey Hall of Fame, will be inducted into the Pittsburgh Penguins hall of fame Feb. 3.
He will be joined by Jack Riley, the general manager when the Penguins joined the NHL in 1967.
Lemieux, a six-time NHL scoring champion, led the Penguins to Stanley Cup championships in 1991 and 1992 before retiring in 1997. Last year, he formed a group of investors that purchased the franchise after it plunged into bankruptcy.
Riley was the Penguins general manager from 1967-70 and 1972-74.
 Load-Date: January 6, 2000

 

End of Document
