

Names in the News
January 6, 1996, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 683 words
Dateline: MEMPHIS, Tenn.
Body




Symphony fans, brace yourselves. The "Elvis Overture" makes its debut to mark the king of rock 'n' roll's 61st birthday.
The 12-minute overture, using parts of 20 Elvis Presley hits, will be performed Saturday night by the Memphis Symphony Orchestra at a birthday concert expected to draw some 4,000 spectators.
"It kind of carries you through the whole scope of his career," said Todd Morgan, spokesman for Graceland, Presley's former residence.
Former Presley backup singers and band members are to perform with the orchestra as videotapes of Elvis in concert provide the lead vocal.
"Elvis will be about a third of the show," Morgan said. "The more we do with Elvis, the more the people like it."
The symphony's annual Elvis concert is part of a weekend-long celebration. Presley was born Jan. 8, 1935. He died Aug. 16, 1977, at age 42.
---
LONDON (AP) - Andre Previn has spent much of his career championing British music. Queen Elizabeth II has returned the favor by awarding the American composer a knighthood.
Previn was cited Friday for his "outstanding contribution to Anglo-American cultural relations and the musical life of Britain."
He has won four Oscars for scoring films such as 1963's "Irma La Douce," but he told The Times of London in today's edition that the knighthood means more to him. "I feel a great deal of gratitude."
While conducting the London Symphony Orchestra from 1968-79, Previn championed British composers such as Ralph Vaughan Williams and William Walton. His British television specials also were popular.
Born and trained as a pianist in Germany, Previn, 66, became an American citizen in 1943.
Other non-Britons who have won honorary knighthoods include Irish rocker Bob Geldof, for his charitable work in Ethiopia in the 1980s, and U.S. Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf, for commanding the Allied Forces during the Gulf War.
---
SAN ANTONIO (AP) - Doggone it. Country-western singer George Strait wants his pet pooch back.
Since the much-photographed Buster, a Blue Heeler, turned up missing from the family's South Texas ranch Dec. 27, Strait has launched a massive missing pet campaign.
"I lost my dog. … He is very loved by our family. Please help!" implores Strait in a large ad in the San Antonio Express-News.
So far, the promise of an unspecified cash reward has reaped lots of curiosity seekers, but no real leads, said Strait spokeswoman Linda Scales.
On Friday, the search for the 8-year-old, blue-gray dog with tan front paws expanded to San Antonio and North Texas. Buster disappeared near Catarina, southwest of San Antonio.
The pet is best known for appearing on the singer's album "Easy Come, Easy Go" and in his Wrangler jeans commercials.
 
 NEW YORK (AP) - Geraldo Rivera is leaving the studio for the front lines.
The talk show host went to Bosnia Friday and will interview U.S. soldiers in Tuzla Monday on his CNBC show, "Rivera Live."
Rivera also will help the charity Feed the Children deliver five truckloads of food, clothing and bedding to the Mostar Orphanage, CNBC officials said.
Last year, Rivera and the Rev. Larry Jones, head of Feed the Children, raised more than $ 1 million to assist the victims of the Oklahoma City federal building bombing.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Sylvester Stallone's on-again, off-again engagement to model Jennifer Flavin is on again.
She's in the early stages of pregnancy with the couple's first child, Stallone spokesman Paul Bloch said Friday. No wedding date was announced.
Stallone, who has two children by a previous marriage, is in Rome working on "Daylight," a film about the aftermath of a collapse in New York's Holland Tunnel.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Michael Jackson has business meetings scheduled this weekend in New York City - his first trip back to the Big Apple since collapsing during a concert rehearsal.
Jackson, 37, also planned to take in a New York Knicks basketball game with director Spike Lee on Tuesday, Jackson spokesman Lee Solters said Friday.
Jackson was stricken Dec. 6 while rehearsing at the Beacon Theater for an HBO special and spent a week in a Manhattan hospital recovering from a gastrointestinal ailment.
 Load-Date: January 6, 1996

 

End of Document
