

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
March 17, 1999, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 725 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: CHELTENHAM, England
Body




Queen Mother Elizabeth presented a prize to jockey Mick Fitzgerald for winning a race named in her honor at the Cheltenham Festival on Wednesday, then watched him fall off her horse in the next race.
Fitzgerald rode Call Equiname to a 1 1/8-length victory over favorite Edredon Bleu in the Queen Mother Champion Chase, the feature race of the National Hunt festival program.
He then rode Easter Ross, one of 30 starters in the Coral Cup handicap hurdle, but was dismounted going over the second fence to the dismay of the 98-year-old mother of Queen Elizabeth II.
Wearing the blue and buff striped silks and black cap of the queen mother's royal stable, Fitzgerald rolled on the ground while the 6-year-old gelding finished the race with no jockey aboard.
Fitzgerald was able to ride in the next race.
---
LONDON (AP) - Chris Ramsey became England's first black international soccer coach Wednesday when he was appointed to take the English under-20 squad to next month's world youth championships in Nigeria.
The 36-year-old former Brighton and Swindon defender also had jobs coaching in the United States and Malta.
"When I started playing, I was among the first batch of black players in this country," said Ramsey, who played for Brighton in 1983 when it reached the FA Cup final.
"To be the first black coach to lead out an England side … I can't tell you how much it means to me. Hopefully I can open the door and a lot of others will come flooding in."
---
SOWETO, South Africa (AP) - Two of the world's fastest runners, Marion Jones and Michael Johnson, interrupted training Wednesday to coach children in this black township southwest of Johannesburg.
The two Americans will compete Friday in the invitational Engen Summer Series Grand Prix at Roodepoort west of Johannesburg.
Several hundred young children, aged 5 to 7, and some adults met with the runners at Netherlands Stadium. About 1,000 students watched the session.
"It's great to get involved with them and by us getting involved, it might make the kids' life a bit more special," said Jones.
Johnson, who holds the world's 200 meter record, encouraged the children to practice and train despite poor sports facilities.
"When we started we also did not have the best facilities and even now we might have some of the best athletes in the world, but still don't have the greatest of facilities," Johnson said.
---
PITTSBURGH (AP) - Former Pitt and Dallas Cowboys running back Tony Dorsett backed out of an appearance at a student rally Wednesday, saying he didn't have all the facts about a stadium debate.
Dorsett and his son, former Pitt cornerback Anthony Dorsett, had been scheduled to speak at the University of Pittsburgh about their experiences at Pitt Stadium, which may be torn down and replaced with a basketball arena.
The Panthers might move to the Steelers' new stadium for home games in 2001. University trustees will vote on the issue Thursday.
The elder Dorsett canceled his appearance Tuesday, and the rally at the student union was called off.
Dorsett told student government president George Mongell that he didn't have all the facts about the stadium debate, so he didn't feel comfortable speaking to the students.
---
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - Sterling Marlin, a Tennessee fan, will paint his race cars orange in honor of the Vols when he races in the state this year.
His Winston Cup car will be orange for the two races in Bristol, Tenn. His Busch Series car will be painted orange for the two races in Bristol and an April race in Nashville.
---
ORLANDO, Fla. (AP) - Parents were angry at pro golfer P.H. Horgan III after his pilot, flying the PGA player and his wife to the Bay Hill Invitational, landed a helicopter on a soccer field crowded with children.
Parents rushed get about 100 5-year-olds and 6-year-olds off the YMCA field before the helicopter landed. No one was injured.
"Then out of the helicopter comes this couple carrying their golf bags," said Karen Woody, whose daughter was playing on the field Monday.
Reacting to complaints from parents, the FAA said it would investigate whether the landing violated federal regulations.
The YMCA had given the pilot permission to land on the field, which is close to the Bay Hill golf club where the tournament is being held.
Bay Hill tournament officials said Horgan regretted the incident and would apologize in writing to the families.
 Load-Date: March 17, 1999

 

End of Document
