

Names In The Game
July 12, 1996, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 661 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: SAN DIEGO
Body




A judge threw out a jury's $ 50 award to a table dancer who claimed she was grabbed in the crotch and injured by St. Louis Rams defensive end Leslie O'Neal.
Judge Thomas Duffy granted a request by O'Neal's lawyer to reverse the jury's finding of sexual battery and throw out the award to Christy Barsoom, a former table dancer.
"Our position is that this has never been about money," said Robert Juskie, O'Neal's attorney. "It's been about clearing his name. It isn't a matter of $ 50 or $ 100."
Duffy said Thursday there was not enough evidence to prove O'Neal sexually battered Barsoom last year during an argument at the topless bar.
Barsoom, who has since left dancing, now lives in Michigan and is raising her two children. O'Neal left the San Diego Chargers earlier this year to join the Rams.
County prosecutors rejected Barsoom's case after determining "there was insufficient evidence to convince 12 jurors beyond a reasonable doubt that a crime had occurred," said James Pippin, a supervisor in the San Diego County District Attorney's office.
---
FRANKFURT, Germany (AP) - Steffi Graf's father will go on trial in September on tax-evasion charges, the Mannheim district court announced Friday.
Peter Graf and the family tax adviser, Joachim Eckardt, are charged with failing to report $ 28 million of his daughter's earnings to evade $ 13.3 million in taxes between 1987 and 1993.
The exact date of the trial has not been set, but it's likely to start in the first half of September, the press office of the court said.
This was likely to give Steffi Graf enough time to complete the U.S. Open, the last of the four Grand Slam tournaments and it ends Sept. 2. She won her fifth French Open and seventh Wimbledon singles titles earlier this year.
Graf, who shares the top ranking with Monica Seles, will compete at the Olympics.
Investigators have not raised any charges against the player, but they are still looking into how much she knew about the management of her earnings. Peter Graf managed his daughter's finances for years.
Peter Graf and Eckardt have been in investigative custody for 11 months. Authorities have rejected several appeals to have them released on bail.
---
PROVO, Utah (AP) - Life is much quieter in Provo for 1992 Olympic silver medal winner Frankie Fredericks, whose native Namibia reveres him as a national hero.
That's just fine with Fredericks, who won medals in the 100- and 200-meter dashes and is preparing for the Atlanta Games.
Last week, Fredericks ran the second-fastest 100-meters in history, turning in a 9.86-second effort in Lausanne, Switzerland. Two days later, he upset new world record-holder Michael Johnson in a 200-meter race in Oslo, Norway.
"One of the main reasons I returned to Provo is because nobody knew who I was," Fredericks told the Daily Herald. "I don't have to do a lot of public appearances. In Namibia, I don't have time to concentrate on things."
Returning to his home country in south Africa would have made preparations for the Olympics difficult, if not impossible. But in Provo, he said, he can keep a low profile.
Fredericks is among favorites for Olympic gold in both the 100- and 200-meter events.
In Lausanne, it appeared Fredericks could have beat the world record had he not celebrated by raising his arms before crossing the finish line.
"If I'm supposed to break the world record, I will," Fredericks said. "The most important thing is that I ran with the best in the world and, on that particular day, I beat everybody. I'm just happy I ran so well."
After the Games, Fredericks will return to his job with Rossing, Ltd., a uranium mining company in Namibia, where he works part-time writing computer programs and in marketing.
---
HARTFORD, Conn. (AP) - Citing a difference in philosophy, the Hartford Whalers director of player personnel said he will resign.
Kevin Maxwell, a former scout for the Whalers, has been with the NHL team since July 1992.
"There is a total difference in philosophy," said Maxwell.
 Load-Date: July 12, 1996

 

End of Document
