

National Geographic Traveler names the must-see spots of a lifetime
The Associated Press
October 1, 1999, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 517 words
Byline: By RANDOLPH E. SCHMID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Some are popular vacation spots, some can be reached only through a long and costly trek. One has been visited by only a few people and one can be enjoyed without leaving the desk.
Two years in the making, National Geographic Traveler magazine has selected the 50 "places of a lifetime - the must-see spots for the complete traveler."
"We are celebrating these places as the century turns, the places you should visit in your lifetime if you are a real traveler," said Keith Bellows, editor of the travel magazine published by the National Geographic Society.
These places, Bellows said, "capture the spirit and diversity of our world … each of them marks you indelibly when you experience it."
The 50 winners - plus one bonus destination - were picked from more than 500 nominations by National Geographic writers and editors along with outside advisers.
Perhaps the easiest to reach spot on the list, placed in the "world wonders" category, is "cyberspace … a destination unlike any visited by humans before."
"Directions of how to get there and what to do once you arrive change with each person you ask. Attempting to map cyberspace is impossible because it is an unchartable land that exists in the ether, that halfway point between your computer and my computer," Traveler reports.
At the other end of the most-visited scale is the 51st, or bonus location, space.
"My pockets filled with a picnic lunch, I float more than 150 miles above the Earth and I look out of the spacecraft's windows; they are filled with Earth, heavenly Earth. She beckons and I follow," recalled astronaut Story Musgrave, one of the few to have ventured to this destination.
Each of the 51 special locations is described in an essay by a guest writer, including former U. N. Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, Virgin Airlines founder Richard Branson, Sen. Edward Kennedy, actor Hugh Grant, Playboy founder Hugh Hefner, singer Eartha Kitt and actor-comedian Robin Williams, among others.
Probably the best-known and most widely visited locations on the list are found in the category Urban Spaces - the cities that offer visitors history, entertainment and culture. Included are Barcelona, Hong Kong, Istanbul, Jerusalem, London, New York, Paris, Rio de Janeiro, San Francisco and Venice.
Wild places, the "last bastions of Eden," involve more exotic travel but also attract many visitors. They include Africa's Serengeti plain, "a vast natural ecosystem where great herds of wildlife have annual migrations." Others in this category include the coral reefs of Papua New Guinea, Australia's vast outback and Antarctica.
Also exotic but less wild is the category Paradise Found - the lovely islands of the Pacific Ocean, the Boundary Waters along Minnesota's border with Canada and the Torres del Paine National Park in southern Chile, among others.
The great outdoors in the Country Unbound category includes such spots as England's Lake District, California's Big Sur, the Alps and Coastal Norway.
And World Wonders features such grand locations as The Great Wall of China, the Taj Mahal, the Pyramids, Vatican City and cyberspace.
 Load-Date: October 1, 1999

 

End of Document
