

Nigeria sees a quiet revolution, but will the military leave?
The Associated Press
October 19, 1998, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 900 words
Byline: TIM SULLIVAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ABUJA, Nigeria
Body




It was a long time coming, but change finally came to Nigeria. What it took was the death of a dictator.
After years of withering under corruption, political brutality and diplomatic isolation, Africa's most populous nation has plunged headlong into reform since Gen. Sani Abacha's sudden death in June.
Political prisoners have been freed, exiles have come home, elections are scheduled and a return to civilian rule is planned. Perhaps most importantly, Nigerians now believe they have a leader, Gen. Abdulsalami Abubakar, who keeps his promises.
"I think Abubakar is committed to reform," said Abdul Oroh of Nigeria's Civil Liberties Organization. "I'm sure he's thinking of history, how history will treat him."
But if Abubakar has proven to be a popular leader and an adroit politician, the future of Nigeria is not supposed to lie with him - or with the other generals who run this poverty-wracked nation from well-guarded villas in Abuja, the capital.
In theory, the generals are to recede into the background after the May 29th civilian transition, "returning to the barracks," as Abubakar puts it.
In reality, few people believe the rich and powerful soldiers will simply disappear from the political scene. They've been around too long - controlling the government for all but 10 years of 38 years of independence - and have too much to lose.
How much power the generals and admirals may hang on to, though, and how they may do it, are the questions that may not be answered until a civilian administration is in place.
"The military will never relinquish power to civilians in our generation," said Saleh Michika, an outspoken former governor of northern Adamawa State. "Maybe to our grandchildren, or our grandchildren's grandchildren, but not now."
The change that Abubakar has effected, and the fear that the military may not actually leave, have Nigerians wavering between hope and cynicism.
"Abubakar has released political prisoners and he instructed the government to increase the salaries of government workers … but I have no certainty of change," said Sani Sadiq, spending a recent afternoon with friends in a tiny tailor shop in the dusty northern city of Kano.
"The change between Sani Abacha and Abubakar is very little. But I'm hoping, hoping change will come."
Even the military junta hints civilian rule could be transitory.
"They're doing everything to let go of power. But there are factors that will make that possible or not possible," said Richard Ikiebe, an adviser to the junta's No. 2 official, the chief of the general staff, Rear Adm. Mike Akhigbe.
What happens, Ikiebe insists, depends on the politicians elected in local, state and finally presidential elections over the next five months. If they are honest and energetic, he said, the military will have no reason to leave the barracks again.
"If we have the right people in government next year, I don't see how the military can hold on to power, either in the background or directly," he said.
But the political scene is in a state of flux, and long-standing ethnic and religious animosities between Muslims in the north and Christians and animists in the south remain strong. Newly formed parties are poorly defined, only three men of significant stature have declared presidential candidacies and one of the most talked-about potential candidates is a former military ruler.
In addition, critics say the military has little room to lecture civilian politicians about hard work and honesty. The past two military regimes - Abacha's and Gen. Ibrahim Babangida's - were rife with corruption and incompetence.
Their misrule left the oil-rich nation crippled. Electricity blackouts can last for weeks in parts of Lagos, the country's business center. Murderous highwaymen haunt the roads, and it can take three days for motorists to make it through the lines at gasoline stations.
Abacha's human rights record, with thousands of opposition figures imprisoned and dozens killed, left Nigeria a pariah state internationally.
In a few months, though, Abubakar has shifted the government's direction, freeing prisoners, meeting foreign emissaries and traveling to Europe and the United States.
In major moves designed to fight corruption, he ordered raises for pitifully paid civil servants - the minimum wage went from about $ 9 a month to about $ 60 - and ordered open bidding for government contracts.
Not everyone is impressed. The junta's critics say the new government is winning praise simply for not being as harsh and destructive as Abacha.
They note that Abubakar flourished during Abacha's rule, that political prisoners remain in the nation's fetid prisons and that some repressive laws are still enforced, including the hated Decree 2, which allows imprisonment without trial.
But if the political scene has changed, the economic plight of Nigeria's 115 million people remains largely unchanged.
The country is mired in poverty despite enormous oil wealth, the profits having evaporated into mismanaged development projects and foreign bank accounts. Unemployment is rampant and simply surviving is a struggle for most Nigerians.
"Nigeria has so many things, but all the money goes away," said Clifford Amadi, who scratches out a living selling used electrical parts in Lagos and says he barely earns enough to feed his family.
Still, he feels things are looking up for his country.
"If we work to get together, we can make it."
 
 Load-Date: October 19, 1998

 

End of Document
