

No joy in Ivory Coast for supporters of the other opposition leader
The Associated Press
October 26, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 713 words
Byline: By TIM SULLIVAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ABIDJAN, Ivory Coast
Body




His face is smeared with black soot - an age-old tradition here before going into battle - his voice is raised to the verge of shouting, his anger is palpable.
When celebrations broke out on the streets of Abidjan after the leader of the military junta was forced from power Wednesday and opposition politician Laurent Gbagbo became this West African nation's new leader, Richard Kuasi did not join in.
Kuasi and thousands of other supporters of Ivory Coast's most popular opposition leader, Alassane Dramane Ouattara, say the presidency should by all rights go to their man, who was barred from running in Sunday's presidential elections.
That faultline of resentment means the instability that has plagued Ivory Coast for months may not be over, even after the dramatic events that ousted junta leader Gen. Robert Guei.
"If the soldiers leave, that's great, but let's have new elections," Kuasi said after marching with thousands of other Ouattara followers Wednesday to the state-controlled broadcast facilities, which had been seized hours earlier by Gbagbo supporters. "This isn't right."
Gbagbo came to power riding on the support of protesters who flooded the streets of Abidjan and other cities and of soldiers and police who turned their back on Guei. The demonstrations came after Guei dissolved the electoral commission as it counted ballots from Sunday's vote and declared himself the winner.
Gbagbo insists it was he who actually won the vote. But a victory in the deeply flawed election would be no proof of broad-based support.
While very popular in some parts of Ivory Coast, Gbagbo's overall backing is thought to be far less than that of Ouattara or Emile Constant Bombet, the candidate of the former ruling party. The Supreme Court barred both men from running in the election - which both their parties then boycotted. That left just a fraction of registered voters to actually cast ballots, including Gbagbo supporters, who came out en masse.
In an election involving all three men, observers say it's very doubtful that Gbagbo could win.
But Ivory Coast's new leader made no moves Wednesday to make peace with Ouattara, a onetime political ally who had blasted him for refusing to boycott the elections.
"I promised … that I would reach out to the main political formations. But I will not take" Ouattara, he told French TV5 television. "I will take lesser-known people who are less marked, less typecast."
Ouattara supporters also accuse Gbagbo of race-baiting, saying he heightens ethnic divisions between his mostly southern, Christian backers and Ouattara's largely northern, Muslim followers for his own political ends.
Amadou Coulibaly, a spokesman for Ouattara's Rally of the Republicans, said the party had no official reaction to Gbagbo's rise to power. But, he added, "our supporters are in the streets, protesting that we were not involved in these elections. They want the process to be repeated."
The anger of those supporters was obvious outside the broadcasting facilities in the exclusive Cocody suburb, where crowds set up roadblocks of wooden tables, burning tires and roadside garbage.
Several times Wednesday afternoon, security forces in riot gear drove away the crowds, using tear gas, gunshots fired into the air and swinging truncheons. While the situation was often tense, witnesses reported no significant clashes between the Gbagbo and Ouattara camps, who massed on either side of the broadcasting compound.
The talk, though, indicated clashes may not be too far away.
A middle-aged Ouattara supporter, who identified himself only as Mr. Diomande, screamed at the crowd, urging them to push toward state television - a major symbol of government power - and "fight this second coup d'etat."
But many say Ouattara's followers are just venting empty talk. For months, they had threatened civil war if Ouattara was not allowed to run in the elections, only to calmly remain at home after the Supreme Court verdict when he told them not to take to the streets.
Jean Kouassi, a Gbagbo supporter sitting on the curb, was unimpressed as he watched the protest.
Ouattara "didn't even cry out when he was excluded as a candidate because he feared the military. But now that we have won, he is ready to destabilize the country. He is a traitor and a coward."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY189; AP Graphics IVORY COAST GBAGBO, IVORY COAST
 Load-Date: October 27, 2000

 

End of Document
