

Old foe the weather delays balloon bids in Australia, Switzerland
The Associated Press
December 28, 1998, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 584 words
Byline: ROHAN SULLIVAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ALICE SPRINGS, Australia
Body




Before they even got off the ground, the latest team seeking to fly a balloon nonstop around the world was reminded of the single factor that has defeated every attempt so far - the weather.
Denver real estate magnate Dave Liniger looked up Monday at the gray clouds shadowing his team's launch zone in the Australian outback and shrugged: "Its raining in the desert."
At this time of year, arid central Australia should have clear skies and temperatures of up to 105 degrees, hot enough to keep all but the local camels and kangaroos in the shade.
But the three-pilot Re/Max International team was forced to postpone a planned Tuesday takeoff because of a high pressure weather system over the region.
The next possible launch dates are Thursday or Friday, by which time the stiff winds and rain are supposed to have passed.
"We are anxious to get into the air," Liniger said.
Winds much stronger than those considered safe for takeoff were blowing between the ground and an altitude of 900 feet, said Dan Pedersen, the team's mission control director.
"Winds exceeding those maximums could not only damage the balloon but present danger to the three pilots and their gondola," said Pedersen, a former U.S. Navy test pilot.
The bid by Liniger and his copilots - journalist Bob Martin of Albuquerque, N.M., and Australian balloonist John Wallington - comes just days after another balloonist team splashed down in the Pacific Ocean.
Chicago millionaire Steve Fossett, British tycoon Richard Branson and Per Lindstrand of Sweden abandoned their flight Friday off the northeast tip of Oahu, Hawaii - about halfway around the world from their starting point in Morocco.
The three men have made a combined 11 attempts to circle the globe, and several other attempts have also failed.
Meanwhile, Switzerland is hoping to gain permission from China for a Swiss-based balloon team to fly over Chinese airspace in another around-the-world attempt later this week.
The crew - Swiss pilot Bertrand Piccard and his partner, Brian Jones of Britain - postponed its flight because it hadn't gotten the go-ahead from China, and now weather conditions mean the team won't be able to launch from the alpine village of Chateau d'Oex before Saturday.
The Re/Max team in Australia expects to succeed where others have failed by floating at the edge of the Earth's atmosphere, where there are no significant weather features.
"When we look up, the sky will be black. We will see stars 24 hours a day," Liniger said Monday.
When they look down, the pilots will be so high they will see the curve of the planet.
Flying in subspace will pose its own dangers, however. A sudden leak in the gondola - a 7-foot-by-8-foot capsule that is pressurized and temperature-controlled like a mini-spacecraft - could be fatal.
The team's balloon is made of polyethylene and has a skin as thin as plastic food wrap. It is 460 feet in diameter at "full float" and 700 feet tall.
Wearing pressurized suits made by Russian space engineers, the crew will rise 1,000 feet a minute during takeoff to reach a cruising altitude of 130,000 feet, or about 24 miles above sea level.
There they expect to catch winds that will carry them west at up to 80 mph along a route that almost directly follows the Tropic of Capricorn.
Sixteen to 18 days and about 22,800 miles later, they hope to return to Earth somewhere in the Australian outback.
The balloon is of a type developed by NASA and has been used before to carry unmanned scientific payloads to heights of about 80,000 feet.
 Load-Date: December 28, 1998

 

End of Document
