

On the margins, a heated battle for white South Africa votes
The Associated Press
June 1, 1999, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 494 words
Byline: DAVID CRARY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, South Africa
Body




Relegated to a minor role in South Africa's election, white voters have been wooed by a half-dozen opposition groups, including a former anti-apartheid party now making headway with calls to reinstate the death penalty.
No single party has emerged as the clear-cut standard bearer for the 4.5 million whites who comprise 11 percent of South Africa's population.
But polls indicate the largest bloc of white votes in the election Wednesday is likely to go to the Democratic Party, formed a decade ago as a coalition of anti-apartheid whites but now appealing to conservatives with calls for get-tough policies on crime.
The Democratic Party is a direct descendent of the Progressive Federal Party, which fought to ease segregation and extend political rights to blacks during the heyday of apartheid. Now, with the black-led African National Congress in power and favored to win re-election, the Democratic Party has adopted the slogan "Fight Back" and transformed itself into a vehemently anti-ANC party.
"The ANC wants to colonize every possible nook and cranny of our society," said the Democratic Party's pugnacious leader, Tony Leon. "Its appetite is bottomless."
The Democratic Party's gains in the polls have come largely at the expense of the New National Party, the current version of the National Party that ruled during more than four decades of apartheid.
For most of its reign, the National Party was supported loyally by most of the country's 3 million Afrikaners, the mainly Dutch-descended whites who began settling in South Africa in the 1600s.
Hard-line Afrikaners began deserting the National Party during the 1980s, when the government tried to moderate the apartheid system. Pollsters say a new wave of Afrikaner defections is occurring as the New National Party woos mixed-race voters while the Democratic Party hammers away with anti-ANC messages.
The result has been an ironic reversal of the old roles of the two white-led parties, with the New National Party depicting itself as multiracial and accusing the Democratic Party of catering to white fear.
"The isolationist and adversarial approach now offered by parties such as the Democratic Party is counterproductive," New National Party leader Marthinus van Schalkwyk said Tuesday. "The fueling of racial antagonism … belongs to the past."
At the far-right of the political spectrum, a couple of hard-line, Afrikaner-led parties are seeking votes from whites still tempted by talk of a white homeland.
Other whites are being wooed by the United Democratic Movement, which has a white and black as its co-leaders, and by the small Federal Alliance, led by the former czar of South Africa's rugby federation.
The ANC, confident of re-election, has been able to view the struggle among the white parties with a degree of condescension.
Nelson Mandela, who is stepping down as president, has dismissed the entire batch as "Mickey Mouse parties" and urged whites to join the majority by supporting the ANC.
 Load-Date: June 1, 1999

 

End of Document
