

Once again, it's Richardson to the rescue
December 10, 1996, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 744 words
Byline: By JIM ABRAMS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




He's become America's ambassador to the rogue states of the world. Whether it's North Korea or Iraq or Cuba, Rep. Bill Richardson is the man with the mission when Americans need rescuing.
His latest foray into the diplomatic underworld was in Sudan, where he managed Sunday to trade rice, Jeeps and radios for three Red Cross workers, including an American, held by Sudanese rebels for more than five weeks. Earlier, the rebels had demanded $ 100 million in ransom.
"This one was one of the toughest, it was totally a surreal atmosphere," Richardson said Monday in an interview from Geneva, speaking of negotiating for five hours under a tree with commandos wielding machine guns. He said the breakthrough came when he learned that the daughter of one rebel leader had died of measles and he proposed that a water safety survey be conducted in the region.
It was just another day in the field for the eight-term New Mexico Democrat, who in the last two years has twice helped captured Americans get out of North Korea, negotiated the release of two Americans held by Iraq and secured the release of an American woman facing life in a prison in Bangladesh.
Richardson, 49, a senior member of the House Intelligence Committee, has done all this despite - or perhaps because of - his lack of formal ties with the administration.
"Sometimes in diplomacy you need a fig leaf," said Richard Haass of the Brookings Institution. "The fact that he is not inside the administration but somehow connected to it is a big plus."
As a negotiator, "he doesn't take no for an answer," said Stanley Roth of the U.S. Institute of Peace, a former adviser on the National Security Council who has known the congressman for many years. "This guy really has been extraordinarily capable."
Richardson, a trusted friend of President Clinton's, has also been careful to keep in step with administration policies. That wasn't always the case with former President Carter and his freelance diplomatic efforts in Haiti and North Korea.
State Department spokesman Glyn Davies stressed Monday that in his "very positive" success in gaining the release of the hostages in Sudan, Richardson had not violated the U.S. policy against negotiating with hostage-takers because he was working on behalf of the Red Cross.
"I'm not a lone ranger," Richardson said. "I think it is counterproductive to get involved in cases unless the government is supportive of my efforts."
Working in a cross-cultural environment comes easy for a man who was born to a Mexican mother, lived in Mexico City as a child and is fluent in Spanish. His district in northern New Mexico is 34 percent Hispanic and 20 percent Indian. He has a graduate degree in diplomacy from Tufts University and began his career at the State Department's congressional relations office.
A senior member of the Hispanic caucus in Congress, his name was on the short list for interior secretary in 1992. He is being considered this year for one of several high level positions in the second Clinton administration, including U.N. ambassador, commerce secretary and energy secretary.
Richardson's first rescue operation came by chance, when a visit to North Korea in December 1994 coincided with a U.S. Army helicopter going down in North Korean airspace.
He negotiated with the North Koreans, who have no diplomatic relations with Washington, the eventual release of one airman, and returned with the body of a second who died in the incident.
In July 1995, after meeting eight times with Iraq's ambassador to the U.N., Richardson traveled to Baghdad where he met Saddam Hussein and secured the release of two American mechanics who had spent four months in Iraqi prisons after mistakenly wandering across the border.
In January he met Fidel Castro for five hours to win a cut in visa fees charged Cubans migrating to the United States. He returned to Havana the following month to accompany three freed prisoners to Miami.
In July, he went to Bangladesh to help win a presidential pardon for a young American woman who had served 4 years of a life sentence for drug smuggling.
His latest trip to Pyongyang was last month, when he got the North Koreans to release Evan C. Hunziker, a Seattle man who was charged with spying after he illegally entered the country from China in August.
His one setback so far has been in India, where a trip to Kashmir last February failed to win the release of four Westerners, including an American, held by Kashmiri separatists.
 Load-Date: December 10, 1996

 

End of Document
