

One place, all places: Visit Florida and see the world - or a facsimile thereof
The Associated Press
January 31, 1999, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 2368 words
Byline: TED ANTHONY, AP National Writer
Dateline: ORLANDO, Fla.
Body




One recent sunny day in central Florida, a minor problem surfaced. The drawbridge was up, so a cluster of modern travelers couldn't cross into China. They found themselves stuck in a jungle outpost just past Germany.
It didn't matter, really. They had options.
They could catch a five-minute boat ride across the lagoon to Morocco for some couscous. They could stop in at the firehouse along Main Street USA. They could head down the road to safari in Africa with real animals, and with some that never existed.
In just a day, they could visit the Jersey Shore boardwalk, the Old West, 16th century England and 1906 San Francisco. They could be slapped around by a Kansas twister, ride a Mississippi riverboat, walk the palm-lined boulevards of Hollywood and sit on the steps of the New York Public Library. They could nosh in a Norwegian fishing village, sample Parisian perfumes, explore Mexican ruins and be served mashed potatoes by Mom in a 1950s suburb. They could experience all the world at once.
Travel has traditionally meant leaving the familiar for new experiences, even risks. But what if there was a place that contained all places? What if one swath of land could be molded into anyplace, any era - an ultimate elsewhere, conceived and constructed to feed the mass-market dreams of an armchair-explorer society while filtering out danger and unpredictability?
Today, at the end of the 20th century, it exists: a stewpot of history and myth, consumerism and technology, meticulous detail and Disney-inspired theme-parkification.
It is called central Florida. Visit it and see the world, or at least a state-of-the-art facsimile.
---
"A telephoto lens and a good selection of filters will probably come in handy in heightening the illusion of having traveled to China for these shots."
-Kelly Monaghan, "Orlando's Other Theme Parks"
---
The notion of "place" has always been powerful to Americans. It feeds ideas of what we were, are, and want to be.
Think how Bedford Falls evokes small-town America in "It's a Wonderful Life." Or a sitcom set in Manhattan: A few basic images - a New York City police car, a street corner, a skyline - immediately put you there. When we tell each other stories, places are the pages upon which we put our words.
Real elsewheres like Rome, Marrakesh, Beijing and London all conjure basic images, even to people who have never been. So do genuinely unreachable places: Camelot. Atlantis. Outer Space. The Future.
These are the raw materials of the placemaking factories, which blend fantasy and reality into persuasive imitation. They have made central Florida into Americans' favorite spot - a $ 16 billion tourism juggernaut, the region families save for a lifetime to experience.
Metropolitan Orlando accommodated nearly 40 million visitors in 1997, as if everyone from Malaysia, Greece and Ecuador came to visit. Tourism employs 154,000, one of every five jobs.
What happened? What transformed this land of swamp, citrus, pines and palmettos into an expanse that cultivates, harvests, packages and markets the places and experiences of an entire world?
It started with Disney.
Walt Disney, creator of California's Disneyland, noticed central Florida's progressive road projects and blank-slate landscape and bought 28,000 undeveloped acres. Upon them rose Walt Disney World, complete with Magic Kingdom and, eventually, an array of theme parks that included the "Experimental Prototype Community of Tomorrow," or EPCOT, with "pavilions" that distilled entire nations into attractions.
Walt Disney World opened in 1971. Hundreds of attractions followed, including rival Universal Studios Florida in 1990.
Las Vegas had tried something similar years ago; Western desert proved as malleable as Southeastern swamp. But Vegas meant gambling; themes came later. Now it's wrapping elaborate narratives, Orlando style, around the betting.
Central Florida does have its own rich culture. But comparatively few seek it.
"Orlando is a replica city," says Richard Foglesong, a political scientist researching a book on Disney and Orlando. "And in some respects, the replica is better than the real article."
Here, the fantasy of movies was etched into reality. Dreams were built into the earth, not stamped upon celluloid.
And the ultimate elsewhere was born.
---
"Harambe, a Swahili name for coming together, is a modern-day East African village. The locals are friendly. … And when the bottle-band plays, you're convincingly halfway around the world."
-Brochure, Disney's Animal Kingdom
---
From books and plays to the nickelodeon and the Imax movie, innovations have always tried to nourish the appetite for elsewheres. But as entertainment and tourism merge, the media-saturated populace grows more sophisticated. No longer is it enough to "see" distant places through a lens. Americans may not desire or be able to afford genuine destinations, but they do want something more.
Since its beginning, America has been about reaching and experiencing other places. The frontier's allure was crucial to this: Pilgrims planted themselves in New England. Lewis and Clark forged into wilderness. Mid-19th-century pioneers spread across the vast West, pushing toward the Pacific.
By 1900, America had run out of frontier to conquer; geographically, we'd taken our wanderlust to its physical limit. But the attitude remained - and mutated.
"One of the most American things is this idea of restlessness: If you can't get along, move along. If the story you're in is a bad one, find another story," says Richard Slotkin, a Wesleyan University professor who studies the frontier experience.
"Now," he says, "we have Orlando to do that. If Fantasyland is feeling a little claustrophobic, you go to Frontierland or Tomorrowland. You have a model in these parks of changing your life by changing your place. That's very American."
Americans - and foreigners - find countless stories here. The largest provider: Disney's "destination resort," where visitors devour choreographed experiences at multiple, foliage-ringed theme parks.
"You can come to Animal Kingdom. … and probably get an animal viewing experience far superior to what you'd see in Africa," says Al Weiss, president of Walt Disney World resort. "Even though it's different, it can probably fulfill a lot of what they would want from foreign travel."
This delicate balance - variety and adventure vs. familiarity and comfort - has produced some odd sights. Morocco with an emergency exit. A wheelchair-accessible Canada. "Locals" happy to be photographed. The grandeur of the Orient, with ample parking and no diarrhea.
"When we went to Jamaica, I loved the island, I loved the people. But I had a really hard time enjoying my vacation when I could look across the street and people were living in absolute poverty," says Valerie Bungart, who moved to Orlando with her husband, Gary, so they could visit Disney whenever they wanted.
"Maybe," she muses, "we don't want the responsibility of travel to a real country."
---
"Joyce, safari of three - please report to the front of the elephant. Your adventure is about to begin."
-hostess at the Rainforest Cafe, Lake Buena Vista, Fla.
---
"Hi! My name is Amber! I'll be your wench this evening," enthuses the woman in Old English garb.
Inside King Henry's Feast, a castle-shaped restaurant on Orlando's International Drive, heaping platters of food and a medieval stage show entertain 400 "guests of the king." Such food-as-experience attractions dot central Florida, each trying to outshout its neighbor, making Orlando a proving ground for the theming industry.
Planet Hollywood and Hard Rock Cafe, both celebrity-themed attractions, are based here, as is Darden Restaurants Inc., the profitable parent company of the less intensely themed Olive Garden, Red Lobster and Bahama Breeze chains.
The mentality is emerging from central Florida, spreading across the land and overseas, carried by ventures like Planet Hollywood. And in cities everywhere, low-level themed places that have existed for years are stepping up efforts to transport customers to dinnertime mini-elsewheres.
Tough day at the office? Dine in Italy - or a tropical rainforest. It's not so far from sushi in EPCOT's "Japan" or a burger in Disney/MGM's indoor 1950s drive-in to the Olive Garden's dine-with-an-Italian-family ads and the Lone Star Steakhouse chain's slogan: "Texas Taste has no boundaries."
Communities, too, are hurrying to amplify anything that emphasizes real or wished-for regionalism.
Metropolis, Ill., touts itself as "Superman's town," home to a man who never existed; conversely, Wildwood, N.J., famed for its 1950s motel and shore-town architecture, is souping it up and billing itself as "Doo-Wop City." Out West, along old Route 66, hamlets left desolate by interstate highways are trying to survive by capitalizing on the myth of the "Mother Road" by turning their residents into attractions.
Orlando the city sees this, too. Its Church Street Station, a melange of nightclubs and restaurants that evoke the 19th century, is revitalizing downtown at the edge of the 21st.
"Every town is starting to think it can be a theme park," says Dan Fesenmaier, director of the Tourism Research Laboratory at the University of Illinois.
Then there is the town of Celebration, Fla., perhaps the ultimate expression of the ultimate elsewhere - a place where, like the Magic Kingdom, mythic small-town America is re-created. But at Celebration, people aren't just passing through en route to Adventureland; they're moving in for a lifetime.
Built by Disney and populated by real Americans, Celebration, just east of Disney's parks, resembles a real-life Pleasantville. Clean streets. A sparkling lake. No bums. But little is what it seems. The downtown movie palace is part of a theater chain. The quaint bakery belongs to a regional supermarket. "Celebration Bank" is one branch of a financial conglomerate.
Neither commerce nor crossroads produced this town. It simply rose - an elsewhere built like its theme park neighbors, but designed to accommodate actual lives. And as other developers follow suit, towns, which once grew over generations, now can be completed in months.
"This is the first time we've been able to shop for our communities in this way. It's fundamentally changing the way things evolve," says Bruce Jolley, associate vice president at the Jerde Partnership, a California architecture-design firm that specializes in "placemaking."
"The influence of theming has touched everything," he says. "The next 15 years, in terms of communities developing, is going to be the wildest time we've ever seen."
---
"Imagine stepping into a place where you could taste and savor the flavors of the world without having to commit to a full meal."
-Web page touting EPCOT as a romantic getaway.
---
The lights of the dusty Kansas town flicker as the tornado chews across the landscape. Pinpricks of water smack onlookers' ashen faces. Then: actual explosions. Projectiles. Mother Nature's fury. Finally, calm returns to this pocket of countryside in the reassuring voice of actor Bill Paxton.
"Thank you for surviving 'Twister,"' he says. And spectator-victims shamble out of the Midwestern twilight and into the sunlight of New York City, brought to you by Universal Studios Florida.
Just up the road, at Cafe Tu Tu Tango on International Drive, Italian music plays as waitresses serve Spanish-style tapas in a loft that showcases working Florida artists. And outside Splendid China, a theme park of miniatures subsidized by the Chinese government, Maureen Day of Rugby, England, offers her thoughts about central Florida.
First: "There's no place like this in the world - everything in one area." Then: "It's not that we mind traveling. But it's hot, and we have children."
Variety and safety. But what happens now that you can indeed be in two places at once?
Perhaps it's natural that a nation of immigrants would create a melting-pot vacation spot where real Norwegians staff a fake Norwegian boat ride, West Africans scoop up linguini marinara and customers speak Arabic at flea markets just up the road from the Arabian Nights dinner adventure.
It's easy to say such fare lacks culture. It has become culture. What happened with movies and TV is happening to the landscape. People want stories - accessible, manageable ones. So travel, born from the word "travail," becomes hardship no more.
"Please explore the rest of Mexico by using the side entrance," instructs a sign. "Seashore sweets," trumpets a Disney BoardWalk store, 40 miles inland. "Today," booms EPCOT's "Spaceship Earth" ride, "the entire world is our next-door neighbor." And here, in some sense, it is.
But do a little architecture, some evocative music and a panoply of products increase global understanding? Are experiences in synthetic landscapes synthetic experiences? Can reality compete?
"Is it so bad that people go to have dinner in quote-unquote China? Isn't that better than NOT going to dinner in quote-unquote China?" wonders Steven Izenour, a Philadelphia architect who studies the commercial landscape. "The fact that we experience each other in a secondhand sort of way is better than not experiencing each other at all."
In a sense, those who come here seek what their forebears did: whatever's over the horizon. This latter-day journey, though, is not from Old Country to New World but from Denim Country to Sea World, from EPCOT country to New York Pizza World. Fantasy, travel, retail, entertainment. All the world at once.
At Disney's Magic Kingdom, one of the earliest and most enduring rides is "It's a Small World," an indoor boat trip through culture upon culture of "animatronic" dolls. It ends with them all singing as one, in an Earth melted into Utopia.
Outside the ride, the cultures come together too. Black and white, yellow and red, foreign and domestic, they assemble in central Florida, where one place can be all places.
Carrying credit cards and cameras, EPCOT "passports" and Mickey hats and travel guides and stomachs full of King Henry's Feast, they saturate themselves with elsewheres - "going" to Hollywood, to Morocco, to Paradise, absorbing well-oiled experiences, sampling stories other than their own.
Making it a small world after all.
 Load-Date: January 31, 1999

 

End of Document
