

Passenger in airline attack was escorted to the plane as nervous passenger
December 31, 2000, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 509 words
Byline: By AUDREY WOODS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




An airline passenger who wrestled with the crew in the cockpit of a nose-diving jumbo jet had been escorted to the Kenya-bound flight at London's Gatwick Airport after he showed signs of nervousness and confusion and had called for the police, British Airways said.
The Boeing 747-400, with 398 people on board, survived two violent nosedives over Sudan during the Friday night attack by the passenger, whom the captain reportedly described as "a madman." The crew and passengers subdued the attacker and bound him, and the aircraft landed safely at Nairobi with five people reported injured.
The attacker, taken to a Nairobi hospital for psychiatric evaluation, was identified by the hospital as Paul Kefa Mukonyi, a 27-year-old Kenyan. A psychiatrist, Dr. Frank Njenga, will present the results of his examination at a news conference on Monday, the hospital said.
Kenyan police spokesman Dola Indidis on Saturday called the attacker "a suspected mental patient" who he said "had gone berserk."
A British Airways spokesman said that before boarding the plane at Gatwick, the passenger "appeared a bit confused and exhibited behavior typical of nervous fliers … but there were no obvious signs of instability or disruptive behavior."
"We escorted him down to the gate - a usual service we offer to put nervous people at ease," the spokesman said on condition of anonymity. Once at the gate, he added, the passenger asked to speak to the police.
Mukonyi was "concerned about items being smuggled aboard the airplane," and after police officers reassured him about Gatwick's security measures he calmed down, Chief Inspector Alan Wingrove of the Sussex Police said Sunday.
After the flight dispatcher agreed to fly him, Wingrove said, officers escorted Mukonyi onto the aircraft and "outlined the circumstances" to the cabin crew director, who also agreed to take him aboard. The officers asked her to speak to the captain "as the decision ultimately rests with him," and they requested that the crew monitor Mukonyi, the chief inspector said.
The Mail on Sunday newspaper carried an account of the incident, which began about 5 1/2 hours into the eight-hour flight, quoting the 53-year-old captain of the plane, William Hagan, who was not in the cockpit when the attack began.
"When I got back to the flight deck there was this guy built like Mike Tyson fighting with the co-pilot, Phil Watson, who was flying the aircraft," Hagan was quoted as saying. "He was like a man possessed. I jumped on his back and tried to wrestle him away.
"After a short time the only thing I could do to break him off was stick my finger in his eye - a horrible thing to do, but it was that or risk 400 lives," Hagan reportedly said.
During the two minute struggle the autopilot was disengaged, which allowed the plane to plummet a reported 19,000 feet from its cruising altitude of 30,000 feet.
British Airways said it was reviewing in-flight security following the attack.
The cockpit door is normally locked during takeoff and landing but kept open during the flight, the airline said.
 Load-Date: January 1, 2001

 

End of Document
