

People in the news
The Associated Press
July 30, 1998, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 628 words
Dateline: CAPE TOWN, South Africa
Body




Stevie Wonder, whose music was banned by the former apartheid government, visited the jail cell Thursday where Nelson Mandela was held.
"As I always say when I speak of President Mandela, he's our king and president," Wonder said.
Wonder traveled by helicopter to Robben Island, where South Africa's first black president spent much of his 27 years in custody. The prison has been converted to a national monument.
Wonder also visited the rock quarry where Mandela did hard labor and was given a piece of stone by officials.
---
UNITED NATIONS (AP) - Peace has a new emissary in Michael Douglas.
The actor and producer was recognized Thursday as a United Nations Messenger of Peace.
"This role means as much to me as the two Oscars I've won," Douglas said. "I've always been a great admirer of the United Nations."
The citation is given to those in arts, literature, music or sports who have agreed to focus worldwide attention on the work of the United Nations. Douglas said he will focus on disarmament and human rights.
"I hope to use the attraction of entertainment … to talk less about movies and hopefully a lot more about these issues," he said.
His fellow messengers include Luciano Pavarotti and Magic Johnson.
---
MEMPHIS, Tenn. (AP) - Fans can find a new place to dwell in the heart of Elvis country when the Heartbreak Hotel officially opens next spring.
Elvis Presley Enterprises bought a working hotel near Graceland and will give it a new theme based on his first million-selling album.
Now called the Wilson World Hotel, its 134 rooms are "packed to the rafters every Elvis week. Our challenge will be to fill it on other weeks," said Jack Soden, chief executive of the company that manages the Presley estate.
The hotel will continue to operate during the restoration and take on its new name next spring.
---
FORT WORTH, Texas (AP) - Barney's lawsuit against the San Diego Chicken is extinct.
A judge threw out the copyright infringement suit Wednesday, leaving the famous fowl free to pummel a Barney look-alike as part of his comedy routine at sporting events.
The company behind Barney, Lyons Partnership, sued the Chicken - the alter ego of Ted Giannoulas - after he started the Barney barrage in 1994.
In the two-minute bit, a Barney clone joins the Chicken for a rap dance. The dinosaur outdances the Chicken, prompting the bested bird to pound the prehistoric one.
Lyons said some children get visibly upset when they see Barney beaten up, but U.S. District Judge John McBryde said the routine is clearly parody and isn't likely to cause trademark confusion.
"The show must go on," said Giannoulas lawyer Kenneth Fitzgerald.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Reality check: The 35th anniversary of the Beatles movie "A Hard Day's Night" is next year.
The milestone has a restoration team working on the rock movie for re-release, with several minutes of never-before-seen footage of the Fab Four goofing off.
"They're not outtakes - it shows the Beatles fooling around with the wardrobe people, that sort of thing," producer Walter Shenson said Wednesday.
The black-and-white movie encapsulates Beatle mania and inspired the era of music videos. Miramax will release it in March after it is digitally remastered with six-track stereo sound.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - A lawsuit accuses Eddie Money of being drunk when he knocked a man into a wall after a fight with the man's neighbor.
Sterling Munce said in the Superior Court suit filed Wednesday that the "Two Tickets to Paradise" singer hit him after Munce stepped outside of his apartment to help June 28.
The suit seeks $ 250,000 in damages. Money was booked for investigation of battery for allegedly punching the other man, but he hasn't been charged.
Money's attorney, Stan Diamond, didn't return a message left at his office Thursday.
 Load-Date: July 30, 1998

 

End of Document
