

People in the news
July 4, 1997, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 716 words
Dateline: WARSAW, Poland
Body




Michael Jackson may soon realize his "dream of returning to the world of childhood" at an old military airport.
The King of Pop wants to build a $ 100 million amusement park at the old Bemowo airport in northeast Warsaw.
"We are treating it as a serious proposal, especially since there is no big amusement park in Warsaw or even in this part of Europe," said city council spokeswoman Jolanta Kalka, noting that the project is a long way from being approved.
Last week, two of Jackson's representatives came to inspect the airport, where 100,000 fans heard him give his first Polish concert in September.
Jackson said during a visit in May he wants to build the amusement park to make real his "dream of returning to the world of childhood."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Lyle Lovett isn't afraid to put his emotions out there.
The singer-songwriter said he knew listeners to his latest album, "The Road to Ensenada," would think some weepy songs about lost love are about the breakup of his marriage to actress Julia Roberts.
"It didn't really concern me, because it was consistent with my writing all along. I've always written about that subject," the 39-year-old Texas native told the New York Post.
Lovett also gave his opinion about the tastes of today's country music listeners.
"I genuinely think that Garth Brooks is what the country radio audience wants now," he said. "Maybe my songs require a bit more from the listener. Maybe they really aren't as good for mainstream country radio as much as they are for other types of radio."
---
CAPE TOWN, South Africa (AP) - You'd never know President Nelson Mandela was 79 from the people he invites to his birthday parties.
"This is one of the happiest moments in my life," said Mandela, who hosted 900 children Friday for a fiesta of face-painting, playing with building blocks and shooting baskets with the Harlem Globetrotters.
The youthful guests at the Culemborg Exhibition Center aren't unusual; Mandela spent last year with disabled children and had a party for street children in 1995.
Mandela won't be 79 until July 18, but he'll be out of the country until then.
"I can see the dream of a rainbow nation emerging before our eyes," said Mandela, who later gave the children his rendition of "Twinkle, Twinkle Little Star."
---
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - It was freedom from the usual controversy for Ted Turner this Fourth of July.
The CNN founder was awarded the Liberty Medal Friday, following in the footsteps of four Nobel Peace Prize winners, including South African presidents Nelson Mandela and F.W. de Klerk and Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres.
The panel of international leaders that gave the medal said CNN International provided fair and accurate information to people who may have no other source of unbiased news coverage.
"The power of ideas often relates to incredible sea change in the ways that nations operate. And in that regard, CNN has given power," Mayor Edward G. Rendell said before presenting Turner the $ 100,000 prize.
Turner said Americans' attitude toward the rest of the world has changed, and noted that 20 years ago foreigners arriving at New York's Kennedy Airport were directed to an area labeled: "aliens."
"Now if you go to Kennedy Airport, if you come from oversees, it still says U.S. passports on one sign, but the other sign says visitors," he said.
Turner founded CNNI in 1985 as the international counterpart to CNN, which he founded in 1980.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Dyan Cannon is such a big Los Angeles Lakers fan that her cheers often turn to tears.
"I've walked out of there crying," she says of the basketball games, where she has floor seats next to retired star Magic Johnson.
The 60-year-old actress, who's co-starring with Jack Lemmon and Walter Matthau in the new film "Out to Sea," says she only missed five or six home games out of 41 last season.
"I'm the No. 1 fan, because I come to the poopy teams," says the actress. "I'm there when the teams that aren't so hot are there."
During her childhood in Washington state, Cannon was also a hockey, baseball and football fan. But basketball was always her favorite.
"I just always loved it, because I could sit close … Those huddles out on the football field, I felt so far removed," she said. "I wanted to hear what they were saying when they got together. I wanted to hear that."
 Load-Date: July 4, 1997

 

End of Document
