

People in the news
December 18, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1047 words
Dateline: BEVERLY HILLS, Calif.
Body




A wild and crazy guy will be host of next year's Oscar awards.
Steve Martin will succeed Billy Crystal at the 73rd Academy Awards on March 25, it was announced Monday.
"If you can't win 'em, join 'em," said Martin, who has made eight Oscar show appearances but has never been nominated for an award.
Crystal, the seven-time host of the show, declined this time, citing a scheduling conflict. He is working on the comedy "America's Sweethearts" with Julia Roberts and Catherine Zeta-Jones.
The Oscar nominations will be announced Feb. 13.
LONDON (AP) - Rock star Bob Geldof has been awarded custody of the orphaned daughter of his former wife, Paula Yates, and INXS singer Michael Hutchence.
Britain's High Court said Monday it gave Geldof custody of 4-year-old Tiger Lily for a year so she could live with her three half-sisters from Yates' earlier marriage to Geldof.
Geldof has been caring for Tiger Lily since September, when Yates was found dead in her London home. Hutchence committed suicide in an Australian hotel room three years ago.
The judge rejected an application from Hutchence's half-sister Tina Shorr, who argued Tiger Lily would be better off growing up away from the publicity surrounding Geldof.
ASBURY PARK, N.J. (AP) - Bruce Springsteen is rocking his old stomping grounds for a cause.
The Boss gave a sold-out benefit concert Sunday that included classic tunes and a new song, "My City in Ruins," about the efforts to revitalize Asbury Park. A second sold-out show was scheduled for Monday night.
Sunday's two-hour show featured guest artists Southside Johnny and members of the E Street Band, including Clarence Clemons, Steven Van Zandt and Springsteen's wife, Patti Scialfa.
The Max Weinberg 7 - the house band for "Late Night with Conan O'Brien" - backed Springsteen.
Proceeds from the concerts go to eight charities that help addicts, homeless and abused women, HIV-infected victims, needy children and people in need of health care and food.
An online auction of concert tickets raised $62,900, including one bid for $7,500.
CHAPEL HILL, N.C. (AP) - A foundation created by Bill Gates is donating $15.1 million to help develop new drugs against two parasitic diseases plaguing millions of people in developing nations.
The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation's five-year grant will bring together experts to fight African trypanosomiasis, or sleeping sickness, and leishmaniasis.
The research consortium will be led by a University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill scientist. The donation was announced Monday.
African sleeping sickness is fatal unless treated. Up to 450,000 people in central Africa are infected. Leishmaniasis, spread by sand flies, causes lesions, disfigurement and death. About 12 million people worldwide have the disease.
COLORADO SPRINGS, Colo. (AP) - They have their theological differences, but Focus on the Family president James Dobson agrees with the Vatican on the issues of traditional marriage and sexual morality.
Dobson, 64, was among several conservative Christians invited by Pope John Paul II to speak at the Pontifical Council for the Family.
Dobson said his speech focused on marital pressures, and afterward he and the pope shook hands.
"I thanked him for his defense of the family," said Dobson, who was among some 30 speakers addressing the council Nov. 28.
He said he was surprised by the pope's frailty.
"His shoulders are bent, and he has difficulty holding his head up. Yet his mind is clear. He obviously is still very bright and very much in touch," Dobson said.
LITTLE ROCK, Ark. (AP) - Gov. Mike Huckabee says he plans to continue appearing on Don Imus' radio show even though the program is no longer broadcast in the state capital.
Imus' show is known for the occasional embarrassing comments he elicits from guests, as well as his own raunchy language. The show had been broadcast in Little Rock on KABZ-FM but was replaced last week with a locally produced show.
The radio host is a top-notch interviewer, the Arkansas governor said in an interview Friday with the Arkansas Democrat-Gazette.
"I can honestly deal far more effectively with people who are crude and raw but yet who would build a ranch for dying children out of a deep love for them," said Huckabee, who has appeared on the show five times.
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - Brad Paisley has gotten an early Christmas present - an invitation to join the cast of the Grand Ole Opry.
Paisley, 28, was playing the Opry on Saturday when he was asked to become a permanent member of the show's cast.
The surprise invitation was extended by fellow country singers Bill Anderson, Little Jimmy Dickens and Jeannie Seely.
Paisley accepted the offer, and will join the cast during the Feb. 17 show.
"Thank you so much folks, for being so supportive," he said.
Paisley, whose hits include "He Didn't Have to Be," has appeared on the show 36 times. Country stars like Hank Williams Sr., Patsy Cline and Garth Brooks have been members of the Opry's cast over its 75-year history.
NEW YORK (AP) - Bill Bradley didn't have any luck securing a job in the Oval Office, but he won't be without a paycheck.
The former senator from New Jersey and former rival of Al Gore has taken a job with New York investment company Allen & Co., the Daily News reported Sunday.
Herbert A. Allen, president of the firm, has been a friend of Bradley's for decades. Allen was active in Bradley's failed bid for the Democratic presidential nomination and let the campaign use the firm's corporate jet.
It wasn't known what type of work Bradley would be doing for the investment house, which specializes in mergers among Internet and entertainment companies.
NEW YORK (AP) - In her latest movie, Michelle Yeoh often looks like she is soaring effortlessly through the air. But she says taking flight on-screen is no easy task.
The wires that supported soaring actors in "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon" are "incredibly heavy," Yeoh said in the latest issue of Newsweek. "It feels like you're holding up 80 pounds."
The "flying" technique used in the movie enabled actors to perform eye-popping martial-arts moves in midair. But it was occasionally a painful experience for Yeoh.
"When I'm running up a wall, if I don't turn the moment I feel slack on the wire, I get yanked and crash into a wall," she said. "It's happened a few times."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY44 of Martin, Geldof; NY43 of Bradley, Yeoh
 Load-Date: December 19, 2000

 

End of Document
