

People in the news
The Associated Press
May 19, 1998, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 719 words
Dateline: ATLANTA
Body




Having severed ties with his longtime manager, Elton John plans to establish his own management company.
London tabloids last week reported that the singer, a part-time Atlanta resident, and John Reid had parted ways.
Colin Bell, an executive with London Records, will be managing director of Elton John Management Ltd., The Atlanta Journal-Constitution reported Tuesday.
Reid became Elton John's manager in 1971. Over the years he has managed or advised such acts as Queen, Simple Minds and George Michael.
---
Eds: A version also moving on financial wires.
CORAL GABLES, Fla. (AP) - Is novelist Tom Clancy's $ 201 million bid to buy the Minnesota Vikings in clear and present danger?
Clancy was a no-show as this week's NFL meetings got under way.
He was supposed to present details of his bid and ownership group to the league finance committee Monday. But he asked for a one-week postponement for more preparation, NFL Commissioner Paul Tagliabue said.
Tagliabue gave Clancy until the close of business Wednesday to update the league on his bid.
"It didn't really make sense for us to come down there," Clancy adviser Marc Ganis said. "All we were going to do is say the same thing we said to the commissioner last Monday."
"We certainly thought when we accepted his bid (in February) that he would have the financing," Vikings co-owner Wheelock Whitney said. "What seems to have developed is he just doesn't have it."
Clancy's novels include "Clear and Present Danger," "The Hunt for Red October" and "Patriot Games."
 
 ---
HARARE, Zimbabwe (AP) - For the second time, scheduling conflicts forced the cancellation of a meeting between the King of Pop and President Robert Mugabe.
The president of Zimbabwe returned home early Monday from an economic summit in Namibia, skipping a lunch engagement with Michael Jackson, the Zimbabwe News Agency reported Tuesday. Mugabe said his tight schedule at the Southern African Economic Forum in Namibia forced him to cancel the lunch.
Last year, Jackson canceled a two-concert trip to Zimbabwe during an African tour because of what promoters described as problems over logistics and the singer's fees. Mugabe apologized for not being able to keep their lunch date and again invited Jackson to visit Zimbabwe.
Jackson, who is in Namibia looking into investment opportunities, was to meet with other heads of state and some of the 850 government and business delegates attending the summit.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - The unorthodox teaching methods that made Jaime Escalante a star and the subject of the 1987 movie "Stand and Deliver" have failed to make the grade in Northern California.
At least a third of Escalante's Algebra I students at Hiram Johnson High School in Sacramento have dropped out since the first of the year, leaving only 20.
He no longer even teaches advanced calculus, the subject that brought him national attention, because only six students signed up.
As a teacher at Garfield High School in the Los Angeles barrio, Escalante transformed a lackluster math program into a nationally known success in which more than 60 percent of the calculus students managed to pass the tough Advanced Placement exam.
Escalante, whose teaching methods include daily tests and a bantering style in which he alternately chastises and praises students, was portrayed by Edward James Olmos in "Stand and Deliver."
Escalante d part of his failure on his teaching style but also said parents and schools place too little pressure on youngsters to learn.
---
SMITHFIELD, N.C. (AP) - The Ava Gardner museum is looking for its fourth home since its opening 18 years ago.
The building has been sold to a church, which has given the museum a year to find a new location for the movie costumes, posters, magazine covers and photos, photos, photos of the sultry, dark-haired beauty.
The museum, which attracts about 5,000 people annually, pays tribute to the North Carolina native who was Frank Sinatra's second wife. Since Sinatra's death last week, the museum has seen an increase in visitors.
"We prefer our next move would be at least semi-permanent," said Deidre Kraft, chairman of the board of directors. "Every time we move it opens up the collection to damage, loss and theft."
The museum moved to its current location in 1994 when the previous site, which also was rented, was converted to another use.
 Load-Date: May 19, 1998

 

End of Document
