

People in the news
The Associated Press
May 10, 1999, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 623 words
Dateline: BOSTON
Body




Joan Kennedy, the ex-wife of Sen. Edward M. Kennedy, was hospitalized after what was described as a mild heart attack.
Mrs. Kennedy, 61, fell ill Friday. She underwent tests at Massachusetts General Hospital and was scheduled Monday to have an angioplasty to determine what further treatment was necessary, said her son Rep. Patrick J. Kennedy.
Mrs. Kennedy, who was divorced from the senator in 1983, has described herself as a recovering alcoholic and has spent time in a number of rehabilitation programs following arrests for drunken driving.
Patrick Kennedy said in a statement that he spent Mother's Day weekend with his mother in the hospital and he expected his brother, Ted Kennedy Jr., and his sister, Kara, to join them. Mrs. Kennedy is expected to stay in the hospital the rest of the week.
---
LONDON (AP) - A previously unreleased single by the Beatles will be put out later this year, along with refurbished versions of the "Yellow Submarine" soundtrack and movie.
The single is about three minutes long and features all four Beatles singing, said Geoff Baker, a spokesman for Paul McCartney and Apple Records. He wouldn't disclose other details about the song Monday.
The 87-minute movie "Yellow Submarine," first released in 1968, is being restored and given a remixed soundtrack, Baker said.
The album had six songs by the Beatles and seven instrumental tracks from the film score by George Martin, the group's producer. The remixed version will drop the instrumentals and replace them with previously released Beatles tracks, Baker said.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Natalie Portman was far from a "Star Wars" fan when she landed the role of Queen Amidala in the latest installment.
"I was born in Israel and I lived there for my first three years," said the 17-year-old Long Islander. "By the time I got to the United States, all the films had already come out. So I missed it the first time around."
Portman plays a queen who resists invasion of her country in "Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace."
She said Sunday that she plays a "strong female character that's really good for girls. She has this unembarrassed idealism."
Portman also appeared in "The Professional."
---
MUNICH, Germany (AP) - Jacqueline Bisset plays Mary and Armin Mueller Stahl is Joseph in a new made-for-TV movie about the life of Jesus.
Filming began Monday in Morocco, said the Kirch media group, which is financing the movie with several other European broadcasters. The movie will be shown on several European networks and on CBS in the United States.
The title role in "The Bible - Jesus" is being played by an American, 25-year-old Jeremy Sisto.
The two-part movie is the latest in a project that began in 1993 to film the entire Bible. Ten episodes based on the Old Testament have been completed with stars including Richard Harris, Ben Kingsley, Dennis Hopper and Klaus Maria Brandauer.
---
PALM BEACH, Fla. (AP) - He's the Artist Formerly Known as Treasury Secretary.
Donald T. Regan, 80, took the Palm Beach art scene by storm with a February show of paintings at Wally Findlay Galleries. Some pieces sold for as much as $ 6,000. Another show is planned for August.
"I know. It defies the imagination," he said in Monday's Wall Street Journal.
The gallery wanted a three-year contract, but Regan would only agree to two. "At this age, I don't even buy green bananas," he said.
Regan's brightly colored canvases feature lighthouses, historic buildings and seascapes. "Believe it or not, I'm what they call 'primitive,"' he said.
Occasionally, Regan donates his art to charity - despite tax laws that bar a write-off.
"Some damn fool at Treasury once said a guy could just scribble on paper and sell it for $ 5,000 and take a write-off," he said. "Guess who that was?"
 Load-Date: May 10, 1999

 

End of Document
