

People in the news
The Associated Press
June 9, 1999, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 610 words
Dateline: CHARLESTON, W.Va.
Body




About 400 high school graduates will have "One More Last Chance" to end the school year with Vince Gill.
Students from three high school graduating classes and their guests will join the country music star June 12 for a picture-taking reception just before he takes the stage at the Charleston Civic Center.
The "Graduate With Vince Gill" promotion was sponsored by a radio station, which promised a party to the high school class that sent in the most postcards with the message, "I want to graduate with Vince Gill."
The station received so many entries - 124,000 - that it decided to declare three winners instead of just one.
"I knew this could be a fun project for the kids, but it certainly exceeded anything I imagined," Gill said. "I'm really looking forward to meeting all the students."
 
 ---
HARRISBURG, Pa. (AP) - It was a beautiful day in the governor's house as Mister Rogers received the Pennsylvania Founder's Award.
Gov. Tom Ridge removed his suit jacket Tuesday and donned a red cardigan similar to the one Fred Rogers, 71, wears on "Mister Rogers' Neighborhood," which is produced at Pittsburgh's public TV station.
"Today we honor a neighbor who has not only taught us right from wrong, but left from right," Ridge said.
The award was created in 1997 to recognize an outstanding citizen who has made significant contributions to the state.
Rogers' show reaches nearly 8 million households every week and, now in its third decade of production, is the longest-running children's program on public television.
 
 ---
DENVER (AP) - JonBenet Ramsey's parents have moved out of their suburban home in Georgia to escape what friends called harassment by the news media, a TV station reported.
John and Patsy Ramsey had moved to Atlanta seven months after their 6-year-old daughter was found beaten and strangled in the basement of their Boulder home in 1996.
Friends of the family said the couple have moved to another house in the Atlanta area, KUSA reported Tuesday. The location is being kept secret.
Reporters and camera crews have been staking out the Ramsey home for three weeks in anticipation of an indictment in 2 -year-old slaying.
The Ramseys remain under suspicion but have denied any involvement.
 
 ---
CANBERRA, Australia (AP) - Nelson Mandela has been called to Order.
The former South African president, who handed over power in his country's election last week, was one of three people appointed an Honorary Companion of the Order of Australia, the country's top honor.
Gov. General Sir William Deane announced the honorary appointments on Wednesday.
Mandela was cited for his personal sacrifice for the people of South Africa and his commitment to reconciliation.
Also appointed honorary companions were the chairman of Japan's Toyota Motor Corp., Shoichiro Toyoda, and professor Rolf Zinkernagel, who shared the 1996 Nobel Prize for medicine with Australian Peter Doherty.
 
 ---
MAYSVILLE, Ky. (AP) - It's Rosemary Clooney to the rescue.
The singer has organized the first annual Rosemary Clooney Music Festival to raise money to renovate the Russell Theater, the site of the 1953 world premiere of her first movie, "The Stars Are Singing."
Restoration of the 69-year-old theater is estimated to cost $ 3.5 million.
Ms. Clooney will headline the Sept. 25 festival on an outdoor stage near the theater in this Ohio River city about 70 miles from Cincinnati.
She will also press her hands in cement that will be installed in a walk of fame in front of the theater.
A nonprofit group bought the theater in 1995 for $ 41,000.
A native of Maysville, the jazz singer and five-time Grammy nominee now lives in Beverly Hills, Calif. She is the aunt of George Clooney.
 Load-Date: June 9, 1999

 

End of Document
