

People in the news
The Associated Press
October 5, 1998, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 618 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body




The ex-wife of Earl Spencer is trying "for a second bite of the cherry" in suing the law firm that advised her before her South African divorce, the firm argued in court Monday.
The London-based Family Law Consortium didn't handle the hearing when a $ 3 million settlement was reached in South Africa in December and said the Countess Spencer's negligence suit is an abuse of court process and should be thrown out.
The former Victoria Lockwood was married to Princess Diana's brother for eight years. They have four children.
Her $ 2.7 million lawsuit suggest that she could have won $ 6.4 million if Family Law lawyer David Hodson had advised her to sue for divorce sooner and in Britain. The press would have been excluded in London from the hearing and publicity kept to a minimum, she said.
---
LONDON (AP) - The Duchess of York discussed life's crises, including a few problems of her own, in her debut Monday as a talk show host.
Prince Andrew's ex sat on a couch in a black pants suit and talked with a woman raped by a serial killer and a hit-and-run driver who confessed 20 years later.
She dedicated the first "Sarah … Surviving Life" to her mother, Susan Barrantes, who was killed Sept. 19 in a car accident.
"Mum taught me so much about how to survive life," Fergie said.
It was the first of 10, one-hour segments commissioned by Sky TV. She's giving her $ 85,000 to charity but will get money for the foreign rights.
The show was launched with a pile of newspaper interviews in which she discussed her boyfriend, a still-married Italian count: "There is certainly no engagement."
"Yes, of course he is my boyfriend and we are very close, yes, and I love Italy," she said. "But I am also, as you know, very close to Andrew."
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - The cast of "The Phantom of the Opera" showered confetti and balloons on a beaming Davis Gaines as he took his curtain calls after his 2,000th performance as the Phantom.
"I couldn't do 2,000 performances if I didn't love what I do," he told the audience Sunday night at the Pantages theater in Hollywood.
Gaines was caught by surprise when Betty White took the stage during curtain calls and told the audience of Gaines' landmark. A banner unfurled and a cascade of balloons dropped from the ceiling.
"I'm still so thrilled to be able to come to work. I am having the time of my life," Gaines said. "Let's go for the next 1,000."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Brad Pitt likes the idea of marriage.
"What's a bigger high," the actor said in November's Vanity Fair. "Spending your life with another - I feel I'd be quite good at it."
But Pitt had nothing to say about his relationship with Jennifer Aniston.
"I have no idea what to tell you," he said. "No idea."
Pitt didn't have much more to say about ex-fiancee Gwyneth Paltrow: "Isn't it true of a lot of people? Since you started dating, there's always been that period until you find the one you want to go the distance with?"
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Benji (all of them) owe a debt of gratitude to Frank Inn.
The 82-year-old animal trainer was honored Sunday by the American Humane Association for his rescue of the dog as a pup, and his kindness-and-love approach that inspired a generation of Hollywood trainers.
"I couldn't keep from crying, though I hid it," Inn said later.
Inn rescued the original Benji from the Burbank Animal Shelter in 1960. The pup grew up to star in "Petticoat Junction" and came out of retirement 14 years later to make the first "Benji" movie.
Benji's grandson put his paws in wet cement near the front door when a new shelter was dedicated in Burbank in 1990.
In addition to Benji, Inn trained Arnold the pig on "Green Acres" and Cleo the basset hound on the 1950s Jackie Cooper show "People's Choice."
 Load-Date: October 5, 1998

 

End of Document
