

People in the news
The Associated Press
March 31, 1998, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 838 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Is Howard Stern reason enough to stay home Saturday nights?
The ribald radio personality will star in a late night show on CBS that will challenge NBC's "Saturday Night Live," the Daily News reported Tuesday.
The show will begin this summer to get a jump on "SNL," which usually doesn't begin its season until October.
Because of concerns about Stern's raunchy humor, CBS affiliates can reportedly opt out of broadcasting the show.
In 1990, Stern was host of a syndicated show that often beat "Saturday Night Live" in major markets, but its risque content scared off stations in smaller markets. The show ended in 1992.
The main competitor to "SNL," Fox's "Mad TV," draws about 4.5 million viewers a week, compared with 9.2 million for the NBC show.
 
 ---
CAPE TOWN, South Africa (AP) - President Nelson Mandela denied on Tuesday that he and his companion, Graca Machel, got married during a three-day cruise aboard the Queen Elizabeth II.
Asked when they got off the ship about rumors they married at sea, the 79-year-old Mandela shrugged off the question by saying, "We live with rumors."
The president's office issued a statement saying, "The office would like to appeal that should reports of this kind be published in the media on April 1, 1998, they should be treated as April Fools' stories."
Ms. Machel, 52, is the widow of former Mozambican President Samora Machel, who died in a 1986 airplane crash. She and Mandela went public with their romance in 1996, after Mandela's divorce from Winnie Madikizela-Mandela.
 
 ---
CINCINNATI (AP) - Twenty-one years after the city of Cincinnati prosecuted Hustler magazine publisher Larry Flynt for obscenity, history may be repeating itself.
A grand jury is looking into Flynt's bookstore, which sells adult videos, magazines and sex toys. Police raided the store on Friday.
City law limits adult businesses to industrial areas and requires a license for a business carrying a significant or substantial amount of sexually explicit merchandise. The law does not define substantial.
Flynt has said that 30 percent to 40 percent of the store's sales have been of adult materials. He has not applied for a license for the business. It is not in an industrial area.
Jimmy Flynt, Flynt's brother and the store manager, was subpoenaed along with five employees and ordered to appear Wednesday before the grand jury. Larry Flynt was not subpoenaed.
Prosecutors would not say what the grand jury is investigating, but Larry Flynt's lawyer, H. Louis Sirkin, said it could be pursuing an obscenity prosecution.
Flynt has dared Cincinnati authorities to prosecute him. He distributed free copies of Hustler on a downtown square last May, then opened his store in October.
Flynt was convicted in 1977, but his conviction was overturned and he was never retried.
 
 ---
SYDNEY, Australia (AP) - Police are investigating an alleged clash between a tabloid photographer and a security guard at the christening of the daughter of Paula Yates and rocker Michael Hutchence.
Brendan Esposito of the Daily Telegraph was allegedly pushed off a 9-foot wall Tuesday as he waited with other photographers for Yates to arrive at the church. He was treated for a bruised spine and released in a wheelchair.
Patrick Riviere, a free-lance photographer, said he heard the raised voices of a security guard and Esposito before the fall.
Col Allen, editor of the Telegraph, said the security guard was hired by a British magazine that had made a deal with Yates for exclusive access to the christening.
Hutchence, a singer with the rock band INXS, committed suicide in a Sydney hotel in November.
 
 ---
VANCOUVER, Wash. (AP) - The YMCA is getting a high-tech boost from Paul Allen.
The co-founder of Microsoft Corp. has donated $ 800,000 for a YMCA recreational center that will include space for everything from basketball and volleyball to rock climbing, rollerblading and laser tag.
The $ 5.7 million complex will be built on the northern edge of town at the corner of a proposed 23-acre public housing development.
 
 ---
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - Martina McBride, nominated for top female vocalist at the upcoming Academy of Country Music Awards, has given birth to a daughter.
Emma Justine McBride arrived Sunday at a Nashville hospital and weighed in at 7 pounds, 11 ounces. McBride, 31, and her husband, John, have another daughter as well.
McBride will perform April 22 when CBS televises the awards show. She also is nominated for top video for "A Broken Wing." She is scheduled to resume touring in June.
 
 ---
ST. PAUL (AP) - Eric Clapton celebrated his 53rd birthday in style, opening his U.S. tour with a 20-piece orchestra before a sold-out crowd.
"This is the best birthday I've had," Clapton told the audience Monday before launching into an encore of "Sunshine of Your Love," from his days with the 1960s power-trio Cream.
Wearing a long, black coat and white T-shirt, the British blues-rock journeyman ran the gamut from his 1970s classic "Layla," to the Grammy-winning ballad "Tears in Heaven," to songs from his new album, "Pilgrim."
 Load-Date: March 31, 1998

 

End of Document
