

People in the news
November 20, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1203 words
Dateline: CAPE TOWN, South Africa
Body




Hordes of adoring teen-agers and a cheetah welcomed the Backstreet Boys on a lightning visit to Cape Town on Monday for the launch of the group's new album, "Black and Blue."
At a news conference, the five members nervously stroked the tame cheetah before fans asked them about their music, their taste in women and their plans.
The five - Nick Carter, Howie Dorough, Brian Littrell, A.J. McLean and Kevin Richardson - plan to visit six continents in 100 hours in a chartered 28-seat jet.
The group spent a few hours in Cape Town, the fourth stop of the publicity swing, before taking off for Rio de Janeiro.
NEW YORK (AP) - Jeffrey Toobin, the author of best-selling books about the O.J. Simpson trial and President Clinton's impeachment, will write next about the deadlocked presidential election.
Toobin, a staff writer for The New Yorker and a legal analyst for ABC, plans to have his new book out next fall.
"It's the most riveting political drama of my lifetime, and all I need is an ending," he said Monday, speaking from Florida.
Toobin also wrote "The Run of His Life: The People Versus O.J. Simpson" and "A Vast Conspiracy: The Real Story of the Sex Scandal That Nearly Brought Down a President."
His next book, still untitled, will be published by Random House.
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - Singer Freddy Fender has hepatitis C and is being evaluated for a kidney transplant.
Fender, whose hits include "Wasted Days and Wasted Nights" and "Before the Next Teardrop Falls," is being treated in Corpus Christi, Texas, said his spokesman Kirt Webster.
"Freddy will continue to perform on weekends and select bookings," Webster said.
Fender, 63, is getting dialysis treatments.
About 4 million people nationwide are infected with hepatitis C, a virus that attacks the liver and is spread through contact with an infected person's blood. It kills as many as 10,000 Americans each year, mostly by causing cirrhosis or liver cancer.
However, it may remain dormant for decades, and some people eventually lose all trace of the virus.
JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) - Danny Glover appealed to South Africans on Monday to join together to fight AIDS raging throughout the country.
"It's going to take all of us to fight this and deal with this. The need is enormous," the "Lethal Weapon" star said.
Glover, a goodwill ambassador for the U.N. Development Program, spoke at a center for HIV-infected mothers and children. He wiped away tears as he received gifts from some of the children.
Roughly 4.2 million South Africans have the AIDS virus, the largest population of HIV-infected people in the world.
PARIS (AP) - American wine critic Robert M. Parker Jr. won the top prize Monday from of the International Academy of Gastronomy.
Parker, a former lawyer from Maryland whose opinion helps decide wine prices around the world, was awarded the Grand Prize of Gastronomic Culture and Food Science.
The academy's founding president, Michel Genin, praised Parker as "a taster without equal" whose opinions reflect "great critical precision."
Parker's wine ratings are published in his newsletter, The Wine Advocate. He has also written nearly a dozen wine books, including "Parker's Wine Buyer's Guide."
BOSTON (AP) - Before Julia Child declared herself a French chef, haute cuisine was seen by Americans as a chore, not an art.
But the European kitchen took on new appeal in the United States after the California native went to Paris and published her first cookbook.
On Sunday, Child became the first U.S. chef to receive the French government's highest award, the Legion of Honor.
"I am very, very proud," said the 88-year-old chef.
The award was presented by restaurateur Roger Fessaguet, who is a knight in the Legion, during a black-tie ceremony.
"Before Julia Child, America was still a meat-and-potatoes country," Fessaguet said. "She helped to make cooking the culture it is today."
Born in Pasadena, Calif., Child moved to Paris with her husband after World War II and received her culinary training at the Cordon Bleu.
In 1961, she published her first book, "Mastering the Art of French Cooking." Soon after, she began her PBS series, "The French Chef."
Recently she has been co-host of "Julia and Jacques Cooking at Home" with Jacques Pepin.
STOCKHOLM, Sweden (AP) - Lauren Bacall did a double take when accepting her most recent award for lifetime achievement.
"I do have to pinch myself to make sure I'm not dead," said Bacall, 76. "Many think a lifetime achievement award means it's over, but I can assure you it's not over."
The movie star was honored Sunday at Stockholm's annual film festival.
The actress, who starred with Humphrey Bogart in such movies as "Key Largo" and "To Have and Have Not," was cited for "straightforwardness, intelligence and an ironic look that have … given her portrayals their unique strength and weight."
ATLANTA (AP) - Sean "Puffy" Combs has taken up the torch of late civil rights leader Hosea Williams, feeding the homeless for the holidays.
Combs pledged on Sunday to pay for this year's charity Thanksgiving dinner, an annual tradition founded by Williams in 1970. Thirty-thousand are expected on Thursday.
"It's a crazy thing to have your stomach growling and not knowing you're about to eat," Combs said. "I feed the hungry in New York every year for the holidays and I've seen hands-on what this does for the people, and it's something we need to all come out and support, even if it's just a dollar."
Williams, a top adviser to the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. in the 1960s, died last week of kidney cancer complications. He was 74.
Combs declined to disclose how much he expected the dinner to cost.
DALLAS (AP) - LeAnn Rimes, whose powerful voice catapulted her to country music stardom as a child, says it's time she spoke for herself.
The Grammy-winning singer, now 18, filed a federal lawsuit last week seeking to void a contract with Curb Records Inc. of Nashville, Tenn. The deal had been struck by Rimes' parents on her behalf when she was 12.
"Her career has blossomed, something that couldn't be predicted when she was 12 years old," said her attorney, Tom Rhodus. "LeAnn simply wants to be her own person. She wants to speak for herself, and she wants to make her own deals."
Rimes also filed suit earlier this year asking for $7 million in earnings allegedly siphoned off by her father and a former manager. Both men have denied the allegations.
Curb Records attorney John David said Rimes' contract was affirmed in 1995 by state courts in Tennessee and Texas.
"She has a valid and binding agreement," David said. "That is the law."
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Papa Roach probably owes much of its success to the band's humble beginnings in Vacaville, Calif.
Living in Vacaville "is what made us hard workers," lead singer Coby Dick said. "We came from a little small town where nothing was going on. We had to fight our way into the scene."
The rock-and-rap band's music uses common themes such as despair to connect with fans, Dick said. But the singer does not aspire to prophet status.
"When people relate to our songs, they sometimes think that I can give them an answer to their problems when I can't," he said. "That's not what I do."
The foursome kicks off its own headlining tour Saturday in San Diego County.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY44 of Rimes, Child, PAR102 on Parker
 Load-Date: November 21, 2000

 

End of Document
