

People in the news
The Associated Press
November 19, 1998, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 901 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




During a sendoff celebration for a departing staffer, Sen. Sam Brownback bathed the employee's feet in a ritual meant to demonstrate respect, a Kansas political newsletter reported.
"It wasn't weird. It wasn't unnatural at all. It was just a show of respect for a valued staffer who meant a lot to Sam," Brownback spokesman Erik Hotmire was quoted as saying in the Hawver's Capitol Report published Tuesday.
Hotmire wouldn't comment Wednesday to The Associated Press. The office of the Kansas Republican also wouldn't identify the staffer, although Hotmire said it wasn't former legislative director Paul Ryan. Ryan was elected Nov. 3 to a House seat from Wisconsin.
In some Christian denominations, foot-washing derives from the biblical story of the Last Supper, after which Jesus bathed his disciples' feet. It's increasingly practiced in Brownback's own Methodist denomination.
---
EUGENE, Ore. (AP) - A woman who claims Bob Vila kicked and punched the back of her airplane seat last November has sued the home-repair king for nearly $ 127,000.
Carol Berger accuses the "Home Again" host of injuring her back and causing her lasting psychological trauma on a Nov. 16 flight from Denver to Eugene. Her lawsuit seeks damages for pain, suffering and mental anguish, medical care and lost earnings.
Vila didn't immediately return a call Thursday.
Berger had the first-class seat in front of Vila on the United Airlines flight. When she reclined her seat, the Circuit Court lawsuit says, Vila "intentionally or negligently kicked and/or punched the back of (Berger's) seat," and that he continued to kick or punch even after she complained to flight attendants.
The lawsuit also accuses the airline of negligence for failing to do anything about it. United wouldn't comment.
---
DUBLIN, Calif. (AP) - Heidi Fleiss, the Hollywood Madam convicted of running a sex-for-hire service for the rich and famous, was released from jail Thursday to a halfway house to complete her sentence.
Fleiss will serve the remaining 17 months on her 37-month federal term for conspiracy, tax evasion and laundering call-girl profits. As part of a plea bargain, she's also serving a concurrent state sentence of 18 months for attempted pandering.
A tearful Fleiss apologized at her sentencing for running a business she blamed on youth and bad choices. On the cable show "American Justice," Fleiss called for equal punishment for the men who used her service, including Charlie Sheen.
Fleiss was arrested in 1995 after an undercover sting operation. Her attorney, Anthony Brooklier, didn't immediately return a phone call Thursday.
---
CAPE TOWN, South Africa (AP) - Paul Simon has agreed to testify in the embezzlement trial of prominent anti-apartheid activist Allan Boesak as long as he can do it via telephone or video from New York City.
The singer, who donated about $ 180,000 to Boesak's Foundation for Peace and Justice Charity, was responding to a request from the prosecutor's office, SABC-TV said Thursday.
Simon cited his heavy work schedule as preventing him from traveling to South Africa in person.
Earlier this week, a major witness recanted allegations of financial wrongdoing against Boesak, delivering a serious blow to the prosecution's case. Freddie Steenkamp, a bookkeeper for the defunct charity, told the court he lied under oath about Boesak stealing $ 300,000.
Steenkamp pleaded guilty to fraud and theft and was sentenced last year to six years in prison.
---
RENO, Nev. (AP) - It's a go from the Reno Planning Commission for a Beverly Hillbillies hotel-casino.
Commissioners on Wednesday approved master plan and zoning changes and a special use permit for the $ 130 million project proposed by Max Baer Jr., who played the dimwitted Jethro Bodine on the TV show from the '60s and '70s.
"I'm pleasantly surprised and I'm happy about it," Baer said after a public hearing on the project proposed for Park Lane Mall south of downtown Reno.
The commissioners also endorsed a 240-foot marquee oil derrick topped by a 70-foot flame. City officials had recommended the structure be limited to 80 feet, flame included.
Baer said Jethro's Beverly Hillbillies Mansion & Casino will rejuvenate Reno's sluggish gambling and tourism industry and pump new life into the struggling mall.
The project must be approved by the Reno City Council and the Regional Planning Commission.
---
LONDON (AP) - Opera star Jessye Norman can't sue a magazine for libel over a remark about her size that she called "vulgar and undignified," an appeals court ruled Thursday.
In a flattering 1994 profile, Classic CD magazine said that when Miss Norman became trapped in some swinging doors on the way to a concert and was advised to turn sideways to free herself, she replied: "Honey, I ain't got no sideways."
Miss Norman contended she never uttered the remark, which she said held her up to ridicule, mockery and contempt because it conformed to a "degrading racist stereotype of a person of African-American heritage".
But Lord Justice Peter Gibson ruled the remark could never convey the defamatory meanings she suggested.
"I could have wished that Miss Norman had told the hoary old joke contained in the anecdote - the subject of this libel action - as it would have shown that, in addition to possessing the remarkable vocal and dramatic talents which have made her world-famous as a distinguished opera singer, she had an engaging sense of humour," he said.
 Load-Date: November 19, 1998

 

End of Document
