

People in the news
April 18, 1997, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 730 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




It was Marcel Marceau as you've rarely seen - or heard - him before.
The world's most famous mime was out of costume and out of character Friday, actually speaking to youngsters at a ceremony celebrating creative writing.
As you might expect, the 74-year-old Frenchman was more comfortable with his mouth closed.
"I don't want to theorize. I want to show you," Marceau said. "I'm a man who likes to demonstrate."
At that, Marceau, working without his white makeup and gloves, launched into his "man walking against the wind" bit - and the crowd went wild.
"He's doing the moonwalk!" someone shouted.
Marceau was a guest of the Children's Creative Writing Campaign, a national organization that honored 10 New York City winners, ages 5 to 14.
---
DENVER (AP) - Gov. Roy Romer, whose hectic schedule doesn't leave much room for decorating or gardening, wishes his first encounter with Martha Stewart had gone better.
It happened at a recent dinner party in Washington, when Romer, the Democratic national chairman, found himself sitting next to a woman he didn't recognize.
Romer introduced himself. She said her name was Martha Stewart.
"Martha, just what is it that you do?" Romer asked.
Ms. Stewart said she had a TV show and magazine.
"When is your show on TV?" Romer asked. "What's the name of your magazine?"
The lifestyle guru laughed and told him it was refreshing to find someone who didn't know who she was.
Romer said he knows now, and he's embarrassed. He plans to call her and apologize - and he may even watch her show.
---
MONTE CARLO, Monaco (AP) - Celine Dion and the Fugees were among the winners at the 1997 World Music Awards, which uses only one measure of performance: record sales.
Ms. Dion won for best-selling pop artist. The rappers won for best-selling pop group.
In the rock category, the winners were Alanis Morissette and the group Oasis. Both also won in the alternative category. Lionel Richie and the Bee Gees won "legend" awards.
Monaco's Princess Stephanie was the host and Prince Albert presided. Half the proceeds go to the Princess Grace Foundation, which aids young artists and the elderly, orphans and underprivileged children. The rest of the proceeds go toward constructing a hospital in Madagascar.
---
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. (AP) - New Jersey is the latest state to cancel a performance by shock-rocker Marilyn Manson.
Manson was one of the acts booked for an all-day heavy metal festival June 15 at the Meadowlands.
However, officials at the sports complex Thursday said they would not sign a contract with the organizers of OzzFest '97 if Manson were part of the lineup. The tour is named for heavy metal headliner Ozzy Osbourne.
Manson is an avowed Satan worshiper whose rock band is known for raunchy on-stage antics and songs about murder, rape and self-mutilation.
Meadowlands officials were concerned about security as well as the nature of Manson's act.
The cancellation comes two days after a May 10 appearance in Richmond, Va., was called off by the city.
The concerts have generated protests in Massachusetts, Nebraska, Texas, West Virginia, North Carolina, Wisconsin and Arkansas.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Jackie Robinson's widow is one of six women selected Outstanding Mothers of 1997.
Rachel Robinson was chosen by the National Mother's Day Committee of the non-profit Father and Mother's Day Council on Thursday.
At a news conference, Mrs. Robinson introduced her daughter, Sharon, a nurse and professor at Yale University, as "the joy of my life."
Later, she recalled how tough it was raising three children while her husband, the first black player in the major leagues, was on the road.
"You have to be a good manager," Mrs. Robinson said.
Others honored were Libby Pataki, wife of Gov. George Pataki; Faye Wattleton, president of the Center for Gender Equality; Bernadette Castro, New York state parks commissioner; Carol Browner, head of the Environmental Protection Agency; and Andrea Jung, an executive at Avon Products Inc.
---
NEW ORLEANS (AP) - Mikhail Gorbachev told an audience of college students to act now to protect the environment.
"Nature has no malice toward us, but nature is sending us a message," the former Soviet leader said Thursday. "Nature is reminding us that it used to exist without human beings."
Gorbachev, who heads an environmental organization, spoke through a translator to about 400 Loyola University students and faculty members.
 Load-Date: April 18, 1997

 

End of Document
