

People in the news
The Associated Press
June 29, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1459 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The star of "The Perfect Storm" tops the list of the biggest and best fish in the sea.
George Clooney, who stars as a fishing boat captain in the movie that opens this weekend, was ranked No. 1 by People magazine, profiling "America's 100 Most Eligible Bachelors."
New York Yankees shortstop Derek Jeter was No. 2.
"If I had a daughter, Derek is the kind of guy that I would want her to marry," said friend Alex Rodriguez, the Seattle Mariners shortstop who also made the cut.
Matt Damon was No. 3, followed by George Bush - George Prescott Bush, that is, the 24-year-old paralegal who's the grandson of former President Bush and nephew of Republican candidate George W.
Bush, the oldest son of Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, says he doesn't need advice from his grandpa, but the ex-president has told him in e-mails to "relax, give things time, get to know her. If the girl's the right one, it will fall into place."
Chef Marcus Samuelsson of the Aquavit eateries in New York and Minneapolis rounds out the top five.
BRANSON, Mo. (AP) - Jerry Seinfeld is collecting new material Jack Kerouac-style by driving across the country? Get out!
Seinfeld was en route from New York to Albuquerque, N.M., in a 1973 Volkswagen Beetle this week when he decided to pull into this country music town to see an old friend and collect on a gold mine of potential material.
On Tuesday, Seinfeld took in a show at the Bobby Vinton Theater. Seinfeld and Vinton used to play in Las Vegas at the same time, said Chris Vinton, the pop singer's son.
Seinfeld "said he was really excited about being in Branson and was somewhat overwhelmed by it and surprised by how sophisticated the facilities are," Chris Vinton said.
LONDON (AP) - The mother of a black British teen-ager slain by white youths presented Nelson Mandela with a lifetime achievement award Thursday in recognition of his fight to end apartheid.
"I'm sure that I can speak for all South Africans, black and white, that this award is recognition of their struggle for peace and democracy in our country," the former South African president said.
Mandela, 81, received the BT Ethnic Multicultural Media Award from Doreen Lawrence, whose son Stephen was stabbed to death at a London bus stop in 1993. She said Mandela was the only person of world stature to take up her cause.
After a long campaign by Lawrence, an official inquiry found that police bungled the investigation and were racist. None of the five white suspects was successfully prosecuted.
Mandela, winner of the Nobel Peace Prize, said the award ceremony ranked among the important occasions of his life, adding, "There's a possibility that one day I might die, and when I reach the new world I will have many fond memories."
MIAMI (AP) - A federal judge Thursday tossed out a lawsuit by Joe DiMaggio's estate against the city of San Francisco, saying she had no jurisdiction over the city's use of the Yankee Clipper's name on a playground.
"Unlike the game of baseball, personal jurisdiction in federal court is not a fielder's choice," U.S. District Judge Joan Lenard wrote.
DiMaggio's estate sued San Francisco on May 31 after the city named the Joe DiMaggio North Beach Playground. Lawyers for the estate argued that the use of DiMaggio's name was unauthorized and that the site, where DiMaggio played sandlot baseball as a child with his brother Dom, wasn't fit for the honor.
The lawsuit included charges of false endorsement and federal trademark dilution and also asked for unspecified damages.
Estate attorney Jeffrey Herman said he would appeal the ruling. Morris Engelberg, a trustee and attorney for DiMaggio's estate who brought the suit, noted that Lenard did not dismiss the case on its merits, only on jurisdiction. Engelberg said he's ready to file suit in California.
DiMaggio died last year at 84.
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Meg Ryan and Dennis Quaid have announced they are separating after nearly 10 years of marriage.
Their publicist, Lisa Kasteler, declined to say whether the two plan to divorce. She said the separation began about six weeks ago.
"The couple hope that the press will respect their privacy during this difficult time," Kasteler said Wednesday.
Ryan, 38, who began filming the kidnap thriller "Proof of Life" in May, endeared herself to American movie audiences with such romantic comedies as "When Harry Met Sally," "Sleepless in Seattle," and "You've Got Mail."
Quaid, 46, starred in the sci-fi time traveling tale "Frequency" in May and is known for roles in "Breaking Away," "The Big Easy" and "Wyatt Earp."
The two met in 1987 on the set of "Innerspace." They married in 1991 and have an 8-year-old son. They also appeared together in "Flesh and Bone" in 1993.
---
WHITE PLAINS, N.Y. (AP) - Earl Simmons, the rapper known as DMX, has been indicted for possession of marijuana and an unlicensed handgun following an incident in January in which his Jeep ran off a highway.
Simmons' car spun off the road, hit a guardrail and came to a stop, according to the indictment. He declined medical attention.
The indictment alleges that a loaded, unlicensed 9mm pistol was found inside and marijuana cigarettes were found in two ashtrays.
Simmons, 29, is charged with two counts of third-degree weapon possession, a felony, and marijuana possession. He could be sentenced to up to seven years in prison if convicted, prosecutors said.
His attorney, Ian Niles, did not return a call seeking comment.
Simmons is appealing a 15-day jail sentence in Buffalo for driving with a suspended permit and possessing marijuana.
Simmons, whose latest album is "...And Then There Was X," has sold more than 10 million records.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Oprah Winfrey has donated $10 million to an organization that places gifted minority students in some of the nation's top public and private high schools.
Winfrey made the donation to A Better Chance at an awards luncheon on Wednesday. She has been a national spokeswoman for the program and has donated more than $12 million to it since 1997.
---
ORLANDO, Fla. (AP) - A federal judge has thrown out a $12 million lawsuit alleging that E&J Gallo Winery used an unauthorized image of the late Hedy Lamarr in a TV commercial.
The judge on Wednesday granted a summary judgment to Gallo, agreeing that the commercial didn't invade Lamarr's privacy and didn't give viewers the false impression that the former screen siren was endorsing the winemaker's product, Gossamer Bay wine.
Lamarr filed the lawsuit last year, after the commercial had finished its one-month run, alleging the unauthorized publication of her name or likeness, invasion of privacy and false endorsement.
Lamarr died in January at age 86, but the lawsuit was continued by a representative of her estate.
In the commercial, a young couple is fighting over the television remote controls. The woman wants to watch a romantic movie featuring Lamarr while the man wants to watch a football game. They compromise by turning off the television, drinking some wine and getting romantic.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - A video for Bruce Springsteen's controversial new song, "American Skin," was filmed during a rehearsal session with the E Street Band at Madison Square Garden this week, according to Billboard magazine.
A Springsteen publicist did not return a call about the report. According to Billboard, the video was shot by director Jonathan Demme, who recruited Springsteen to write the 1994 Oscar-winning song "Streets of Philadelphia" for the movie "Philadelphia."
Demme also directed Springsteen's video clip for that song.
"American Skin" prompted an outcry from New York City police union officials over its repeated refrain of "41 shots" - a reference to the 1999 fatal police shooting of Amadou Diallo, an unarmed West African immigrant.
Springsteen and the band finish up a yearlong reunion tour this Saturday at the Garden.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Actor Gary Busey and his wife are divorcing after nearly four years of marriage, according to court records.
Busey's manager, Herb Nanas, said he was unaware a divorce petition had been filed. A message left for Busey's lawyer, Arthur Soll, wasn't immediately returned.
Court documents filed Wednesday say Busey and Tiani W. Busey separated June 18. Busey, 56, cited irreconcilable differences.
It marked the second time the couple was named in a divorce petition. Busey filed a similar one in June 1998 but it was later withdrawn.
The couple wed in 1996. A year earlier paramedics were called to Busey's Malibu home by his future wife, who said he had collapsed.
Authorities said Busey had been using cocaine when he was stricken. Drug charges were dropped after he enrolled in a rehabilitation program.
Busey, who received an Oscar nomination for 1978's "The Buddy Holly Story," has also appeared in such films as "Under Siege" and "The Firm."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY44 of Clooney, Seinfeld; Ryan and Quaid, Springsteen
 Load-Date: June 30, 2000

 

End of Document
