

People in the news
The Associated Press
October 21, 1998, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 723 words
Byline: AP Photos NY44, Seinfeld, Lady Spencer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Jerry Seinfeld had no funny observations to offer on the subject of Jessica Sklar.
The comedian was cornered Tuesday at his gym by a New York Post reporter asking about his married gal pal.
"You know, I'm barely interested in my own life. I don't know how you could be interested in it," Seinfeld said.
Pressed on whether he was in love with Sklar, the 26-year-old estranged wife of Broadway theater scion Eric Nederlander, Seinfeld snapped: "You're a poor human."
Both the Post and the Daily News reported that Seinfeld took up with Sklar soon after she married Nederlander four months ago. Nederlander, whose father owns six theaters and a piece of the Yankees, is filing for divorce, the newspapers said.
---
ATLANTA (AP) - An Atlanta business organization has withdrawn a speaking invitation to Tom Wolfe over reports that his new novel includes an unflattering description of the city's real estate community.
Sam Massell, a former Atlanta mayor and president of the Buckhead Coalition, said Wolfe's "A Man in Full" amounts to "Buckhead bashing."
Buckhead is a wealthy area of north Atlanta.
"I'm not passing judgment on his book," Massell said, "but I don't want to spend the coalition's money for a program that has as its principal speaker someone who has authored a book that attacked the community."
Massell cited a section of the book where a real estate developer orchestrates a Klan rally to drive down the price of a prize piece of real estate he hopes to buy.
The dispute apparently isn't a major concern for Wolfe, whose book will be released Nov. 10. Publicist Jeff Seroy said Wolfe's schedule wouldn't have allowed him to accept the speaking engagement anyway.
---
CAPE TOWN, South Africa (AP) - The former wife of Earl Spencer spoke of her struggles with drugs, alcohol and anorexia in her first public appearance since her bitter divorce.
"Addiction is a disease," Lady Spencer said Tuesday. "It is not a respecter of age, color, class or creed, and it causes your loved ones despair and pain."
The former model Victoria Lockwood spoke at the opening of Stepping Stones, a rehab center. She has acknowledged suffering from eating disorders and drug and alcohol problems in the past.
Lady Spencer and Princess Diana's brother settled their divorce out of court in the middle of a trial. She received $ 3 million.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - The Taliban militia's newest enemies are Jay and Mavis Leno.
The "Tonight Show" host and his wife donated $ 100,000 on Wednesday to a campaign to call attention to the Taliban's restrictions on women.
"Two years ago, women in Afghanistan could work, be educated and move freely," Mrs. Leno said. Since the Taliban took control in 1996, women have been banned from working and are forbidden to leave their homes unless accompanied by a male relative. Taxi drivers are beaten if their fare is a woman alone. The Taliban defend their edicts in the name of Islam.
Their donation went to the Feminist Majority Foundation for its Campaign to Stop Gender Apartheid.
---
PORTLAND, Ore. (AP) - Say goodbye to Portland, Howard Stern.
KWBP, a WB affiliate, has become the latest TV station to drop the "Howard Stern Radio Show" as offensive.
"Managers of television stations have an obligation to determine what's appropriate and what isn't," general manager Steve Dant said.
Stations in Birmingham, Ala., San Diego, St. Louis and Phoenix have dumped Stern since the shock jock's latest TV venture debuted Aug. 22.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Steven Spielberg dropped in on a Lower East Side high school for troubled teens with three Holocaust survivors Tuesday to show off a new CD-ROM.
"These are my heroes. Their lives represent millions of others that were snuffed out," the "Schindler's List" director told students at Satellite Academy, linking arms with the three in a neighborhood once dominated by Jewish immigrants.
Proceeds from the sale of the CD-ROM, "Survivors: Testimonies of the Holocaust," are going to Spielberg's Shoah foundation.
---
LEXINGTON, Ky. (AP) - Ashley Judd is more than just a Cool Cat. She's the Cool Cat's poster girl.
The actress, who rarely misses a University of Kentucky basketball game, is dressed in nothing more than a hockey jersey and blue toenail polish for a poster promoting the hockey team at her alma mater.
The poster is being given away at games to increase attendance. Judd provided the photo.
 Load-Date: October 21, 1998

 

End of Document
