

People in the news
The Associated Press
April 8, 1998, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 706 words
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, South Africa
Body




Diana Ross, in town to open a new auditorium, strolled arm-in-arm with President Nelson Mandela on Wednesday.
The singer will hold one concert here Thursday, with Mandela in attendance.
"I hardly go to music concerts, but tomorrow I will be going to her concert," he told reporters. He was rewarded with a kiss on the cheek and a hug from his guest.
"I have been wondering if she would be humiliated to visit an old man like me," said the 79-year-old president, drawing a laugh from Ross.
"I'm moved to tears," she responded.
---
CHICAGO (AP) - R. Kelly's upcoming album may be Grammy-winning material, but it was loud Grammy-winning material to police.
The rhythm and blues star, whose "I Believe I Can Fly" is an anthem for the ambitious, refused to lower the volume on his car stereo Monday and was cited for violating the city's strict noise ordinance.
The singer, who doesn't use his first name (Robert) professionally, was arrested on disorderly conduct charges when he became verbally abusive. He posted $ 75 in bond and was released. A hearing was scheduled for May 7.
Kelly, who won three Grammys this year, was playing a demo tape of a new album when he ran afoul of the law.
"I think this is absolutely ridiculous," said Wayne Williams, a vice president at Kelly's label, Jive Records.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - The "South Park" cliffhanger will be resolved this month rather than in May, thanks to hundreds of complaining fans.
The cable network said Wednesday it moved up the broadcast of its episode where Cartman's father is revealed from May 20 to April 22.
Comedy Central originally promised the answer on April Fools' Day, but the episode poked fun at cliffhanger television instead.
Fans of the cartoon weren't amused. More than 2,000 people called or sent e-mails to protest.
---
SYRACUSE, N.Y. (AP) - Hayden Carruth turned down an invitation to the White House because the Clinton administration has "abused the interests of poets and their readers continually."
The poet and author said he first planned to ignore the invitation to visit April 22 for a "Millennium Evening" in celebration of American poetry.
But after thinking about the government's budget cuts for the National Endowment for the Arts, which "have destroyed many individual artists," he decided to reject the invitation in a letter to the Clintons.
"Thank you for thinking of me," Carruth wrote.
"However, it would seem the greatest hypocrisy for an honest American poet to be present on such an occasion at the seat of the power which has not only neglected but abused the interests of poets and their readers continually, to say nothing of many other administratively dispensable segments of the population. Consequently, I must decline."
Sue Vogelsinger, communications director for the White House Millennium Council, said Clinton's support for the arts has been "really quite strong, but someone always is going to disagree, so it's not too big a surprise."
---
WASHINGTON (AP) - Jimmy Carter has his own sub.
The Navy on Wednesday named its third and final nuclear Seawolf submarine after the former president because he's the only commander-in-chief to have served aboard such vessels.
"President Carter is the only U.S. president ever to qualify in submarines. He has distinguished himself by a lifetime of public service, and has long ties to the Navy and the submarine force," a Navy statement said.
Carter graduated from the Naval Academy in 1946 and served in the Atlantic and Pacific submarine fleets. He resigned his commission when his father died and went home to run the family's Georgia farm and supply company.
The sub is under construction in Groton, Conn., and Quonset Point, R.I.
---
EDINBORO, Pa. (AP) - Another year, another honorary doctorate for television's "Mister Rogers."
Fred Rogers, host of the PBS children's series "Mister Rogers' Neighborhood," will be awarded the doctorate on May 9 by the University of Pennsylvania at Edinboro.
"I will have to admit we're kind of on the tail end of giving him an honorary doctorate," university spokesman William Reed Jr. said. "If I remember right, he has 39 of them to date. We may be the 40th or somewhere in that neighborhood."
Rogers' show debuted in 1968 and is the longest-running program on public television.
 Load-Date: April 8, 1998

 

End of Document
