

Queen Elizabeth tries informality on the road to modern monarchy
November 29, 1997, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 645 words
Byline: By AUDREY WOODS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




The stiff upper lip has curved up at the corners, and the familiar solemnity of Queen Elizabeth II has been transformed by a smile.
It might not have seemed a momentous event: With flowers in one hand and a balloon clutched in the other, the queen was enjoying the congratulations of people waiting outside after a 50th wedding anniversary service at Westminster Abbey last week.
But the monarchy is under pressure to modernize, especially since the death of the spirited and approachable Princess Diana, and the informality of those moments and the warmth of the luncheon speeches that followed marked a big step forward in the ongoing royal thaw.
As a charm offensive, it was something of a coup.
"The queen," said The Times, "found a warmth of feeling which stretched from the well-wishers lining Whitehall to the hardened and skeptical press."
Although Elizabeth has modified the monarchy throughout her 45-year-reign, the momentum of change picked up five years ago as her children's problems turned into a royal soap opera and public opinion soured.
The queen's "annus horribilis," 1992, was a turning point - with two separations and a divorce among her children, a devastating fire at Windsor Castle, and a lot of bad publicity about the costs of monarchy and her exemption from income tax.
She began paying tax, opened Buckingham Palace to paying visitors to meet the costs of repairing Windsor, and took her children off the royal payroll. Her yacht has just been retired, and her train is likely to follow.
But as Diana's popularity so vividly demonstrated, many people want something more personal from the royal family.
The queen's anniversary speech Nov. 20, with its extraordinary personal praise for her husband, was clearly an effort to let her subjects see more of her humanity without altogether surrendering her dignity.
Even the famously grumpy and impatient Prince Philip loosened up enough to pay his wife a rare public compliment for her tolerance of his trying ways, and to give his children a pat on the back.
Prince Charles, looking only slightly embarrassed, was as down-to-earth as he has ever been in public while on his African tour a month ago with Prince Harry, 13.
All this may not qualify the royals for a spot on Oprah Winfrey's show, but it constitutes a notable relaxing of the royal reserve.
"I think the queen is responding to a period when people are wanting a simpler and more informal approach - but they only want it up to a point," said Lord St. John of Fawsley, an expert on the monarchy and constitution.
In her anniversary speech, the queen promised to heed the people's wishes for change, but she pointed out that the deference of her courtiers can insulate her from harsh reality.
Even in the days after Diana's sudden death, with hundreds of thousands of weeping people carrying flowers and candles through the streets, she apparently did not recognize the volatility of the emotions building up.
Many people, encouraged by some of the tabloids, resented the queen's decision to stay in Scotland, reading it as a sign of indifference to Diana's death, and demanded a more public display of grief.
Prime Minister Tony Blair is widely credited with opening the lines of communication. The queen returned to London and spoke on television to the nation - another milestone in the opening-up process. The queen normally speaks to the nation only on Christmas Day - with the exception of a speech broadcast at the end of the Persian Gulf War.
Times columnist Simon Jenkins believes people are in sympathy with their queen, and that her troubles are bonding her to her subjects.
"The queen's experience of family life has made her seem more human, and more worthy of respect, than anything in her reign so far," he wrote.
"I believe this experience has brought the House of Windsor closer to the heart of the nation than any golden wedding homily."
 Load-Date: November 29, 1997

 

End of Document
