

Reggae, rock and rhetoric: Junta radio is on the air
The Associated Press
July 10, 1998, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 519 words
Byline: By IAN STEWART, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BISSAU, Guinea-Bissau
Body




The bumping beat fades off the air, replaced with a flourish of rolling Portuguese: "Rrrrrrrradio Bombolon! You're listening to the voice of the junta."
Junta radio is speaking the language of the people: rock, reggae and rhetoric.
On the air for only about three weeks, the radio - controlled by Guinea-Bissau's breakaway military leaders - has become a regular part of the day for most everyone with a receiver.
Sure, it's full of propaganda and polemic, but it's the music that keeps many tuned in. And it's a heck of a lot better than the news bulletins and traditional tunes the radio station played before last month's coup attempt.
Spinning hits by Guinea-Bissau's hit duo "Iva and Ichy," along with a mix of tunes from the West and elsewhere in Africa, Radio Bombolon for many is a brief escape from their daily diet of war reports and the sound of gunfire.
"I'm a communicator," says disc jockey Issidoro Alfonso Rodrigues. "I like what I'm doing. I like what the junta is doing and want to speak to the people."
Fumbling through a stack of CDs, he cues his selection on the player. All the while he chatters about justice, democracy, freedom. Rodrigues knows all the right buttons to push.
"This is the voice of justice," he barks into the mike in staccato Portuguese. "Justice is for the people. We are not bandits. We are not criminals. We are a group of men for justice just like you."
Following the junta line, Rodrigues says the coup attempt by former chief of army staff Brig. Ansumane Mane was aimed at ousting President Joao Bernardo Vieira. Instead it has led to fighting that appears to be escalating into a civil war in this West African enclave of 1 million people, formerly a Portuguese colony.
"Vieira is a crook. He's stolen from you the people and left you with what?" Rodrigues says into the microphone.
For his part, Vieira, the legitimately elected president, says Mane and his renegade soldiers are a bunch of outlaws, taking the law into their own hands.
Whatever the truth to the struggle between Mane and Vieira, the voice of the junta radio has struck a chord with the people.
The radio station is the sole source of news for most local residents, says one listener, Beto N'funta. The lively music helps him make it through the day, N'funta said as he rode in the back of a minibus that was blaring Radio Bombolon.
A civilian who believes in the rebel cause, DJ Rodrigues was trained in communications at Guinea-Bissau's state-controlled broadcasting authority, where he worked for four years before the coup attempt.
Known better by his on-air nickname "Nuno," Rodrigues was quick to join the rebel radio station when renegade troops captured a broadcasting outlet on the northern side of Bissau.
Now he sits by himself for 12-hour shifts in a bunker-like studio, where wood panels have replaced shattered window panes and a military generator supplies the electricity.
Rodrigues signs off with his trademark - "This is Rrrrrrrradio Bombolon" - and with a flick of a switch the mike goes dead, giving way to the gyrating, toe-tapping thump of "Super Mama Jambo's" local hit "Bring the boat to shore."
 Load-Date: July 10, 1998

 

End of Document
