

Release of hostages in the Philippines delayed
The Associated Press
August 19, 2000, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 633 words
Byline: By PAT ROQUE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JOLO, Philippines
Body




Their high hopes dashed, negotiators returned empty-handed Saturday from an attempt to win the release of 24 hostages held by Muslim rebels in the southern Philippine jungle.
The Abu Sayyaf guerrillas insisted on freeing the hostages in two batches instead of one because of security concerns, said former Libyan Ambassador Rajab Azzarouq, a member of the negotiating panel who traveled to the rebels' camp.
"We have to come back another day and renegotiate," a tired and disappointed Azzarouq said, shaking his head. He said he would return when the rebels were ready to talk, but gave no time frame.
Two vans that were to carry the hostages, some held as long as four months, returned empty from the rebels' area on remote Jolo island, and military escorts and armored personnel carriers were withdrawn.
"It's very sad," said Malaysian Ambassador Mohamed Arshad M. Hussain.
Negotiators confirmed, however, that three Malaysians and a Filipino had been released Friday and would be picked up Sunday by a Malaysian plane.
President Joseph Estrada had earlier ordered negotiators to win the release of all the hostages in a single group.
Those instructions had raised suspicions of a possible military attack on the Abu Sayyaf soon after the release.
Chief government negotiator Robert Aventajado read a statement from the rebels saying they had decided to free only two Europeans on Saturday because of fears of a military attack. Aventajado denied any such threat and said the negotiators refused the offer.
Troops on remote Jolo island had been placed on high alert for the possible release of all the hostages, but army Col. Nur Askalani insisted there were no troop movements.
The Abu Sayyaf is the smaller of two major Muslim rebel groups that have been fighting to create an independent Islamic nation in the southern Philippines.
The rebels were holding the hostages - which also include six French, two Germans, two Finns, two South Africans and 13 Filipinos - in primitive jungle huts.
Once released, some of the hostages were to be flown from Jolo to Zamboanga and presented to diplomats from their home countries. They were then expected to fly aboard a Libyan-chartered plane to Tripoli to meet with Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi before returning home.
Libya has played a high-profile role in the negotiations for the 10 Europeans and two South Africans. Libya denies reports that it is paying as much as $25 million ransom to the rebels, however, and Azzarouq has insisted the money will fund development projects in the southern Philippines instead of going to the rebels.
"The motive here is humanitarian. What we are doing now is just to show the world that Libya is a peace-loving nation and our leader Gadhafi is a leader for peace," said Libyan Ambassador Saleem Adam.
Over the years, Libya has mediated relations between Muslim guerrillas and the Philippine government and helped build schools and mosques in the impoverished south, home to nation's Muslim minority. But Libya also has been accused of training rebels from the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, another separatist group.
Negotiators working to free the Malaysians said Friday they had reached an agreement on a guerrilla demand for an additional $1 million ransom payment, but did not provide details.
An estimated $5.5 million was paid last month to the Abu Sayyaf group for the release of six other Malaysians and a German, according to military officials. That payment was supposed to cover the three remaining Malaysians as well, but the guerrillas reneged at the last moment and demanded more money
The Abu Sayyaf rebels originally abducted 21 people from a Malaysian diving resort on April 23. They later seized three French journalists and a dozen Filipino Christian evangelists who visited the rebel camp to pray for the hostages.
 Load-Date: August 20, 2000

 

End of Document
