

Religion weaves through the live of George W. Bush
December 14, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 554 words
Byline: By RICHARD N. OSTLING, AP Religion Writer
Body




George W. Bush, the first Methodist to assume the presidency in more than a century, brings with him a rich religious tradition, and a history of calling on his faith at important times.
He began his first full day as president-elect at a prayer service, originally scheduled the day after the election but pushed back until the outcome was clear.
"He wants to start this on a message of prayer and healing," said spokeswoman Karen Hughes.
Bush made the arrangements mid-morning Wednesday, phoning the Rev. James L. Mayfield of Tarrytown United Methodist Church in Austin, Texas, where his family has attended regularly since he was elected governor six years ago.
Country and western music star Larry Gatlin sang a song he wrote for the occasion, with the refrain, "Come let us reason together, and heal the hurt deep inside. Let us reach out our hand to our brother, and heal the great divide."
The theme of reconciliation was also sounded by the Rev. Kirbyjon H.Caldwell, a Methodist minister from Houston, who prayed to God to "fill this country with your power, your purpose and your peace … and grant the president-elect with all the wisdom he might need for a moment like this."
The Rev. Mark Craig, pastor of a Dallas Methodist church, raised some eyebrows when he compared Bush to Moses of the Old Testament. "You were chosen by God, as was Moses, to lead the people," he said. Afterwards, Bush spokesman Dan Bartlett said that Craig's assertion that Bush was "chosen by God" was "the minister's own reflections" and not a view that Bush would express.
The Bushes retain membership in Craig's 12,000-member church, one of the biggest in the nation's second largest denomination, from their years in Dallas. Vice President-elect Dick Cheney has also worshipped there.
It's not the first time Craig has spoken at an important moment in Bush's journey to the White House.
At a prayer service the morning of his second inauguration as governor, Craig preached on Exodus 3:11, in which Moses resists God's call to lead the Israelites out of Egypt. Craig's point was that people find excuses but the nation needs people who are willing to lead.
His mother, Barbara, told him, "He was talking to you." The sermon, Bush later said, "changed my life," and helped prod him toward his presidential run.
Mayfield said that each Sunday at Tarrytown since Election Day "we have prayed for both the Gore family and the Bush family as they dealt with the trials and stress." Bush has attended most weeks since the election.
Bush has long been open about his faith. Asked a Des Moines debate a year ago about the political thinker he identified with, he famously answered, "Christ, because he changed my heart."
The president-elect has always been a regular churchgoer. But in 1985, while he was an oilman in Midland, Texas, he fell into a life-changing seaside chat with the Rev. Billy Graham in Kennebunkport, Maine.
Bush described the impact in a 1999 sermon at Houston's Second Baptist Church: "I searched my heart and recommitted my life to Jesus Christ. My relationship with God through Christ has given me meaning and direction. My faith has made a big difference in my personal life and my public life as well."
Ever since, the president-elect has tried to read the Bible daily. "I have also learned," he once wrote, "the power of prayer."
 Load-Date: December 15, 2000

 

End of Document
