

Remake the U.N.? Many say expanding Security Council is No. 1 priority
The Associated Press
September 7, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 553 words
Byline: By NICOLE WINFIELD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




With all the talk this week about making the United Nations better able to meet the challenges of the 21st century, Japan has a fairly concrete proposal: Give it a permanent seat on the Security Council.
The problem is the Africans want one, too. And the Arabs. And the Latin Americans.
Still, many think the Japanese have a pretty good shot since they pay so much of the U.N. budget - 20 percent, or just under the 25 percent the United States is billed.
On Thursday, Prime Minister Yoshiro Mori urged the world leaders at the U.N. Millennium Summit to end seven years of deadlock and agree to an expansion of the 15-member council to make it more representative of the 189-member organization.
"It is clear that the Security Council of today does not fully reflect the realities of the international community as it enters the 21st century," Mori said.
"In order to enhance the legitimacy of the United Nations, it is urgently necessary to reform the Security Council so that it can effectively fulfill its expected role through its activities for the prevention of conflicts and the maintenance of the peace and security," he said.
Security Council reform has been a major theme of the presidents, prime ministers and other world leaders who have gathered in New York this week for the summit, which was designed specifically to chart the course of the United Nations in the next century.
Many say one of the organization's key shortcomings is that the 189-member body is essentially directed by the five countries that have veto power on the Security Council: the United States, Britain, France, Russia and China.
"When it was enlarged the last time, in 1963, the United Nations had 110 members. Today it has 189," French President Jacques Chirac told a special session of the Security Council on Thursday. "New powers have emerged."
The Security Council is made up of the five veto-weilding permanent members and 10 non-permanent members whose seats rotate every two years. For the past seven years, the General Assembly has been negotiating an increase in both the permanent and non-permanent members but has been stymied by disputes over who to put on and whether to extend veto power to them.
The United States, Britain and France favor adding five new permanent seats - Japan, Germany, and one member from Asia, Africa and Latin America, to be selected by their regional groups. Those regions are a long way from agreement on a single country to represent them, however.
Many industrialized and developing countries oppose any expansion of the permanent members, including Italy. But diplomats believe Italy's position is based on the fact that it would be less likely to win such a seat over Germany, which pays nearly 10 percent of the U.N. budget. Italy is billed 5 percent.
Spanish President Jose Maria Aznar told the summit on Thursday that any discussion of council reform must take into account the existing use of the veto to prevent countries like Russia from blocking or threatening to block council intervention in humanitarian crises.
"In our days, armed conflicts take their heaviest toll among civilian populations, namely women and children," he said. "We must therefore seek and define an understanding of those situations in which international reaction may not be thwarted by the exercise of veto power."
 Load-Date: September 8, 2000

 

End of Document
