

REPORTERS NOTEBOOK: The meaning of chad
November 14, 2000, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 720 words
Byline: By ANNE GEARAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MIAMI
Body




A new word entered the American political lexicon with the disputed presidential election in Florida: Chad.
It sounds like an African country or a prep school nickname, but in election parlance the term refers to the little paper squares dislodged when voters use a punchcard voting machine.
If a punch does not go all the way through, voting machines may not read the punch, or the stray bits of paper may block the machine as it reads the ballot.
Perforations at the corners of the square are supposed to make it easy for the machine to make a clean hole beside the voter's chosen candidate.
Sometimes the punch is not complete, leading to complicated calculations about just how much punch equals a vote.
Three of the four counties where Democrats requested recounts by human eyes and hands used punchcard machines.
Palm Beach County prepared to start hand counting 425,000 ballots Tuesday. They expect to continue through Sunday, working 14 hours a day. The county strongly favored Gore in the initial count.
The county, site of the most dramatic allegations of voter confusion, has rules about chad. Still, county vote counters flip-flopped about how to count some votes during a weekend recount.
In general, the county counts a vote when chad is hanging by one or two corners. A chad attached on two sides is called a "swinging door," while a chad perforated on three sides is called a "tri."
In most places, chad attached on three sides are not counted.
In Palm Beach County and elsewhere, indented or "pregnant" chad does not count. The term means chad that bulges but does not break any of the four perforations.
Many counties nationwide are moving from punchcards to computerized systems, but the Federal Election Commission says 37 percent of voters in the 1996 presidential election used punchcards.
MIAMI (AP) - A showdown hearing on hand recounts in Florida's too-close-to-call presidential election took a strange turn Monday as lawyers discussed disputed punchcard ballots.
What sounded like a bizarre rejection of motherhood was actually a discussion of ballot marking in counties where voters use a pointed stylus to indicate their choice on a paper ballot. An indentation, as opposed to a perforation, is called a pregnant ballot.
"Pregnancy does not count in Palm Beach County," lawyer Bruce Rogow said to laughter.
Later the state Democratic Party sued the county canvassing board in an effort to get "pregnant chad" counted.
The case drew about 30 lawyers, including separate attorneys for each county election board, the state attorney general and many other parties. Extra desks set up for the hearing could not handle the two dozen lawyers on the opposing side, and lawyers knocked knees as they squeezed onto a row of chairs behind the desks.
The ornate ceremonial courtroom was packed to overflowing, with spectators lining the back wall and jockeying for position outside the door. It is the same chamber where Panamanian dictator Manuel Noriega was tried and where the Miami relatives of Elian Gonzalez argued unsuccessfully to keep the Cuban boy from returning home.
U.S. District Judge Donald Middlebrooks sat under a 1930s-era representational mural of Florida depicting orange pickers, muscled longshoremen, a landing seaplane, Miccosukee Indians in traditional striped dress and a pigtailed schoolchild.
Before the recounts hearing, Middlebrooks rejected TV network attempts to place a camera in the courtroom - a rare sight inside federal courthouses. Neither side in the dispute over the ballots objected.
"I hate to put you in a position of losing a hearing when you're not opposed," Middlebrooks told a lawyer for the networks. While in private practice, Middlebrooks pursued similar First Amendment cases and said, "I had the same success you're having."
The judge said it wasn't permitted under an appeals court ruling in a case he lost.
People with Bush-Cheney and Gore-Lieberman signs and U.S. flags gathered out of one another's hearing and sight on opposite corners of the courthouse block. A Gore supporter carried a sign reading, "George W. is not our governor. Let Floridians decide." The Bush side chanted "We want Bush."
Retired U.S. Sen. Howard Metzenbaum, an Ohio Democrat, attended the hearing as a spectator. He said he owns a South Florida condominium and couldn't resist the political theater.
 Load-Date: November 15, 2000

 

End of Document
