

Reports cites gains, setbacks in human freedom in 1999; TOPS with 9 grafs to include Albright comments on Russia, China; picks up graf 6, The report
The Associated Press
February 25, 2000, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 731 words
Byline: By GEORGE GEDDA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




As a result of free elections in Indonesia and Nigeria, two of the world's most populous states, more people came under democratic rule last year than at any time in the recent past, the State Department said today in its annual report on human rights around the world.
The report also said interventions in Kosovo and East Timor "demonstrated that the international community has the will and the capacity to act against the most profound violations of human rights."
On the negative side, the study cited Serbia's expulsion of more than 850,000 Albanians, the Indonesian military's complicity in the militia rampage through East Timor and the "horrors" perpetrated by rebels in Sierra Leone.
These events "all show that the world has a long way to go before it fully adheres to the precepts of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights," the report said.
It added that the military coup in Pakistan and popular dissatisfaction in largely democratic Latin America "clearly demonstrate that the road to democratic governance is not without its problems and challenges."
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright used the occasion of the report's release to highlight the abuses she said Russian soldiers have committed in Chechnya.
Speaking to reporters, she reaffirmed an earlier administration call for Russia "to launch full and open investigations into credible reports of massacres and other human rights violations in Chechnya."
She said the United States "will continue to speak out on behalf of those in China who are systematically denied basic political and religious freedoms."
She also endorsed China's proposed entry into the World Trade Organization, saying it would set in motion changes that "will add to the pressures welling up from within China for greater personal and political freedom.
The report, issued annually since the late 1970s, surveys more the 180 nations and territories and covers all of 1999.
Some country-by-country highlights:
-China: Authorities broadened and intensified their efforts to suppress those perceived to threaten government power or national stability. "Citizens who sought to express openly dissenting political and religious views faced widespread repression." In the weeks leading up to key events last year, including the 50th anniversary of the People's Republic, the government moved against political dissidents across the country, detaining and formally arresting scores of activists."
-Russia: Russian attacks on separatists in Chechnya included air strikes and indiscriminate shellings of cities predominantly inhabited by civilians. "These attacks, which in turn led to house to house fighting in Grozny, led to the deaths of numerous civilians and the displacement of hundreds of thousands more." There were credible reports of Russian military forces carrying out summary executions of civilians in Chechnya.
-North Korea: Government repression is so severe that no organized opposition is known to exist. "The government regards almost any independent activity-including listening to foreign broadcasts, writing letters, and possessing 'reactionary' printed matter-as crimes against the state."
-Burma: The military intensified its systematic use of coercion and intimidation to restrict further freedom of association. "Authorities undertook a sustained, systematic campaign to destroy the National League for Democracy without formally banning it."
-Iraq: The regime continued to commit widespread, serious and systematic rights abuses, summarily executing actual and perceived political opponents.
-Syria: The government uses "its vast powers to quash all organized political opposition."
-Sudan: The government continues to restrict most civil liberties, including freedom of assembly, association, religion and movement. "Government security forces regularly tortured, beat, harassed, arbitrarily arrested and detained opponents or suspected opponents of the government."
-Sierra Leone: Rebel forces committed "numerous egregious abuses, including murder, abduction, deliberate mutilations and rape." Pro-government militias also committed abuses, albeit on a lesser scale.
-Cuba: The government of President Fidel Castro continued to suppress opposition and criticism. "Cuban authorities routinely harass, threaten, arbitrarily arrest, detain, imprison and defame human rights advocates and members of independent professional associations."
 Load-Date: February 26, 2000

 

End of Document
