

Report: Apes in the wild could go extinct
April 9, 1997, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 455 words
Byline: By ERICA BULMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GENEVA
Body




Man's closest genetic relative, the ape, is facing pressures that could drive it into extinction in the wild, the World Wildlife Fund warned Thursday.
Driven from their natural habitats, hunted for their meat, poached as trophies and listed as the 'plat du jour' in fancy Paris restaurants, the world's great apes have been fighting a losing battle in recent years.
While there are still tens of thousands of great apes left - from chimpanzees to orangutans to gorillas - their numbers have dropped precipitously.
The wildlife group warned that the ape could end up extinct, but did not estimate when that could happen.
The latest threat comes in the form of war.
"The most endangered of all these apes is the mountain gorilla, whose last stronghold is the troubled - sometimes war-torn - zone along the frontiers of Rwanda, Zaire and Uganda," Elizabeth Kemp, Species Policy Information Officer for WWF International said.
"Civil unrest has put the gorilla and chimpanzee in great peril," she noted.
In 1994, hundreds of thousands of refugees fled ethnic violence in Rwanda, streaming into Zaire and settling near the Virunga National Park, a haven for mountain gorillas.
The WWF said that landmines, firewood collection, random shootings and the threat of disease are killing chimpanzees and putting the gorillas at risk.
Kemp noted, though, that Zairian rebels were cooperating with conservationists to help protect animals.
One of the largest threats to the great ape is loss of habitat, the report said.
"Unsustainable logging, agricultural expansion, oil exploration, mining and human migration into ape habitat are all causing the animals' forest home to shrink as never before," the report said.
The report warned that in 50 to 70 years the forests in Zaire, Equatorial Guinea and Cameroon could disappear completely.
In Malaysia and Indonesia, it said, less than two percent of the orangutan's forest habitat remains. Suitable habitat for the animal has declined by 80 percent in the past 20 years.
Wildlife is also being increasingly hunted for food, it added.
"Bush meat," long hunted by the denizens of the forests, has become fashionably exotic, with restaurants as far as Paris and Brussels offering monkey on the menu.
The great apes are also hunted for souvenirs. In the late 1980's many orangutan skulls were sold to tourists as trophies in Indonesia, a practice that has been stopped by the government.
Chimpanzees, which roamed Africa by the millions at the turn of the century, are down to 100,000 to 200,000 today. In Asia the number of orangutans has decreased from 100,000 to 30,000. The number of bonobo chimps has been halved in the last 20 years, dwindling to below 25,000. The western lowland gorilla is now extinct in Zaire.
 Load-Date: April 9, 1997

 

End of Document
