

Research center a place for those who admire the camel
The Associated Press
May 11, 1998, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 631 words
Byline: By DONNA BRYSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BIKANER, India
Body




It's morning and the 225 pampered residents of India's National Research Center on the Camel are at their most vocal, their pitiful and piercing calls carrying across western India's Thar Desert.
Camel specialist Sumant Vyas doesn't seem to notice the racket. To him, the camel's voice is just one more of the creature's admirable features. During the mating season, he says, braying males can be heard by every other camel within a half-mile radius.
Vyas and the other scientists at the center just outside Bikaner, about 250 miles west of New Delhi, are dedicated to, perhaps even obsessed with, spreading awareness of the camel's finer points - its ability to go up to a week without water, for example, or to carry loads of more than a ton for miles.
Most of India's estimated 1.5 million camels - the largest population outside the Horn of Africa - are in the Thar. The one-humped camelus dromedarius is everywhere - ploughing arid fields for maize and barley, nibbling leaves from prickly trees with their thick-skinned lips or loping calmly through traffic in towns like Bikaner, with proud-necked, bony-kneed, saucer-footed ease, dragging wagons of television sets from warehouse to market.
Camel-mounted soldiers from India fought in both world wars, and camels still help patrol the country's western border. They deliver ballot boxes to remote desert villages during elections and vaccines during anti-polio campaigns.
Some 8,000 tourists visit the research center every year, drawn by the camel's Lawrence of Arabia mystique, or eager to find out more about the animals they rode on the desert safaris organized by tour companies in Bikaner.
Despite man's long association with the camel, scientific interest in the animal is fairly recent. The 14-year-old Bikaner center is holding its first international symposium this summer; the first such meeting was held just six years ago in the United Arab Emirates.
Most Indian farmers and merchants buy their camels - paying an average of $ 250 for one - from nomadic tribesmen. But, with younger men forsaking the harsh desert life for city jobs, camel breeding traditions are being lost.
The Bikaner center's first priority is ensuring the continuation of true strains of the workhorse Bikaneri, with its long lashes and ear hairs to keep out the desert dust; the more delicate Jaisalmeri, prized for racing; and from coastal Gujarat the Kachchhi, adapted to slightly more humid conditions. Center researchers are also studying and seeking ways to conserve the rare, double-humped Bactrian camels found in northern India's Ladakh region.
Center researchers visit farmers to explain how best to care for camels and to provide their pure-bred males for stud.
Vyas, a reproduction specialist, says increasing the number of calves from any one female is the key to preserving strong, healthy breeds. He's perfecting a technique for transferring embryos from one to several females in a lab that, though far from state-of-the-art, is gleamingly well cared for.
The lab and pens where the camels spend the nights or undergo experiments are set in one corner of a 2,000-acre lot of scrub and dunes where the camels are set loose to graze during the day.
Recently, Bikaner researchers began experimenting with diet and exercise to determine whether they could improve racing breeds. They discovered in the process that, contrary to conventional wisdom, females are faster over short distances.
Though camel racing is not as popular in India as it is in the Arab world, where it is big business, it is a way to raise the profile of the center. Its camels were winners at the annual Bikaner Camel Festival in January, and now its scientists are hoping their bosses in the government's agriculture department will allow them to try their luck in the Gulf.
 Load-Date: May 11, 1998

 

End of Document
