

Revived peace talks focus on progress 'on the ground'
October 20, 1997, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 745 words
Byline: By SAMAR ASSAD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




In a first sign of progress after months of crisis, Israeli and Palestinian negotiators said Monday they were closer to agreement on the operation of a Palestinian airport in the Gaza Strip.
Israeli leaders, meanwhile, hinted at flexibility on Jewish settlements, suggesting they were willing to shelve new construction projects for a few months.
Opening the airport, which Palestinians envision will bring in a half-million passengers a year, is of enormous symbolic as well as practical importance to the Palestinians. Most of Gaza has been autonomous since May 1994, but Israel has maintained strict control over the airspace.
The lack of a working airport contributes to Gaza's economic and commercial isolation. Even fledgling Palestinian Airlines has to fly in and out of the Mediterranean resort of El Arish, across the border in Egypt.
The status of the airport is being discussed by one of nine committees working on outstanding issues from already signed peace accords.
"The Palestinian side wants implementation on the ground - that's what counts, and that's what we are here to achieve," said chief Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat.
U.S. envoy Dennis Ross returned to the Middle East on Sunday to supervise the work of the committees, and has been shuttling back and forth between the two sides. Ross met early Monday with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, but there was no statement after the closed-door session.
Emerging from talks later in the day with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, Ross said the sessions involving American, Israeli and Palestinian officials were proving productive. "We are giving this a push," Ross said.
Erekat said Washington must press for further Israeli troop pullbacks and an end to unilateral Israeli actions such as settlement building in the West Bank. "We believe it is a must now for the American side to help us in trying to identify the scope and size of further redeployments," Erakat said.
Monday's meetings came amid indications Israel might be softening its stance on settlement construction following a U.S. demand for a "time-out" in new building. Foreign Minister David Levy told Israel radio that Israel would limit construction in Jewish settlements to a "necessary minimum."
"We want to move forward and not create a situation that would make all our efforts to advance the process irrelevant," he said.
However, Jerusalem's mayor, Ehud Olmert, said there would be no slowdown in construction in east Jerusalem, where Israel is building a large Jewish neighborhood. The eastern sector is claimed by the Palestinians as a future capital and the start of construction in March triggered the breakdown of peace talks.
Olmert said Israel was determined to complete the neighborhood, known in Hebrew as Har Homa and in Arabic as Jabal Abu Ghneim.
Palestinians have demanded a complete halt of building in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, where they hope to establish a future state. "Our problem is with the current settlement activities … and the land that has been confiscated for these settlements," said Palestinian negotiator Hassan Asfour. "Our problem is not with the ones yet to come."
Despite friction over the settlement issue, Israel said progress by the working committees was heartening.
"Chances are that we will continue to work in an intensified fashion and reach results fairly soon," said Eitan Ben-Tsur, the director general of Israel's Foreign Ministry.
Other issues being discussed include the establishment of a Palestinian seaport in Gaza and the creation of "safe passage" routes for Palestinians across Israeli territory between the Gaza Strip and the West Bank.
Security has been a major sticking point in airport talks.
Israel fears militants hostile to the Jewish state could use the airport - located less than a mile from the Egyptian border - to smuggle in weapons or flee. It has insisted that only nations that have flight agreements with Israel itself, such as Jordan and Morocco, be allowed to use the facility.
According to the senior Palestinian on the committee, Fayez Zedan, the two sides moved toward agreement Monday on a joint Israeli-Palestinian checkpoint at the entrance to the airport.
Palestinian officials will be in charge of stamping passports and handling customs duties, with Israeli officers present but not visible, Zedan said. A similar arrangement is in place at the Allenby Bridge crossing between the West Bank and Jordan, with Israeli officials sitting behind one-way windows.
 Load-Date: October 20, 1997

 

End of Document
