

Rich nations and poor discuss the problems of the poor
The Associated Press
July 20, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 555 words
Byline: By SCOTT STODDARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TOKYO
Body




Representatives of the world's wealthiest nations sat down Thursday with the heads of four of the poorest to explore ways to close the gap between them.
President Clinton, en route to the G-8 economic summit in Okinawa, said he regretted being unable to take part in the unprecedented meeting in Tokyo.
"The Okinawa summit will create a framework to fight infectious disease, increase access to basic education and expand opportunity through information technology," Clinton said. "Despite a stronger global economy, too many people around the world live every day without essential health care, basic literacy or the opportunity to share in the benefits of modern technology."
U.S. Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers said after the session that, "there was an agreement on the fundamentals for development, including the overwhelming importance of education." Summers filled in at the meeting for Clinton, whose departure for Japan was delayed by the Mideast peace talks.
The meeting came one day in advance of the annual summit of the seven richest countries plus Russia - known as the G-8.
In a sense, the session was an outgrowth of the demonstrations last December that disrupted another economic conference, with thousands of protesters decrying globalization, which they see as widening the divide between rich and poor.
"The leaders of the rich countries want to put a human face on their summit," said Robert Hormats, the head of Goldman Sachs International in New York. "They want to make it kinder and gentler" as a way to answer their critics.
Executives from the California-based Internet equipment provider Cisco Systems Inc. and other companies attended the discussions, along with experts on poverty from the United Nations and World Health Organization, as well as World Bank President James Wolfensohn.
The leaders assembled at the residence of a former Japanese prince, embracing, smiling and exchanging greetings in English and French.
Prime Minister Yoshiro Mori shook hands with each participant in advance of their two hours of talks. In addition to technology and education, they discussed improving health care in developing countries.
Summers said the meeting will produce specific suggestions at the G-8 session on the island of Okinawa. The eight are the United States, Japan, Britain, Italy, Canada, Germany, France and Russia.
"It was a very productive and very interesting session that gathered a variety of perspectives that sets the stage for a G-8 that emphasizes development issues," he said.
Last week, Japan announced it would provide $15 billion over the next five years to help poor nations develop information technology systems. Further pledges were expected from other G-8 leaders.
The leaders of poor nations that attended were Chuan Leekpai, prime minister of Thailand; Olusegun Obasango, president of Nigeria; Thabo Mbeki, the president of South Africa; and Abdelaziz Bouteflika, president of Algeria.
Summers said wealthy nations, private industry and international organizations must work together, not only to forgive debt and provide economic assistance to poor countries, but also to improve education and fight diseases such as AIDS.
"As important as economic policies are, they are not sufficient for economic development," Summers said.
On the Net: G-8 Summit Online: http://g8.market2000.ca/ 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo TOK137
 Load-Date: July 21, 2000

 

End of Document
