

Rioting opposition protesters take to the streets of Abidjan
December 4, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 627 words
Byline: By GLENN McKENZIE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ABIDJAN, Ivory Coast
Body




Wielding nail-studded sticks and rusty machetes, mobs of protesters clashed Monday with riot police over the exclusion of Ivory Coast's main opposition leader from upcoming legislative elections.
The demonstrators blocked roads with burning tires and scrap lumber in several shantytown neighborhoods, witnesses said. Police and soldiers replied by firing tear gas and, in some cases, live ammunition.
At least two people were killed and an unknown number injured in the protests, which paralyzed Ivory Coast's main city. Several commuter buses were torched, stores were closed and clouds of black smoke wafted over the city.
The Rally of the Republicans, or RDR, had called on its supporters to protest a Supreme Court decision last week to exclude the party's leader, Alassane Dramane Ouattara, from the Dec. 10 legislative ballot. The party has said it will boycott the vote.
More than 30,000 RDR supporters, many carrying homemade weapons, including a few crude firearms, converged on the main soccer stadium in Abidjan.
"Ouattara, king of the north," some chanted.
Regional and ethnic tensions have heightened since December 1999, when Ivory Coast's first coup shattered the country's reputation as a haven of financial and political security in a region wracked by wars and civil unrest.
Ouattara's supporters are mainly northern Muslims while the ruling class consists mainly of southern Christians.
At one point, RDR protesters ran into the stadium dragging a boy with bullet wounds in his abdomen. The boy, who was barely conscious and whose eyes were rolling, had been shot by paramilitary police in the nearby neighborhood of Atiecoube, the youths explained.
The rally ended in disarray without officials speaking to the crowd because they did not have a microphone. Many protesters drifted away to march on the state television station, the site of demonstrations during the October public uprising that toppled junta leader Gen. Robert Guei.
Security forces were deployed around the broadcast center. Nearby, soldiers watched over two men stripped naked and lying on the street. Smoke rose over the area and the sound of shooting and smell of tear gas drifted on the breeze.
A senior party official, Frederic Guede-Guina, vowed the RDR would "hold the streets" to block Sunday's legislative ballot.
"There will be no elections without Ado," Guede-Guina said, using Ouattara's nickname.
Interior Minister Emile Boga Doudou said at least two people were killed and two policemen injured by the protesters. RDR officials said three of their supporters had been killed and another arrested.
Crowds of youths - some carrying Ouattara posters - took advantage of the anarchy to randomly attack passing motorists, in some cases robbing them of their belongings or damaging their cars.
Doudou initially said Sunday the government was outlawing the protest, but authorities later agreed to allow the demonstrators to gather at the stadium. By that time it was too late for organizers to inform supporters not to take to the streets, RDR spokesman Aly Coulibaly said.
Hundreds died in several days of street violence in October following the presidential elections. In that vote, Guei, the junta leader, stopped vote-counting and claimed victory when it appeared opposition activist Laurent Gbagbo had more votes. The move sparked the uprising that brought Gbagbo to power.
Ouattara also was banned from the presidential vote. In both cases, the court ruled he was ineligible because of doubts about his citizenship and about whether his parents were born in Ivory Coast. Ouattara has insisted he and his parents are Ivorian.
The United Nations and France, Ivory Coast's former colonial ruler, have criticized Gbagbo's government for barring Ouattara from the legislative ballot.
 Load-Date: December 5, 2000

 

End of Document
