

Rosa Whitaker: The first assistant U.S. Trade Rep for Africa
The Associated Press
August 25, 1998, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 1065 words
Byline: By PETER ALAN HARPER, AP Business Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Just the resume alone is an indication of supreme networking power.
That resume, packed with references to trade and business related to Africa, propelled Rosa Whitaker to a brand new government position, assistant United States Trade Representative for Africa.
With contacts in the private sector, among African ambassadors, government bureaucrats, and the fractious nonprofit American supporters of Africa, Whitaker already knows the players she must deal with while coordinating interagency U.S.-Africa trade policy and investment matters and being the chief negotiator on African trade issues.
Moreover, it's the first time Africa has had a singular emissary among the 20 other assistant trade representatives handling regions, countries and policy. The position is an outgrowth of the recognition - largely spurred by Ron Brown, the late Commerce secretary - that Africa is a vast, untapped market rich with resources positioning for global commerce.
"A lot of what we are doing now is the institutionalization of his work," Whitaker said.
Whitaker, 38, started in March, just in time to accompany President Clinton on his historic trip to Africa this spring.
But just before that, Whitaker assembled a presidential mission that Rep. Charles Rangel, D-N.Y., undertook last December that is still talked about in Washington.
"That mission laid the groundwork for the president's visit," Rangel said. "In each country, it wasn't just knowing the issues and the people, she knew the … culture."
Few are surprised by her ascendancy. Rangel said that Whitaker was equally adept at drafting an education bill as she was moving a trade bill. And that resume inspires.
"Everywhere I turn and BOOM she's made a move," said Mel Foote, executive director of the Constituency for Africa, a Washington-based group that strives to build support for Africa among Americans. "If I were thinking about a business partner down the road, she would be the kind of person I'd want to go with."
A Washingtonian, Whitaker infuses her work with the many elements of her life. In her temporary quarters, the walls of her office are bare, except for one item, a leather duplicate of a 1590 map of Africa, its divisions and rivers noted in Portuguese.
"It's a reminder of the slave trade," Whitaker said, her eyes fixed on the rendering. "This is where Africa was under the rule of colonial masters. I look at it as a source of pride … a reminder of Africa's history, historically, how far it's come, though it still suffers from global economic apartheid."
For one thing, she said, her eyes lowering, "The world is increasingly globalized and Africa is going to be left behind."
Her commitment to Africa began as a youngster when she spent time with her great, great, great aunt, Barbara Simmons, who lived to be 106 years old and talked about the life lead by those in her family born into slavery.
"I got firsthand accounts of this and you can't be exposed to that and not have that impact you personally," Whitaker said. "These discussions, the stories she shared, had a lot to do with my values, how I was shaped."
That inner energy moved her toward excellence. At 15, while in junior high school, she was elected youth chair of her neighborhood planning council. In high school, she opted to study one year in Wisconsin, where she discovered schooling far superior to that in segregated Washington, and never needed to take her senior year to graduate.
She worked for the Congressional Black Caucus while attending American University in Washington, where she received bachelor's and master's degrees in political science. She then spent five years at a social services agency.
Whitaker said it is important to provide service to those who need it - these days, she helps support a 15-year-old boy she knows in Africa - but it was time to move into something new.
So, in 1988, she ran her hometown's international economic development agency, which touted her as the youngest woman nationwide to hold such a position. In 1991, she started an international consulting practice. In 1992, she joined the foreign service of the State Department and a year later was posted in Abidjan, Ivory Coast, as deputy chief of the embassy's economic section.
During her time in Africa, Whitaker met Mike Williams, a longtime aide to U.S. Rep. Jim McDermott, R-Wash. They had involved discussions about upgrading Africa's economic status.
"We had a trade policy with every region of the world with the exception of Africa. With Africa, we had an aid policy," Whitaker said. "And all of what we were doing would not be fruitful unless we had a trade policy."
Their discussions would resume later. In 1995, she was back in Washington as the deputy chief of the State Department's international energy policy office. She also accompanied Commerce Secretary Brown on one of his missions to the continent.
"I'm not often star struck but with prime ministers and heads of state, he was incredibly impressive," she said. "He touched them in a way I haven't seen Africans or African-Americans touch Africans."
In 1996, she took her sabbatical with Rangel, who had made a commitment to Commerce Department employees to carry forward Brown's work after his death that year in a plane crash.
"It was fortuitous. Rangel was politically positioned to make this happen," Whitaker said.
She reunited with Mike Williams, who had drafted the Africa Growth and Opportunity Act, which was languishing in the House. The bill, which Whitaker helped revise as it made its way through committee, calls for the United States to be involved proactively in developing trade with Africa.
Williams said that Whitaker, using her skills and the power of Rangel's office, cajoled the friendly and forced the reluctant to the table, where she turned reticence into cooperation.
"Rosa's involvement was crucial to the overall package," which passed the House but is being held up in the Senate, Williams said. "If she had not taken a sabbatical, we probably would not have had a bill."
Williams and others were unsparing in their praise. But among the terms used to portray her, Whitaker is always surprised to be described as ambitious; she considers herself driven.
"The difference is the motivation for ambition is self. The motivation for being driven is to make a difference," she said, leaning forward to make her point. "My fear is, when I leave, people won't know I was here."
 Load-Date: August 25, 1998

 

End of Document
