

Round-the-clock efforts to contain crisis in Israel-Palestinian talks
The Associated Press
February 5, 2000, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 533 words
Byline: By SAMAR ASSAD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




The United States stepped into a dispute between Israel and the Palestinians on Saturday, amid hints from the Palestinians that the crisis could suspend or even halt peace negotiations.
U.S. Mideast envoy Dennis Ross was meeting with officials from both sides to try to bridge the gaps over the location of an Israeli withdrawal from 6.1 percent of the West Bank.
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, describing an "unprecedented crisis," sent envoys to consult with officials in Jordan and Egypt.
An aide to Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak, Gadi Baltiansky, said Saturday that Israel had no intention of changing the location of the withdrawal.
Arafat adviser Nabil Abourdeneh told The Associated Press that the Palestinian leadership's course of action will depend on the outcome of U.S. mediation. Ross was to meet with Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat and his Israeli counterpart, Oded Eran, together later Saturday to hear their positions, officials from both sides said.
Following the meeting at U.S. Ambassador Martin Indyk's house near Tel Aviv, Ross was then to report back to the U.S. administration.
"There are round-the-clock consultations and efforts," Abourdeneh said. "The next 24 hours are critical, after which we will assess what steps to take next."
Abourdeneh would not elaborate on the options being considered, but Palestinian Cabinet Minister Ziad Abu Zayyad said the Palestinians would take public opinion into account in deciding whether to continue talks with Israel.
"For now, negotiations are our choice, but if Israel keeps dragging on the peace process, we will go back to our people and ask what should be the option," Abu Zayyad said. He would not specify what form the popular consultation would take.
A summit between Arafat and Barak on Thursday ended in sharp disagreement over the location of the West Bank territory Israel is to hand over.
The Palestinians want the land to include heavily populated suburbs of Jerusalem, a request that Israel rejected, saying it has the sole right to decide the location of the withdrawal.
Erekat said Israel also proposed including another troop redeployment, the last under interim peace agreements, in a final peace treaty slated for September. A framework agreement for that treaty is due by Feb. 13, Baltiansky said that deadline clearly would not be met.
He said Barak told Arafat he was committed to trying to reach a framework agreement as soon as possible, and stood by the September target date for the treaty. Negotiators would meet Sunday to work on the framework, Baltiansky said.
Former Prime Minister Shimon Peres, who was not given a role on Barak's peacemaking team, said Israel needs to put peace with the Palestinians ahead of negotiations with Syria that are currently on hold.
"It will be very difficult to make a deal with the Palestinians after the Syrians," Peres said, because the Syrians will be given a "very generous map" returning land Israel captured in the 1967 Mideast War - making it hard for the Palestinians to accept less.
Syria is demanding that Israel agree to return all of the strategic Golan Heights. Barak has indicated his willingness to do so, but has refused preconditions to resuming the talks.
 Load-Date: February 6, 2000

 

End of Document
