

Russians remain cool to World Council of Churches NEW YORK (AP - The Rev. Konrad Raiser, general secretary of the World Council of Churches, expects the Russian Orthodox Church to take part in the organization's 50th anniversary assembly in December. But delegates are expected to be lower-ranking staff from the church's ecumenical department.  Raiser, speaking at a media luncheon, said no members of the Russian hierarchy are likely to attend the meeting in Harare, Zimbabwe. Still
The Associated Press
October 9, 1998, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 639 words
Dateline: HARTFORD, Ga.
Body




A pastor has been charged with deliberately setting fire to his rural church.
A Pulaski County grand jury indicted the Rev. Felton York in late September on charges of first-degree arson, vandalism of a place of worship and second-degree criminal damage to property in the Jan. 8 fire at Hartford Baptist Church.
The fire gutted the sanctuary and heavily damaged other parts of the red brick church in Hartford, 40 miles south of Macon. Damage was estimated at $ 100,000.
York, who has not been arrested, said he learned of the charges when the indictment was published in the local newspaper. "It was some surprise to me, and I don't want to talk about it," he said.
James Turk, an assistant district attorney for the Oconee Judicial Circuit, said he will seek an arrest warrant before the next term of Superior Court, which begins Dec. 14.
York has been part-time pastor at Hartford Baptist for more than five years.
---
 
 Mormon president denounces polygamy among schismatics
SALT LAKE CITY (AP) - Breaking with the usual practice of avoiding embarrassing topics at the Mormon Church's semiannual conferences, President Gordon B. Hinckley condemned the practice of polygamy among schismatic groups
"I wish to state categorically that this church has nothing whatever to do with those practicing polygamy," Hinckley said. "Not only are those so involved in direct violation of the civil law, they are in violation of the law of this church."
Child abuse and incest charges, filed last summer against two Utah polygamists, brought national attention to the continuation of the practice by splinter groups despite the opposition of the Mormon Church opposition and a ban in the state constitution.
The church's founder, Joseph Smith, announced the modern-day revival of polygamy as divine revelation, but the church officially abandoned it in 1890.
Hinckley's sermon also denounced homosexuality as a sinful violation of "God-sanctioned marriage." The church recently donated $ 500,000 to an initiative campaign designed to prevent legalization of same-sex marriage in Alaska.
---
 
 Mormons expect to meet goal of 100 temples by 2000
SALT LAKE CITY (AP) - Mormon Apostle M. Russell Ballard told the church's semiannual conference that the goal of building 100 temples by the end of the century will be met and possibly exceeded.
The church currently has 53 temples around the world. The major expansion program was announced in April by church President Gordon B. Hinckley. Most of the new temples will be smaller than previous structures.
Ballard said the temple building program was prompted by worldwide growth of Mormonism, which now has 10 million members. Many new converts are in remote areas far from existing temples.
Hinckley told the conference that another construction project - a new assembly hall to seat 21,000 - should be completed by the April 2000 conference.
---
 
 Religious statue used as pot pipe
EASTPORT, N.Y. (AP) - A statue of the baby Jesus stolen from a church two years ago has been found in an altered form - as a "bong," a water pipe used to smoke marijuana.
Timothy Rhatigan, 18, of Eastport, was arrested and charged with criminal possession of stolen property.
"The head and stomach had been hollowed out so it could be used as a 'bong,"' Police Officer Dominick Arpino said Tuesday.
The statue was stolen from the Shrine of Our Lady of the Island Church in Eastport in September 1996.
The church has been hit by a spate of vandalism and thefts.
Most recently, this past May another infant Jesus and seven sheep statues were stolen. In June, the statue of Saint Joseph and a crib were stolen, and in August, thieves broke into a donation canister and broke cement benches on a walkway.
Rhatigan is not a suspect in the other thefts at this time, Arpino said. The investigation is continuing and more arrests are expected, he said.
 Load-Date: October 9, 1998

 

End of Document
