

Rwanda Bids Good Riddance to the Last U.N. Peacekeepers
April 18, 1996, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 517 words
Byline: By CHRIS TOMLINSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KIGALI, Rwanda
Body




The last U.N. peacekeepers in Rwanda left the central African country today, and few of those they came to help were sorry to see them go.
The withdrawal of the remaining 362 troops - some by plane and others by truck - ends a 2 -year mission that failed to live up to its goals.
Deployed to enforce a January 1994 peace agreement between the then-Hutu government and Tutsi rebels, the 2,500 or so troops were ordered not to interfere when the slaughter of minority Tutsis began on April 7, 1994.
More than 500,000 people, mostly Tutsis, died in the ensuing slaughter as most of the peacekeepers were either evacuated or sat in their barracks.
Ten Belgian peacekeepers assigned to protect the prime minister were murdered after they obeyed police orders to put down their light arms. Prime Minister Agathe Uwilingiyimana, a moderate Hutu, also was killed.
When the war was over, the U.N. presence in Rwanda increased but never to the 5,500-troop maximum authorized by the Security Council. Last summer, the council reduced the limit to 1,800 troops and 200 military observers.
When the pullout began in March, Rwandans stood outside the peacekeepers' headquarters screaming, "U.N. go to hell!"
A Danish study of the United Nations Assistance Mission to Rwanda called its performance dismal. And observers here say the United Nations is making the same mistakes again.
The U.N. Security Council passed a resolution March 8 calling for the replacement of the peacekeeping operation with a limited civilian staff that would help the country rebuild. But so far, no funds are forthcoming. Marrack Goulding, the U.N. undersecretary-general for political affairs, arrives in Kigali on Friday to discuss the operation.
Rwanda has asked for more human rights observers, but the United Nations can barely afford the 100 already there.
"Political commitment has never been stronger, but people do not want to put up the money," said Ian Martin, chief of the U.N. human rights mission in Rwanda.
Two years after the genocide, Rwanda also is impatient with the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. Charged with bringing the masterminds of the genocide to justice, the tribunal has yet to try anyone.
"If the international tribunal is not going to start trials, then we will, and we will not hand over suspects we capture to the tribunal," said Foreign Minister Anastasa Gasana.
A spokesman for the tribunal said that U.N. financial problems have kept the tribunal from moving any faster.
But the outgoing U.N. special representative, Shaharyar Khan, said the Rwandans have unrealistic expectations about what the United Nations can accomplish.
"I think they don't see that this huge bureaucracy, this monolith, walks at such a slow pace," Khan said. "There is no malice, this is just the reality."
Rwanda's needs, however, are urgent. With 70,000 people crammed into prisons built to house only 20,000, the need to get the justice system going again is desperate. Attacks on people in Rwanda staged from the refugee camps in eastern Zaire doubled in March, and the extremist leaders' grip on power in the camps is strengthening.
 Load-Date: April 18, 1996

 

End of Document
