

Satellite data gives new, bigger measure of the universe
February 14, 1997, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 579 words
Byline: By ROBERT BARR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Turns out the universe may be bigger than we thought.
A European satellite has measured the position of 120,000 stars, and the results have led scientists to correct one of their basic measuring sticks of the universe.
The results are based on the first analyses of data from the European Space Agency's Hipparcos satellite, launched in 1989. They were presented Friday at a meeting of the Royal Astronomical Society in London.
The Hipparcos measurements of pulsing stars called "cepheids" indicated that they are about 10 percent farther away that previously estimated.
That means the universe is bigger and perhaps a billion years older than previously thought. The Hipparcos conclusions may help resolve a paradox that has emerged from other ways of measuring: that the universe is younger than the oldest stars.
"Until Hipparcos, the cosmic distance scale rested on well-informed guesses. The distances we now have, for stars of many kinds, provide for the first time a firm foundation from which to gauge the distances of galaxies," said Michael Perryman, project scientist for the European Space Agency.
Cepheids are an important benchmark for stellar measurements because their brightness is directly related to their pulse - the longer the pulse, the brighter the star.
By comparing the brightness of two cepheids with the same pulse, astronomers can estimate how far apart they are. One of the best-known and closest cepheids is Polaris, the pole star.
Measurements taken by Hipparcos indicated that cepheids were about 10 percent further away than had been thought. Or to put it another way, they were a bit brighter than astronomers had guessed.
The Hipparcos measurements indicate the oldest stars are about 11 billion years old, while the universe is somewhere between 10 billion and 13 billion years old.
Other estimates have the stars up to 14 billion years old and the universe as young as 9 billion.
"I hope we've cured a nonsensical contradiction that was a headache for cosmologists," said Michael Feast of the University of Cape Town in South Africa. "We judge the universe to be a little bigger and therefore a little older, by about a billion years."
Robert Kirshner, professor of astronomy at Harvard University, said the key will be nailing down where in the 10 billion to 13 billion range the universe's age falls.
"If their number is 10 to 13 billion, it isn't settled," Kirshner, who had not seen the report, said in a telephone interview.
"We are finally getting to the point where we don't disagree on the distance scale by a factor of two, but by 10 percent. That's good. It means science is growing up."
The Hipparcos satellite was launched in 1989 but failed to reach its correct orbit. After reprogramming from the ground, the satellite - named for an ancient Greek astronomer - operated until 1993. It has taken since then to analyze the data.
Hipparcos made precise measurements of the annual fluctuation of the position of 120,000 stars. In addition, Hipparcos logged 1 million more stars in a second, less-accurate series.
Measuring from a satellite avoids the distortions of looking through the Earth's atmosphere and the effects of the Earth's gravitation.
Measurement is "one of the most fundamental parameters" of astronomy "and one of the weakest before the Hipparcos mission," said Floor van Leeuwen of the Royal Greenwich Observatory.
The European Space Agency said the full data will be published in June and will be available then to all astronomers.
 Load-Date: February 14, 1997

 

End of Document
