

Scarred by the violence, many see no point in holding a summit
The Associated Press
October 16, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 755 words
Byline: By DAFNA LINZER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




An Israeli military siege of towns in the West Bank and Gaza Strip is keeping hundreds of thousands of Palestinians from jobs and schools. Clashes with Israel have left nearly 80 Palestinians dead and thousands wounded.
In Israel, many spent the Sukkot holiday weekend - normally a time of trips and picnics - indoors, fearing possible terrorist attacks by Islamic militants. An Israeli soldier brutally beaten to death by an angry Palestinian mob was laid to rest.
Doubtful that the wounds from weeks of violence could be healed at Monday's Mideast summit, many on both sides said their leaders should have stayed home.
In marches in Gaza City and the West Bank towns of Hebron and Ramallah, thousands of Palestinians on Monday expressed their opposition to renewing contacts with Israel. "Yes to the intefadeh (uprising), no to the summit," read a banner signed by Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat's Fatah faction.
"We're still a people under siege," said Palestinian moneychanger Sosian Adawi, one of hundreds of mourners attending the Ramallah funeral of Raed Jaoud, 30, who died Sunday after being injured in a clash with Israeli troops last week. "I don't think it (the summit) will be successful."
In Hebron, a masked gunman fired shots in the air. "Those bullets are for Israel," said the gunman, who would only give his first name, Ali. "That's what we want from our president. We are behind Arafat."
Israelis, in turn, have become increasingly disillusioned with Arafat. Heading into the summit, Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak said Israel may have to wait for a change in the Palestinian leadership to strike an accord.
"All his life, he (Arafat) believed that Palestine would be liberated with blood and fire," commentator Nahum Barnea wrote in the Yediot Ahronot daily. "The question is how to make sure that his successor is different from him."
In the West Bank settlement of Elon Moreh, home to an American-born rabbi shot and killed a week ago by Palestinian militants, neighbors discussed security arrangements around their community and devoted little time to the summit.
"So many times we have gone to summits and signed agreements with the (Palestinians) that are not worth the paper they are written on, so what good will another summit do?" asked Rabbi Elyakim Levanon.
He said Israel instead should disarm Palestinian police who can no longer be trusted with the weapons they were given as part of earlier peace deals.
Barak and Arafat both headed into Monday's summit at Sharm el-Sheik, Egypt, as reluctant participants with low expectations. Their advisers have repeatedly said they believe little would be accomplished.
Several informal cease-fires to end the unrest have collapsed so far, and marathon meetings Oct. 4 in Paris failed to get the leaders to come to terms on a truce.
The violence exploded after a Sept. 28 visit by hard-line Israeli politician Ariel Sharon to a Jerusalem shrine holy to Jews and Muslims. Close to 100 people have been killed, most of them Palestinians, leaving a fragile peace process in tatters and deep uncertainty over whether the two sides will be able to pick up the pieces.
Many frustrated Palestinians believe Arafat will face intense pressure to sign an unfavorable agreement at the summit, attended by President Clinton and the leaders of Egypt, Jordan and the United Nations.
"The struggle is not going to end with the summit or with words. It's just the beginning because now we are facing our destiny," said Nader Jabari, a 41-year-old Palestinian math teacher in Hebron. He referred to the United States as "the devil," adding that Palestinians will not settle for less than their own state.
Israel has slapped a closure on the West Bank and Gaza, preventing Palestinians from entering Israel. In addition, those living in the West Bank cannot leave their communities, with Israeli army roadblocks ringing each town. In Hebron, an added internal closure has kept thousands of Palestinians, who live in close proximity to a small number of Jewish settlers, under an around-the-clock curfew.
After two Israeli reserve soldiers were killed by a frenzied Palestinian mob in Ramallah on Thursday, many Israelis wondered whether Barak should even be talking to Arafat anymore.
The Israeli Maariv daily on Monday ran photographs of more than a dozen Palestinians present during the lynching - framegrabs from video footage - and said many had gone into hiding. Israeli Cabinet ministers have vowed to track down the killers of the two soldiers, regardless of how much time it takes.
 Load-Date: October 17, 2000

 

End of Document
