

Secretary of agriculture learns firsthand the effects of drought
The Associated Press
August 4, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 594 words
Byline: By CHRIS TOMLINSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KAJIADO, Kenya
Body




The U.S. Secretary of Agriculture handed out bowls of boiled corn kernels mixed with beans to children wearing red and navy blue school uniforms Friday, supplying them with possibly their only meal for the day.
In the background, emaciated cattle foraged in grass killed by the worst drought to hit the region in 40 years.
Dan Glickman, the United States' top agriculture official, met with government officials and Maasai tribal leaders to learn about the drought firsthand. And he said other developed countries are not doing enough to help.
"We are supplying nearly half of the food that goes through the World Food Program and while we do have a bounty of surplus of commodities, I do think, in my judgment, that the rest of the world, the developed world, needs to really up their share," Glickman said. "The U.S. should not be the only nation providing the bulk of food assistance to the world."
The United Nations reported last week that only 36 percent of the aid requested to alleviate disasters worldwide had been delivered by member nations. The U.N.'s World Food Program has cut rations to some refugee camps and other food programs because not enough food is available.
Driving the 50 miles from Kenya's capital, Nairobi, to the Maasai village of Kajiado, Glickman looked out over the rolling savanna that has turned brown and beige following more than a year without seasonal rains. Where there would normally be tall grass, only clumps of dead roots remain and the only sign of life came from the fading green leaves of wilting thorn bushes and acacia trees.
The commissioner for Kajiado district, John Abduba, said residents welcome donated food, but some do not have enough water to cook it.
"Because of pasture problems and water problems in this district, all the rivers are dried up. The water ponds that provided water for the animals have dried up also," Abduba said.
Desperate to keep their cattle alive, most of the Maasai men from Kajiado have walked their herds hundreds of miles in search of water, leaving behind thousands of women, children and elderly with little means of survival, Abduba said.
Women and old men, dressed in traditional red plaid wraps and wearing beaded jewelry, waited patiently at a school in Kajiado while Glickman helped aid workers hand out a milled flour made from corn and soybeans that came in bags labeled "Gift from the USA."
"I've learned that without this food assistance an awful lot of people would be in very serious trouble," Glickman said. "We are learning about the distribution scheme to see what we can do to improve it, what additional foods we need to give people a balanced, nutritional diet."
He said the United States would send an additional 1,100 tons of food aid to Kenya in the next few months. U.S. farmers have had bumper crops in recent years and 1.1 million tons of food aid has been distributed worldwide this year, U.S. officials said.
"That is a significant amount of food that will obviously help America's agriculture, but it also has a humanitarian purpose," Glickman said. "The $300 million in the Global Food for Education program will come largely through the Commodity Credit Corp., which is largely assets of food surpluses that farmers produce, so any kind of food assistance program has a beneficial effect for American agriculture."
President Clinton announced the Global Food for Education program during the G-8 summit in Japan last week. The program will provide school lunches in a bid to help keep students in school.
---
On the Net:
Interaction site, http://www.interaction.org 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NAI101-104
 Load-Date: August 5, 2000

 

End of Document
