

Slaughter Near the Pyramids: A Reminder of Militant Islam's Threat
April 20, 1996, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 705 words
Byline: By SALAH NASRAWI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




The bursts of gunfire that killed 18 elderly Greek tourists have also drowned out Egypt's claims of limiting a Muslim extremist revolt.
Egyptian officials had exulted for months that the insurgency had been contained in rural southern Egypt, far from the capital and major tourist attractions. But Thursday's attack on a group of more than 80 religious pilgrims was a disturbing reminder that militant Islam remains a threat - even in sight of the Pyramids.
Recently, Interior Minister Hassan el-Alfy told reporters in the southern town of Malawi that "the radical groups have lost the initiative, which is now in the hands of the security force."
But el-Alfy's police were nowhere in sight when three gunmen opened fire on a hotel on Cairo's Pyramid Road, shouting "Allahu akbar," or "God is great," the cry of Islamic militants.
Experts say the attackers were almost certainly from al-Gamaa al-Islamiya, or the Islamic Group, the radical movement at the center of a 4-year-old insurgency to overthrow the mostly secular government and install strict Islamic rule.
"This is a typical al-Gamaa operation," said Mohammed Salah, an analyst on Islamic affairs for the London-based daily Al-Hayat. "One cannot mistake that the assailants are very professional members of the group."
He said the group may not claim responsibility, as it has for other killings of tourists and Egyptian officials, because the attack appears to have gone wrong. Police are investigating whether the gunmen mistook the victims for Israelis who frequent the hotel.
Today, a statement sent to a Western news agency in Cairo claimed responsibility on behalf of al-Gamaa and said the attack had indeed been intended to hit Israelis. Earlier, a news agency in Athens got an anonymous call saying al-Gamaa was not responsible. There was no way to authenticate either statement.
The sudden reappearance of the radicals, whether from al-Gamaa or not, is no surprise.
Critics had warned that the government's statements about ending the revolt were too optimistic. They said that force alone would not put down the insurgency and that the government must first confront the poverty and unemployment that often drives recruits into militant movements.
The government's harsh handling of the insurgency also built resentment. Many of the 940 people killed in the revolt were radicals slain by police. Scores have been put on trial and 50 executed after conviction.
Nabil Abdel-Fatah, a researcher at the Al-Ahram Center for Strategic Studies, said it was difficult to wipe out groups like al-Gamaa because they organize themselves in small cells. He compared the group to a bunch of grapes in which one could be plucked off but the others would remain in place.
Destroying Islamic radicalism is difficult also because it has been a thread in the fabric of modern Egypt for much of the century and has given impetus to militant movements throughout the Middle East.
President Gamal Abdel Nasser, who liberated Egypt from its monarchy, did battle with Muslim radicals. President Anwar Sadat, who made peace with Israel, was killed by them.
The Muslim Brotherhood, founded in Egypt in 1928, has been the exemplar - and sometimes the training ground - for almost every Islamic extremist group. Sheik Ahmed Yassin, a founder of the Palestinian movement Hamas blamed for suicide attacks in Israel, got his start in the Brotherhood.
The Brotherhood long ago disavowed violence, though the government still claims it supports Egypt's militants. After Thursday's attack, the Brotherhood issued a statement condemning the killings as "a treacherous crime."
Abdel-Fatah of the Al-Ahram think tank said the attack could have been spurred either by Israel's recent onslaught in Lebanon, which has caused deep Arab resentment, or by increasing anger at the government's boasts of victory over terrorism.
He said the radicals were particularly incensed that Egypt hosted an international summit last month in the resort of Sharm el-Sheik, which condemned terrorism and supported Israel in its battle with Palestinian Muslim militants.
"There is a general resentment about the Sharm el-Sheik summit," he said. "They (the radicals) want to prove that they are still capable of doing the same things."
 Load-Date: April 20, 1996

 

End of Document
