

Slaughter in Uganda the latest in 'adventure tourism' gone awry
The Associated Press
March 3, 1999, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 794 words
Byline: By WILLIAM J. KOLE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NAIROBI, Kenya
Body




Bungee jumping off bridges over the Rio Grande. Deep-sea diving to the watery grave of the Titanic. White water rafting through the churning cascades of East Africa's White Nile.
By definition, adventure tourists take plenty of risks. But the tourists who traveled to the Ugandan rain forest to view rare mountain gorillas were apparently unaware those risks included marauding Rwandan rebels.
In the wake of the slaughter of two Americans, four Britons and two New Zealanders, it is clear the area is dangerous. Government officials knew it. Environmental groups working to protect the gorillas knew it.
But did the tour operators know it? And if they did, did they pass the information on to their clients?
Mark Ross, the American guide who escaped the rebels and gave the first grisly account Tuesday of the other tourists' fate, was asked at a news conference if his clients were aware of the dangers.
"No," he said. But asked later if he knew the risks, he said: "Yes."
"As the opportunities for travel to obscure and potentially dangerous parts of the world increase, travel agents and individuals themselves have got to exercise discretion and responsibility," said Menzies Campbell, a British member of Parliament.
Rebels in Central Africa use the majority of the region's national parks as cover for their bases. They are remote, unpopulated, and offer plenty of food in the way of wild game.
The rebels sent letters to Ugandan officials two weeks ago warning that Britons and Americans would be targeted, but the threats were not passed on to British tour operators or diplomats, The Express newspaper of London reported Wednesday.
Uganda's president, Yoweri Museveni, blamed park rangers Wednesday for failing to alert the military to a security problem.
However, it was a well-known problem. For more than two years, Hutu rebels based in Congo - from the same militia that carried out the 1994 genocide of more than 500,000 Tutsis and politically moderate Hutus in Rwanda - have been waging cross-border raids into Uganda. They are angry at Uganda for its support of Rwanda's Tutsi-led government, and at the United States and Britain for their increasingly close ties with Rwanda.
"Previous warnings made clear there has been rebel activity in this area and the situation was very changeable," Baroness Symons, a minister in Britain's Foreign Office, said Wednesday.
In August, Hutu rebels kidnapped four foreign tourists just across the Ugandan border in Congo while they were on a trek to observe gorillas. A Canadian tourist was later released, but the others - two Swedes and one New Zealander - have not been heard from since.
As the grim process of identifying the bodies of the slain tourists wrapped up Wednesday, the warnings started - travel advisories from foreign governments urging their citizens to avoid the troubled region.
The Clinton administration issued a warning "which strongly urges American citizens to postpone their visits to Uganda's gorilla parks because of the current security situation," White House spokesman David Leavy said.
Still, adventure tourism remains a specialty: For Americans, the top international destinations remain London, Paris, Rome, and Cancun, Mexico, according to a January survey of the American Society of Travel Agents and Fodor's.
Gorilla watching, while in itself a tranquil matter of sitting quietly in tall grass, also takes stamina. Just to get to gorilla habitats takes hours of driving on badly rutted roads, followed by long hikes on steep, rugged slopes through mosquito-infested jungle. Travelers sleep outdoors, in campsites.
Acacia Expeditions, a British-based tour group, said Wednesday it was canceling all Uganda tours "for the foreseeable future" after four of its clients were among those kidnapped and released.
Acacia's brochure describing its 28-day, $ 1,430 "Gorillas, Game Parks and Chimps" tour stresses the expertise of its guides and ensures "a safe and highly enjoyable trip."
It doesn't mention possible kidnap or insurrections, but tour organizer Sue Ockwell said Acacia relied on a British Foreign Office report stating: "The rebels are periodically active. While the situation is currently peaceful, it can change rapidly."
"Safety is paramount. All tour operators want to have their clients come back again. Common sense dictates you don't want to have the blood of your clients on your hands," she said in an interview.
"It's unthinkable that we would compromise on safety," she said, but added: "These aren't package holidays where you sit on the beach. You can run into floods, earthquakes, tribal insurrections. We have to be ready for anything."
"People do tend to go on holiday and switch their brains off," she said. "I do it myself. But you must be alert and watch what's going on."
 Load-Date: March 3, 1999

 

End of Document
