

Solo balloonist ends round-the-world attempt in Asia
The Associated Press
March 3, 2000, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 735 words
Byline: By KATE N. GROSSMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CHICAGO
Body




American balloonist Kevin Uliassi's attempt to make history by circling the globe alone ended in disappointment Friday in a field in the Southeast Asian nation of Myanmar, more than 13,000 miles from liftoff.
Uliassi, 36, brought his balloon down safely 10 days after beginning his journey from a quarry in northern Illinois. Uliassi ended up about 1,200 miles short of the solo long-distance record.
Flight spokesman Bo Kemper said he didn't know why Uliassi decided to come down, but Uliassi had said he was unsure whether he had enough fuel and supplies to make it across the Pacific.
Todd Little, a member of the flight crew, said the Myanmar military sent a message to the command center through the State Department that Uliassi was not injured in the landing.
Uliassi later was able to leave a brief message on his parents' answering machine that he was "A-OK."
Uliassi was taken to a hospital, where an examination found that he suffered only a few bruises, Little said. Uliassi was to spend the night at the hospital, where he hoped to get his first full night of sleep since the balloon lifted off.
Uliassi last communicated with his flight crew in the Chicago suburb of Homewood 13 hours before he landed, when he told them he was going to sleep.
When Uliassi's flight command center noticed he was descending, the crew sought assistance from the State Department, which had the Myanmar government initiate a search and rescue mission.
Kemper said officials in Myanmar, formerly known as Burma, told him Uliassi touched down around 4:30 a.m. Chicago time near some railroad tracks and a road. Authorities said Uliassi landed 310 miles north of the capital, Yangon.
"It was a controlled descent," Kemper said. "It was a nice, normal landing."
Myanmar, one of the world's poorest nations, is controlled by its military. Foreign donors, including the United States, have restricted aid since a 1988 crackdown on a pro-democracy uprising in which thousands of protesters were gunned down.
Uliassi's flight crew spent much of Friday trying establish phone contact with him. They were also making plans to possibly send a relative to Myanmar to help bring Uliassi home. Although the crew didn't know exactly where Uliassi was, they could still keep tabs on him because he was carrying equipment that tracks his location.
Last March, Swiss psychiatrist Bertrand Piccard and English balloon instructor Brian Jones became the first people to circle the world nonstop in a hot air balloon, landing safely in Egypt.
This was Uliassi's second try at becoming the first person to circle the globe alone. On his first attempt, in 1997, his balloon ruptured over O'Hare International Airport, forcing him down in Indiana. Uliassi lives in Scottsdale, Ariz., but has lifted off from the Chicago area to be close to his family and ballooning friends.
Unlike his wealthier rivals, including Chicago millionaire Steve Fossett, Uliassi relies on sponsors and donations. He raised $500,000 for this trip and had 15 volunteers staff his flight command center round-the-clock.
Fossett holds the solo balloon flight record - 14,235 miles - set in 1998. That trip ended when a storm off the Australian coast sent his balloon into the Pacific.
"I would think in Kevin's case that he has to be very pleased," Fossett said before the flight ended. "He's making one of the finest balloon flights ever, and he had not previously made a long balloon flight."
Uliassi avoided major problems, but some maneuvering he did last week to steer clear of threatening storm clouds in the Atlantic may have proved his undoing. He had to change altitude several times, leaving him with less fuel than he had planned.
"In any long-distance balloon flight there are several points where a 'go' or 'no-go' decision has to be made," said Scott Lorenz, another flight spokesman. "It's water, water everywhere and it's several days without any land in sight."
To count as an around-the-world flight, a balloon must cross all lines of longitude, without using the shortcut of making the trip close to the earth's poles, according to the Federation Aeronautique Internationale, the governing body of air sports. The distance around the globe at the equator is 24,902 miles, but it is shorter at higher latitudes.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE: Uliassi's mission Web site is at www.j.renee.iit.edu. See www.fai.org/balloon.asp for information about the history of ballooning and records.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos CXSC101-103; AP Graphic SOLO BALLOONIST
 Load-Date: March 4, 2000

 

End of Document
