

Somewhere in the world, a birth will mark another billion
The Associated Press
May 27, 1999, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 531 words
Byline: By DAVID BRISCOE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Chances are it will be a boy born in the Third World on Oct. 12, but no one will know exactly which child pushes the world's population to 6 billion.
It took most of the age of humanity to mark the first billion in 1804 and more than a century to mark the second. But now the world is adding a billion every dozen years or so.
Demographers believe growth will slow down, but the next billion could be added at another record pace, according to the Population Reference Bureau, which issued its 1999 World Population Data Sheet on Wednesday.
Researcher Carl Haub is already focusing on 7 billion and the debate over whether the next billion will come faster or slower than the last.
Median U.N. projections say it will take 14 years to add another billion people. Population projections, however, have become more complex than ever, with birth and death rates varying widely from region to region, the impact of AIDS, advances in population programs and longer life expectancies.
The United Nations has decided the best estimate for the 6 billionth living earthling's birthday is Oct. 12. That's calculated from the current rate of population increase of about 1.4 percent a year.
There are no plans to even attempt the virtually impossible task of pinpointing who the child will be or where he or she will be born, but it's likely to be in a Third World country in Africa or Asia because that's where most children are born.
And odds are, narrowly, that it will be a boy simply because there are 105 boys born for every 100 girls worldwide. The latest data show about 50.4 percent of the world's population is male, but in the industrialized world, 51.6 percent of the population is female. In the United States, women outnumber men 51-49.
That is because a variety of factors weigh in after birth, including higher infant death rates among males and the generally longer life expectancy for females in developed countries.
Haub said even a slight change in fertility or mortality now could make a huge difference in world population figures over the next century
"If we miss just a little bit on the projections, we could end up with 7 billion by the fastest rate ever," he said.
The median projection that it will take two years longer to reach the next billion is based on the idea that fertility rates worldwide will drop to two children per woman. The current rate is 2.9.
That is very optimistic, said Haub, even though demographers do not expect percentage population increases to spiral ever upward.
"We've just gone through a demographic century that I don't think will ever be equaled," he said at a news conference releasing the data from the independent, non-advocacy research group. The report notes that world population in the 20th century increased by 4.4 billion, reflecting more than 300 percent growth.
Haub said population increases in the next century could accelerate in some countries, but the worldwide pattern will vary, with growth occurring almost exclusively in less developed countries. Industrialized nations, which doubled their population in the 20th century, will grow slowly or not at all, he said. Europe, in fact, is likely to lose population over the next 100 years.
 Load-Date: May 27, 1999

 

End of Document
