

South Africa's 'Nanny of the Nation' inspires love and hate
The Associated Press
November 14, 1998, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 708 words
Byline: PAUL HARRIS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAPE TOWN, South Africa
Body




Love her or loathe her, she is impossible to ignore.
From taking on the tobacco industry to importing Cuban doctors, Dr. Nkosazana Zuma, South Africa's first black Minister of Health, is often at the center of government controversies.
The woman critics call the "nanny of the nation" notched her latest victory Thursday, when the upper house of Parliament gave final approval to one of the world's toughest anti-smoking laws. The measure, which bans lighting up in public places and all tobacco advertising, awaits President Nelson Mandela's approval.
In some ways Zuma, 49, typifies the leadership of the governing African National Congress as it gears up for national elections next year, which it likely will sweep.
Transformed from liberation fighter to government minister, she and her colleagues still display the combative political style that marked the struggle for survival under the adversities of apartheid.
Showing no fear of tackling huge global concerns, like the prices pharmaceutical firms charged for drugs, Zuma has pressed on with health reforms in spite of fierce criticism from opponents.
Zuma summed up her own attitude during a parliamentary debate earlier this year when she lambasted opposition lawmakers for demonizing her and insisted she would not "somehow disappear."
"Forget about the person and look at the issues," she snapped.
To critics she is an interfering, power-hungry busybody who wants to ban smoking in public and whose mistake-prone department squanders millions of dollars.
For her defenders, Zuma is the champion of the poor who overhauled a racist health system and brought basic care to millions of blacks ignored during apartheid.
Change has come quickly in her four years at the helm since all-race elections in 1994 ended apartheid.
Within months of taking office, she made primary health care free for pregnant women and children under six. By 1996 it was free for all South Africans.
Shifting resources from wealthy hospitals mainly serving whites, Zuma launched a campaign to build clinics in poor rural areas. By the end of 1997 more than 350 had been built, compared with 17 in the last year of white rule.
"We have brought health care into parts of the country that never had it before," said Zuma's spokesman, Vincent Hlongwane.
Born in KwaZulu-Natal province, Zuma was the oldest child in a family of eight headed by a primary school teacher. She won a place at medical school, but left the country to join the ANC in exile and finished her degree in Britain.
Zuma hit the headlines from the start, after sponsoring a lavish AIDS awareness musical that cost one-fifth the government's AIDS budget and was shut down because the department used improper procedures in awarding the production contract.
On Friday, the scandal came back to haunt Zuma when a government-mandated corruption commission started civil proceedings to recover $ 1.8 million from her and other health officials in connection with the production.
True to form, the government backed Zuma. Deputy President Thabo Mbeki's office defended her role and said it had full confidence in her.
But there have been other incidents, including Zuma's backing of the anti-AIDS drug Virodene, which contains a potentially cancerous industrial solvent.
Zuma accuses her detractors of defending elitism and past privileges. The battlefields of the fight against white rule may have shifted to the corridors of power, but the language is the same.
"If you protest her policies, she calls you a racist, or says you oppose transformation," said David Morrell of the South African Medical Association. "Every change she makes seems to carry some threat."
Recent criticism came from researchers who attacked her decision to end funding for expensive AZT treatments for HIV-positive pregnant women to reduce the risk of passing the virus on to their children. Zuma said the money was better spent on prevention.
While often sympathizing with Zuma's aims, doctors agree she appears dictatorial and refuses to listen to other opinions.
"Her ideals are wonderful," Morrell said. "But relations are very strained. She seems to regard doctors as adversaries."
But Zuma has hung on with the full backing of Mandela, and likely will stay on in the job after the elections.
 Load-Date: November 14, 1998

 

End of Document
