

South African human rights panel launches probe of racism in the media
The Associated Press
November 16, 1998, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 548 words
Byline: By DANIEL J. WAKIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, South Africa
Body




South Africa's Human Rights Commission said Monday that it will launch an investigation into racism in the media, but sidestepped a probe into charges of bias at two papers.
The announcement raised concern by free speech watchdog groups and newspapers that the right of expression could be trampled in the commission's attempt to correct the wrongs of South Africa's past.
The chairman of the commission, N. Barney Pityana, acknowledged that the panel had a delicate job in steering between the rights of equality and of free expression.
But, he told reporters, "South Africa has no reason to place freedom of expression on a pedestal above other rights."
The goal of the probe is to stimulate debate on racism and help the media "reflect the true nature" of South African society, Pityana said.
In a larger sense, the probe is another example of the country's effort to wrestle with the legacy of decades of white minority rule after the fall of apartheid.
The chairman said the scope of the investigation would be established by January. He said it was uncertain whether broadcasters - including the state television and radio company - and magazines would be included. Nor would he define what "racism" in the media might be.
The commission would invoke its subpoena powers if media did not cooperate. That concerned some.
"It's very worrying if they are going to become very heavy-handed, and it could have a chilling effect on the media," said Laura Pollecutt, executive director of the Freedom of Expression Institute.
The probe stems from a complaint lodged with the commission by black lawyers and accountants associations against two weekly newspapers, the Mail and Guardian and the Sunday Times - which has the nation's highest newspaper circulation.
The Mail and Guardian, an opponent of apartheid, was criticized for disproportionately targeting blacks in its investigative pieces, an accusation the paper rejects.
The Sunday Times was accused of ignoring or trivializing black victims of violence. The complaint also took a white columnist to task for saying African-American White House staffers who visited South Africa with President Clinton realized they "would probably be living in shacks with no running water if their ancestors hadn't been abducted by slave traders."
Times editor Mike Robertson said the complaint was based on "errors and distortion." In one example, the black deaths allegedly given short shrift had happened a week before, he said.
"I'm really disturbed by the Human Rights Commission. I think they found the media guilty of racism in advance," he said. "Who is the (commission) to say to any newspaper or television station, 'You shouldn't report on that,"' he said.
Pityana said he would not investigate the individual complaints because racism pervades "the whole of South African society."
Since the days of apartheid, media ownership is no longer exclusively white, but few blacks occupy senior editing jobs.
Last month's Truth and Reconciliation Commission report, a major survey of rights abuses under apartheid, found the English language media had "often adopted a policy of appeasement toward the state" and that the Afrikaans-language media "with rare exceptions chose to provide direct support for apartheid and the activities of the security forces."
 Load-Date: November 16, 1998

 

End of Document
