

South Africa delays voter registration for half of the country
The Associated Press
November 24, 1998, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 421 words
Byline: By DANIEL J. WAKIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, South Africa
Body




South Africa today postponed voter registration for half the country, saying it was unprepared to sign up all the 25 million people eligible to take part in next year's elections.
The Independent Electoral Commission called off registration in four provinces just three days before it was to begin compiling the voter rolls for the first election since the African National Congress swept to power in the balloting that ended apartheid.
No date has been set for the election.
Commission officials told reporters that the southern provinces needed more time to train the 72,000 civil servants nationwide offered by the ANC-led government to staff the registration.
The commission had to turn to the public employees because it did not receive enough government funds to hire its own workers. The military said 8,200 soldiers will take part.
Controversy over the registration has been brewing for weeks.
More than 5 million people are estimated to lack updated identification documents, which contain a bar code to ensure accuracy, that are needed to register and vote.
Red tape and confusion have hindered many from acquiring the documents or temporary piece of paper that also can be used to register. Most of those lacking the new document are whites, because blacks rushed to replace their restrictive apartheid-era IDs after the fall of white minority rule.
The ANC has insisted on the bar-coded IDS as the only entry into the voting booth, causing an outcry from the mainly white-supported opposition parties.
Now, only the nation's five northern provinces, including central Gauteng where Johannesburg and Pretoria are located, will register voters Friday, Saturday and Sunday. The provinces account for about half the number of eligible voters.
The other four will go forward Dec. 3-5, said the chief electoral officer, Mandla Mchunu.
In a nationally broadcast speech Tuesday, President Nelson Mandela said difficulties were to be expected given the scope of the first-time exercise.
"But the work that has been done so far and the goodwill that has been shown gives me the confidence that we will succeed," he said.
Mchunu said the commission was urging Mandela to settle on May election date, before the weather worsened and days shortened in the southern hemisphere fall.
Mandela called a May 19 date mentioned in news reports Tuesday "speculation by journalists."
The first all-race elections, in 1994, were held without registration. But the new constitution of post-apartheid South Africa requires a complete, national voters roll.
 Load-Date: November 24, 1998

 

End of Document
