

South Africa Joins the Sexual Revolution
March 11, 1996, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 872 words
Byline: By ALEXANDRA ZAVIS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAPE TOWN, South Africa
Body




Former convent school girl Gerda Keresztesi has much to do in her busy downtown shop, such as artfully arranging handcuffs and vibrators or advising clients on the latest blue movie releases.
Just five years ago, carrying a copy of Playboy magazine meant getting turned away at the border. But along with the dismantling of apartheid's racial separation, the new South Africa is shedding its official prudishness.
Keresztesi, 29, opened her first sex shop in the neon-lit Seapoint neighborhood four years ago "to shock the old nuns." It was so successful she opened a new shop in the middle of the business district.
"This kind of material was forbidden for so long that people are inquisitive," she said. "They want to see what is there."
Under the former white minority government, strict censorship laws banned material that depicted intercourse, masturbation, homosexuality and the vague areas of "lust" and "licentiousness." Keresztesi was raided five times and had goods worth 40,000 rand ($ 11,000) confiscated.
Her headaches with the law may soon end under relaxed rules proposed by President Nelson Mandela's government.
A bill expected to win parliament approval this year would legalize all forms of pornography except articles depicting extreme violence, bestiality or exploitation of children under 16.
The bill would also define what items could be sold anywhere to people over the age of 18 and those limited to sale in licensed sex shops.
Keresztesi is delighted, but not everyone is happy about government loosening the rules. Much of the white minority has a conservative religious heritage, and many in the black majority hail from tribal cultures equally straitlaced about sex.
"Our overriding concern is the child," said Frank Kahn, the Cape Town attorney general who opposes allowing pornography. "Our legislation is going to be more liberal than the rest of the civilized world."
Despite the restrictive censorship laws still on the books, South Africa's sex industry mushroomed after Mandela's African National Congress won the nation's first all-race election last year to end apartheid.
Liberation went far beyond the shucking of political oppression. Sex shops have opened throughout the country; newspaper adds offer blatant prostitution and hard-core pornography, and live sex shows thrive at night clubs and strip joints.
Police have even been working openly with prostitutes to track down a Cape Town serial killer targeting street walkers.
"We aren't investigating prostitution; we are investigating a case of murder. And if that means turning a blind eye to their activities in order to achieve success, that is what we will do," said police Capt. John Sterrenberg.
The new sense of freedom permeates the country. Telephone callers flood radio chat shows to discuss sexually transmitted diseases, contraception methods and other sex issues. Five years ago, sex education was banned in schools, and the government refused to acknowledge the existence of AIDS within its borders.
Interracial marriages, also once banned, are a source of endless fascination in women's magazines.
South Africa is the first country to offer constitutional protection to homosexuals with a clause preventing discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.
Parliament's defense committee has now instructed the army to stop discriminating against people who are openly gay or lesbian in its recruitment drives. In December, the first gay wedding was celebrated by two men in Johannesburg.
Gambling, still technically illegal, now takes place openly in dozens of hotels and nightclubs.
The backlash has been small but vocal, involving prominent religious leaders, lawyers, civil servants and school principals.
In reaction to the explosion in sexually graphic material on the shelves of ordinary convenience stores, as well as in the proliferation of sex shops, a national group called Stop Pornography has collected more than 160,000 signatures from people seeking an outright ban on such publications.
Anti-porn activists have picketed mom-and-pop grocery and sandwich shops that display magazines like Hustler, Penthouse and Playboy next to the cash register.
"We believe there can't be half measures because selling pornography in sex shops or in wrappers will not assist in keeping it out of the hands of children or sexual perverts," said Stop Pornography's spokesman, Horace van Rensburg.
Opponents link the increased accessibility to what the public perceives as an increase in child sex abuse, violence against women and the breakup of marriages.
Supporters of the changes dispute that.
Jeff Zerbst, associate editor at Hustler magazine, said the proposed classification system and sales restrictions would promote self-censorship.
"The point is that people who want to get hold of the stuff can buy it, and people who shouldn't read it can't," he said.
Government officials say the new law would conform to constitutional guarantees of freedom of expression, reversing decades of government control under apartheid.
Brown Coetzee, the publications director in the Home Affairs department, promises flexibility.
"No act is ever final," he said. "We have to put it into practice, find what its shortcomings are, and then we can make amendments."
 Load-Date: March 11, 1996

 

End of Document
