

Stamps In The News: It's holiday time for the U.S. Postal Service
The Associated Press
November 16, 1998, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Lifestyle
Length: 393 words
Byline: SYD KRONISH
Body




It's holiday time again. Happily, millions of people will be sending cards and letters to family members and friends wishing them warm greetings of the season.
It's also holiday time for the U.S. Postal Service with the issuance of new stamps as part of its continuing annual series. One format is called Holiday Traditional and another is labeled Holiday Contemporary.
The Holiday Traditional stamp for Christmas 1998 illustrates a master work of art - "The Florentine Madonna and Child." The image portrays a 15th-century sculpture created by an unknown artist in Florence, Italy.
The painted and gilded terra-cotta statue on the stamp features the Christ Child being held by his mother. This sculpture is part of the National Gallery of Art's permanent collection in the Italian Renaissance Gallery.
The word "Christmas" appears on the top of the stamp. On the bottom is "Florentine 15c" and "National Gallery."
The Holiday Contemporary Series will continue this year with four beautiful wreaths stamps. This quartet of 32-cent offerings symbolizes joy and good fortune.
First-day covers for the Traditional Florentine Madonna stamp of 32-cents denomination can be ordered from the Stamp Fulfillment Services of the Postal Service. The covers will be postmarked with the official first day of issue cancellation. You may phone (800) STAMP-24.
-
Sweden features the millennium
Sweden will start a new stamp series called "The Millennium Series." The stamps will focus on the 1900s.
Sweden Post, the country's postal unit, says the series will be a cavalcade of 20th-century memories. The first stamps illustrate innovation and discoveries in various fields that had an impact in Sweden during the years up to 1938.
These stamps are available at your local dealer.
-
Undersea marine life offerings
The Republic of Djibouti, a former French colony in northeast Africa, has released a sheetlet of stamps with a 75 francs denomination that focuses attention on undersea marine life. It is in conjunction with the United Nations program called, International Year of the Ocean.
Depicted are the paradise tanager, the red-eyed tree frog, the dolphin, the humpback whale, the green monkey, the yellowlip sea snake, the longhorn cowfish, the false cleanerfish, the big reef squid, the blue shark, the hermit crab and the octopus.
These stamps are also available at your local dealer.
 Load-Date: November 16, 1998

 

End of Document
