

Stamps In The News: New releases feature endangered species
The Associated Press
March 27, 1998, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 483 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body



For AP Special Features
The plea continues - protect the endangered species throughout the world!
Emphasizing the plea, the United Nations Postal Administration has issued a new set of 12 stamps depicting a variety of species in danger of extinction. The set is the sixth in the UNPA's multiyear series on this subject.
The stamps are divided into three different currencies - United States, French and Austrian.
The United States set of 32-cent stamps illustrates the lesser galago, the Hawaiian goose, the golden birdwing and the sun bear. The French units in francs show the short-tailed Tibetan macaque, the Queen Alexander's birdwing, the Caribbean flamingo and the Persian fallow deer. The Austrian set in schillings features the green turtle, the burrowing owl, Ralph Brooke's birdwing and the lesser panda.
First-day covers of the new United Nations stamps are available by writing to: United Nations Postal Administration, P.O. Box 5900, Grand Central Station, New York, N.Y. 10163-9992. Or call (800) 234-UNPA.
Also available is the "1998 Endangered Species Annual Collection Folder" of single mint stamps. The collection is contained in a specially designed album which devotes separate pages to each of the 12 endangered species. Descriptive information is provided in each of the three languages and each stamp is highlighted by photos relative to the species.
The collection album can be obtained via the same address as given for the United Nations Postal Administration.
---
UNICEF is honored
Continuing the efforts of the United Nations to help people worldwide, the postal officials of Uganda in east Africa have issued a set of four stamps honoring the work of UNICEF during the last 30 years. The theme of the set is "Putting Children First."
The quartet of stamps illustrates such programs as Health, Water and Sanitation, Basic Education and Child Care, Coordination Communication, and Adolescents Development.
The 300 shillings stamp depicts a child in a wheelchair in support of children with disabilities. The 400 shillings portrays a mother holding her child as a nurse inoculates the child against polio. The 600 shillings emphasizes the importance of sanitation. The 700 shillings shows children in a classroom.
These stamps are available at your local dealer.
---
For new stamp collectors
If you are just starting out as a stamp collector, here are some terms to help in your selection process.
A cachet is a design on an envelope describing the event depicted. Cachets appear on first day of issue, first flight and stamp exhibition covers.
A miniature sheet is a single stamp or block of stamps with a margin on all sides bearing some special wording or design.
A souvenir sheet is a small sheet of stamps with a commemorative inscription plus illustrations connected with the commemoration.
A surcharge is an overprint that changes the denomination of the stamp from its original value.
 
 Load-Date: March 27, 1998

 

End of Document
