

Stamps in the news: special stamps issued for 50th anniversary of UNICEF
January 10, 1997, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 448 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




The 50th anniversary of UNICEF (United Nations Children's Fund) resulted in the issuance of special stamps by many countries during 1996. Some released stamp designs based on images used by UNICEF for its own Christmas cards.
Canada's set of three, using the UNICEF design, showed outdoor winter activities and the lively winter scenes gave a "Canada flavor" to the theme, said Heather LaFleur, the stamp designer.
UNICEF was created by the United Nations General Assembly on Dec. 11, 1946, to help children in countries devastated by World War II.
Canada's 1997 stamp program commenced with the same commemoration as the U.S. Postal Service - the celebration of the Chinese New Year, called "The Year of the Ox."
Other items on the 1997 stamp agenda for Canada include a set honoring "Canada in Hollywood" to coincide with the Pacific '97 international stamp show which is scheduled for San Francisco in May; a set hailing 12 prominent Canadians for "Canada Day,"; a John Cabot stamp to mark the 500th anniversary of the famed explorer's historic voyage to Canada; a 10th stamp in the continuing "Masterpieces of Canadian Art" series; plus a set featuring "thrilling characters of the Supernatural."
First-day covers are available by calling the National Philatelic Centre at (800) 565-4362, or by writing to Canada Post Corp., Corporate Mail Centre, 2701 Riverside Dr., Suite E0070, Ottawa, Ont. K1A OB1.
---
Elevator inventor honored
Did you know that the man who invented the elevator was honored on a U.S. stamp?
Elisha Graves Otis built the first elevator in 1851 in Yonkers, N.Y. He even incorporated a safety device to check the fall of the elevator in case the lifting chain broke. In 1856, Otis exhibited his elevator at an exposition - the American Institute Fair in New York.
Later, Otis invented items such as a railroad car truck with brakes, a steam plow and a baking oven. Before he died in 1861, Otis invented a steam elevator.
The Otis elevator is depicted on the 1988 5.3 cent Transportation coil stamp.
---
Beauty of horses highlighted
The Central African Republic, a former French colony in equatorial Africa, has released a series of 235 francs stamps and a single 1,000 francs souvenir sheet to highlight the beauty of "Horses of the World."
The stamps display the appaloosa, the quarterhorse, the Belgian draught horse, the thoroughbred, the mustang, the haflinger, the Welsh pony, the British shire, the Shetland pony, the fiord pony, the Standardbred, the Morgan, the Waler, the palomino and the pinto.
Shown in the stamp portion of the 1,000 francs souvenir sheet is a photo of the saddlebred horse.
The stamps of the Central African Republic are available at your local dealer.
 Load-Date: January 10, 1997

 

End of Document
