

Stamps in the news: Triangular stamps will celebrate Pacific '97 stamp show
The Associated Press
December 20, 1996, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 496 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




Another California Gold Rush?
Next summer, the U.S. Postal Service will issue six new postal items to celebrate the "Pacific '97" stamp show to be held in San Francisco. It is expected this set will be one of the most popular in many years.
In the offing are the first-ever triangular stamps issued by the Postal Service. The vignettes, based on mid-19th century images, represent California transportation scenes of that period. One stamp illustrates a clipper ship off the California coast and the other stamp shows a mail stagecoach.
Also scheduled in the set is a pair of souvenir sheets featuring the design of the first U.S. postage stamps which were issued in 1847, re-engraved with current denominations of 50 and 60 cents. The original first stamps of 150 years ago portrayed the head of Benjamin Franklin on the 5 cents stamp and George Washington on the 10 cents. Each souvenir sheet shows an enlarged die proof of the original designs.
Two postal cards will display the Golden Gate Bridge photographed in the afternoon and at sunset. The 20-cent domestic rate card (daylight) features a scene looking eastward toward the United States while the 40-cent international rate card (sunset) looks west across the Pacific.
More information as to designs, background, exact dates of issue and how to obtain the stamps and first-day cancellations will be reported here as soon as they become available from the Postal Service.
---
Air Force To Be Saluted
An added entry to the 1997 Postal Service schedule will be a stamp saluting the 50th anniversary of the Air Force as a separate military service. It will be released Sept. 18, the anniversary date.
The new 32-cent stamp will feature the Air Force's Thunderbird jets flying in a classic diamond formation. In the lower left corner will be the inscription "U.S. Department of the Air Force 1947-1997."
---
Olympics Honored Again
Eritrea, an independent nation in eastern Africa, has just released a sheetlet of nine vertical stamps and two souvenir sheets in tribute to the 1996 Olympic Games held in Atlanta. The stamps are the first by Eritrea to honor the Olympics.
Depicted on the stamps are a volleyball game, a laurel wreath, women's basketball, the Olympic torch, cycling, a second Olympic torch, a second cyclist, an Olympic gold medal and a soccer match.
One souvenir sheet features cycling and the other shows a soccer player.
The stamps of Eritrea are available at your local dealer.
---
Count von Zeppelin Cited
Grenada, a British Commonwealth island nation in the eastern Caribbean, has issued a set of two sheetlets and two souvenir sheets honoring the aviation legacy of Ferdinand Graf von Zeppelin of Germany.
The stamps illustrate the lighter-than-air balloons commonly called "Zeppelins," which were utilized by Germany and Great Britain during World War I.
The souvenir sheets depict the balloons of other countries based on designs created by Count von Zeppelin.
The stamps of Grenada are available at your local dealer.
 Load-Date: December 20, 1996

 

End of Document
