

Stamps in the news: United Nations stamps feature 'Flag Series'
February 14, 1997, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 504 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




Flags that flutter in the breeze outside the United Nations' building in New York can be seen again on the latest United Nations Postal Administration stamps in its special "Flag Series."
On Sept. 26, 1980, the United Nations issued the first 16 stamps in this series. By 1989 all 159 members had been honored with stamps featuring their national flags. However, since that time the U.N. membership has increased to 185 countries and therefore new stamps had to be issued from time to time reflecting the additions.
The 11th group of eight stamps in the "Flag Series" has now been issued to honor Tajikistan, Georgia, Armenia, Namibia, Liechtenstein, Republic of Korea, Kazakhstan and Latvia.
The United Nations Postal Administration says the "Flag Series" has afforded the public an opportunity to enjoy the colorful and varied designs on the flags flying outside the U.N. headquarters. These stamps are true miniaturized versions of the flags, faithfully reproducing not only the colors and designs but also the flags' true proportions.
Also issued by the UNPA was a souvenir folder containing one mint single of each of the 1997 "Flag Series."
Collectors may order the new U.N. "Flag Series" stamps by phone, calling (800) 234-UNPA. Credit card orders will be accepted (American Express, Visa, Master Card). Or you may write to: U.N. Postal Administration, P.O. Box 5900, Grand Central Station, New York, N.Y. 10163-9992.
You can also open a "Customer Deposit Account" thus receiving all U.N. stamps and other philatelic items automatically by calling the toll-free number.
U.N. commemorative stamps generally remain on sale for 12 months while stocks are available.
---
First woman to receive pilot's license
Amelia Earhart has been proclaimed the greatest female flier in U.S. history. But do you know who was the first American woman to receive an airplane pilot's license?
She was Harriet Quimby who became the first American woman to receive her license Aug. 1, 1911. She was honored on a 50-cent Pioneers in Aviation airmail stamp issued April 17, 1991. The stamp depicted Quimby with goggles and helmet. Her single-wing plane appeared in the background.
In 1912, Quimby was the first woman to fly over the English Channel. That same year Quimby's monoplane suddenly nosed over in flight and she was killed in the crash.
---
Dedication to classic cars
Grenada Grenadines in the Eastern Caribbean has issued two sheetlets of stamps dedicated to "Classic Cars of the World."
Shown on the stamps are the Chevrolet Belair Convertible (U.S.), the Rolls-Royce Torpedo of England, Nissan "Cepric" of Japan, Mercedes-Benz of Germany, Bugatti Type 13 of Italy, Mazda of Japan, MG K3 Rover of England and Plymouth Fury of the United States.
Two souvenir sheets also were issued. One illustrates the Bugatti Roadster with a Mercedes-Benz SSK in the border. The second souvenir sheet displays the Lincoln Type L of the United States with a Honda 500 of Japan in the border portion.
The stamps of Grenada Grenadines are available at your local dealer.
 Load-Date: February 14, 1997

 

End of Document
