

Stamps in the News: U.N. honors endangered species
March 28, 1997, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 467 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body



For AP Special Features
The emphasis on saving the endangered species of the world has long been promoted by the United Nations.
To further this effort, the U.N. Postal Administration has issued a set of stamps in the U.N.P.A.'s multi-year series on this important subject.
The four species illustrated on the sheets of 12 stamps are the African elephant, Major Mitchell's cockatoo, the Black-footed ferret and the cougar.
Each sheet of 12 includes four marginal inscriptions, two on the left margin and two on the right. The marginal inscriptions show the emblems of the United Nations and the year 1997.
Mint stamps are available in selling units of full sheets or a single unit of four stamps in an attached block. First day covers are also available from the U.N. Postal Administration, P.O. Box 5900, Grand Central Station, New York, N.Y., 10163-9992. Or you may phone toll free 1-800-234-UNPA.
The U.N.P.A. has also scheduled the 1997 Endangered Species Annual Collection Folder of single stamps available May 30.
The album devotes separate pages to each of the endangered species. Descriptive information is provided in English, French and German, and each stamp is highlighted by a colorful array of photos illustrating the various species, reports the U.N.P.A.
The collection folder is available from the same address as the orders for the mint stamps and first-day covers.
---
Sending love
Love makes the world go around, claims the U.S. Postal Service.
According to a recent study commissioned by the USPS, 63 percent of Americans send "special cards" to their significant others on Valentine's Day. And more that 56 percent say they send love letters and romantic cards the rest of the year by first class mail.
Not to be forgotten, moms and dads also receive endearing notes on Valentine's Day, reports the Postal Service.
The study also shows that women are likely to send three times as many Valentine cards as men!
Is chivalry dead? Or are phone calls a lot easier?
---
Rock 'n' roll stamps
The Gambia, a republic situated in West Africa, has released a sheetlet of nine stamps and a souvenir sheet in tribute to the "Legends of Rock and Roll."
The stars shown on the stamps are: Roy Orbison, Mick Jagger, Bruce Springsteen, Jimi Hendrix, Bill Haley, Gene Vincent, Buddy Holly, Jerry Lee Lewis and Chuck Berry.
The single souvenir sheet salutes the king of rock 'n' roll - Elvis Presley - in his many performances.
These stamps from the Gambia are available at your local dealer.
---
Fungus celebrated
Mushrooms on stamps?
Yes. Tanzania recently issued a set of two sheetlets depicting mushrooms of the world. The names of the various mushrooms appear in their Latin derivations rather than in English. But only a mushroom expert would know the difference.
The stamps of Tanzania are available at your local dealer.
 Load-Date: March 28, 1997

 

End of Document
