

Stamps In The News: "Celebrate the Century" program to begin
The Associated Press
January 30, 1998, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 424 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body



For AP Special Features
Thirty commemorative stamps to be issued in a single day!
That's the ambitious undertaking of the U.S. Postal Service to inaugurate its "Celebrate the Century" program. According to Postmaster General Marvin Runyon, the unprecedented commemorative stamp and educational program is designed to honor the "most memorable and significant people, places, events and trends of the 20th century."
Runyon has resigned as postmaster general, but will remain in office until May 15.
The 30 new stamps are scheduled for issuance Feb. 3. They will hail the first two decades of the century - 1900 through 1919.
The first stamp in the set features a scene of immigrants arriving at Ellis Island. The others, all 32-cent stamps, pay tribute to:
The Ash Can School of Art in Cleveland; John Muir; WEB Du Bois; Model T Ford; St. Louis World's Fair; First Flight of the Wright Brothers; Robie House designed by Frank Lloyd Wright; Teddy Bears; First World Series; Pure Food and Drug Act Passes; Gibson Girls; Crayola Crayons; Theodore Roosevelt; Great Train Robbery and Federal Reserve.
Also: Woodrow Wilson; Armory Show; George Washington Carver; The Grand Canyon; Construction Toys; Child Labor Law Passes; Jack Dempsey; Panama Canal; Transcontinental Phone Line; Jim Thorpe; Charlie Chaplin; Crossword Puzzles; Scouting, and World War I.
These stamps will be available at all post offices on two collectible sheets of 15 stamps each - one honoring the years 1900 through 1909 and the other honoring 1910 through 1919.
Stamps representing the years 1900 through 1949 had already been recommended by the Citizens' Stamp Advisory Committee, including people appointed by the postmaster general to review all stamp suggestions and make recommendations for future stamps.
However, stamp subjects representing the years 1950 through 1999 will be voted on by the public. Ballots will be made available at all post offices.
-
Uganda hails UNICEF
Uganda has announced the issuance of four stamps depicting the work of UNICEF in that country during the past 30 years.
The United Nations' program assists uplifting the welfare of women and children, particularly in underdeveloped countries such as Uganda.
The 300 shilling stamp depicts UNICEF efforts to support children with disabilities. The 400 shillings shows UNICEF efforts to safeguard children against polio. The 600 shillings illustrates UNICEF efforts in promoting basic sanitation standards among children. The 700 shillings portrays UNICEF efforts in ensuring children's rights to a basic education.
 

 
 Load-Date: January 30, 1998

 

End of Document
