

Sudan seeks an apology from the United States along with U.N.  probe
The Associated Press
August 23, 1998, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 749 words
Byline: By JAMAL HALABY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KHARTOUM, Sudan
Body




Sudan wants a public apology from Washington for its missile strike against a factory in Khartoum, and has asked the United Nations to investigate U.S. allegations that the factory produced the ingredients for chemical weapons.
Sudan would welcome a U.N. inspection of the factory that U.S. missiles destroyed Thursday, but would not allow the team to inspect any other alleged chemical weapons site, Information Minister Ghazi Salah el-Din said at a news conference Sunday.
He confirmed that Sudan is recalling its entire diplomatic staff from Washington, but said the nation was not severing ties with the United States.
"This is in retaliation for the U.S. action," Salah el-Din said.
Sudan also will take steps against European countries that "openly and unconditionally supported the United States' aggression against Sudan," he added.
Britain, Germany and several other European states backed the U.S. strike against a pharmaceutical factory in north Khartoum. President Clinton ordered the attack, and a simultaneous strike against militant camps in Afghanistan, in retaliation for the Aug. 7 bombings of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.
The United States says the Khartoum factory produced the ingredients of chemical weapons. Sudan says it produced only anti-malaria drugs and vaccines.
In a letter dated Friday and made available Sunday, Sudan's permanent representative to the United Nations asked the Security Council to investigate the U.S. charges, a request supported by the Arab Group and the Group of Islamic States.
At the news conference, Salah el-Din said Washington has been hinting it wants a dialogue with Sudan.
"We have been receiving signals and suggestions by third parties that the U.S. wishes to take a milder position towards Sudan," he said.
"Our response is that we do not entertain any behind-the-scenes contact," he said. "If they want to speak to us, they have to come up with a public apology."
U.S. officials say the Khartoum factory belonged to a corporation in which the Saudi militant Osama bin Laden had a stake. Washington accuses bin Laden of instigating the embassy bombings.
"Bin Laden never came near the factory and there is no way that this factory could have produced chemical weapons," Salah el-Din said.
The United States persuaded Khartoum to expel bin Laden from Sudan in 1995 - a diplomatic push the minister called a mistake.
"We gave (U.S. officials) a piece of advice that they never followed. We told them: 'Don't send him out of Sudan because you will lose control over him.'
"Now, the United States has ended up with war with an invisible enemy," Salah el-Din said.
Meanwhile, a leading Muslim activist was quoted as saying that Islamic militants have begun work to retaliate against the United States, targeting U.S. and Israeli strategic sites and airliners - a warning he said came directly from bin Laden.
Omar Bakri Mohammed, leader of Al-Muhajiroun, a London-based Islamic group known to have connections to the Saudi militant, read the warning he said was signed by bin Laden to Italy's La Repubblica newspaper.
Asked on CNN'S "Late Edition" about a similar statement from another group, National Security Adviser Sandy Berger said it was almost identical to a "fatwa," or religious edict, that bin Laden issued in May and to television interviews and other statements he has made recently.
Asked why no evidence of anything but commercial pharmaceuticals has been evident in the wreckage of the Khartoum plant, Berger refused to describe "physical evidence" the government has of a dual role.
"I have no question, the intelligence community has no question, that that factory was used to manufacture a chemical used in making nerve gas," he said.
Salah el-Din, on Sudan's request to the Security Council for an inspection of the Khartoum factory, said: "We want the United Nations to investigate U.S. allegations that this factory contains chemical weapons, but we will not accept other inspections because that would distract world attention from the issue of U.S. aggression."
Sudan's foreign minister, Mustafa Osman Ismail, said Sudan is ready to receive former President Carter and members of Congress to determine whether the factory produced weapons ingredients.
"We will keep the place (factory) as it is," Ismail told reporters, speaking from Baghdad at the end of a visit to Iraq. "It is very, very important that the international community, the American, European and Sudanese people know whether the American claims are right or wrong."
 Load-Date: August 23, 1998

 

End of Document
