

Sudan's rebel leader: 'The war in the south is over'
March 19, 1997, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 473 words
Byline: By CHEGE MBITIRU, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LOKA, Sudan
Body




Rebels fighting Sudan's Islamic government said Wednesday that their recent capture of two key towns gave them the strength to attack the main city of Sudan's south.
Rebel leader John Garang, speaking to reporters at his camp in the dense bush, said his soldiers were ready to approach Juba - a government-held market town on the west bank of the White Nile - and were therefore close to controlling the entire south of Africa's largest nation.
"I can, for all practical purposes, say the war in the south is over," Garang said. Hundreds of rebel soldiers milled about the camp as he spoke, wearing new-looking camouflage uniforms but a hodgepodge of footwear: Sneakers and street shoes but no boots.
Sudanese rebel groups - led by Garang's Sudan People's Liberation Army - have been have been fighting since 1983 for more autonomy for Christians and animists in the south. More than 1.3 million people have died in the fighting and resulting famines among people displaced by the war.
Rebels seized the towns of Yei and Kajo-Keji over the weekend, a double triumph in the far, central south that marked a new stage of the SPLA offensive in the western half of Sudan's Equatoria region.
In January, SPLA forces triumphed in the southeast with the capture of several towns on the Ethiopian border, approaching the Roseires Dam on the Blue Nile - the source of most of the power for the Sudanese capital Khartoum.
Garang, pointing to a field map, said rebel positions west and east of the White Nile meant that government reinforcements could not reach Juba from the north - all part of a southern rebel offensive in planning for 16 months.
He denied reports of outside assistance - particularly from Uganda, just over the southern border.
Both Sudanese president Lt. Gen. Omar el-Bashir and information minister Brig. el-Tayeb Ibrahim Mohamed Kheir have claimed that Ugandan forces were involved in the fighting in the south - a claim Uganda denies.
Garang said his rebels, without assistance, had captured 17 Soviet-made T-55 tanks on the eastern front and another 14 in the south. The rebels also say they have taken 1,000 government soldiers prisoner and scattered 7,000 others in the southern offensive that began March 1.
The Sudanese government has mobilized hundreds of army soldiers and national militia fighters to counter the rebel offensives.
"If they think that by taking a couple of border areas they were going to launch an uprising, they were wrong," el-Bashir said recently. "We are going to chase them out of these areas."
El-Bashir, who took power in a military coup in 1989 and installed an Islamic regime, has charged that the rebels are trying to split the nation.
"Sudan will never be another Somalia or another Afghanistan," el-Bashir said. "We have inherited a united Sudan and we are handing it over to our sons a united Sudan."
 Load-Date: March 19, 1997

 

End of Document
