

Survey shows violent conflicts on the decline worldwide
The Associated Press
January 4, 1999, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 615 words
Byline: By SLOBODAN LEKIC, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The year ended with a war simmering between the United States and Iraq. But a cease-fire by Basque separatists, a letup of terrorism in Greece and the end of Liberia's vicious civil war are among events that contributed to a sharp drop in the number of violent conflicts worldwide, say think tanks that track the world's warfare.
In its annual survey of 192 nations and territories released Sunday, the National Defense Council Foundation counted 60 conflicts. That represents a drop of seven from 1997 but remains well above the 35 conflicts happening when the Cold War ended in 1989.
The Alexandria, Va.-based council, which promotes greater awareness of defense matters, tallies all violent situations that result in regional instability. These include even major criminal activity and drug trafficking.
"The most specific and paramount danger to international peace at present is the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons," warned Andy Messing Jr., NDCF's executive director.
"Theoretically, if the participants in any one of these 60 conflicts obtain weapons of mass destruction, they can turn a relatively minor imbroglio into a cataclysmic situation involving neighboring states and even the entire world," Messing said.
The group's list includes cross-border wars, such as between Ethiopia and Eritrea, and civil wars such as those in Afghanistan, Sri Lanka, Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo, the former Zaire. Countries with major internal insurgencies include Afghanistan, Algeria, Colombia and Yugoslavia.
Italy and Panama were destabilized by mafia and other drug-related violence. "There is a continuing rise in drug trafficking worldwide, polluting capitalism and destroying democracies," the report said.
The report described the situation inside Iraq as "execution of political prisoners, political unrest, Kurdish insurgency, Turkish military incursion, combat with American and British forces."
Some of the hot spots listed are far from daily headlines: a separatist movement in Namibia's Caprivi Strip, separatist violence in Senegal, an insurgency in Tajikistan.
Countries removed from the 1997 list because their conflicts had subsided or turned largely nonviolent include Bangladesh, the Central African Republic, Greece, Papua New Guinea, Spain and Liberia.
The group's criteria for selection is based on the level of disruption of the socioeconomic and security fabric of a country, caused by both internal and external conflicts.
The count differs from that of another Washington-area think tank, the Center for Defense Information, which lists only conflicts resulting in major combat and omits items like major criminal activity.
"We have not finalized our annual count, but it will be in the low 20s," said Daniel Smith, the group's associate director. Last year's count was 26, he noted.
Smith said U.S. involvement in efforts to resolve many of those crises was on the rise, contributing to defusing conflicts.
"The administration played mayor roles in settling the Northern Ireland issue and in preventing the escalation of violence in Kosovo," Smith said.
"The United States was much more active in Africa in general and in the training of a number of national battalions there to assume the burden of peacekeeping operations," the retired Army colonel said. "We also were instrumental in the settlement of the Peru-Ecuador border dispute."
Asked to comment on the number of violent conflicts, CIA spokesman Tom Crispell said it depends on "what your criteria is for definition of conflict."
The agency maintains its own count, which in the past several years has hovered in the mid-20s. The CIA's final figure for 1998 will be available this month.
 Load-Date: January 4, 1999

 

End of Document
