

Taliban says sanctions will only hurt the poor
December 20, 2000, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 730 words
Byline: By AMIR SHAH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KABUL, Afghanistan
Body




Afghanistan's ruling Taliban militia, protesting harsh new sanctions over its refusal to surrender terrorist suspect Osama bin Laden, ordered U.N. offices closed Wednesday and vowed to boycott peace talks.
The sanctions - chiefly a one-sided arms embargo, a ban on official travel and the closure of Taliban offices outside Afghanistan - are not directed at the Afghan people but are designed to isolate the Taliban, said Erick de Mul, the U.N.'s chief coordinator for humanitarian aid to Afghanistan.
However, the Taliban maintained the sanctions will only serve to hurt the poorest and most vulnerable in Afghanistan, a country already suffering from its worst drought in 30 years. Supreme leader Mullah Mohammed Omar called the sanctions "an oppressive action to subject the poor to inhuman sanctions."
"Step by step, the international community is killing Afghanistan," said 55-year-old Mohammed Zahir, echoing sentiments shared by other Kabul residents. "Slowly, slowly they are letting us die."
The U.N. Security Council on Tuesday gave the Taliban a month to hand over bin Laden and to close terrorist training camps - or suffer new sanctions. Bin Laden is suspected of masterminding the deadly bombings of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998.
The Taliban's information minister, Qadratullah Jamal, denied that Afghanistan was host to terrorist training camps. And the new sanctions won't result in bin Laden's extradition, he added.
"Our position on Osama is unchanged. There is no evidence against Osama. We think this is just an excuse," he said in Kabul. "The United States and Russia are using the excuse of Osama and terrorism, but really it is the Islamic system of the Taliban they want to destroy."
The Taliban ordered a boycott of U.S. and Russian products, and Foreign Minister Wakil Ahmed Muttawakil urged Islamic countries to join Afghanistan in trying to "hurt the economy of these countries."
The United States and Russia, former superpower rivals, had lobbied hard to get the 13 other U.N. Security Council members to adopt the resolution, calling Afghanistan a "haven of lawlessness."
The boycott is little more than a gesture since Afghans, among the poorest in the world, can't afford the few U.S. products on the market, such as cigarettes and candy.
However, the Taliban's vow to close the United Nations' political offices when the sanctions take effect was a major setback, said Koichiro Tanaka, de Mul's political affairs adviser. Other U.N. humanitarian and charity aid workers won't be affected.
The United Nations has been brokering talks to end 20 years of civil war between the Taliban, which enforces a strict brand of Islam over 95 percent of Afghanistan, and the country's opposition, which is led by ousted President Burhanuddin Rabbani and holds some territory in the north.
"The Taliban have to understand that anyone but the U.N. would be unacceptable for the U.N. and for the international community," Tanaka said from Pakistan.
Fearing a violent backlash to the sanctions, the United Nations withdrew its international staff this week. However, de Mul said Afghanistan had been quiet so far. "We will watch for another day and then we will begin to return," he said by telephone from Islamabad, Pakistan.
In war-ruined Kabul, Afghans said the world had forgotten them.
"Why is the United Nations doing this to us?" 45-year-old Bizmullah Balkhi asked as he and hundreds of others waited in frigid weather to catch a bus to Pakistan. "We have so many problems in this country."
The World Food Program estimates up to 1 million Afghans could starve this winter.
Pakistan warned Wednesday that the sanctions would add to a humanitarian disaster at its doorstep.
Thousands of Afghans took up a vigil on the border pleading with Pakistan to open its gates. Pakistan, itself impoverished, receives limited international aid and no U.N. assistance in feeding and housing the 2 million Afghan refugees already living there.
Militant Islamic groups headquartered in Pakistan warned that the sanctions could generate a backlash from the Islamic world.
Washington heavily bankrolled Islamic insurgents during the 1980s war in Afghanistan against soldiers of the former Soviet Union. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, Islamic factions took control in 1992, turning their guns on each other until 1996, when the Taliban took control of most of the country.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos KAB101, ISL101
 Load-Date: December 21, 2000

 

End of Document
