

Tension makes Ivory Coast's expats think the unthinkable: fleeing
The Associated Press
September 30, 2000, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 967 words
Byline: By ELLEN KNICKMEYER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ABIDJAN, Ivory Coast
Body




Stability made Ivory Coast what it was for 40 years - a beachhead for Westerners in troubled West Africa, complete with skyscrapered skyline, well-made croissants and the only ice skating between Egypt and South Africa.
Peace and prosperity drew millions, from African migrant workers to Lebanese restaurateurs, American missionaries to French financiers. Expatriates joked they settled in bustling Abidjan because "it's so convenient to Africa."
But yesterday's welcome is turning ever more to today's threat for the outsiders who now make up as much as one-third of Ivory Coast's population.
The military junta that took power amid the country's first-ever coup, on Christmas Eve, increasingly is appealing to anti-foreigner sentiment in its bid to stay in power through an election promised for Oct. 22 to return Ivory Coast to civilian control.
After shooting, looting and now near-daily scares of more to come, life for Ivory Coast's expatriates has become a worry of if, when - and how - to get out.
"We have extra provisions packed and can leave quickly, but one thing we don't know - where's the rendezvous point?" Marysha Yonis, a British-American, said as she picked up some of her three children at an English-language school in Ivory Coast's commercial center of Abidjan.
"We know the embassy will take care of us, but will it be an airport evacuation - because last time they closed the airport - or by water?" Yonis wondered, while saying the time to run had not yet come - and might not ever.
Most of Ivory Coast's foreign population are laborers from neighboring African countries - and many of them have already sent their families home.
The same holds for true for the non-African population, which numbered up to 330,000, most Lebanese, before the recent troubles. Enrollment at the English-language school dropped 10 percent over summer break.
The drop is greater at the city's French-language expatriate school, said merchant John Salame, a French national who sent his wife and three children to France over summer vacation
"Every week, we hear something, so we tell them, 'Stay away," said Salame, whose warehouse was one of several looted in the December coup. "When it gets worse, all of us will be leaving."
Salame and many others here are veterans of West Africa's other unrest - arriving in Ivory Coast after violent upheaval in Togo, Sierra Leone, Liberia or elsewhere.
Ivory Coast was supposed to be a haven from all that.
Under founder Felix Houphouet-Boigny, Ivory Coast grew to be the most prosperous country in tropical Africa after independence in 1960. His conservatism, patronage by the former French colonial rulers and development of cocoa, coffee and palm oil crops made Ivory Coast flourish. Even in the late 1990s, after Houphouet-Boigny's death in 1993, the annual growth rate hit 5 to 6 percent.
A drop in cocoa prices helped change all that - the one-time ice skating rink is now a dank slab in the now-mildewing, once-snazzy Hotel Ivoire.
On Christmas Eve, gunfire in the streets punctuated the end of an era in Ivory Coast.
Guei assumed power within days of the coup, promising that military rule would be finite and bloodless.
Soon, however, the general traded his uniform for statesmanlike gray and blue suits - and today is showing increasing unwillingness to surrender power.
Abidjan awoke Sept. 18 to yet more machine-fire fire - an assassination attempt against Guei, backed by allies of main opposition leader Alassane Dramane Ouattara, the junta claimed.
Arrests followed, as did opposition claims of torture and killings - accusations the government has denied.
The wait for a potentially explosive announcement on whether Ouattara will be allowed to run against Guei in the scheduled Oct. 22 presidential vote keeps tensions running strong.
Guei's junta claims Ouattara is secretly a foreigner and thus ineligible. Guei, who rejected African leaders' attempt at mediation last week as unwanted outside interference, increasingly depicts Ivory Coast's troubles as us vs. the world.
"Foreigners out!" Ivorians screamed in one angry pro-junta demonstration last week, while Guei looked on smiling.
"The country is almost suffering in comparison with Nigeria, which shows how far it's fallen," Gregory Kronsten, a London-based financial analyst with WestLB, said by telephone.
The situation is bad enough that the African Development Bank, Ivory Coast's leading foreign presence with 1,100 jobs, has drawn up emergency plans for moving to another country, staffers say. Bank officials refused on-the-record comment.
The size of the non-African expatriate community here could make any evacuation unparalleled in the recent history of African troubles.
Many expatriates have stockpiled food and water, drawn up phone trees to spread news in case of trouble, and dropped by their embassies to leave hand-drawn maps of the routes to their homes - essential in a city where few streets have names.
"I've packed my bag of coup food," said American mother Stephanie Schulte, who put the same precaution to use in unrest in Togo. "I'm hoping I don't have to use it."
France, with 20,000 to 30,000 nationals here, has a military ship stationed somewhere offshore able to evacuate 3,000 people. The U.S. Embassy and other Western embassies have contingency plans as a matter of routine.
Missionaries make up the biggest single bloc of Ivory Coast's 2,000-2,500 Americans. The missionaries plan to meet Tuesday to try to draw up plans of their own.
"People are seeking to do what they can to prepare for what could be a bad situation," said Paul Shaddick, assistant director of Ivory Coast's International Linguistic Society, whose work includes translating religious works.
"There are a lot of foreigners in the country," Shaddick said. "Ivory Coast has always had a place for them. Until now."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY193
 Load-Date: October 1, 2000

 

End of Document
