

The World Has Had Enough With Liberia's Warring Factions
May 12, 1996, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 968 words
Byline: By TINA SUSMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MONROVIA, Liberia
Body




The world's impatience with Liberia's warlords is finally boiling over.
The United States is sending some extra aid with the message that this is Liberia's last chance to get its act together. A West African force that has been trying to keep the peace is threatening to leave.
Most visibly, thousands of sick, hungry Liberians who escaped from chaotic Monrovia on a leaky freighter last week had to sail from port to port in West Africa seeking safe haven.
Ivorian officials, fed up with the 350,000 Liberian refugees already crowding camps along the border, allowed only a hasty patch job before sending the loaded ship back out to sea. The freighter was finally allowed into a Ghanaian port on Sunday after being blocked by floating cranes.
Heartless perhaps, but some say it's to be expected given the havoc Liberia's 6 -year civil war has caused in an economically depressed region whose countries have health crises, social problems and wars of their own.
"I want us to send the final piece of advice to the leaders of Liberia, both civil and military, that their country is in mortal danger of being completely abandoned by the international community," Ghanaian President Jerry Rawlings said last week in Accra, where a summit of West African states to discuss Liberia was scrapped because almost no one showed up.
The question is whether Liberia's six-man government, comprised of three warlords and three civilian representatives, will take the latest warnings to heart.
They haven't before. The August 1995 peace accord now on the skids was the 13th signed since Charles Taylor led a rebel assault on the government to launch Liberia's war on Christmas Eve 1989. More than 150,000 Liberians have died since then and half the population of 2.9 million is now homeless.
The events leading to the accord's disintegration were similar to the past failures: clashes in the countryside, finger-pointing by a half-dozen faction leaders vying for supremacy, escalating combat.
This time, the United States, United Nations and others mediating the conflict say forcing faction leaders to accept peace is largely the task of the West African peacekeeping army that is now on the verge of pulling out.
Nigeria and Ghana provide the bulk of the soldiers in the army, which has ranged from 5,000 to 10,000 men depending on the frustration levels of contributing nations. Both are now threatening to withdraw the force.
The army has effectively abandoned the streets to fighters and has been accused of taking part in some looting and gun-running. Army leaders say that without more money from the West, they can't be expected to send badly equipped, poorly paid men into a war that has killed more than 100 of them.
"We are concerned that Nigerians should not continue to lose their lives over a matter that does not necessarily concern us," Nigeria's foreign minister, Tom Ikimi, said recently in Lagos.
The United States, which has spent about $ 80 million on assistance for the West African force over the past five years, last month offered an additional $ 30 million if the army improves its effectiveness.
In addition, Vincent Kern, deputy assistant secretary of defense for African affairs, said Thursday that the Pentagon was considering shipping surplus defense goods and providing training for the peacekeepers.
Those measures, and international pressure, could persuade faction leaders to call off their fighters, said U.S. Ambassador to Liberia William Milam.
"Between the pressure we're bringing in the United States … and in (West Africa), and the knowledge that this is basically their last chance, I think that will be a substantial motivation," Milam said in Monrovia.
As Milam spoke last week, gunmen continued their turf battles throughout the city, leaving streets deserted and civilians cowering behind walls or in their tin shacks and bullet-shattered buildings.
On Sunday, the radio station belonging to Taylor, a member of the six-man ruling Council of State, announced the government had "instituted measures to restore full normalcy to Monrovia and its environs."
Milam and others acknowledged that even if the pressure works, civilians will face years of hardship before the damage done to their country and once-secure capital is repaired.
Those repairs will depend on the return of foreign aid agencies, whose vehicles and offices were trashed during the past month of violence.
"The feeling I have is that nobody is going to come back until there's some security, some ability to do their job," said Eric Thomas of the international aid agency Doctors Without Borders, which evacuated its expatriate staff of between 50 and 60 people. "It doesn't make much sense to return with our equipment and logistics if we're just going to lose it."
Looting continued in downtown Monrovia on Sunday, with people walking down the streets carrying mattresses and pushing wheelbarrows full of junk. One kid was pushing a tricycle, its little seat heaped with goods.
Every shop is either looted or burned or soldered shut. Burned-out cars lie everywhere, their windows shattered, their insides stripped, some with blood smears, most with bullet holes in the doors and windshields.
The U.S. Embassy, working with the West African force, is temporarily trying to keep essential city services operating. It has arranged food deliveries to the city's telephone workers, who have been working round-the-clock to keep lines operating. It also was trying to arrange delivery of chlorine to the water company to prevent a cholera outbreak.
A measles vaccination program began Wednesday at Greystone, the former U.S. Embassy residential compound that now houses some 20,000 refugees.
West African leaders say they'll meet in August to see if Liberia's situation has improved and decide the future of their commitment to the country.
 Load-Date: May 12, 1996

 

End of Document
