

The morgue: Some relatives find loved ones, others keep searching
The Associated Press
August 11, 1998, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1077 words
Byline: Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NAIROBI, Kenya
Body




After visiting 20 hospitals and making daily rounds of mortuaries, Joseph Kaimburi's worst fears were finally confirmed: One of the bodies crowded on a slab in the stench-filled city morgue was his beloved older brother.
They were supposed to meet at Nairobi Hospital at 11 a.m. Friday to visit a friend. But David Kaimburi, a 40-year-old businessman with a wife and three children, never arrived. He had gone to the American Embassy to pick up visa forms for a visit to America, his 37-year-old brother said.
A bomb exploded in the embassy's rear parking lot at 10:35 a.m. About the same time, a bomb exploded at the U.S. Embassy in Tanzania. Nearly 5,000 people were injured and more than 200 killed in the two attacks.
For three days, Kaimburi had hoped he would find his brother in a hospital bed. He had even gone to hospitals outside Nairobi in his desperate search.
As he stood by the slab - which normally holds one body but now held two because of the overwhelming number of casualties from the bombing - he struggled with his emotions.
And as he spoke, he kept looking at his brother, still wearing green pants, a striped shirt and jacket. His head was battered, but his face was still recognizable. A metal identification tag, number 3799, hung from his ankle.
"It's very torturing," he said quietly.
His brother was at the embassy by chance, an innocent victim of terrorist bombers.
"It's unfortunate that the bombing is coming in an African country where we are very peaceful, where we have no problems," Kaimburi said. "We have never had any problems with America. … The relationship is very good. They are supportive. … This is a very unfortunate incident."
While Kaimburi was speaking, dozens of Kenyans walked through the morgue looking for husbands and wives, brothers, sisters, parents, children and friends. Some bodies were relatively intact, some badly burned, some partially or totally decapitated, some already decomposing.
It was a gruesome scene, yet there was almost complete silence - except for the hysterical wailing of a woman outside.
Mary Otieno, 23, had just identified the body of her husband, Elias Otieno, 30, a clerk at the Ufundi Cooperative building adjacent to the embassy, which collapsed in the explosion.
Overcome with grief, she collapsed near a bench outside, sobbing uncontrollably.
"I don't understand how people can be so inhuman," said Francesca Atieno, 34, a cousin of the dead man, explaining that he left three young children, the youngest just 1 month old.
"Maybe the world is too lenient with them. Maybe that's why they get away with it," said Atieno, who has a public relations business. "The world has a population of over 4 billion. The terrorists are just a pocket in the 4 billion. If we all say 'no' to it, it will stop."
At another slab in the mortuary, Maurice O. Orato, 38, had just identified his wife, Margaret Akinyi, 34, who was an accountant at the Ufundi Cooperative and the mother of four children ages 3 to 13.
"Since the bombing, I've been to every hospital. I've come to this mortuary several times but didn't find her. Today, we called the hot line, and they told us to come here," Orato said.
Tears welling in his eyes, he said he had identified his wife by the clothes she wore when she went to work, her shoes and a necklace.
"I'm an unhappy man because I'm left with no wife," said Orato, who works for the post office. "It's a very difficult life now for me and the family. The children are all crying. I have no peace now. They're asking where their mother is."
He said he didn't know what could be done about the terrorists.
For Charles Kamuti, 31, the visit to the morgue was another exercise in frustration.
His younger brother, Lawrence Gitau Kamuti, 29, an assistant pharmacist in the badly damaged 22-story Cooperative Bank of Kenya building near the embassy, was still missing. He has a wife and two children, the youngest just 2 months old.
"I came here in the morning and evening. On Sunday we were here again. And today we came - but so far nothing," Kamuti said.
He complained that relatives still looking for loved ones weren't getting any help from police or the government.
Lists have been posted at hospitals, and at Uhuru Park in the center of Nairobi, but they are not complete.
Medical facilities in this poor East African country have been overwhelmed.
The International Committee of the Red Cross is compiling a computerized list of all the dead and injured, including those treated and discharged.
It hopes to publish the list in the next few days, and use its expertise in global tracing to help Kenyan authorities identify the dead and reunite the living, said spokeswoman Nina Galbe.
But as the hours pass by, people like Kamuti become more desperate for news.
On Monday, he went to the pharmacy where his brother worked and found his brother's jacket, with his wallet and identification still in the pocket. The pharmacy, on the ground floor, wasn't too badly damaged.
"If only he were inside he would have survived," Kamuti said. "But if he went out after the first explosion ..."
He couldn't finish the sentence.
Many survivors reported hearing a small first explosion before the big bomb blast - and some said they ran to windows or outdoors to see what had happened.
He said he couldn't find words to describe how he felt about the bombers, but he said the bombing may contain a lesson for Kenyans, and Africans.
"It's high time we learn why Americans are fighting terrorism," Kamuti said. "In Kenya, we've never had such a terrorist attack."
Dr. Richard Gakunju, a clinical pharmacist, was at the morgue searching for his brother-in-law, a teacher he did not want to name. The brother-in-law tutored students every day in the Cooperative Bank building between 10 a.m. and 11 a.m., just the time that the bomb exploded.
When he heard the blast, Gakunju said, he couldn't believe it.
"It's the last place you'd expect a bomb of such magnitude," he said.
Why would terrorists choose Kenya?
"Maybe because this is the last country you'd expect it and security might be lax, and maybe because the Americans have the biggest diplomatic station here in east Africa," Gakunju said.
"Of course, we don't understand why they would want to kill so many Kenyans in the process, because we do believe it's Middle East terrorists who are responsible. Kenyans would not do that," he said.
Then, Gakunju was off on another search of hospitals and morgues, still hoping he would find his brother-in-law alive.
 
 Load-Date: August 11, 1998

 

End of Document
