

The Associated Press
The Associated Press
November 26, 1999, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 1120 words
Body




The holiday season kicked off on Friday with shoppers packing the stores for $99 TV sets and Pokemon freebies, and merchants wondering whether this is the year when the Internet finally hurts them.
While the Internet still only represents about 3 percent of total holiday sales, it's getting more attention this Christmas than ever before. E-retailers are spending hundreds of millions of dollars on TV spots, magazine ads and billboards and offering bargains to drive traffic to their Web sites.
Shoppers are quickly embracing the Internet. About 10 percent say they will use the Web for gift buying, up from about 5 percent last year, according to a survey by Deloitte & Touche for the National Retail Federation.
---
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Americans' personal income vaulted ahead in October at the fastest pace in more than five years, giving consumers plenty of cash to spend as they head into the holiday shopping season.
The Commerce Department reported Friday that personal income - which includes wages, interest and government benefits - rose 1.3 percent last month, more than twice as fast as spending. It was the biggest monthly gain since April 1994, when incomes also rose 1.3 percent.
---
 
INDIANAPOLIS (AP) - Along with big crowds, noisy malls and screaming children, this year's holiday shoppers can probably expect lousy service, too.
Experts say the booming economy is making it harder for stores to find capable salespeople. The problem is even worse during the holidays, when stores have to hire extra employees to handle the crush of shoppers.
"The employment situation is real challenging for retailers today," said Grant Monahan, president of the Indiana Retail Council. "It makes it really difficult for retailers to go out and find good quality help. So there unfortunately may be some circumstances when you come across a less than helpful clerk."
---
 
BRUSSELS, Belgium (AP) - The euro slumped to its lowest level to date against the dollar and the yen Friday despite brighter news on Europe's economic prospects and efforts by central bankers to talk up the infant European currency.
In European trading, the euro fell to $1.007, down from its previous low of $1.0108 in July and a 15 percent drop from peak reached on the euro's market debut on Jan. 4. Against the yen, the euro skidded to 104.70, the latest in a series of all-time lows.
In trading in New York, the euro crept back up to $1.0156, but it seemed only matter of time before the shared European currency fell below the $1 benchmark for the first time.
---
 
JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (AP) - Technology consultants GartnerGroup are among the world leaders in promoting awareness of the Year 2000 computer bug, advising global corporations, foreign governments and the U.S. Senate.
It won't be long before we learn just how accurate were the country-by-country Y2K readiness ratings by the Stamford, Conn.-based company. But meantime, some countries are complaining the Gartner ratings have unfairly damaged their international image, perhaps even hurting foreign investment.
Although Jackson did not specifically blame Gartner for harming his country, South African officials complained earlier this year after the international grain trader Cargill mentioned a Gartner report as influencing its decision to suspend deliveries to this country for two weeks over New Year's.
---
 
LONDON (AP) - In a merger aimed partly at fending off potential predators, United News & Media and Carlton Communications are combining to create one of Britain's most powerful television companies.
The combined group would have interests ranging from digital television broadcasting and national newspapers to a string of local British TV franchises and U.S. businesses, including Technicolor. The stock deal values Carlton at $6.7 billion.
The merger would be one of the biggest shakeups in years in Britain's media industry.
---
 
LONDON (AP) - After clearing a key regulatory hurdle to its hostile bid for National Westminster Bank, Bank of Scotland on Friday sweetened its offer to $44.4 billion.
The new bid increases pressure on NatWest in a 2-month-old takeover attempt that has rocked the clubby world of British finance.
The Bank of Scotland's revised offer values NatWest at $41.2 billion. The Scottish bank also would pay a special dividend to NatWest shareholders equal $3.2 billion, payable after the enlarged group divests three smaller banks.
The total value of Friday's bid is equal to $26.60 a share - 23 percent higher than what Bank of Scotland originally offered in September.
---
 
MANILA, Philippines (AP) - After two years of being humbled by a devastating economic crisis, recovering Asian nations flexed their resurgent confidence on the world stage Friday by pushing to have an Asian lead the International Monetary Fund.
Confident that the worst of the Asian financial debacle is over, officials attending talks in advance of Sunday's summit of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations are moving to bolster ties with more powerful neighbors, band together for global influence and resume the economic growth of what used to be called the Asian Miracle.
They offered some pointed advice Friday to the world's richest countries: Don't leave us out of major decision-making, or decisions won't get made.
---
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - If Cuban president Fidel Castro decides to attend next week's global trade meeting in Seattle, he will be a center of attention - probably the only head of government there besides President Clinton. And he will have a congenial setting for taking aim at the U.S. embargo against his island nation.
Since he seized power 40 years ago, Castro has visited the United Nations several times but has been in the United States outside New York only once - a trip to Washington just three months after he took over.
Among the 134 nations expected to send representatives to the World Trade Organization meeting, almost all agree with Castro that the U.S. embargo against Cuba should be lifted. Aides say he has been boning up on trade issues in advance of the meeting, but he has yet to announce whether he will attend.
---
 
By The Associated Press
The Nasdaq Stock Market sprinted to another record Friday, as investors gave Internet retailers a boost at the traditional start of the holiday shopping season. But stocks overall had a mixed performance in light post-Thanksgiving trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 19.26 to 10,988.91.
Prices of pork bellies futures continued to surge higher Friday in trading on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange on strong demand for bacon.
In other markets, grains and soybeans futures prices were lower on the Chicago Board of Trade. Commodity markets in New York were closed for the Thanksgiving holiday.
 Load-Date: November 27, 1999

 

End of Document
