

The Hubble: Looking for answers
February 19, 1997, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 534 words
Byline: By MICHELLE KOIDIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SPACE CENTER, Houston
Body




Gleaming in the sunlight, the upgraded Hubble Space Telescope was set free today to resume its quest for answers to the oldest of puzzles: How did the universe begin? How old is it? How did we get here?
The $ 2 billion telescope, orbiting 385 miles above Earth, will require two to three months of tests before its work begins again.
The release followed five spacewalks in as many days on space shuttle Discovery. Astronauts installed powerful, new eyes and improved electronics, and repaired insulation damaged by extreme temperature changes. They finished their improvements early Tuesday.
At the command of astronaut Steven Hawley inside the cabin, the ship's crane released its grip on the Hubble and the telescope slowly drifted away. Discovery was over the African coast.
"HST is free to study the stars," shuttle commander Kenneth Bowersox said, referring to the telescope by its initials.
Later, their boss, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin, spoke with the crew.
"I know what skill and courage it took to get the job done," Goldin said. "You made America proud … what a tremendous achievement."
The four spacewalkers also talked with reporters and said there were few surprises, even though they had to make emergency repairs to Hubble's torn insulation.
"I don't think anything threw us for a loop," spacewalker Gregory Harbaugh said.
The $ 105 million near-infrared camera installed by the spacewalkers will look at distant objects, and a $ 125 million imaging spectrograph will search for massive black holes and stars forming in distant galaxies.
The Hubble, nearing the halfway point of a 15-year flight, was designed to detect light from billions of years ago, soon after the "Big Bang" created the universe. It has already revealed thousands of galaxies and photographed huge gas clouds that were the breeding grounds for new stars.
During 33 hours of spacewalks, astronauts also swapped new electronics for old, and mended rips and wrinkles in the telescope's thin insulation with material brought along on the shuttle, just in case.
"For me and for NASA, it's just like going and winning the Super Bowl," chief spacewalker Mark Lee said.
Since Hubble's launch in 1990, the telescope has looked deeper into the universe than any other instrument, giving clues about the evolution of the universe and new evidence that most of its stars were created about 7 billion years ago.
The service call by Discovery and seven astronauts was less urgent than NASA's first in December 1993 - a do-or-die mission to correct Hubble's blurred vision with corrective lenses.
This time, astronauts tried only to make the telescope better. The mission, which cost $ 795 million, and most of the upgrades were planned years ago.
"It's not the Hubble Space Telescope. It's really the Hubble Space Telescope II," said Ed Weiler, NASA's chief Hubble scientist.
Another shuttle crew will visit the telescope for a tuneup in late 1999.
From Mission Control, Jeff Hoffman told the crew:
"It's been great looking at these departing views of Hubble, the last views of Hubble we'll get for two years, nine months, four days, according to current calculations."
Discovery's 10-day mission is due to end with a Florida landing early Friday.
 Load-Date: February 19, 1997

 

End of Document
