

The pope heads for Nigeria amid dissident crackdown
The Associated Press
March 19, 1998, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 652 words
Byline: By IAN STEWART, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LAGOS, Nigeria
Body




If peace and harmony are Pope John Paul II's message to Nigeria, he's found a tough audience in this country of purges, summary executions and iron-fisted rule.
About the time the pope arrives in Nigeria on Saturday, a closed-door tribunal will be deciding the fate of 26 alleged conspirators accused of plotting to overthrow Gen. Sani Abacha's military regime.
Later, the pope will pay a courtesy call on Abacha, who seized power in 1993, dissolved the government and imposed martial law. The apparent winner of that year's aborted presidential elections, Mashood Abiola, is languishing in prison, biding his time until Abacha sees fit to carry out his delayed execution.
In the weeks leading up to the pontiff's visit, scores of government opponents and pro-democracy activists have been thrown in jail or harassed, the Human Rights Watch group said.
Amnesty International says hundreds of political opponents, journalists and trade unionists are in Nigerian jails. Among the coup suspects caught up in Abacha's latest military purge are his former deputy leader, Lt. Gen. Oladipo Diya, and a senior newspaper editor.
The top suspects could face the death sentence or life in prison. Verdicts and sentencing by the secretive military tribunal were not expected to be made public immediately.
Although John Paul's three-day trip has been billed as a strictly religious occasion, church officials in Nigeria expect him to quietly urge Abacha to relieve Nigeria's swelling prisons of inmates whose only crime was having dissenting political views.
"He will recharge our spiritual battery," Lagos Archbishop Olubunmi Okogie said. "But I expect that he will also plead for the coup suspects and other dissidents."
Government critics, however, fear the pope's visit and meeting with Abacha will lend tacit support to the military regime.
"This visit is going to project the junta here," Lagos-based lawyer and human rights activist Femi Falana said. "The pope is going to meet with the junta, which will take maximum benefit of the visit."
Abacha's ruling military council has spent about $ 375,000 on preparations for the visit.
"The papal visit is an honor to Nigeria," Abacha, a devout Muslim, said recently. "It has gladdened the hearts of the people of Nigeria."
The country's minority Christian population is pleased by the government's welcome for the pope's visit, which comes after years of tense relations between the nation's Christians and majority Muslims, including violent clashes in the 1980s.
Abacha is increasingly aware of his international image and wants to project the image of a statesman, Falana said.
Having recently scored a public relations triumph in Africa by using his armed forces to help restore nearby Sierra Leone's ousted elected government, Abacha is aiming now to build on newfound popularity with a successful papal visit.
Behind the scenes, however, the military has tried to ensure that dissident voices heard by the pope will be far and few between.
Earlier this month, police lobbed canisters of tear gas into crowds of pro-democracy protesters in the Nigerian commercial capital, Lagos. Rifles fired warning shots into the air, while police dragged off at least 10 students and leading democracy activist Olisa Agbskoba.
At the same time, in the political capital Abuja, a carefully orchestrated demonstration in support of Abacha urged the military strongman to run for the civilian presidency.
"This shows that Nigerians, who have been denied credible leadership, are highly impressed by Gen. Sani Abacha's impeccable achievements," Abacha's spokesman David Attah said.
Whether genuine or not, Abacha's projected popularity at home is met by international scorn.
Already unpopular for seizing power with brute force and canceling civilian elections in 1993, Abacha's decision two years later to execute author Ken Saro-Wiwa and eight other minority activists transformed Nigeria into a pariah.
 
 Load-Date: March 19, 1998

 

End of Document
