

THE 20TH CENTURY; Quotations on 20th century human rights
The Associated Press
November 7, 1999, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 426 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Some comments on human rights in the 20th century:
"The problem of the 20th century is the problem of the color line - the relation of the darker to the lighter races of men in Asia and Africa, in America and the islands of the sea." - W.E.B. DuBois, 1903, from "The Souls of Black Folk."
"If women had had the vote, as men have the vote, we should have had equal laws." - Emmeline Pankhurst, British suffragette leader, 1908.
"In these times of great crisis, it often seems futile to be talking about free speech, property rights and the sanctity of the family, among other such things. But when peace in the world, real peace, depends so much on the freedom and natural rights of individuals everywhere, we just must work all the harder." - Eleanor Roosevelt, 1948, during the debate over the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
"Non-violence is the first article of my faith. It is the last article of my faith. … I am endeavoring to show to my countrymen that violent non-cooperation only multiples evil … I am here, therefore, to invite and submit cheerfully to the highest penalty that can be inflicted upon me for what in law is deliberate crime and what appears to me to be the highest duty of a citizen." - Mohandas K. Gandhi, on trial for sedition, 1922.
"I have a dream that one day on the red hills of Georgia the sons of former slaves and the sons of former slaveowners will be able to sit down together at the table of brotherhood. I have a dream that one day even the state of Mississippi, a state sweltering with the heat of injustice and oppression, will be transformed into an oasis of freedom and justice. I have a dream my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but the content of their character." - Martin Luther King Jr., 1963.
"The real sexual revolution is the emergence of women from passivity, from the point where they are the easiest victims for all the seductions, the waste, the worshiping of false gods in our affluent society, to full self-determination and full dignity." - Betty Friedan, speech, 1969.
"People, your government has been returned to you!" - Vaclav Havel, dissident elected the first post-communist Czech president, 1990.
"We dedicate this day to all the heroes and heroines in this country and the rest of the world who sacrificed in many ways and surrendered their lives so that we could be free. Their dreams have become reality." - Nelson Mandela, inaugural address as post-Apartheid president of South Africa, 1994.
End Adv for release anytime
 
 Load-Date: November 8, 1999

 

End of Document
