

The serenades of the savanna enliven a safari in Zimbabwe
The Associated Press
June 8, 1998, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 1146 words
Byline: By KAREN SCHWARTZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HWANGE NATIONAL PARK, Zimbabwe
Body




You'll never forget the sounds of an African night.
The snorting of rutting impalas, the barking of zebras, the bellow of elephants and a hundred other roars, whistles, chirps and hollers.
But my first night in the field, this wild chorus was a chilling cacophony.
A broken drive shaft had hobbled our Land Rover, and we were stuck in deep sand on a seldom-traveled dirt road along the edge of Hwange National Park.
I knew Hwange was closed after dark, in part because of the danger from lions. Yet here my husband, the driver and myself were stuck in the middle of who-knew-where, hours after dusk, with no radio, no gun and no hope of getting the open-air Land Rover onto hard ground where the tires might grip.
It was only later that I learned that the sounds were a song of safety. The animals go quiet when there's a predator around.
By the next day, our nighttime adventure had already become the talk of The Hide safari lodge, and the 14 other guests had heard how after fruitless attempts to push the car out, we had finally cut the bungee cords holding the canvas roof to the vehicle and used the tarp for traction under the tires.
That night in Hwange was the only time we even came close to roughing it during our trip. There are basically two ways to tour Zimbabwe - as a backpacker or in luxury. As we considered this the trip of a lifetime, we chose the latter.
Our dollars were well spent. Our days at The Hide began with coffee and biscuits left on the deck outside the tent (which had an attached bathroom and hardwood floors); then a 6 a.m. rendezvous for a morning drive or walk.
Given our recent experience with vehicles, we opted at first for the walk. Moving single-file behind a guide armed with the largest rifle I had ever seen (a Weatherby .458 magnum), we walked through tall grass beaded with dew as our guide pointed out the various plants, insects and birds. Under the watchful gaze of a lone wildebeest, we crept to within about 150 feet of a herd of zebra and an hours-old foal and watched his awkward first steps. Later, when we strolled back into camp, a family of hundreds of baboons chattered at us from the neighboring trees.
Although one doesn't get as close to the animals on foot as one does in a vehicle, Zimbabwe's guides are among the most highly trained of any country's and the walks provide an opportunity for them to share their knowledge of tracking and animal identification. The guides were only too pleased to explain how to tell the droppings of a browser from a grazer, and they taught me how to tell the speed, age and sex of an elephant from its footprint.
The dawn activity would be followed by a full breakfast that was a clear reminder of Zimbabwe's British heritage. Then the day's activities would involve at least two game drives in the now-repaired Land Rover.
Our trip was in May, the start of the dry Zimbabwe winter which lasts through October. During our stay, the vegetation was still full and lush, and the temperatures relatively moderate, from the low 80s at midday to 45 at night. As the pools of water dry up through the winter, game viewing becomes easier because the animals congregate at the remaining watering holes and never stray very far. The tradeoff, however, is that the landscape bakes brown and the temperatures rise, peaking in October.
Despite the timing of our trip, we did not lack for animals. Hwange is known for its healthy elephant population. Too healthy, some would say, as the herds threaten to overwhelm the fragile ecosystem in which they live. This has led to passionate arguments as to the best and most humane way to control the size of the herds. Regardless of where one stands on the issue, it is hard to feel anything but awe watching these massive animals move about with seeming delicacy and a quietness that allows them to virtually melt into the trees.
Hwange, Zimbabwe's best-known park, also has large herds of zebra, scores of doe-like impala, smaller groups of sable and kudu antelope, and families of warthog whose tufted tails wave antenna-like as they trot along. Giraffe, wildebeest, jackals, and the fearsome Cape buffalo are also commonly seen.
And then there are the birds. I have never considered myself a birder, but it's impossible not to be captivated by the eagles, hawks, cranes, ostrich and the common but extraordinarily beautiful lilac-breasted roller.
Unfortunately, there are no rhino in Hwange. The only place to be reasonably sure of seeing white rhino in Zimbabwe is in Matopos National Park, where the rhinos, including the few remaining black rhinos, were consolidated in an attempt to save them from poachers. Matopos, in the southern part of the country, offers a variety of other animals (no lions or buffalo), Stone-Age cave drawings, and the grave of Cecil Rhodes, after whom the country was named Rhodesia until its independence in 1980.
Matopos can be visited in a day-trip from Bulawayo or by staying at a private camp in the hills near the park. One resort, Amalinda, has carved its Flinstone-like rooms out of the boulders and is notable for the trips it arranges to a nearby tribal village, medical clinic and school.
Still, apart from the rhino, Hwange is where the wildlife is. And we'd toast our good-fortune every afternoon with a "sundowner" cocktail served in the Land Rover while watching the sun set over a waterhole where elephants played.
We'd spent several nights at The Hide and I'd still not seen the lions that my imagination had so fearfully conjured that first night. Still, the guides had seen their tracks and knew they were in the vicinity.
Our last night, they got a little closer than we expected. After dinner, my husband and I were walking behind a tent while a lion, unbeknownst to us, was walking in front of it - to the amazement of those who watched it saunter through the camp. We all quickly climbed into the Land Rovers for a night drive in hopes of tracking the giant cat.
We found him, and it was not the chilly night air that caused me to shiver. Imagine a sound that you feel as much as hear. A visceral "oomph" that resonates through your body and sets your nerves to jangling. That was the roar of this lion.
The black-maned male lay on his side in the grass. Every few minutes his belly would rise as he filled his lungs with air. And as he expelled the air, there was that noise. Soon after, there was an answering roar that grew closer.
Our guide explained that the two lions were brothers. Sure enough, within a few minutes the second lion appeared. Together they walked, slowly, regally, clearly lords of their domain, down the road and into the closed park where we could not follow. We saw many other things that night. Sleeping crown cranes adorning the skeletal branches of a tall tree, bat-eared fox and a family of civets.
But all that anyone could speak of was the magnificence of the lions, and of that sound.
 Load-Date: June 8, 1998

 

End of Document
