

Tragedy, indecision, inertia: a look back at the year of genocide
The Associated Press
March 26, 1998, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 789 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Body




President Clinton stood at the grieving heart of one of history's greatest slaughters Wednesday, finally called it genocide and pledged "never again."
But the U.S. policy that stalled global action in Rwanda in 1994 still stands in 1998. And for all the regretful words in Kigali, the superpower's readiness - and the world's ability - to act the next time remains an open question.
During his brief visit to the central African nation, Clinton was clearly moved by the terrible tales of wholesale death told him by six survivors from 1994, when thousands of killers among Rwanda's Hutu majority massacred hundreds of thousands of minority Tutsis in an organized three-month campaign.
Addressing Rwandans at the airport in their capital, Clinton spread the blame widely for the world's failure to stop the carnage.
"The international community, together with nations in Africa, must bear its share of responsibility for this tragedy," he said. "We did not act quickly enough after the killing began."
The inertia and indecision, bumbling and backbiting that slowed the international reaction to the 1994 Rwanda crisis came from various capitals and bureaucracies. But again and again, knowledgeable officials have since reported, it was Washington - particularly its policy dubbed "PDD-25" - that was the biggest obstacle to a speedier response.
Rwanda occurred just six months after 18 American soldiers were killed in a firefight in Somalia. The U.S. Congress had lost its stomach for U.N. "humanitarian intervention."
As the bloodshed began in Rwanda on April 6, 1994, the Clinton White House was putting the finishing touches on Presidential Decision Directive 25, setting stringent standards for U.S. support for U.N. peacekeeping operations, which many in Washington felt were proliferating uncontrollably.
"Peacekeeping can be a useful tool for advancing U.S. national security interests in some circumstances," the directive stated, "but both U.S. and U.N. Involvement in peacekeeping must be selective and more effective."
The byword in Washington had become "learn to say no" to the United Nations. Washington got to say no that very night.
The Canadian commander of a small U.N. force already in Rwanda, Maj. Gen. Romeo Dallaire, appealed by satellite phone to U.N. headquarters in New York for authority to upgrade his men's mission from "peace monitors" to aggressive protectors of civilians. But because the Americans were opposed, permission was denied, a senior U.N. official later reported.
The next night, the U.N. Security Council, where Washington holds the strongest hand, met for just four minutes on Rwanda and took no action.
Dallaire later said that if his 2,500-member U.N. force had been doubled or tripled in the first month, "hundreds of thousands of people would have survived." African governments pushed for an expansion, but advisers convinced U.N. Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali that U.S. opposition made it impossible.
It wasn't until April 21 that the council took action - and that was to slash the U.N. force to 270. American sources said the Clinton administration had to be persuaded to leave even that many there.
By early May, bodies by the hundreds were tumbling down rivers and over falls in Rwanda. Public opinion finally pressured the Security Council to reverse course and approve plans to intervene.
But PDD-25, signed by Clinton on May 3, 1994, still slowed the response, as the Americans closely questioned every U.N. move.
The policy sets 11 criteria for U.S. approval of U.N. peace operations, including development of an "exit strategy" - that is, a plan and time frame for withdrawal.
More generally, the complex policy sapped the sense of urgency from the crisis. The Pentagon, for example, quibbled over whether to supply combat boots to Ghanaian troops earmarked for Rwanda, balked at an all-at-once troop deployment, said it might take a month to ship U.S. armored personnel carriers.
In the end, the first decisive move came not from New York but from Paris, when the French government unilaterally sent its troops into Rwanda in June 1994.
The directive still governs U.S. actions on peacekeeping. But a less formal policy from those days was eventually dropped, as Clinton himself noted in acknowledging Wednesday that "we did not immediately call these crimes by their rightful name, genocide."
His administration had shied from using the term because some might have invoked the 1948 Genocide Treaty's demand for action.
In Wednesday's speech, however, Clinton spoke the "rightful name" 11 times. And he pledged that "never again must we be shy in the face of the evidence."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Charles J. Hanley has reported on international affairs for The Associated Press since 1976.
 
 Load-Date: March 26, 1998

 

End of Document
