

Treatment the next challenge as India's AIDS cases rise
The Associated Press
January 18, 1999, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 810 words
Byline: DONNA BRYSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW DELHI, India
Body




On paper at least, India is ready to cope with the consequences of increasing AIDS cases. It hopes to avoid being overwhelmed by not just the disease, but by fear and ignorance.
P.L. Joshi, deputy director of the government's National AIDS Control Organization, confidently fingers a thick, plastic-bound sheaf of tables and prose that detail how nearly 1 million medical workers, from hospital janitors to surgeons, will be trained to care for AIDS patients.
But Joshi acknowledges the training has barely begun, and those patients today face being turned away by hospitals or, when they are admitted, find that doctors and nurses refuse even to touch them.
"There is an element of fear," Joshi said. "People think that if they handle these patients, they will get the disease. Discrimination can only be taken care of by a strong training program."
Experts say India's nearly 1 billion people are in only the early stages of an AIDS epidemic that already has swept over Europe and America and decimated Africa, where in some places a quarter of the population is infected with the AIDS virus.
Joshi and his colleagues in India's campaign against AIDS have focused on education and prevention, hoping to keep the infection rate down. Now they acknowledge they also must face the challenge of caring for people with full-blown AIDS and those infected with the virus.
The World Bank predicts that already struggling medical systems in developing countries like India will be so swamped by AIDS it will be impossible for people with other diseases to get care.
India's government estimates 5 million people, less than 1 percent of Indians, are infected with the AIDS virus. That is considered low by many experts because it is based on very limited testing, but even that figure means one of the world's poorest countries has more infected people than any other nation.
The estimate of infected Indians has increased steadily from 2.5 million in 1996, spreading mainly through heterosexual sex into the general public from high-risk groups like prostitutes and intravenous drug users.
It can be a decade or more before an infected person develops AIDS. Joshi's agency says the number of full-blown AIDS cases has soared from six in 1986 to 3,167 in 1996 to around 5,000 in 1998.
Knowledge about the disease is lacking among most Indians, including health professionals.
Four years ago, India's largest and most prestigious hospital, the All-India Institute of Medical Sciences, surveyed its more than 7,000 employees about AIDS.
Dr. Bir Singh, head of AIDS training at the institute, said he found many staff members did not follow even simple procedures like using needles properly to ensure they did not prick themselves with tips contaminated with a patient's blood.
Worse, Singh found doctors and nurses infected with the prejudices about AIDS that are common in the rest of India. A disease linked to sex and drugs in this conservative society is deeply shameful, and those infected with the virus are often treated as if they deserve to die.
"The moment it becomes known that a person on a ward is HIV-positive, fear engulfs the ward. That fear is still rampant. That shows the ignorance among the medical community," he said. "If the time comes, God forbid, when one in four patients is HIV-positive, what will we do?"
Sahara, a private residential drug treatment program supported by international aid groups, already faces that problem. Director Neville Selhore estimates a third of the 120-130 recovering drug addicts living at Sahara's house in south New Delhi are infected.
"In 1990, a lot of the people here started to fall ill," said Selhore's wife and co-director, Elizabeth. They soon learned the increasing cases of tuberculosis and shingles pointed to the spread of the AIDS virus and took on the task of treating that as well as addiction.
Over the years, the Selhores have developed a matter-of-factness about AIDS that would be striking anywhere. The couple and their young sons live at Sahara along with the recovering addicts.
The boys "know about the disease, and they're cool," Selhore said. "They see how we deal with it. They know there are only so many ways it can be transmitted."
At the 16-bed clinic that Sahara opened earlier this year, attendants pat patients' hair or help them walk with casual affection. They counsel the patients not to share medications like ointment, to use condoms, to stay healthy.
Pop music plays in the background. With books and board games on a shelf in a room that doubles as parlor and nurse's office, the atmosphere is that of an unusually calm and orderly college dorm. The message is simple: People with the AIDS virus can live a normal life if they are armed with information.
"We teach people to take care of themselves. Because how many people can the government and organizations like this take care of?" Selhore said.
 Load-Date: January 18, 1999

 

End of Document
