

Trouble in the Muslim Brotherhood, Younger Members Break Away
October 11, 1996, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 557 words
Byline: By MAE GHALWASH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




A government campaign branding its members terrorists didn't stop Egypt's largest fundamentalist group. Neither did mass arrests and prison. It's a classic conflict - young vs. old - that threatens the Muslim Brotherhood.
A move by some members to create a separate political party with broad appeal to moderate Muslims and Christians has split the Brotherhood, which had inspired many of the main fundamentalist groups in the Middle East.
Some already have quit the Brotherhood and scores more - even some longtime supporters - are contemplating the move, Muslim activists say.
No one thinks the Brotherhood and its secret membership roll of thousands will disappear. But dynamic, up-and-coming leaders are among the defectors, weakening the group while it faces a government onslaught.
"These are the members that helped the Brotherhood rise to power in the 1980s and 1990s. Without them, the Brotherhood will lose its creative soul," said Hisham Mubarak, a researcher who has studied the organization.
The walkouts were triggered by the old guard's rejection of an attempt to establish the Wasat, or Center party, which was praised by analysts as a way to give an open role in Egyptian politics to Islamic activists.
But Abou Elala Mady, the main founder of Wasat, says the dispute only disclosed "what was boiling under the surface" - a deep resentment against Brotherhood elders.
The Wasat, which never got the needed government approval to be a political party, takes a difference approach than the Brotherhood's elderly leaders.
Wasat issued a public platform outlining its ideas and inviting women and minority Christians into Egypt's political leadership. By contrast, the Brotherhood is a Muslim, all-male bastion known for its secrecy.
The Brotherhood, too, claims to be moderate, but critics say its history belies this. Founded in 1928, the Brotherhood was banned in 1954 for its role in political assassinations.
The movement, which since has renounced violence, gained new power in the 1970s when President Anwar Sadat gave it free rein to counter his leftist foes. Using young student recruits - like Mady, now 38 - the group gained control of labor unions and set up clinics, schools and charities that endeared it to the poor.
Last year, when it seemed the Brotherhood would gain behind-the-scenes power in parliamentary elections, the government began arresting its members. It accused the group of backing armed Muslim militants - a charge the Brotherhood denies.
Younger members, meanwhile, grew resentful of the absolute authority of the Brotherhood's leader Mustafa Mashoor and his deputy, Maamoun Hodeiby, both in their mid-70s. The dissidents say the two, after years in prison, simply can't deal with outsiders or new ideas.
Hodeiby denies the charges. "We are open to everyone and we hear all ideas," he insisted.
But he admits the leadership "advised" the younger members to drop the idea of the Wasat party since it would only divide loyalties.
Ironically, Mady and two other Wasat founders were arrested on charges the party was a front for the illegal Brotherhood. The three eventually were acquitted.
Now, Mady says, his jail time while awaiting trial provided time to think. He became convinced more than ever that political pluralism - and not the closed world of the Brotherhood - is the only solution to Egypt's many problems.
 Load-Date: October 11, 1996

 

End of Document
