

Two boys, a letter, a continent: African stowaways touch the world
The Associated Press
March 13, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1157 words
Byline: By TIM SULLIVAN, RAF CASERT, Associated Press Writers
Dateline: CONAKRY, Guinea
Body




Anyone paying attention might have noticed something strange about the two boys slipping into G'bessia Airport.
Despite the West African heat, both were wrapped in sweaters. At their sides flapped thin plastic bags jammed with birth certificates, school report cards, photographs and a letter.
But Conakry's airport at evening rush hour is not the sort of place where people pay attention. It is a humidity-choked thicket of confusion where travelers, hustlers and cab drivers jostle under the terminal's broad tin roof.
Soldiers patrol with Kalashnikov rifles. Families jam their faces between metal bars, straining to see loved ones crossing the tarmac. Corrupt customs officers with outstretched hands ask travelers, "What do you have for me?" Women with papoosed babies scramble up garbage piles to hop over the airport's crumbling outer wall and tend rows of tomatoes near the runway.
So Yaguine Koita and Fode Tounkara, two skinny, bookish 14-year-olds determined to change their lives, apparently passed unnoticed as they headed for the Brussels-bound Sabena Airlines Airbus A330 that, four times each week, links wealthy Western Europe to one of Africa's poorest cities.
Here's what Sabena Airlines officials say must have happened next:
The boys boosted themselves onto the rear right-hand tires, 5-foot slabs of black rubber almost their height. Then they grasped the gleaming, tubular landing gear and swung themselves into the oval-shaped opening of the wheel bay nearly 12 feet above the tarmac.
Yaguine, the leader, lay down on a metal shelf amid the wires, support bars and hydraulic tubes. Fode curled up in a coffin-sized space just beneath.
As the plane taxied to the runway, the roar of the engines, just 30 feet from their hiding place, was too loud for them to hear each other. Even if they screamed.
---
 
The July 28 journey carrying Yaguine Koita and Fode Tounkara from the slums of the capital of Guinea to Belgium's front door would soon shake the prosperous brotherhood of European nations. The determination of two young boys would yank aside a veil of indifference and confront Europe, Africa's former colonial master, with a devastating image of the continent it had left behind. It would even reverberate through the General Assembly of the United Nations.
It began with a dream.
After school, Yaguine and his few close friends would often wander past the neighborhood maze of decaying shacks, past teenage girls selling cigarettes and tiny tins of Nescafe, past unemployed men playing boccie ball in the red dirt.
They would head for a cluster of shaded beach-side rocks where they could study, talk, kick a soccer ball. There, Yaguine (pronounced Yag-EEN) would watch the airliners coming and going at G'bessia Airport. There, his fantasy would take shape.
The boy went to school, did homework, lived in a two-room shack with electricity, a refrigerator and a 10-year-old video game player. His father, Liman Koita, scratched out a living fixing electrical appliances. In a country where life expectancy is just 47 years, per capita incomes are under $2 a day and only 36 percent of adults can read and write, the Koitas weren't too badly off, relatively speaking.
On the TV screen in the shack, Yaguine could watch CNN and a half-dozen European channels pirated from a distant satellite dish. The boy had seen James Bond ordering martinis and Bruce Willis saving the world. He had seen American TV series dubbed into French. He had seen the promised land, and it was full of white faces.
This quiet, rail-thin boy had no interest in replaying his father's life of quiet desperation. He missed his mother, who had left, remarried and was now living a blue-collar life outside Paris. He dreamed of going to school in Europe, getting a good job, becoming a pilot and coming back to Conakry to help his father.
And so, last July, Yaguine sat down and wrote two letters in the flowery French he had learned at school. He left one of them for his father. The other he took with him.
Saying he was going to visit his grandmother for a few days, he slipped behind his house and down a small rutted road, cut through an open-air mechanic's workshop teeming with grease-covered children, and walked into Fode Tounkara's yard.
Fode had grown up lost, a boy so desperately shy that he was often forgotten in a pack of siblings and half-siblings so numerous that family members disagree on the total.
The family lives in a moldy two-room shack that makes Yaguine's house look practically suburban. Fode's father earns a few dollars a week as a security guard. A devout Muslim, he has two wives. Fode's mother, Damaye Kourouma, is a heavyset, bent-over woman who makes 80 cents a day growing and selling potato leaves, a sort of Guinean spinach.
The poverty, relatives and neighbors say, was difficult on Fode (pronounced FO-day). He was sometimes shunned by the wealthier children at his school, a conservative Islamic academy. He buried himself in work, studying or helping his mother tend her garden.
His only close friend was Yaguine, with whom he shared shyness and bookishness. "They were quiet, yes, quieter than the rest of us here. So they were together all the time," said Fode's brother, Sekou.
His father, Karamoko Tounkara, an aloof, bearded man, said Fode was not the ambitious type, and he is sure the boy simply followed his more worldly friend.
But his mother saw something else.
"What he knew," she said, sitting on a tiny wooden stool and resting her head in her hands, "was that his family was poor and he went to Europe so that he could help them."
---
 
The news from Africa is rarely good. Millions die or are left homeless in a relentless cycle of wars, famine, drought and poverty. Nearly one in five children south of the Sahara dies before age 5. Primary school enrollment is 74 percent, the lowest of any region in the world. Nearly half the adults can't read. Of the world's 11 million AIDS orphans, 95 percent are in sub-Saharan Africa.
Children under 15 are fighting in conflicts from Sierra Leone to Congo.
Across Europe, compassion fatigue has set in. Belgium, the boys' haven of choice, has an estimated 75,000 illegal immigrants. The country's bickering political parties agree on one thing: It's too much.
Yet still the desperate tide flows north.
Tens of thousands of Africans make their way to Europe by air, boat or overland, often using phony passports.
A year ago, an 18-year-old Senegalese man barely survived a flight in a wheel well from Dakar, Senegal to Lyon, France. Sent home, he tried the same thing again, this time to the Ivory Coast, and died along the way.
So what Yaguine and Fode did was hardly unprecedented. What was unusual was the letter they carried - a handwritten plea on a page torn from a school composition book.
On its envelope Yaguine wrote in French:
"In case we die, deliver to Messrs. the members and officials of Europe."
---
 
To be continued tomorrow.
End advance for release Sunday, March 19
 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY329-332 of March 13; AP Graphic locator map GUINEA;
 Load-Date: March 20, 2000

 

End of Document
