

Two executives blamed for scandal, but where was the board?
The Associated Press
January 9, 1999, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 819 words
Byline: By KRISTEN MOULTON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SALT LAKE CITY
Body




Let the finger pointing begin.
As top executives resigned from Salt Lake's Organizing Committee amid investigations into how low city boosters stooped to win the 2002 Winter Games, blame is being fixed on two men: Tom Welch and David Johnson.
But where was the board they reported to and how much did its members know?
Those are the questions facing this city reeling from the bribery scandal and bracing for more revelations by four separate investigations in Salt Lake, Washington and Lausanne, Switzerland.
Johnson, the senior vice president for the committee organizing the Games and the point man in wooing International Olympic Committee members during the city's bid, was forced to resign Friday.
Welch, who resigned in 1997 after spousal abuse charges, has been stripped of his $ 10,000-a-month consulting contract and $ 500,000 pension. He was at the helm of Salt Lake's quest for the Games for a decade, including the years leading up to the 1995 IOC vote giving Salt Lake the Winter Games.
His successor as chief executive of the organizing committee, Frank Joklik, resigned Friday, revealing that investigators had found boosters gave IOC members cash payments ranging from $ 5,000 to more than $ 70,000 and expensive gifts; paid educational, travel, housing and medical costs of IOC members and their families; and helped IOC member Jean-Claude Ganga of the Republic of Congo in making a profitable land investment.
The New York Times, quoting unidentified investigators, reported Saturday that Ganga had received payments totaling about $ 70,000 before the 1995 vote.
Attempts by The Associated Press to contact Ganga for comment in recent days were unsuccessful; The was no answered to calls to his homes in Paris and Brazzaville, Republic of Congo, or his office in Yaounde, Cameroon.
The possibility that prostitutes were hired for IOC members also is under investigation, Gov. Mike Leavitt said Friday.
Joklik said he knew nothing of the corruption, and Leavitt said his departure was a self-sacrifice so the Games - just three years away - can have a fresh start.
Yet some wonder: Where were Joklik - the volunteer chairman of the bid committee while he was the chief executive of Kennecott Copper Co. - and Utah's other business luminaries who served on the bid effort board?
In the dark, claims the Republican governor.
"No one on this board knew what was going on," Leavitt said. They were victims of a "systematic cover-up" orchestrated by a small group handling the cash, he said.
"We were deceived. We were lied to," said banker Spencer Eccles, who raised millions for the bid and a member of SLOC's executive committee. "I'm sick at heart."
The bid committee board's purpose was to oversee a small staff focused on showcasing Salt Lake, its snow and sports facilities to the Olympic community. While employees wooed IOC members, board members focused on raising money from friends and corporations for the bid effort.
After Salt Lake won, the bid committee formed the nucleus for the larger organizing committee.
A longtime critic of the Salt Lake Olympics, local health care finance consultant Stephen C. Pace, doesn't buy that board members were victims.
"The board has acted like a room full of cockroaches when you snap on the light. They have just run for cover," Pace said.
"The board's only defense to being charged with being corrupt is, 'No, we're not corrupt, we're incompetent,"' he said. "Given that that's their best answer, I think they've all gotta go."
That appears unlikely.
Robert Garff, chairman of the organizing committee, said the future of some board members "will be part of the discussion" once SLOC's outside ethics panel finishes its investigation.
The ethics panel, led by a former Utah Supreme Court justice and including a former U.S. attorney, is scrambling to finish its report by Thursday's organizing committee meeting.
The IOC expects to wrap up its own bribery probe by Jan. 23, and the U.S. Olympic Committee's investigative report is due by Feb. 28. The Justice Department has not said how long it might take to determine if criminal charges are warranted.
Nolan Karras, who is the governor's stand-in on the organizing committee and was involved in the bid before 1991, says the board could be blamed if it had not set up policies to prevent such payments.
The board required checks of any significant amount to have two signatures and had outside auditors study the soundness of the safeguards and the propriety of the spending, Karras said.
"If the auditors don't tell you and the audit committee doesn't tell you and the management doesn't tell you, how would you know?" he asked.
Board members knew all about the wining and dining of visiting IOC members and the gifts of cowboy hats and quilts.
"We understood that. We were part of that," said Verl Topham, senior vice president of PacifiCorp and a longtime board member. "But that's a far thing from direct cash payments."
 
 Load-Date: January 9, 1999

 

End of Document
