

U.N. Peacekeepers Take the Heat in South Lebanon Violence
May 14, 1996, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 673 words
Byline: By SAM F. GHATTAS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: QANA, Lebanon
Body




The recent Israel-Hezbollah fighting has made a mockery of the U.N. peacekeepers' mission in south Lebanon. Combat soldiers from nine nations have been reduced to counting shells and delivering relief supplies.
Eighteen years after its creation and with 206 dead in a mission largely unaccomplished, the U.N. Interim Force in Lebanon, or UNIFIL, still waits for the day it can implement its mandate to restore "peace and security."
Withdrawing the 4,500-strong force - comprising troops from Poland, France, Italy, Finland, Ireland, Ghana, Nepal, Fiji and Norway - could mean even more war in bullet-pocked southern Lebanon.
Holding its ground until a Middle East peace agreement is reached means more mockery and abuse.
"We're told to wait," says Timur Goksel, the force's spokesman since 1979. "We're still waiting and we're being bashed … insulted, humiliated and taking casualties. At best, we're trying to keep the lid on things."
There's no better illustration of the force's helplessness - and endurance - than Qana, where 91 Lebanese refugees were killed and more than 100 wounded when Israeli artillery opened fire April 18 on the U.N. base where they had taken refuge.
They were among 800 refugees who thought they would be safe at the Fijian battalion's headquarters.
Israel has hinted it is seeking Security Council reconsideration of the peacekeepers' mandate when it comes up for review in July, contending the force has become inconsequential. The force costs the U.N. $ 135.3 million a year.
But UNIFIL says the problem lies with Israel's refusal, right from the start of its mission, to allow the peacekeepers to deploy all the way south to the Lebanon-Israel border as decreed by U.N. Resolution 425 of 1978.
"The mission didn't even start," Goksel said in an interview in the port city of Tyre near Qana.
Hezbollah too is critical, accusing UNIFIL of hindering their operations in southern Lebanon.
"There's a war going on. UNIFIL's duty is to stop the (Israeli) aggression against Lebanon, not to block the way of someone fighting the aggressor," complained Hezbollah leader Sheik Hassan Nasrallah in an interview last week.
The lightly armed peacekeepers are only allowed to shoot back in self-defense. Last month's fighting starkly revealed their inability to control events in their operational zone.
By UNIFIL count, about 1,150 guerrilla rockets were fired on northern Israel. Israel retaliated with 32,000 shells and 750 air raids.
UNIFIL deployed in south Lebanon in March 1978 after Israel invaded the region to crush Palestinian guerrillas. It was supposed to operate as far south as the Israeli frontier. But the Israelis have held onto a border strip ever since.
Parts of the UNIFIL-policed zone overlap the Israeli-occupied enclave.
Israel invaded again in 1982, crashing through UNIFIL checkpoints to drive Palestinian guerrillas out of Lebanon.
Since then, Israel's enemies have been Lebanese Shiite Muslim guerrillas.
Despite the hazardous conditions, UNIFIL has done what it could to keep the lid on. Checkpoints confiscate guerrillas' weapons of guerrillas and hand over men and arms to Lebanese authorities.
That has meant casualties. More than 200 peacekeepers have been killed over the years, half by militiamen of the Israeli-backed South Lebanon Army and Hezbollah guerrillas. The South Lebanon Army held 21 Finns hostage for a week in 1985.
During the April fighting, a Fijian officer was shot in the chest when he challenged a Hezbollah rocket squad. Two Nepalese soldiers were wounded by a Hezbollah hand grenade.
Two Katyusha rockets landed harmlessly near UNIFIL's headquarters in the coastal village of Naqoura. An Israeli air strike narrowly missed a U.N. relief convoy.
"It's awkward," admitted Commandant Declan Lawlor of the Irish battalion at Tibnin, several hundred yards from the northern edge of the Israeli zone. "The original mandate has not been fulfilled.
"We try to do as much as we can within the current constraints," he added, stressing that "if the U.N. wasn't here, this place would be a wipe-out."
 Load-Date: May 14, 1996

 

End of Document
