

U.S. trade bill could save jobs in the Caribbean and Central America
The Associated Press
November 17, 1999, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 652 words
Byline: By MATTHEW J. ROSENBERG, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KINGSTON, Jamaica
Body




A few months ago, Sandra Reed had a job sewing zipper flies into Gitano blue jeans and shorts sold in the United States.
On weekdays she took the bus to the factory, worked eight hours, then headed home to her small, dilapidated home in the infamous Trenchtown neighborhood to care for her four children. At the end of the week she collected $65.80 in pay.
But in August, Gitano's parent company, U.S. apparel giant Fruit of the Loom, announced it was leaving Jamaica to consolidate overseas operations at a new factory in Mexico, where it enjoys duty-free access to the U.S. market under the North American Free Trade Agreement.
And so Reed, along with 538 fellow workers, joined the estimated 11,000 Jamaicans who have lost their jobs since NAFTA was approved in 1993 and more than 30 foreign-owned factories moved to Mexico.
Reed, 24, can't read and doesn't own a radio or a television. She doesn't know what NAFTA is.
So she also doesn't know that she may have something to look forward to.
Last week the U.S. Senate passed a bill that would end duties on apparel made in the Caribbean and Central America, effectively granting the region trade parity with Mexico for selected products and industries.
The Senate bill is a variation on one passed by the House of Representatives to reduce or eliminate tariffs on goods from 48 sub-Saharan African nations. The two bills are being reconciled in a joint Senate and House committee. The final bill is expected to include the Senate's decision to include the Caribbean and Central America.
Caribbean and Central American leaders have been clamoring for such a move since NAFTA was passed in 1993, effectively negating many benefits they enjoyed under the Caribbean Basin Initiative.
President Clinton has pledged his support for parity, but Congress three times has voted down similar proposals, fearing American jobs would be lost.
Caribbean leaders argue the opposite. They point out that the Caribbean is one of the few areas with which the United States has a trade surplus. In 1997, the 14-nation Caribbean Community exported $1.8 billion of goods to the United States and imported $4 billion.
Before the Caribbean Basin Initiative, the bill's proponents note, the U.S. suffered large trade deficits with the region.
In Jamaica, the sharp drop in garment exports - from a high of $268 million in 1995 to $200 million in 1998 - gives credence to the complaints. And the loss of jobs in the garment sector has contributed to a unemployment rate in Jamaica estimated between 20 and 25 percent.
Meanwhile, Mexico's textile exports to the United States have risen at a stunning rate of 44 percent a year since NAFTA was implemented.
"We need parity to compete," said Industry and Investment Minister Paul Robertson. "If we're going to benefit from globalization we need to be on the inside, not the outside looking in."
The companies themselves say NAFTA parity may be the only thing that prevents them from packing up and moving to Mexico.
"If it is not passed it would certainly raise the question as to how competitive Jamaica and the other Caribbean countries would be with Mexico and the Far East in the long term," said Mark Jaeger, a vice president at Jockey, which operates two factories in Jamaica.
Douglas Lindo, an executive at JamPro, the government's business promotion agency, said 85 percent of Jamaica's garment exports are destined for the American market and "it would certainly mean a lot to existing investors and put us at an advantage when talking to potential investors."
Lindo said the relatively high labor standards in Jamaica - an eight-hour workday and a minimum wage of $31.58 a week - have made the country attractive for companies concerned about the negative image of sweatshop labor.
"You walk into a major apparel plant in Jamaica and the standards are among the highest of any offshore plants in the world," he said. "Some even have air conditioning."
 Load-Date: November 18, 1999

 

End of Document
