

U.S. and Britain considering trial in the Netherlands under Scottish law
The Associated Press
July 21, 1998, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 585 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Ten years after the bombing of a Pan Am jetliner, the United States and Britain are considering a trial of two Libyan suspects in the Netherlands under Scottish law.
Col. Moammar Gadhafi has refused to release the two suspects - both Libyan intelligence agents - for trial in the United States or Britain on charges of planting the bomb on Pan Am 103 that killed all 259 passengers and crew members and 11 people on the ground in Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988.
However, he has hinted he would be willing to send them to a third country for trial.
There was no immediate word whether convening a Scottish court in the Netherlands or elsewhere would overcome Gadhafi's objections.
"We're looking at it, but I don't know that it can be done," President Clinton said Tuesday. "We've tried to find some way that has real integrity that will work, but there are all kinds of practical difficulties."
State Department spokesman James P. Rubin said "the onus would be on Libya" to turn over the suspects if a Scottish court were convened in a third country.
"If Libya were to do that, then Libya would be complying, and the families and the United States that have sought justice would be getting the justice that has been denied so long," Rubin said.
A ban on travel to Libya, imposed by the United Nations in 1992 as a pressure tactic, has not been enforced systematically.
For example, President Blaise Camaore of Burkina Faso flew to Tripoli on Monday without notifying the sanctions committee. And earlier this month, President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt visited Gadhafi, who was recuperating from hip surgery. The United States supported Mubarak's request for an exemption on the grounds the trip had a humanitarian purpose.
Rubin insisted the proposal for a trial in The Netherlands was not a concession to Gadhafi nor the result of violations of the travel ban.
The two suspects - Libyan intelligence agents Abdel Basset al-Megrahi and Lamen Khalifa Fhimah - were indicted in Scotland and the United States in 1991 for planting the bomb that exploded Dec. 21, 1988.
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and Sandy Berger, assistant to President Clinton for national security, telephoned about 10 members of families of American victims to tell them about the development.
"This is the usual whitewash," Susan Cohen of Cape May Courthouse, N.J., told The Associated Press afterward. "This is really appalling. For years, they have given us all their reasons why an international trial will threaten American justice. And now it looks it good to them."
"It's a collapse," said Mrs. Cohen, whose daughter, Theodora, died in the terrorist attack. "Why would Gadhafi agree to anything unless it is in his interest? He will manipulate the situation to his interest."
But Jim Swire, whose daughter Flora died in the attack and who represents other British relatives, said it was time to break the impasse. "Common sense dictates that something has to be done," he said.
Rubin said the U.S. "bottom line" is that "the accused perpetrators of this heinous crime must face justice before U.S. or Scottish courts." And, he said, "we are working to achieve that goal."
Cohen said Berger told the families this "might be a way to call Gadhafi's bluff."
The Guardian, a British newspaper, said Foreign Secretary Robin Cook and Albright would announce in the next few days that the trial could take place in The Hague, the Netherlands.
The New York Times reported the trial may be held in the World Court. This was denied by State Department officials.
 Load-Date: July 21, 1998

 

End of Document
