

UNICEF: Hundreds of millions of children work around the world
December 11, 1996, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 570 words
Byline: By SUE LEEMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




In India, child carpet weavers are tortured during shifts of up to 20 hours. Malaysian children risk snake bites working 17-hour days on rubber plantations.
In Portugal, children as young as 12 slog in the construction industry, while in the United States, immigrant or minority boys and girls brave pesticides on farms.
Six years after the Convention on the Rights of the Child, hundreds of millions of youngsters still are forced to work long hours, often in hazardous conditions, the U.N. children's agency said in its annual report today.
The main causes are poverty, poor education and entrenched social traditions, UNICEF said in the report, which marks the organization's 50th birthday.
"It can never be in the best interests of a child to be exploited or to perform heavy and dangerous forms of work," the group said.
It noted that the United States, Switzerland, the Cook Islands, Oman, Somalia and the United Arab Emirates are the only countries that have not ratified the convention, which offers extensive protection to children. Many countries that have ratified it, however, do not abide by it.
UNICEF said that because many countries don't keep statistics on child labor, and others do not include the many children who work in the informal sector or in homes, it is impossible to know how many children are working.
"All that is clear is that the number of child workers worldwide runs into hundreds of millions," the group said in the report.
Half of the world's child workers live in Asia, according to the report. In Africa, one child in three is at work; in Latin America, the rate is one in five.
Child labor also is increasing in developed countries including Britain and the United States, thanks to the growth of the service sector and the quest for a more flexible work force, according to the report.
Probably fewer than 5 percent of child laborers work in the sweatshops of industries exporting cheap goods to the stores of the developed world, UNICEF said. Most sell goods on the street, work on farms or clean homes.
The pool of poor, exploitable children is growing because of social spending cuts imposed on developing countries by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, the group said. Poor education also contributes to the problem by causing children to drop out of school.
In some places, poor children and members of ethnic minorities are assigned the most hazardous jobs, UNICEF said.
In northern Europe, child laborers are likely to be African or Turkish; in Argentina, many are Bolivian or Paraguayan; in Thailand, many come from Burma.
Many children are pressed into poorly paid domestic service, where they can suffer physical and sexual abuse, UNICEF said.
In South Asia, parents pledge children as young as 8 to factory owners in exchange for small loans. In India, such bonded labor is widespread in the carpet-making, match-making, slate and silk industries. Some children are tortured to make them conform; others become stunted from being forced to crouch in cramped conditions.
At least 1 million youngsters a year are lured into prostitution, UNICEF said.
Other children labor in industry or on plantations, at risk from dangerous chemicals or faulty materials.
A 1990 survey of Mexican-American children working in the farms of New York state showed that almost half had worked in fields still wet with pesticides and more than a third had been sprayed, UNICEF said in the report.
 Load-Date: December 11, 1996

 

End of Document
