

United Nations considers redefining the term 'refugee'
The Associated Press
January 14, 2000, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 594 words
Byline: By NICOLE WINFIELD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




For 50 years, the United Nations has given special care and protection to the world's refugees, who have fled fighting in their homelands and sought safety in other countries.
But these days, the organization is being called on more and more to care for the 20 million to 25 million so-called "internally displaced people," who have abandoned their homes to escape wars but just haven't crossed borders.
Whether the United Nations can give these people the same care as the 15 million people worldwide who are considered refugees is more than just a semantic debate. It concerns issues of money, bureaucracy and most importantly, sovereignty.
At the request of the United States, the Security Council on Thursday held an open debate on the issue, which has grown more contentious in recent years as the number of internally displaced has surpassed the number of refugees across the globe.
While protected under the same Geneva Conventions that give refugees special status in countries of asylum, the internally displaced often fall through the care cracks, unable to get the same level of international aid.
Africa has been particularly hard hit, with an estimated 10 million internally displaced. Four million of them are in Sudan, and another 1 million to 2 million are in Angola.
In both countries, fighting between government troops and rebels has prevented the United Nations and other aid organizations from reaching many of the displaced, who often end up in isolated areas without food, water or shelter.
In other cases, however, governments directly prevent aid from entering countries, viewing civilians as allies of their enemies. Citing national sovereignty, these governments can block the U.N. refugee agency and other organizations from mobilizing aid inside their borders.
"The difficulty of having access to large numbers of people in insecure and isolated areas is compounded by the complexity of assisting civilians in their own country - where their own state authorities or rebel forces in control are frequently the very cause of their predicament," the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees, Sadako Ogata, told the council.
She stopped short of suggesting that the UNHCR try harder to gain access to these people or take on a new mandate covering the internally displaced. The agency's mandate and resources - already stretched thin caring for refugees - enable it to care for only about 5 million of the world's internally displaced.
But U.S. Ambassador Richard Holbrooke went further, calling for the United Nations to "erode if not erase" the distinction between refugees and internally displaced and put responsibility for both under a single agency.
"I recognize that the distinction raises complex legal issues of international sovereignty." Holbrooke said. "And I recognize that governments in this room and elsewhere have various reactions to the issue. But let us remember that individual lives are at stake."
China's U.N. ambassador, Qin Huasun, voiced some of that opposition, saying international aid should be given only "on the basis of respect of sovereignty, territorial integrity and noninterference into internal affairs."
China consistently stresses the rights of countries to manage their affairs internally, fearing international intervention in Tibet and Taiwan.
But Roberta Cohen, a guest scholar at The Brookings Institution, said at a press conference that the debate is likely to continue
"I think there is now a realization that we've got to have an international system that addresses the needs of people on both sides" of the border.
 Load-Date: January 15, 2000

 

End of Document
