

United States rebuilds military ties with the United Nations
The Associated Press
February 5, 2000, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 727 words
Byline: By EDITH M. LEDERER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




The U.S. military is resuming high-level contacts with U.N. peacekeeping officials after years of strained relations over the debacle in Somalia and the U.S. failure to pay its U.N. debt.
"It is rebuilding a relationship which was severely strained and more or less dried up" in recent years, U.S. Ambassador Richard Holbrooke said in an interview on Friday.
"We're trying to use Pentagon know-how to help the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in its planning effort. This is not an attempt to take over U.N. responsibilities," he said. "Since American taxpayer dollars are involved, and at times even American lives are at risk, we want to help get it right."
U.S. Defense Secretary William Cohen came to the United Nations on Jan. 20 and met Secretary-General Kofi Annan and Undersecretary-General Bernard Miyet, who heads the peacekeeping department. Cohen has invited Miyet to Washington for the first time Tuesday and Wednesday.
U.S. Undersecretary of Defense Walt Slocum, who is in charge of policy, has also been at the United Nations twice in the past month, and the White House and Pentagon sent senior officials to New York Thursday to discuss U.N. peacekeeping plans in Congo and East Timor, Holbrooke said.
"We welcome the improved collaboration with the Pentagon, with whom we've had good relations in the past," said U.N. Communications Director Shashi Tharoor.
In the early 1990s, as U.N. peacekeeping operations were built up following the end of the Cold War, the Pentagon and the United Nations worked hard to establish a close relationship, said David Malone, a former Canadian ambassador to the United Nations who now heads the New York-based International Peace Academy.
But the killing of 18 American soldiers in Somalia during a U.S.-led peacekeeping operation in 1993 was partly responsible for the United States backing away from the ties. Relations worsened over the U.S. failure to pay its U.N. debt.
U.S. Defense Department spokesman P.J. Crowley also welcomed the new collaboration.
"We certainly agree with U.N. efforts to stabilize important regions of the world through its peacekeeping efforts and we are in renewed discussions with the U.N. on ways to make these efforts most effective," he said.
The United Nations is currently involved in 17 peacekeeping operations around the world, the newest in East Timor and Sierra Leone.
American military observers and civilian police are currently participating in a number of U.N. peacekeeping operations, including Bosnia, East Timor, Georgia, Kosovo and Western Sahara.
The Security Council has scheduled a vote Monday to nearly double the U.N. peacekeeping force in Sierra Leone from 6,000 to 11,100. The council is also expected to consider, possibly later next week, a U.S.-drafted resolution to expand the current U.N. mission in Congo from 79 military liaison officers to 5,537 military personnel, including at least 500 military observers.
Diplomats have said U.S. approval and financing for the expanded Sierra Leone and Congo operations would be a clear sign of Washington's concrete commitment to peacekeeping in Africa and would back promises Holbrooke made during the U.S. focus on Africa in the Security Council in January.
U.N. sources said the United States is likely to provide some military observers in East Timor in addition to civilian police as well as engineers and medical personnel to help with humanitarian relief.
The U.N. peacekeeping department maintains high-level contacts with many countries, including Britain and France which last year became the first permanent members of the Security Council to put frontline troops on standby for rapid deployment around the world.
While high-level U.S. military contacts are just resuming, Tharoor noted that the chief planner for U.N. military missions is currently an American colonel, Bob Phillips.
Timothy Wirth, president of the United Nations Foundation and a former U.S. undersecretary of state for global affairs, said November's vote in Congress to pay a significant part of the U.S. arrears and Holbrooke's advocacy of improved U.S.-U.N. relations paved the way for the high-level military contacts.
"Our ulterior motive is our exterior motive," Holbrooke said. "It's to help the U.N. through very difficult planning because the U.S. Pentagon's planning capability is quite ahead of the U.N., and they are understaffed."
 Load-Date: February 6, 2000

 

End of Document
