

Up close, scene by scene, Africa's cataclysm chills the human spirit
June 3, 1997, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 1055 words
Byline: By MORT ROSENBLUM, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: KIGALI, Rwanda
Body




For all of its dramatic magnitude, the cataclysm in central Africa strikes you scene by scene, face by face. Seen up close, against a broad backdrop, it chills the human spirit.
At Kigali airport, near the first epicenter of calamity, a hollow-cheeked, empty-eyed woman descends the ramp of a U.N. cargo plane from the eastern Congo, just one in an endless line of refugees.
She has a name, but reporters dashing to another plane, chasing yet another aspect of the cataclysm, have no time to learn it. Anyway, there are uncounted thousands more like her still to come.
The woman holds the tiny hand of a naked toddler. And she also clutches at her last possession: a dirty red bucket with nothing in it.
At the bottom of the ramp, she slips and topples backward onto the infant slung behind her shoulders in a filthy wrapper. Her son, still grasping her hand, falls with her, and he wails in terror.
A haggard Indian woman in a U.N. smock helps her to her feet. Neither child is hurt. When a reporter approaches to ask questions, the U.N. worker turns away. She has seen too much to talk about.
The unknown refugee remains just another of those unidentified faces that numbs the sensibilities of people far away. But from her group's collective experience, her story is plain.
A Hutu, she would have fled to neighboring Zaire with more than a million others in mid-1994, after people of her tribe rose turned on the Tutsi, a minority of lordly herders who dominated Hutus for centuries.
In a matter of months, as the world watched in inaction, at least a half million Tutsis bled to death from machete slashes or bullets stitched across the chest. Then Tutsi rebels seized power in Rwanda and Hutus were put to flight.
At a squalid camp on volcanic rock near Goma, the woman survived cholera and killing that took 100,000 lives. She and the others then walked deep into jungle rife with malaria, with roots and bugs for food.
After some respite in a bare-bones U.N. camp, bands of refugees fled again, fearful that Tutsis in the ranks of Laurent Kabila, headed to victory over Zairian President Mobutu Sese Seko, would slaughter them and leave their bodies in the remote bush.
Eventually, they fell into the thin net of U.N. relief workers in eastern Zaire. They were jammed into a truck, then stood for hours in the sun to climb into the belly of a terrifying, noisy machine.
Now the woman is headed home to a village where she may be ostracized by former friends. Some returnees have been accepted back; others, murdered in their sleep.
The feeling of pity is overwhelming. But nothing is so simple in the cataclysm of central Africa.
Was this what it seemed: one more case of an innocent bystander caught up in an ethnic conflict, engineered by leaders at the top, which "the international community" did not try to stop in time?
Or could she be like that woman who told reporters, three years earlier, how she hacked to death eight of her neighbors' children simply because they were Tutsi?
The refugees coming home, and uncounted others still in flight, are the human fallout of great events. The entire region is reshaping itself.
Laurent Kabila swept across Zaire in a seven-month civil war and on May 17 overthrew Mobutu Sese Seko's 32-year reign. He restored the country's old name: the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Kabila was helped by President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda, who ended a violent dictatorship a decade ago, and by Paul Kagame, the Tutsi chieftain who captured Rwanda from Hutu leaders in 1994.
Together, the former rebels control central Africa - Congo, Uganda, Rwanda. And in Burundi, a minority Tutsi government holds power over the majority Hutus.
The new allies espouse market economies and foreign investment. Museveni implanted a sort of democracy, and his Uganda has proved to be an economic success.
U.S. and European diplomats say their governments quietly encouraged Kabila, with some material aid, in the hope of new stability and prosperity in what was long a turbulent region.
Those are the grand geopolitics. But, up close, aid workers keep in mind one of Africa's oldest proverbs: When elephants fight, the grass gets trampled.
Guilt is by broad definition, not case-by-case justice, and revenge is taken accordingly. Some Tutsis in command in Rwanda believe that any refugee who has not come home is acknowledging involvement in tribal murders.
Western diplomats say that Kagame and Kabila at least tacitly condone in the eastern Congo what some liken to Bosnian ethnic cleansing to avenge genocide by the Hutu.
"The Tutsis regard refugees as criminals who committed genocide, and they are shooting them," said Aldo Ajello, the European Union's special envoy to the region.
He told The Associated Press that thousands were murdered around an area he visited south of Kisangani, and he suspects many others were killed in places investigators could not reach.
Ajello said he did not think Kabila was aware of the magnitude because he allowed access to some massacre sites. But, he said, Kabila bears responsibility for sending Tutsis into the camps.
Emma Bonnino, the EU commissioner for humanitarian affairs, described the eastern Congo as "a veritable slaughterhouse."
Privately, aid workers say they believe that Tutsi rebels among Kabila's forces are not only seeking revenge, but also attempting to lower odds of future conflict by eliminating the young.
No one is clear on the numbers. Doctors Without Borders estimated recently that 390,000 Hutu refugees remained in the Congo and said 190,000 of them had "disappeared."
Many are "pre-cadavers, without the strength to eat," the humanitarian group said.
U.N. flights evacuated 35,000 refugees from Kisangani over three weeks, including the unknown woman. But there are uncounted others to come, and many may be left behind.
"We just can't get to many places," said Michele Quintaglie, spokeswoman for the U.N. World Food Program in Nairobi, Kenya, who finishes her 15-hour days in frustration.
She knows the evacuees include some killers and many innocent people simply caught up in events. That woman her plane rescued could be either, and it is not her job to determine which is which.
"At best," Quintaglie said, "ours is an ad hoc effort to reach as many areas as we can and use the means we have to keep as many as people as possible alive for a while longer."
 Load-Date: June 3, 1997

 

End of Document
