

Voters - More Complex Than Meets the Political Eye
July 24, 1996, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Political News
Length: 503 words
Byline: By LAURA MECKLER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




"Crossfire" may make for good TV, but a partisan shouting match is not real for most Americans.
That's the conclusion of a new report that argues Americans find most issues are complex and not easily placed on a liberal-to-conservative spectrum.
The report, released today by the nonpartisan National Issues Forums, is a compilation of hundreds of public forums around the country where people gathered to discuss the nation's problems and solutions. The discussions focused on the troubled American family, the changing economy and America's place in the world.
The idea was to give people time and opportunity for substantive, deliberative discussion that goes beyond slogans.
"The conventional wisdom is that the public is apathetic and turned off to politics. That's just not true," said John R. Doble, whose New Jersey research firm wrote the reports. "People just feel very disconnected. They don't feel the way issues are presented, from the left and the right wings, reflects their own values."
The report concludes that politicians are not speaking the same language as citizens, although many issues identified in the forums are common themes on the campaign trail - taxes, drugs, media depictions of sex and violence, teen pregnancy and deadbeat dads, among them.
The trouble is that politicians tend to offer easy answers when they don't exist, Doble said.
At the same time, candidates often are diverted to side issues that are not important to citizens and only alienate them from the process.
Most people don't care about what Bob Dole said about tobacco, whether people in the White House ever did drugs, whether same sex marriages should be legal or whether children should be forced to say the Pledge of Allegiance, he said.
"We kind of get focused on these false issues and lose sight of the real big issues and real big choices we have to make," he said.
"That's not where people's day to day concerns, worries, aspirations and fears are. That's why people tune out. That's why people don't listen."
The report also found participants believing:
-The United States has accomplished nothing worthwhile in the world over the last 20 years. Participants were not proud of U.S. action in Haiti, the Persian Gulf, Somalia, South Africa or as it relates to the fall of the Soviet Union and its communist bloc.
-Things are getting worse for a shrinking middle class. Older participants were particularly concerned about the fate of the next generation.
-Programs that give people the opportunity to succeed are vital, such as early education, nutrition programs and financial aid for college.
-Domestic needs have been neglected at the expense of foreign affairs. The country gives out too much foreign aid, although participants supported it more after learning more about it.
Doble said he would recommend that candidates give voters more credit than they do.
The National Issues Forums describes itself as "a national network of citizens who sponsor nonpartisan deliberative public forums about timely public policy issues."
 Load-Date: July 24, 1996

 

End of Document
