

War crimes tribunal negotiators hear the voice of experience
The Associated Press
June 16, 1998, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 538 words
Byline: By CANDICE HUGHES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ROME
Body




The memory is still vivid: The judgment at Nuremberg; a tense young prosecutor listening to the verdicts ring out.
"Death by hanging. Death by hanging. Death by hanging," recalled Benjamin Ferencz, who tried 22 Nazi war criminals half a century ago. "I felt no excitement, no jubilation. It was a somber moment."
Envoys haggling over the world's first international court to try war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity heard a powerful sound Tuesday: The voice of experience.
The most venerable was that of 78-year-old Ferencz, a retired law professor and tireless campaigner for an international criminal court.
"I have come to Rome to speak for those who cannot speak: the silent victims of monstrous deeds," he told the delegates.
Ferencz as well as judges from the ad hoc tribunals on Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia all spoke at the second day of the five-week U.N. treaty conference.
The Nuremberg tribunal gave birth to the idea of a world criminal court; the horrors of Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia revived it. Now delegates from 153 countries are trying to surmount huge differences and give it life.
"If we care enough and dare enough, an international criminal court - the missing link in the world legal order - is within our grasp," Ferencz said in his speech. "The place to act is here and the time to act is now."
Later, in an interview, he recalled his days as a war crimes prosecutor.
Ferencz said he "peered into Hell" as a soldier witnessing the liberation of Nazi death camps. As a young lawyer, he jumped at the chance to become a Nuremberg prosecutor.
He prosecuted 22 Gestapo officers accused of murdering more than 1 million people. They were the commanding officers of special "elimination" units: The infamous massacre at Babi Yar was their handiwork.
"There was no doubt in my mind that they were mass murderers on a grand scale," Ferencz said.
All were convicted; 13 were sentenced to hang.
Fifty years later, the country they served, Germany, is one of the most forceful advocates of an international world court. And Ferecz has persuaded other Nuremberg prosecutors to attend the conference as well.
"We're trying to be a presence, to say: Look here. We're watching you. Don't say you can't do it," he said with a smile. "We did."
Hopes are that at the end of the Rome conference, the delegates will agree on a treaty setting up a court to try individuals for war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity. The treaty would then have to be ratified by participating nations.
Wide differences exist on how the court would function, especially on who or what would trigger prosecutions and what the role of the U.N. Security Council would be.
Representatives of the ad hoc tribunals for Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia also spoke to delegates Tuesday, giving advice based on hard-won experience.
They said there has to be a mechanism to allow investigators and prosecutors to gather evidence unhindered and a way to protect witnesses.
The United States finds itself relatively isolated at the conference by its insistence that the Security Council have what amounts to ultimate control. Others want a court independent of the council with a prosecutor who has the power to initiate cases on his or her own.
 Load-Date: June 16, 1998

 

End of Document
