

Wild and wide-open at the World Cup
The Associated Press
June 13, 1998, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 777 words
Byline: BY BARRY WILNER, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




FIFA is getting exactly what it hoped for on the field, with wild and wide open play at the World Cup.
Away from the stadium, things aren't nearly so bright.
As Day 4 of the world championship featured more attacking soccer, officials were busy investigating ticket scams and a burglary at Saudi Arabia's hotel. They also mourned the death of Fernand Sastre, one of the guiding forces behind this tournament.
Mexico and Nigeria kept the offensive onslaught going as teams averaged nearly three goals a game through the first nine contests. The Mexicans connected three times in the second half to beat South Korea 3-1 at Lyon. The Olympic champion Nigerians rallied to overtake Spain, one of the World Cup favorites, 3-2 at Nantes.
In a night game at Saint-Denis, Belgium tied the Netherlands 0-0 in an intense game dominated by the Dutch.
The Paris prosecutor's office said fans in France who bought, but did not receive, tickets for the games from brokers or tour operators should file a complaint, including "evidence to determine how and where the events occurred." Authorities will investigate, the first indication of possible criminal prosecution as organizers reel from the impact of the ticket scandal.
FIFA, the international soccer body, and the French World Cup organizing committee said earlier in the week they would file lawsuits against companies or individuals found to have taken part in ticket scams. Thousands of fans from as far away as Japan and South America are without tickets they had been promised or even paid for.
The organizers also urged victims of the scams to files lawsuits themselves.
Fernand Sastre, who led France's drive to be host of the World Cup and served as co-president of the tournament's organizing committee, died Saturday of lung cancer. He was 74.
Sastre shared the presidency of the committee with former World Cup star Michel Platini. Hospitalized in Paris, Sastre died three days after the championship began.
"Destiny did not see fit to give him the opportunity to see this World Cup through when he gave so much to it," Platini said in a statement. "Soccer has lost a great ambassador today."
Saudi Arabian team members lost $ 11,000 in cash when their hotel rooms in Lille were burglarized while they were playing their first World Cup match on Friday.
At least the soccer offered an entertaining distraction, with 26 goals in the first 10 games, three more than in 1994 at the same juncture.
Mexico, which lost four warmup games to club teams and has struggled ever since firing coach Bora Milutinovic - now with Nigeria - and hiring Manuel LaPuente, woke up in the second half.
Luis Hernandez, its star striker, connected twice against the undermanned Koreans, who played with 10 men for the final 60 minutes.
"Basically, we didn't lose our cool," Hernandez said. "We paid attention and we didn't become desperate. We unloaded all that energy that had built up."
It was Mexico's first victory in nine World Cup games in Europe.
South Korea, which has never won a World Cup game, took the lead in the 28th minute when Ha Seok-ju's 30-yard free kick ricocheted off the head of Mexico's Duilio Davino in the defensive wall.
Two minutes later, Ha was given a red card by Austrian referee Guenther Benko for a late, sliding tackle on Ramon Ramirez. Ha became the first victim of the FIFA dictate to crack down on foul tackles from behind.
"I doubt it was a veritable red card," said Korean coach Cha Bum-kun,. "Maybe a yellow.
"Of course I told the players about the new FIFA rule about tackling from behind. I was quite disgusted when Ha went into the tackle. He should've been calmer in that situation."
Nigeria got one gift goal in stunning Spain. With the Spanish leading 2-1 on a goal and an assist by Fernando Hierro, Garba Lawal fired from the left wing parallel to the goal line. Veteran goalie Andoni Zubizarreta, standing about 1 yards from the near post and facing Lawal, deflected the ball into his net with his hand.
Five minutes later, Sunday Oliseh's blast won it.
"Football can be just like that," said Zubizarreta, playing his 125th game for Spain. "It's not bad luck. Nigeria exploited a moment of play and that's all."
The defeat was only Spain's second since the 1994 World Cup.
"This team is accustomed to fighting back and has got this far on its own strength, and that's what we're going to have to do now," Zubizarreta said. "We're going to have to get together and start from zero."
That's where the Dutch and Belgians, playing for the fourth time in World Cup finals or qualifying since 1994, wound up. And Dutch striker Patrick Kluivert was ejected in the second half for elbowing Lorenzo Staelens in the chest.
 Load-Date: June 13, 1998

 

End of Document
