

Wives of Arab ambassadors raise money the American way
The Associated Press
May 12, 1998, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 767 words
Byline: By DONNA ABU-NASR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




As the aromas of cardammom-laced Turkish coffee and incense filled the room, the wives of four Arab ambassadors discussed their first Western-style effort at raising money for American women and children.
"I found it very difficult to ask for money," Laila Benaissa, a Moroccan, said with a laugh. "It's not done in our part of the world."
"We thought we were really smart and didn't need any public relations firm to help us," recalled Hoda Maher, an Egyptian. "But then we discovered we needed someone to direct us and help with the details."
"It teaches you to make quick decisions and achieve a lot in a limited time," said Lynne Muasher, from Jordan.
"We learned how to be part of a group, and that it's not always necessary to be the chairperson," said Feryal al-Sabah, a Kuwaiti, who was hosting the gathering.
The four women are members of a charity group called the Mosaic Foundation, which was formed a few months ago by the wives of 18 Arab ambassadors in Washington with a mission to raise money for American institutions that benefit women and children.
As Muslims, Arabs are obligated to donate a certain part of their income to charities or to the needy through their mosques. But Mosaic is the first Arab charity designed to help Americans.
The foundation's first effort will be a benefit gala at the Kennedy Center on May 19 at which a Lebanese group, the Caracalla Dance Theater, will perform. Proceeds from the performance, expected to be about $ 300,000, will go to St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis, Tenn. The hospital was founded by the late entertainer Danny Thomas, a Lebanese American, in 1962.
Mosaic has held together despite the tensions that mar relations among many of the countries represented in the foundation: Saudi Arabia has border disputes with Yemen; Kuwait severed relations with the Palestinians over the Palestinians' support of Iraq's 1990 invasion of Kuwait; and Sudan and Egypt are ironing out residual tensions over terrorism and Islamic fundamentalism.
"We rose above all the political clouds," said Mrs. Al-Sabah, a member of Kuwait's ruling family.
But at their meetings, the women joke about the different shades of Arabic they speak. While written Arabic is understood by all Arabs, dialects, accents and some of the vocabulary differ from one country to the other. Words like "towel," "cute" and "breakfast" in Lebanese Arabic could be incomprehensible to other Arabs.
Seated on a low couch in the Syrian room of the Kuwaiti ambassador's residence - the room, with walls embossed with embroidery, was lifted out of an 18th century palace in Damascus and brought here in the 1960s - Mrs. al-Sabah said the charity won't take part in any political activity.
"We wanted to do this because we're part of this society, so why not give back to this community?" she said as waiters with trays laden with dainty cakes and Arab pastries moved about the room quietly.
At the same time, the foundation will send out a cultural message, Mrs. Maher said. "Some Americans think of terrorists when the word Arab is mentioned. The dance performance will show that we're decent, cultured human beings."
For some in the group, this is the first "job" they've ever held and the experience has been exhilarating.
Mrs. al-Sabah said she found it "fascinating" to watch American women organize charity events or volunteer their time and "exciting" later on to follow their example.
Mrs. Benaissa, a former library science teacher, said she managed to get over her initial embarrassment at raising money. Arabs are discreet about the donations they make and the subject is rarely discussed in public.
"It became easier after the first phone call," she said.
The women acknowledged they have made mistakes.
For instance, although Hillary Rodham Clinton has agreed to become the foundation's honorary chairwoman, her name doesn't appear on the members' list.
"It was printed before she gave us her response," said Mrs. Muasher. "We didn't expect to deal with so many details."
As the day of the gala looms closer, the women said they were a bit nervous.
"We'll all be mothers of the bride at the day of the event," joked Mrs. al-Sabah. "All of us will be sneaking into the Kennedy Center in dark glasses by 9 a.m. to make sure everything is OK."
"We want to prove to everybody that we can carry it off," said Mrs. Muasher.
The countries involved in the charity include Algeria, Bahrain, Djibouti, Egypt, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen and the Palestinian Authority, represented by its PLO office.
 
 Load-Date: May 12, 1998

 

End of Document
