

Woman sailor hopes to break male domination of 'round-the-world race
The Associated Press
September 13, 1998, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 799 words
Byline: By TERRENCE PETTY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PORTSMOUTH, R.I.
Body




The last time Isabelle Autissier was in the perilous around-the-world race called the BOC Challenge, 30-foot seas wrecked her sailboat and sent her spinning in an underwater roll as if she were a doll in a washing machine.
"I heard the wave coming. It tore off the mast and the roof of the cockpit and destroyed the rudders. It was incredible," says Autissier, who, miraculously, was not hurt.
The Dec. 28, 1994, disaster thwarted Autissier's hope of becoming the first woman to win a solo race so dangerous that it attracts only a handful of sailors.
But Autissier's no quitter.
She's entered this year's edition of the 27,000-mile race, whose name was changed to Around Alone because of a switch in sponsors. Held every four years and lasting about eight months, the race begins Sept. 26 in Charleston, S.C.
A small, blue-eyed Frenchwoman with wind-tousled hair, Autissier (pronounced O-TISS-ee-ay) will be competing against 18 men, a number of whom she has faced before on the three-stage course around the planet.
Some of her rivals, like veterans Giovanni Soldini of Italy, have brand-new boats that may be faster than Autissier's 3-year-old vessel.
But sailing experts say Autissier may have an edge because she knows her boat well and has shown an uncanny ability to find good winds.
"Isabelle is one of the early favorites. She and Soldini are the two to beat," said Herb McCormick, a spokesman for the race and executive editor of Cruising World magazine. "She's probably the sharpest at forecasting weather on the go. That's a huge advantage."
During the first leg of the last race, in 1994-95, the fleet hit calm air but Autissier found a low-pressure system that hurled her boat past the pack. She raced into Cape Town, South Africa, five days ahead of her closest rivals, setting a first-leg speed record.
She looked set to win, but back-to-back storms stopped her. Gale-force winds broke the mast off her boat in the pernicious Southern Ocean.
Following repairs in the Kerguelen Islands, she was catching up with the fleet when monstrous waves pushed her boat into an underwater spin that again tore off the mast and punched a gaping hole in the deck.
After futilely trying to bail the boat out with a bucket, Autissier was plucked from her vessel by an Australian navy helicopter.
"It was the first time I've ever had to leave my boat," Autissier says. "You get to know your boat's personality. I talked to mine."
Autissier's newest boat is a gleaming-white, high-tech, 60-foot speedster called PRB, the name of the French company that sponsors her.
For the upcoming race, Autissier has placed the highest priority on surviving it.
"You can't win if you don't finish," says the 41-year-old Autissier, who has been working on her boat at a marina in this town on Rhode Island's Narragansett Bay.
Two skippers have been lost at sea since the first BOC Challenge in 1982-83 and many others have been plucked out of the ocean. One skipper committed suicide in despair over his failure to finish. Only 12 of 20 boats finished the last race, held in 1994-95.
To help in her quest to at least finish the race, Autissier has a folded-up balloon on the rear deck of her boat. It could also save her life.
If her boat is thrown upside-down, she would activate a canister of compressed air to inflate the balloon, which should lift the stern, push the bow into the water and right the boat. No one knows for sure whether the system will work because it's never been tested on a real boat.
Since joining the ranks of pro sailors 10 years ago, Autissier's career has been as wild as the seas she sails on.
She placed seventh in the 1990-91 BOC Challenge. Sailing in 62 days from New York to San Francisco around Cape Horn in the 1994 Gold Race, she slashed 14 days off a record set in 1989.
Autissier entered her PRB boat in the 1995-96 Vendee Globe Challenge, an even more exhausting around-the-world sailing marathon because the solo skippers circumnavigate without stopping.
Autissier was disqualified, however, when her boat lost a rudder and she was forced to go ashore for repairs. She kept racing and would have placed second if it weren't for the disqualification.
Autissier admits that when she began around-the-world solo racing, male smugness may have goaded her into seeking to break their domination of the sport.
"I had to prove I was as good as they were," she says.
Jean-Pierre Mouligne, a Frenchman in this year's race, says women can be at a disadvantage in storms because maneuvering the boat becomes physically more arduous. But Autissier compensates with her toughness and ability to find good winds, Mouligne said.
Despite all of the perils, Autissier thrives on jousting alone against the capricious seas.
"Even in a big storm you can be happy because being inside of it is so fantastic," she says.
 Load-Date: September 13, 1998

 

End of Document
