

WORLD ON THE MOVE; Europe's immigrant influx rankles some, but others see salvation
The Associated Press
April 10, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 996 words
Byline: By ELLEN KNICKMEYER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ROME
Body




The new Europeans stake their turf where they step off the train: The blocks around Rome's rail station bustle with Chinese hawking the latest in plastic goods, video stores wallpapered with veiled Punjab poster beauties, Senegalese shivering over counters of withering tropical fruit-in-exile.
East Asians dominate the immigrant enclave but not yet in such numbers it can properly be called a Chinatown. It's a China-Philippines-India-Nigeria-Morocco-Bangladesh Town, heterogeneous nationalities huddling together in homogenous Rome.
The incense stores, Nike-knockoff emporiums and tropical-fruit vendors of Rome's estimated 210,000 legal immigrants sprawl over only a few blocks. But 10 years ago, few, if any, were there.
It's already all too much for Andrea Salvatucci, a handyman finding his own comfort in numbers among fellow Italians in a neighborhood video-game room.
"Italy isn't Italy anymore," Salvatucci says, gazing out at the busy street while he whiles away a rainy afternoon. "There are too many, too many. We are full."
In fact, Italy - and all of Europe - may just have started refilling.
With the ranks of Europeans dwindling as the birthrate heads down to half that of its death rate, Europe is caught in a demographical dilemma that the United Nations suggests might best be solved by a mass influx of immigrants.
A U.N. population report released in March projects Italy would need to let in up to 2.2 million new immigrants every year just to keep its labor pool filled and its pension system manageable. That would be an annual influx about twice the total number of immigrants now in Italy.
Germany would need even more - up to 3.4 million every year, the report said.
The population crunch stands to bite hardest in Italy, whose birthrate vies with Spain for the lowest in Europe as Italians increasingly trim their family size. The U.N. study said Italy's population could drop 28 percent by 2050, from 57 million people to 42 million.
The dilemma is in the shrinking, and aging, labor pool. By 2030, Italy's pension costs will rise from an already high 14 percent of gross domestic product to 17 percent or 18 percent, absent unprecedented economic growth, the country's statistics bureau says.
Italy would have to raise the retirement age to 77 to maintain the current ratio of four workers for every pensioner, the U.N. report said.
But don't look for Italy to throw its borders open any time soon or start setting up all-roads-lead-to-Rome employment booths in Albania or Nigeria.
This is a land that last took in mass numbers of outsiders back when the Roman Empire needed slaves, and the feared costs of immigrants to the Italian culture outweighs any hoped-for gain to the Italian economy.
"That would be dangerous to our society," Interior Undersecretary Alberto Maritati said in rejecting the kind of influx envisioned by the United Nations. "It's an exaggerated number of foreigners that could not be integrated into our society. It would cause rejection, insecurity."
So new to newcomers that it didn't even have an immigration law until 1983, Italy already has seen its population of legal immigrants more than double since 1993.
They still make up just 2.2 percent of Italy's people - small even by western European standards. But to Italians accustomed only to Italians, the boat people washing up nightly on their southern shores or the Poles and Filipinos filling piazzas of northern cities on Sundays already can seem like an invasion.
Italy's right wing is at least as outspoken on the subject as Austria's, where Joerg Haider's rightist party won a spot in the coalition government in part by drawing on voters' resentment toward immigrants.
"The reality is that citizens don't want a multiracial society," Umberto Rossi, leader of Italy's Northern League, said last year after a spate of killings in Milan that were popularly blamed on ethnic Albanian crime gangs.
Rossi's separatist northern-based party once urged parachuting immigrants back over their home countries.
Polls repeatedly find that many Italians perceive immigrants as a source of crime and unwanted competition for jobs. The second is a crucial issue in Italy, where unemployment holds steady at around 12 percent.
But the rate in large part reflects the reluctance of Italians in the south, where unemployment runs at 22 percent, to leave family and land to find jobs in the north, where joblessness is just 4.9 percent.
Immigrant-aid centers say that leaves northern employers calling them to beg for workers.
No one is competing for the jobs this first generation of newcomers is finding.
"There's work, but it's work they don't want to do," says Sijo Baby, a 23-year-old from India. "We do more work, but they don't pay us more."
He is part of a group of former Indian engineers and students of computer programming who congregate on the steps outside the Church of St. Catherine of the Ropemakers on Sunday mornings. In Italy, they're cleaning stairwells, picking tomatoes, washing dishes, lifting and fetching for elderly and infirm Italians.
"Here in Rome, there are good people, but no future," 22-year-old George Anto says, getting nods from the men around him.
Italy so far has largely been spared the anti-foreigner violence by the skinheads of Germany and some other countries. Romans seem to welcome immigrant enclaves for their touch of exoticism - like the novelty of take-out food that isn't pizza.
Bemused as it still seems by the newcomers, Italy has set up little or no social provisions to steer them into jobs, off the streets and out of crime.
"These are really crucial years," says Le Quyen Ngo Dinh, an immigration director for the Catholic charity Caritas in Rome. "If Italy is able to build a system that works, then in a few years the perception will be much better than today.
"But if there's just a lot of words and doing little, than the situation is going to get very tense."
---
On the Net: http://www.un.org/esa/population/unpop.htm 
End Adv for Sunday, April 16
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY312-313 of April 10; AP Graphic UN MIGRATION, Logo WORLD ON THE MOVE
 Load-Date: April 17, 2000

 

End of Document
