

'For the Moment,' Iraqi Troops Remain in Saudi Border Town
The Associated Press
January 30, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 702 words
Byline: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KHAFJI, Saudi Arabia
Body




Marine Cobra helicopters had just struck Iraqi positions inside this abandoned border town Wednesday, and a belch of red fire and oily, black smoke obscured the triumphal arches near its entrance.
Soldiers on the outskirts thought at least 50 Iraqi troops in armored personnel carriers still controlled the town, almost a day after they rolled across the border in the largest ground action yet in the 2-week-old war.
The Marines leaned into their machine guns or TOW missile launchers as the light faded, blending gray sky with gray, wet sand. They waited for any Iraqi response.
The small weapons platoon expected the firing would come from a large green warehouse-like building on the town's southern edge. They hoped the fire and black smoke meant the Cobra had knocked out the Iraqi armored personnel carrier dug in right behind it.
"If they control the town for the moment, it's only going to be for the moment," said Lt. Michael Ragoza, 26 of Bradley Beach, N.J., the Marine platoon commander.
Iraqi units had poured south into Khafji through an abandoned border post, eight miles north of town. Sporadic fire exploded all day. Most was small arms and artillery, but Marines said the Iraqis let rip a few rockets toward the rear lines at noon.
Whenever the Marines saw an Iraqi soldier, they fired .50-caliber machine guns or MK-19 40mm grenade launchers. They had kept their vigil all night, and were expecting to do it again.
The Marines said the helicopters flying overhead to scout for Iraqi positions had sent out flares, as if trying to avoid heat-seeking missiles.
"There has been a lot of stuff going downrange," Ragoza said.
The intermingled Saudi and American units had both been outside the town, to the south, when the action started late Tuesday.
Two journalists who passed the last roadblock heard only faint sounds of battle. A car engine easily drowned out the distant thump of artillery, and an eerie silence pervaded the whole area.
The smoke and tense lines of soldiers gave some hint of the standoff. But hostilities were evident from a crater in the road, three feet across, about 550 yards from the first building.
A Saudi tank faced into the town. Otherwise, it would have been free sailing right into the Iraqi lines.
American briefers in Riyadh were talking about an Iraqi withdrawal, but the soldiers that had kept vigil on their weapons overnight hadn't seen it yet.
They said at least 10 Saudi tanks had moved in earlier in the day to cut off any retreat or advance by the B.M.P.s, the Soviet-made armored personnel carriers used by the Iraqi army.
The Marines said when they first tried to enter the town from its southern edge after 10:30 p.m. Tuesday, they came under fire and were forced to withdraw about two miles farther south.
A few Saudi soldiers were pinned down between their positions and the Iraqis, but a rescue operation was being planned.
All day weapons poured in, and a massive variety of American and Saudi artillery, including tanks and 155mm Howitzers, lined the road leading out of the town.
The Marines did not expect the Iraqis to try to move south.
"If they tried to come here in a massive attack, it would be suicide," Ragoza said.
The town is surrounded by low, wet sand areas known as sabkhas that are impassable to heavy vehicles after the recent rain. That would leave the road as the only exit.
The Marines said they were still not sure how the attack started.
But they said initial reports indicated that up to 80 Iraqi tanks and armored vehicles pulled up to the border and said they wanted to defect.
When an escort party from the coalition forces arrived, the Iraqis opened fire, the Marines said. They did not know which of the allied forces was involved.
Despite reports that the refinery in Khafji had been hit, there was no smoke or fire coming from it.
The road just south of Khafji was crammed with Saudi armored personnel vehicles moving into the lines around the town, the troops on top flashing jubilant V-for-victory signs as they passed.
Sgt. Ian Willis, 27, of Bristol, Pa., shaken by the sudden skirmish, said he thought the border situation was getting "too hot."
Rogoza remarked: "I guess now I really don't care. It's just making it back home all right."
 Graphic



 
LaserPhotos DHR5, DHR6, NY13

 

End of Document
