

'The President Has Decided He Wants to Go Today'
The Associated Press
January 17, 1991, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1436 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER CONNELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




This is how America went to war.
On Tuesday - Jan. 15 - in the solitude of the Oval Office, President Bush sat in his white wingback chair and signed a piece of paper committing America to battle Saddam Hussein's army.
But he left the date and the hour blank, hoping against hope that in the final hours before the United Nations deadline lapsed, a diplomatic miracle or a sudden retreat by Iraq's dictator from Kuwait might spare the world this bloodshed.
Midnight came and went and when Bush awoke Wednesday morning his intelligence advisers told him there had been no breakthrough. The half-million-man Iraqi army had not budged.
George Bush's mind was made up.
Five and one-half months to the day that Iraq overran the small, oil-rich emirate, the phone rang early Wednesday in the Washington home of Prince Bandar bin Sultan, the Saudi ambassador. At the other end was Secretary of State James A. Baker III, asking Bandar if he could get to the State Department immediately.
Bandar, a former fighter pilot and like Baker a graduate of Princeton, had been expecting the call.
He sped downtown by limousine and went directly up to Baker's seventh-floor office.
"The president has decided he wants to go today," Baker told him. Was King Fahd still on board?
Bandar called the palace in Riyadh. Using code words agreed upon in advance, the ambassador relayed the message. The monarch assented.
Baker had started his day at the White House, joining Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and national security adviser Brent Scowcroft for breakfast in Scowcroft's office, their normal Wednesday ritual.
Cheney, the man Bush called after signing his undated order Tuesday, left the White House without ever seeing his commander-in-chief. But Cheney had already signed his own "execute order" on Tuesday setting the stage for the biggest U.S. military offensive since the Vietnam war.
Baker stayed to attend the president's national security briefing, joined on this day by CIA Director William Webster, as well as two regular participants, Vice President Dan Quayle and White House chief of staff John Sununu. In addition to the gulf crisis, they had to keep an eye on the turmoil in the Baltics.
It was a rainy, dismal morning in the capital, a far cry from Tuesday's spring-like weather, when hundreds of antiwar demonstrators had descended on Lafayette Park across Pennsylvania Avenue from the White House.
Overnight, the protesters had stenciled antiwar slogans in blood-red paint on downtown sidewalks. Their ranks dwindled in Wednesday's rain and mist, but a band of American Indians kept up a haunting drumbeat.
The White House, wary of intruders, closed its doors to tourists.
Bush got a call from German Chancellor Helmut Kohl. The mail brought a letter from Pope John Paul II.
Bush placed a call to evangelist Billy Graham, an old friend and spiritual counselor to many American presidents, and invited him to spend this night. Graham readily agreed.
On Capitol Hill, the Congressional Budget Office issued a report estimating war against Iraq could cost anywhere from $$28 billion to $$86 billion. The Senate rang with denunciations of the Soviets' crackdown on Lithuania.
Reporters jammed the White House briefing room, where spokesman Marlin Fitzwater gave evasive - but not untruthful - answers to questions on when Bush would order combat on the first day after the passage of the U.N. deadline.
"The president is steeled for what's ahead. He's set a clear course and his hand is steady at the helm," said the spokesman, who also made an urgent plea for the last American journalists to get out of Baghdad "at once."
For the most part, Bush kept out of sight, although photographers snapped pictures of him and Baker walking down the White House Colonnade on their way back from lunch. Two pensive men in pinstripe suits, their shoulders bent, hands thrust into pockets.
In mid-afternoon, reporters got a crack at questioning Bush as he met with his newly designated secretary of education, Lamar Alexander, and a dozen education advisers in the Cabinet Room.
Did the lull signify a grace period for Saddam?
"Life goes on and education … is very, very important," said the president, pale and drawn. He laughed at a reporter's comment that he looked grim and chided her: "Lighten up."
Wednesday afternoon, Bush had Scowcroft call Cheney and inform him to proceed on the war timetable. Nothing had arisen to freeze their battle plan, crafted to have the first bombs striking Baghdad and vital targets across Iraq and Kuwait at 7 p.m. EST - 3 in the morning in Iraq.
As dusk fell, rumors swept the capital that the attack was imminent, maybe even already under way. Camera crews kept watch on the White House driveway, waiting in vain for chauffeured cars to roll up with the congressional elite.
In Foggy Bottom, Baker worked the phones, calling the foreign ministers of the Soviet Union, Egypt, Spain, the Netherlands and Luxembourg, the secretary-general of NATO, the ambassadors of Israel, Syria, Germany, Japan and Kuwait. None of the calls lasted more than two minutes.
"These were not to seek approval. They were notifications," said Margaret Tutwiler, Baker's spokeswoman.
Bush completed the final draft of the speech he would deliver that night to the nation. He walked back to the residence to change clothes.
Across the Potomac, Cheney and Gen. Colin Powell, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, conferred one last time. From the windows of the defense secretary's office in the Pentagon, they could see the lights playing against the capital's marble monuments.
Everything was in order. A squadron of F-15 fighter bombers scrambled from a Saudi base, bound on a moonless night on bombing runs intended to knock out Saddam's missiles and his capacity to communicate with his army in Kuwait.
Now it was time to put out the word.
House Minority Leader Robert Michel, R-Ill., who led the fight to secure the House's backing for unleashing America's forces, took the president's call at 5:20 p.m.
The White House call found House Speaker Thomas Foley, D-Wash., in his car bound on a shopping trip to Brooks Brothers. He hastened back to the Capitol to return the call on a secure line.
Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole of Kansas took the call alone in his office at 5:40 p.m. He and Bush spoke for five minutes.
Dole, like Bush a combat veteran of World War II, sat alone for 10 minutes. When Dole emerged, his staff read in his face the news of war. "He didn't say anything. He didn't have to," said Walt Riker, his press secretary.
Bush reached Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell, D-Maine, and a half-hour later dispatched deputy national security adviser Robert Gates to Capitol Hill with envelopes containing formal notice that diplomacy had failed.
Gates briefed Dole, Michel and Mitchell in Dole's office, and afterward repeated his information for Foley and House Majority Leader Richard Gephardt, D-Mo.
Bush was in his small study off the Oval Office as he made the calls to lawmakers and to leaders of the coalition, now his partners in war. He also watched the evening TV news.
A few minutes into the 6:30 p.m. broadcasts, reporters on the scene in Baghdad broke the news of the attack to America.
Bush, who had worried about the safety of those journalists, watched the drama unfolding on ABC and CNN with Quayle, Sununu and Scowcroft. The president, in a blue shirt and tie, had his suit jacket off.
The correspondents' reports of fire and light in the sky before 7 o'clock were "a mystery" to the president and his team, Fitzwater said afterwards.
"It may have been (the Iraqis) were shooting tracers or antiaircraft (fire). We just don't know," he said.
Then, at 7 o'clock, when a correspondent reported that a communications tower had exploded, "The president commented, 'Right on schedule,"' said Fitzwater.
"Marlin, you better go ahead and go," he said.
At 7:06 p.m., the press secretary walked grimly into the frenzied press room and announced in Bush's words, "The liberation of Kuwait has begun." The president would address the nation in two hours.
Bush, after a pat on the back in private for Fitzwater, retreated to his quarters, while technicians, under the watchful gaze of Secret Service agents, rolled television cables into the Oval Office.
At 9:01 p.m., Bush, looking calm and somber, faced the camera and read his brief for war.
"Just two hours ago, allied air forces began an attack on military targets in Iraq and Kuwait. These attacks continue as I speak," he began.
As Bush talked, a Secret Service agent stood near the Oval Office door holding a green military bag with a gas mask for the president.
America was at war.

 

End of Document
