

A Day in the Mountains and on the Phone, a Walk Alone in the Night
The Associated Press
February 24, 1991, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1123 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER CONNELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




As the clock ticked down toward noon - high noon - Saturday, Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev made one final appeal by telephone to President Bush at Camp David. Gorbachev wanted 48 more hours for Saddam Hussein to get out of Kuwait.
Bush had something else in mind.
Indeed, by then Bush had already begun making his own calls to other allied leaders, setting into motion the countdown toward another, secret deadline: 8 o'clock EST Saturday night.
That was the hour selected almost two weeks earlier by Bush's field commander, Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf, to launch the counter-invasion to drive the Iraqi army back over its own border.
After 5 weeks of unrelenting aerial warfare against the world's fourth largest army, the time had come for ground forces to finish the job.
Bush did not tell Gorbachev that. He did not reveal that the ground war would start that night. He told the Soviet leader the coalition was "firm and united" behind the ultimatum.
The decision had been made. The only question was whether - as military people put it - the American troops and the allies were "good to go."
They were, and they did.
Bush, in a flurry of phone calls he made from Camp David, was more forthcoming with leaders of other countries allied with the U.S. forces in the Saudi desert and Gulf waters.
As the day wore into evening, he also called the four past American presidents and leaders of Congress to inform them that the hour for the ground war against Iraq had come.
Six-and-a-half months after Saddam's tanks overran Iraq's rich oil emirate neighbor, there would be no more delays for diplomacy.
On Friday, Bush had laid down his ultimatum: Iraq must start moving out by noon Saturday EST.
An Iraqi official had ridiculed Bush's tactic, accusing the president of rushing it out so as not to intrude on his weekend at the mountaintop retreat.
Bush knew all along that he would be returning to the White House Saturday night to announce that the ground war was under way and to ask Americans to drop whatever they were doing and to pray.
At Bush's side at Camp David's Laurel Lodge, on this sunny day that seemed more autumn than winter, was Secretary of State James A. Baker III, an old friend and confidant from Houston. Bush began his workday there at 7 a.m. reading written intelligence briefings.
Brent Scowcroft, Bush's national security adviser, was back at the White House, monitoring the on-rushing preparations for full-scale war.
Gorbachev's call came at 11:15 a.m. EST. The two spoke for half an hour.
Afterwards, as the fateful noon deadline passed, Bush walked along the forested paths of his Catoctin Mountain retreat with Baker by his side.
The ultimatum had been Gen. Colin Powell's idea.
The chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, at a meeting of Bush's war council Thursday, suggested giving Saddam one last chance, and the commander-in-chief readily agreed.
"That way, his (Powell's) forces would know how to plan for it," said White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater. "It would be a precise yardstick to use in gauging (the Iraqis') movements."
A fortnight earlier, Powell and Defense Secretary Dick Cheney had returned from Saudi Arabia and presented Bush with "a general plan for the conduct of the ground war," White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said. It had been in the works for months.
The air war had gone on "a little longer than they anticipated," Fitzwater said, because of the raids devoting to wiping out the Scud missiles that Saddam used to terrorize cities in Israel and Saudi Arabia.
But neither the last-minute shuttle diplomacy between Baghdad and Moscow nor the fresh reports of executions and the torching of oil wells in Kuwait changed the timetable.
Bush, after listening to Cheney and Powell on Feb. 11, had given Schwarzkopf the leeway to set the final time for the offensive within a window of dates.
On Saturday, Bush spoke several times by telephone with Cheney at the Pentagon and Scowcroft at the White House, "and made it clear that there was no reason not to go ahead," said Fitzwater.
"Up until noon today, the president had the option to say, 'Stop,"' Cheney told reporters at the Pentagon late Saturday night. Diplomatic considerations or bad weather could have caused a last-minute delay, he added.
But this was "a massive undertaking with hundreds of thousands of people involved," Cheney said, and Schwarzkopf needed time to get his forces moving in sync.
In mid-day, Washington buzzed with reports that the Pentagon had been given the authority to launch the ground war at any time.
As night fell, Bush touched base with former Presidents Nixon, Ford, Carter and Reagan, then notified the leaders of Congress.
Around 9 p.m. the White House announced that Bush would return to Washington and addressing the nation within the hour.
By this time, the ground war had been under way - and unannounced - for an hour.
Baker tried without success to reach Soviet Foreign Minister Alexander A. Bessmertnykh before departing Camp David.
When Marine One landed shortly after 9:30 p.m., Vice President Dan Quayle was waiting with Scowcroft, Chief of Staff John Sununu and other top aides to greet the president and accompany him to the Oval Office.
"Is everything ready?" Bush asked his press secretary.
Then, inside the privacy of the Oval Office, "his first question was, 'What have we heard?"' related Fitzwater. "Secretary Cheney gave him some preliminary information."
Baker hurried off to the State Department. Bessmertnykh called back in time to learn the news before Bush spoke.
Outside, antiwar demonstrators kept up a drumbeat in Lafayette Park. But on this night, there were also a 100 demonstrators rallying in support of Bush.
"Nothing less than total victory," read one banner.
At 10 p.m. Bush strode into the White House briefing room. Time had been too short to lay the television wires needed to deliver an address from the Oval Office.
The noon deadline had passed, said Bush, with no sign from Saddam Hussein except "a redoubling of (his) efforts to destroy completely Kuwait and its people. I have therefore directed General Norman Schwarzkopf, in conjunction with coalition forces, to use all forces available, including ground forces, to eject the Iraqi army from Kuwait."
"The liberation of Kuwait has now entered a final phase," he said.
Back in the Oval Office, the president briefly discussed with aides his plans for Sunday. He said he would attend an early morning church service. He watched television commentators analyze the offensive over which the Pentagon had draped a news blackout.
Finally, before heading upstairs, Bush made a solitary walk in the darkness out on the White House grounds, alone with his dog Ranger and his thoughts on the night he sent thousands of soldiers into battle.

 

End of Document
