

A Look at Where the Tots Play the Slots
The Associated Press
January 17, 1994, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 673 words
Byline: By THOMAS WAGNER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KATMANDU, Nepal
Body




Peaks, pot and poker. That summarizes what has drawn foreigners to Nepal since the Himalayan kingdom opened its doors more than 40 years ago.
First, Edmund Hillary scaled Mount Everest, the world's highest peak, in 1953, making Nepal a magnet for mountain climbers, hikers and environmentalists.
In the 1960s and 1970s the hippies came to smoke legal, cheap marijuana and sit around the temples of Katmandu looking mystical, but really stoned.
Today, Nepal is becoming the gambling center of the Asian subcontinent, especially for Indians. That could be the best economic news for this poor nation since it became a democracy four years ago and began reforming its socialist economy.
Joe Manickavasagam of the World Bank described Katmandu as "the Las Vegas of South Asia," and said that helps "the tourist industry provide a lot of the foreign revenue this nation needs."
In a part of the world where gambling is usually illegal and often considered sinful, Katmandu has four casinos that provide slot machines, roulette and poker to anyone interested. All are attached to luxury hotels and pay stiff license fees and taxes.
Three of the casinos have been open less than two years and welcome children equally young, if they are with adults. Toddlers sitting on parents' laps and gleefully pulling slot-machine handles are a common sight, even at midnight.
An experienced poker player can win a bundle on a few hands in a country where the per capita annual income is $ 180 and many people still live in mountainside huts.
"This looks like dreamland," Sobha Bothra, a housewife from Udaipur, India, said at Casino Anna. "The people are so busy gambling, they don't see or hear anything."
"I'm glad India doesn't have casinos, because too many people would lose all their money while such loud rock 'n' roll music is playing," said Mrs. Bothra, who wore a sari, a nose ring and a bindi, a dot of red paint on her forehead.
Nepal's decision to avoid that problem by barring its 19 million citizens from the casinos caused protests. Then tourism declined last year and some Nepalese were admitted, which caused the government to complain.
Most of the gamblers come from India, and many stop at Pashupatinath Temple in Katmandu, one of the holiest Hindu shrines, to pray for good luck. Others go to Kumari Temple.
That and the growth of Katmandu as a convention center enable some gamblers to deceive their families into thinking they are in Nepal for conventions or on pilgrimages.
Nepal first experimented with gambling in 1968, when the Casino Nepal was allowed to open in a remote area of the city at the Soaltee Hotel, owned by the royal family. The casino was closed to Nepalese a few years later, after many had lost everything at the tables.
Katmandu sits in a mountain valley that traps much of the pollution produced by its old buses and cars, cement factories and brick kilns. Many people wear masks outdoors.
Western tourists often head out of town soon after arriving, to hike in the wild, climb mountains or go rafting on white-water rivers.
Those who stay behind gravitate to the casinos, which provide the only entertainment after 10 p.m., when bars and restaurants are required to close.
Richard Tuttle, an American who manages all four casinos for Cannosa Investments Ltd. of Hong Kong, speaks of the future, not the present.
"The casinos aren't making that much money, but the potential is tremendous." he said in an interview.
"Five huge cities - Dhaka, Calcutta, Bombay, Karachi and New Delhi - are only a short flight away from Katmandu, and they don't have casinos. If 10 percent of India's 900 million people have money, and 10 percent of them gamble here, that's 9 million people!"
It will take several years, he said, for airlines to serve Katmandu well enough and to bring in the kind of shows that made Las Vegas famous.
He acknowledged that "comparing Katmandu to Las Vegas is like comparing shopping in New York City and in a supermarket: Our casinos wouldn't rate half a star."
But Tuttle added: "That will all change down the road."
 Load-Date: January 18, 1994

 

End of Document
