

A Look at Developments in the Soviet Republics
The Associated Press
August 26, 1991, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1094 words
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Here is a look at independence movements and other developments Monday in the Soviet republics, with brief historical notes:
 
 ARMENIA
History: Proclaimed a Soviet republic in November 1920. Declared soveignty on Aug. 23, 1990, and was to vote Sept. 21 on independence.
Present: President Levon Ter-Petrosian told the national legislature the central government has "completely outlived its usefulness." He told the Tass news agency Armenia wants to maintain economic relations with other republics after becoming independent.
AZERBAIJAN
History: Proclaimed a Soviet republic in April 1920; declared sovereignty on Sept. 23, 1989.
President Ayaz Mutalibov banned the Communist Party from all government offices and law enforcement agencies. Thousands gathered in the central square of the capital Baku demanding convening of a special parliament session, the news agency Interfax reported. The central square renamed from Lenin Square to Azadlig Square (Freedom Square) by the Baku city council.
 
 BYELORUSSIA
History: Established as Soviet republic in January 1919; on July 27, 1990, parliament adopted a declaration of sovereignty.
Present: Lawmakers in the republic of more than 10 million people southwest of Moscow voted unanimously Sunday to declare full independence.
 
 BALTICS:
History: Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania declared independence from the Soviet Union in 1918, but were annexed again in June 1940 as a result of the a Soviet-German agreement.
 
 ESTONIA
Iceland established diplomatic ties with Estonia. Estonia's declaration of independence was recognized by the Soviet republic of Georgia, Tass said. Estonian leaders suggested dissolving local councils in three predominantly Russian-speaking areas of Estonia because they had "ignored the laws of Estonia," the independent Baltfax news agency reported.
 
 LATVIA
Denmark's ambassador arrived in the capital city of Riga, the first diplomat posted in the Baltics in 50 years. He will present his credentials to the three Baltic governments. Latvia declared outright independence last week, saying it was nullifying the transition period that followed its decision last year to seek independence.
 
 LITHUANIA
The republic began claiming control over its borders and issuing visas. Hungarian and French envoys arrived to discuss restoring diplomatic ties. Lithuania declared itself independent on March 11, 1990.
 
 GEORGIA
History: Declared independence in 1918, but was invaded by Soviet military and proclaimed the Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic in 1921. Parliament declared in November it would seek independence.
Present: The Georgian prosecutor ordered Georgian Communist Party buildings sealed in the capital Tbilisi and other cities, Tass reported.
 
 KAZAKHSTAN
History: The Kazakh republic was formed from Uralsk, Turgai, Akmolinsk and Semipalatinsk provinces in August 1920; declared sovereignty Oct. 25.
Present: President Nursultan Nazarbayev, who previously opposed secession, appealed to the national legislature to recognize the independence of the three Baltic republics, Georgia and Moldavia. He said there should be no national parliament or Cabinet of Ministers and that republics should have their own armies and foreign ministers. He said the Soviet Union should be reorganized as a loose confederation called the "Free Union of Sovereign Republics."
 
 KIRGIZIA
History: Formed as an autonomous region in 1926 and admitted to the Soviet Union as a constituent republic in December 1936; declared sovereignty on Dec. 12.
Present: President Askar Akayev spoke out in favor of radical reform of power in the country, telling the Interfax news agency the present system is "both an ideological and practical anachronism." The Central Committee of the republic's Communist Party fired its entire staff, Tass reported, and decided to hold an extraordinary party Congress in November.
 
 MOLDAVIA
History: Formerly included in Romania, Moldavia was annexed by the Soviet Union in 1940.
Present: Alexander Mosanu, chairman of the Moldavian parliament, said lawmakers would vote for independence during a special parliamentary session on Tuesday. President Mircea Snegur signed a decree recognizing Estonia, Lithuania and Georgia as independent countries.
 
 TADZHIKISTAN
History: The Tadzhik republic was admitted to the Soviet Union in December 1929; declared sovereignty Aug. 25, 1990.
Present: President Kakhar Makhamov issued a decree banning Communist Party cells in the republic's law enforcement agencies, courts, Justice and Interior Ministries and in the presidential office, Tass reported Saturday.
 
 TURKMENIA
History: The Turkmen Soviet Socialist Republic was formed in October 1924; on Aug. 22, 1990, declared its sovereignty.
Present: Turkmenistan has supported the new Union Treaty.
 
 UKRAINE
History: The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic was proclaimed in December 1917 and established in December 1919; declared sovereignty July 16, 1990.
Present: Communist Party activities were suspended in the second most populous republic pending the outcome of an investigation into the party's role in the coup. Leaders of the Ukrainian parliament ordered the Interior Ministry, KGB headquarters and 11 party offices be searched for incriminating documents. It also froze the party's assets and took control of its property.
 
 UZBEKISTAN
History: The semi-independent Khanates of Khiva and Bokhara became the Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic in October 1924; declared sovereignty on June 20, 1990.
Present: President Islam Karimov told Parliament to draft a law on independence. He issued a decree putting the Interior Ministry and KGB under the republic's jurisdiction. The republic's Communist leaders convene a special session to decide whether to split from the national party, Interfax reported.
 
 RUSSIA
MOSCOW: Soviet lawmakers convene in a raucous legislative session in the Kremlin and declared the union dead. President Boris Yeltsin took control of state-run Novosti news agency and appointed his information minister to run the national broadcasting monopoly. He reserved right to negotiate Russia's borders with seceding republics - except for the Baltics.
The city council asked Yeltsin's government to eject the stodgy Lenin Museum from its coveted site off Red Square and give the property to the city.
OMSK: Russian television reported that officials have found a truckload's worth of shredded documents at the local Communist Party building.
LENINGRAD: A commission began work Monday to determine the role of local government and Communist Party officials in the coup, Russian Information Agency reported.

 

End of Document
