

A Look at Members of the New Committee Ruling the Soviet Union
The Associated Press
August 21, 1991, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 856 words
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Here is a look at members of the State Committee for the State of Emergency in the USSR, formed on Monday to take control of the country from Mikhail S. Gorbachev:
 
 GENNADY YANAYEV (ghen-AH-dee yah-NYE-ev)
Yanayev, a 53-year-old career Communist, was elected vice president of the country in December. He was seen as a compromise candidate to appease hard-liners. Yanayev has not criticized Gorbachev publicly, but he has expressed concern for the well-being of the public in the transition to a market economy. He spent his eight months as vice president mainly greeting foreign officials, including President Bush when he arrived in the Soviet Union for a summit with Gorbachev in late July. An ethnic Russian, Yanayev is a member of the Soviet congress and the national Supreme Soviet legislature. He also is a member of the Communist Party's ruling Politburo and its policy-setting Central Committee.
VALENTIN PAVLOV (VAHL-en-teen PAHV-loff)
The Soviet prime minister, Pavlov had been involved in another apparent attempt to seize power from Gorbachev. In June, he asked the national legislature to grant him emergency powers to issue decrees without the approval of the president or parliament. The legislature turned down his request. He was elected prime minister in January, nominated by Gorbachev. The 53-year-old Pavlov had been finance minister during a time when the government's budget deficit soared. The portly official, whose hair is in a crew cut, is a veteran of the Soviet bureaucracy. He had been deeply involved in helping Gorbachev draft presidential decrees on economic reform and appeared often on television and at the legislature to discuss the soaring Soviet budget deficit, new taxes and the falling value of the ruble. He has accused Western banks of trying to undermine the Soviet economy. On Tuesday, Pavlov was reported to be ill and unable to perform his duties.
 
 DMITRI YAZOV (de-MEE-tree YAZ-off)
The Soviet defense minister since 1987, Yazov has consistently allied himself more with KGB chiefs than Gorbachev. Although his speeches contain endorsements of Gorbachev's reforms, he has opposed some publicly, especially those involving military cutbacks and draft deferments for students. The 68-year-old Yazov holds the rank of marshal. As defense minister, he has met frequently with his American and other Western counterparts. Since 1981, he had served as commander of Soviet military forces in Central Asia, the Far East, and finally as deputy defense minister for personnel. He has served in the army since 1941, the year the Soviet Union was attacked by Nazi Germany. There were unverified reports Tuesday that Yazov was also ill.
 
 VLADIMIR KRYUCHKOV (VLAD-ee-meer KROOCH-koff)
The 67-year-old chairman of the KGB secret police since October 1988, Kryuchkov has been the most vocal - and most powerful - critic of many of Gorbachev's reforms. He has often been seen in public with Yazov, leading to speculation that they were the driving force behind hard-line opposition in the Soviet leadership. He has given speeches and interviews charging that the West was actively trying to undermine Soviet society. In June, he said the West was demanding fundamental economic reforms in return for "vague promises of a favorable attitude toward economic aid." At the same time, he has tried to improve the KGB's image, launching a major public relations campaign to present his agency in a good light. The KGB today denied reports that he resigned from the eight-member committee.
 
 BORIS PUGO (bah-REES POO-goh)
Long viewed as a hard-liner, Pugo has often been asked to explain the actions of Soviet troops he controls as Soviet interior minister. Those troops have been called upon increasingly to quell ethnic violence that has flared in many of the 15 republics. In some cases, the troops themselves have been accused of attacks, particularly in the Baltic republics. Pugo earlier headed the Communist Party's Control Commission, which investigates breaches of discipline in party ranks, and held various party and government jobs in the Latvian republic.
 
 OLEG BAKLANOV (OH-leg bakh-LAHN-off)
First deputy chairman of the Defense Council, Baklanov had been minister of general machine building and a secretary of the Central Committee. Aged 59, Baklanov is an engineer with a reputation as a technocrat.
 
 VASILY STARODUBTSEV (vah-SEE-lee stah-ro-DOOBT-seff)
Chairman of the Farmers' Union, Starodubtsev had since July 1990 been a member of the Communist Party Central Committee. He also is a member of the Soviet parliament. A 60-year-old ethnic Russian, he is a specialist in agriculture from Tula in Siberia.
 
 ALEXANDER TIZYAKOV (alek-ZAN-der teez-YAHK-off)
President of the Association of State Enterprises and Industrial, Construction, Transport and Communications Facilities of the USSR. Since last July, he has been a member of a commission studying alternative was to transfer to a market economy. In March 1991, he was one of a group of economists who met with Gorbachev to discuss proposed economic program. Moscow News described him as representing a centrist position, similar to that of Starodubtsev.

 

End of Document
