

A Vast Arsenal Still In The Hands Of The Citizenry
The Associated Press
June 17, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 696 words
Byline: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KUWAIT CITY
Body




At first glance, the mound of assault rifles and other weapons in the back office of the Sabah al-Salem police station would indicate that officials are succeeding in getting civilians to turn in their weapons.
Rocket-propelled grenades and 50-caliber machine-gun rounds spill out of two filing cabinets. Weapons on the floor include an anti-aircraft gun barrel, several grenade-launchers, AK-47s and M-16s.
But a closer inspection shows that the bulk of the weapons are slightly rusted hunting rifles.
Kuwait, once a largely non-violent society, has been transformed by the Iraqi occupation into a country where guns are zealously held.
A government program to collect all the weapons in civilian hands by Tuesday may fall short of its goal by 50 percent, police officers say. Former resistance fighters put the return rate even lower, at about 20 percent.
Western diplomats worry that Kuwait could become another Lebanon, given the large number of weapons in private hands, the suspicion among ethnic and religious communities and frustration over slow rebuilding.
But the prospect of house-to-house searches to take away guns is no more heartening.
Kuwaitis say they are keeping their weapons as insurance in case their government leaves them unprotected again - the Cabinet and all senior army officers fled when Iraq invaded on Aug. 2.
"It's a small amount (returned). People are afraid of the future, maybe Saddam Hussein will come back again," said Sgt. Ahmed Mohammed, who catalogues all the weapons coming into the station.
The hunting weapons eventually will be re-licensed. But the military guns, which came from abandoned Iraqi stocks and burglarized Kuwaiti storerooms, are being confiscated.
"We don't know how many weapons are in Kuwait. It depends on the honesty of the people," said Col. Abdul Latif Al-Issa, the police officer in charge of the weapons collection program.
About 15 people have showed up towing anti-aircraft guns the Iraqis left in their back gardens. al-Issa believes others are keeping similar weapons as "souvenirs."
Many people believe the Iraqi occupation lowered the threshold of violence in society, so Kuwaitis will turn to guns much more readily.
They worry that Palestinians, frustrated by unemployment and abused by the security services, might take up arms. Police said only 1 percent of the returned weapons have come from non-Kuwaitis.
Younger members of the ruling al-Sabah family and resistance cells also are unlikely to disarm.
And Shiite Muslims, who want years of discrimination to end in recogniation of their loyalty during the invasion, are believed heavily armed.
Col. al-Issa said authorities are considering searching houses for weapons before the deadline expires.
But for many diplomats, the prospect of the Kuwaiti army conducting house-to-house searches is a human-rights nightmare given the widespread international condemnation of Kuwait over the torture of detainees by security forces and summary trials of alleged Iraqi collaborators.
"It's an area they can blunder into with enormously negative consequences. I can't come up with an example of any society that has been able to go into homes and sweep for arms with any success," said a Western ambassador.
Private Kuwaiti citizens bristle at the thought of losing their arsenals, which often are proudly displayed to guests.
"The government can't come into my home. What am I, an Iraqi?" said one man who was imprisoned for two weeks and tortured during the occupation.
He asked visitors if they had any suggestions on how he might bury his six rocket-propelled grenade launchers and 12 grenades in his garden, and would not enumerate all the other guns he had.
A nearby bureau drawer contained an unused assault rifle. He reached under the cushion he was sitting on and pulled out a loaded .357 Magnum.
Prices of guns have risen as more and more people use them to feel secure. A second-hand Czech pistol recently went for nearly $$800.
Resistance members scoff at the potential 6-month jail sentence and $$3,000 fine for possessing weapons after the turn-in date expires.
"The Iraqis gave people a death sentence for a flag and we still kept the guns," said one resistance fighter.

 

End of Document
