

After All the Suffering, Has Anything Changed?
The Associated Press
May 21, 1992, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 806 words
Byline: By PETER ENG, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BANGKOK, Thailand
Body




The king's intercession has defused the immediate confrontation between military powerbrokers and protesters. But the frustrations that brought tens of thousands of Thais into the streets have been allowed to fester, seeds for future turmoil.
The demonstrators, tired of the military's domination of politics, wanted army-backed Prime Minister Suchinda Kraprayoon's immediate resignation. Suchinda, a former army chief, led a military coup last year that overthrew an elected government.
The protesters retreated without a pledge from Suchinda to resign any time soon. Parliament was to take up reform legislation, but not until the end of the month.
Thai culture simply doesn't put a high priority on justice or retribution; it stresses face-saving compromise. In the past, military officers who led abortive coups have been pardoned, even promoted, then come right back to try to seize power again.
For six decades, the Thai military has simply said: "I have a right to tell you what to do simply because I have a uniform and a gun." Military leaders have long been seen as corrupt, politicized and not particularly effective on the battlefield.
Thursday, Col. Bunchon Chawansin, a military spokesman, indicated the army still considered itself the final arbiter of political life.
"In politics, we have the parliament but if the politicians are bad, then who will check and balance the MPs? In the past, it has been the military," he said. "If the Thai people don't want this situation, they have to select good people as MPs so the soldiers can withdraw."
The armed forces supreme commander, Kaset Rojananil, on Thursday thanked soldiers for "restoring peace."
Since Sunday, at least 40 people were killed and 600 wounded in clashes between protesters and soldiers. The army is not investigating the killings because there is no evidence excessive force was used, Bunchon said.
The protests died down after King Bhumibol Adulyadej brought Suchinda and pro-democracy leader Chamlong Srimuang together. National television showed the prime minister and the revered opposition figure kneeling before the monarch as he told them to solve the problem.
The scene was extraordinary. It is widely known the king works behind the scenes but this was the first time in modern Thai history the monarch was shown directly intervening in a political crisis.
But the solution he sanctioned was less than what the demonstrators wanted.
The king supported amending the Constitution to require the prime minister to be an elected politician. Suchinda was chosen prime minister by the pro-military governing coalition after the March election.
Even with all sides publicly committed to the amendment, there is no timetable for Suchinda's resignation. Pro-democracy activists were further disappointed Thursday by news that parliament would not take up the amendment issue until May 29 and the process would take a month.
And no one believes Suchinda's promise to back the reform, said pro-democracy activist Samlee Jaidee, a Thammasat University professor. Many people, she said, are unhappy that despite the Suchinda-Chamlong reconciliation, the situation reverted to what it was before the mass demonstrations.
Everyone on the streets, she said, is asking: Is the prime minister serious or is he just buying more time? "You cannot believe a liar," she said.
"It would be most unfortunate if the entire episode turned out to be just a deal between two persons (Suchinda and Chamlong), if the two just said let bygones be bygones," said Surin Pitsuwan, a member of parliament from the opposition Democrat Party.
"The issue is much more important, a matter of principle. I hope that Thais will not just sit still and feel happy that the two made up," he said.
Already the governing coalition appears to be dragging their feet on the amendment, Surin said.
The anti-Suchinda Nation newspaper said in an editorial Thursday that, "One thing is certain: Thailand will never be the same again. We know in our hearts that this nation will never heal if despots are permitted to continue to muscle their way into power and impose their will upon society."
That may be an optimistic view. The recent protests were more broad-based than ever before in Thai history, joining poor workers with professionals, students, entertainers. Some estimates said 100,000 or more rallied some days. But the large majority of the capital's 10 million residents, and the farmers that comprise most of the country's 55 million population, still focus on their daily lives and are content to leave politics to others.
"I don't know what has been happening. I don't know who is the prime minister," said Seewai Philarn, a 27-year-old security guard in Bangkok's central Silom business district.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Peter Eng has been news editor in the Bangkok bureau of the Associated Press since 1984.

 

End of Document
