

At Khafji, Confusion Among the Troops, And the Military Spokesmen
The Associated Press
February 1, 1991, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 621 words
Byline: By JOHN KING, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KHAFJI, Saudi Arabia
Body




On the radio, the American military command said U.S. forces had played only a supporting role in the fighting to evict Iraqi troops from Khafji.
"Tell HIM that," a Marine officer said, pointing to an exhausted leatherneck who had escaped from the frontier town minutes earlier.
The exhausted Marine was carrying a charred AK-47 he had taken from an Iraqi armored personnel carrier, or APC, after knocking it out with a shoulder-launched missile.
A short time later, a Saudi military spokesman told reporters that Khafji was "completely liberated" by Saudi-led forces.
That was news to Marines on the southern outskirts of the city, who came under rocket-grenade fire shortly after the Saudis had boasted of reclaiming their city.
"I guess everybody's a little confused about what's going on," said the Marine officer, who spoke on condition of anonymity. "I know I am."
From the outset late Tuesday, the one constant in the battle of Khafji was confusion.
Allies underestimated Iraqi strength and troop positions, Saudi troops fired wildly in areas of the city full of friendly forces, and Saudi and U.S. military officials gave inaccurate accounts of the situation.
As Saudi and Qatari forces massed to begin the assault on Khafji, U.S. Marines were relaxed, saying they were there to support the Arab allies if necessary. They were told by the Saudis that only a few hundred Iraqis remained in the city. Little resistance was expected.
Five minutes into the attack, the mood changed suddenly.
As they crossed into Khafji, forces from Saudi Arabia and the gulf kingdom Qatar came under heavy rocket-grenade and machine gun fire, from the north, northwest and even in some cases from behind. Most retreated. The Marines also withdrew down the road after coming under unexpected fire.
Saudi and Qatari forces regrouped and later stormed into Khafji, where they eventually drove out the Iraqi forces. But Marine reconnaissance patrols who were hiding in Khafji say the fighting was far from organized.
"The Saudi APCs came rolling in and once they encountered fire they just started shooting all over the place," one Marine said, speaking on condition of anonymity. "Toward the Iraqis, toward our position, toward other Saudis, everywhere, at anything that moved, even at things that didn't move."
Marines gave the Qataris high marks for their doggedness but said in the confusion, they, too, began firing on Saudis. Confusions reigned, in part because some armored equipment used by allied forces resembles Iraqi equipment.
Marines were considering ordering TOW missile launchers into the city to attack Iraqi armor, but were dissuaded by their reconnaissance reports.
"There's no way I was sending guys into that mess," the Marine officer said.
Communication also was a problem. A Marine recon team in the city could communicate only with other Marines. Vital information on targeting and enemy positions had to travel a tortuous route.
"I'm trying to get my counterpart to go to his counterpart to go to his higher," a frustrated Marine adviser said over the radio.
There also was considerable confusion away from the fighting.
When reports of the battle surfaced, U.S. military officials said Marines were only providing artillery support.
Later, the official line changed to say Marines were not "engaged" in any ground fighting but were in the area to provide support.
Media pools formed to cover combat were not brought to Khafji until Thursday, a full day after the assault to liberate Khafji began. Two Associated Press reporters and an AP photographer, acting independently of the pools, were the only journalists to witness the fighting.
Only Friday did the U.S. military command acknowledge there were Marines in the city during the fighting.

 

End of Document
