

At the Wall, Thoughts of the Old War and the New One
The Associated Press
January 17, 1991, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 461 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The first full day of war drew some Americans to the black granite wall bearing the names of 58,175 of their countrymen lost in the last big war, Vietnam, 1959-75.
They went to reflect, to walk hand-in-hand, to leave a carnation or a flag in the gravel path of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.
They went to take a picture, to bite a lip, to look for a searched-for name, to recoil upon finding it.
Bruce Giersdorf, of Silver Bay, Minn., went there, buttoned up against a chilly wind. He is a fire technician for the Forest Service. His wife also works for the Forest Service. She came to Washington on business. He tagged along.
"It is incredibly vast," he said, gesturing toward the wall. "You wonder how these people died."
He was in high school during Vietnam, too young to be drafted.
"I can see the necessity of it," Giersdorf said about the new war, in the Persian Gulf, against Iraq. "I can see the waste. It is sad that this is what it takes to get people to work together in common bond."
The wind blew leaves along the wall. The flags snapped. Schoolchildren poured out of a bus, joshing, jostling, snapping chewing gum, snapping pictures.
But they came to the wall in whispers. A boy shoved his yo-yo into his pocket. Another stood before the engraved names, counted down 15 lines from the top, found one he was looking for, touched it with his fingertips.
Three churchwomen - Mrs. Leah Corning of Jamestown, N.D., Mrs. Martha High of McLean, Va., Mrs. Yvette McCoy of Milwaukee, Wis. - went together to the wall.
They were in Washington for a meeting of the Episcopalian United Thank Offering Committee, to parcel out church contributions.
An airplane boomed overhead. Mrs. Corning said that when she got off the plane that brought her here and heard the airport noises, she thought of the jets over Baghdad.
Still, she said, "It is up to us to defend these people against a tyrant."
David and Diane Summers, British tourists, went to the monument on their last day in Washington.
They thought the war was necessary, were pleased England was in it too.
He: "They've already raped one culture, Kuwait, why should they be allowed to do it to another, the Saudis?"
She: "Yes, but I just hope we don't end up with another monument, with more names."
Across the street sat the immense brooding statue of Lincoln, martyr to another war.
The schoolkids raced up the stairs, and read Lincoln's war words:
"With malice toward none; with charity for all; with firmness in the right, as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to finish the work we are in; to bind up the nation's wounds; to care for him who shall have borne the battle, and for his widow, and his orphan - to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace among ourselves, and with all nations."

 

End of Document
