

At the Movies: "Flight of the Intruder"
The Associated Press
January 14, 1991, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 535 words
Byline: By BOB THOMAS, Associated Press Writer
Body




"Flight of the Intruder" depicts a different side of the Vietnam War: no napalm bombings, no slaughter of women and children, no spaced-out soldiers. This is the carrier war, clean and polished, with loads of male bonding, and an occasional fatality as a reminder that war is hell.
John Milius ("Red Dawn," "Farewell to the King") directed the film with his customary love of all things military. While its roots go back to the recruitment-poster movies of World War II, "Flight of the Intruder" is nonetheless filled with terrific excitement of aerial combat. The flight scenes are among the best ever done, graphically dramatizing the sophisticated weaponry that modern-day pilots must master.
The A-6 Intruder shares star status with Danny Glover, Willem Dafoe and Brad Johnson. The homely, versatile aircraft was designed to support ground troops and fly from carriers in all kinds of weather. The only thing it can't do is defend itself.
Lt. Jake "Cool Hand" Grafton (Johnson), a hot pilot of the Intruder, is distressed because of the meaningless missions he is assigned; in one his bombardier is killed by ground fire.
Cmdr. Frank Camparelli (Glover), who claims to be third-generation Mafia, is Grafton's commanding officer, a fire-breathing stickler for regulations. Bombardier Lt. Cmdr. Virgil Cole (Dafoe) is the enigmatic latecomer with a clouded past record.
Grafton burns to accomplish something of significance in the war, and he concocts a plot to bomb Hanoi - off-limits to U.S. planes. Cole refuses to join such a suicidal mission, but finally agrees. They bootleg maps and fly off. The bombing and the aftermath are the best parts of the film.
The screenplay by Robert Dillon and David Shaber, from Stephen Coonts' best-selling novel, is a primer in air war movies. Grafton couldn't be more heroic, Camparelli more cantankerous or Cole more sardonic and mysterious. Within such limitations, all three actors admirably perform their chores.
Brad Johnson carries the heaviest load; in his second important role (he was Holly Hunter's second lover in "Always") he exudes the old-time star quality of Clark Gable and Gary Cooper.
Milius pushes all the buttons: the barroom brawl; escape from the MP's; romance with a war widow (Rosanna Arquette); heroic rescue of the downed pilot; reconciliation of maverick pilot and commander. When Grafton heads "downtown" on the main road to Hanoi (a reprise of Luke Skywalker's flight in "Star Wars"), he murmurs the 23rd Psalm.
With good acting and great carrier and combat photography, "Flight of the Intruder" almost makes you forget the klunkiness of the plot and dialogue. One thing's for sure: It's timely.
A Paramount Pictures release produced by Mace Neufeld. The rating is PG-13, mostly for language and excitement. Running time 115 minutes.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.

 

End of Document
