

At the Movies: "Into the Sun"
The Associated Press
January 29, 1992, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 439 words
Byline: By BOB THOMAS, Associated Press Writer
Body




In "Air America," hot pilot Mel Gibson initiated greenhorn Robert Downey Jr. to the perils of flying for the CIA in Laos. In "The Hard Way," banzai cop James Woods gives movie idol Michael J. Fox a crash course in New York crime busting.
"Into the Sun" seems like a parody of those two buddy pictures. Despite a skimpy budget, "Into the Sun" offers more entertainment, perhaps because of its lack of pretension. Part "Top Gun," part Hope-Crosby "Road," the new film demonstrates how bright scripting and lively acting can overcome cost limitations.
Like Fox in "The Hard Way," Anthony Michael Hall is a movie heartthrob eager to study real life for a film role. At a Mediterranean air base, he undergoes pilot training under the reluctant tutelage of Michael Pare, called Hotshot for his skill in the sky. Pare has been forced into the task by Deborah Maria Moore, his superior officer and bedmate.
Pare expects to exhaust Hall with rugged drills, but the movie star proves an astute learner (he also makes a play for Miss Moore). Seeking revenge, the pilot takes Hall for a spin in an F-16. They encounter hostile aircraft.
The pair are downed, and they fall into the hands of desert Arabs. That's when the fun begins. The unlikely partners use their cunning to confound and escape their captors.
An unlikely story. How would a civilian be allowed to fly into a potential war zone? How could there be air battles without a war going on? In spite of itself, "Into the Sun" delivers a surprising amount of lighthearted entertainment.
The air scenes are convincingly exciting; amazingly, they were photographed with miniatures. Pare has the right tone for a stock hero, and Hall has all the right moves of a self-absorbed star. Miss More, daughter of Bondman Roger Moore, gives a dimension of spunky charm to what could have been the obligatory love interest.
Fritz Kiersch's direction seems uncertain in the early going - Terry Kiser as the star's manager is overly obnoxious. But the pace quickens after the desert crash. The story and screenplay by John Brancato and Michael Ferris offer some clever variations on the male-bonding theme.
The Trimark Pictures release is rated R, mostly for language. Running time: 100 minutes.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.

 

End of Document
