

Baker: 'Closing The Door' On Further Talks
The Associated Press
January 6, 1991, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1041 words
Byline: By JOAN MOWER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Secretary of State James Baker III, bound for Europe and a rendezvous with Iraq's foreign minister, said Sunday he will tell Tariq Aziz that the Jan. 15 deadline for getting out of Kuwait is final and he's "closing the door" on going to Baghdad for further talks.
"There is only one chance for a peaceful solution in my opinion," Baker said shortly before embarking on a weeklong diplomatic mission to Europe and the Middle East in a last-ditch swing to prevent war over the Persian Gulf crisis.
"That chance for peace is if they finally begin to realize over there in Iraq that the international community is serious" about using force to drive Iraqi troops from Kuwait if they don't pull out by Jan. 15.
Later in London, Baker flatly rejected a French overture to Iraq that would link a pullout from Kuwait to an eventual Mideast peace conference.
"We find it impossible to sign on to it," Baker said.
The U.S. administration has opposed for several months any "linkage" between the invasion of Kuwait and the Palestinian-Israeli dispute.
But Baker's rejection of President Francois Mitterrand proposal is the first unqualified put-down since France extracted a commitment from the European Community last week to pursue a dialogue with Iraq.
Notwithstanding his resolve not to travel to Iraq for talks, Baker declined under questioning by reporters to rule out the possibility of taking with Iraq's president somewhere other than in Iraq.
Baker will meet Aziz in Geneva, Switzerland, on Wednesday to tell him face-to-face that the United States is prepared to lead the effort to forcibly expel Iraqi troops if necessary.
Baker will deliver to Aziz a typewritten letter from President Bush to Iraqi President Saddam Hussein.
NBC News reported Saturday night that the final paragraph of the letter bluntly warns Saddam: "You have only two choices: comply with the resolutions or risk destruction of your country."
President Bush, returning to the White House from Camp David on Sunday, refused to comment on what message he wrote the Iraqi leader.
"I don't believe in releasing letters until the guy has a chance to read it," said Bush, accompanied by his wife Barbara and Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady and his wife, Katherine, who also spent the night at the presidential retreat.
Bush summoned his top national security and defense advisers to the White House for a strategy session Sunday evening. Participants included National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, Gen. Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger.
"This Jan. 15 deadline is real," Baker said on ABC-TV's "This Week With David Brinkley." "We've been dealing with this issue for over five months. It is not a case of not having been patient."
Baker also ruled out traveling to Baghdad to see Saddam. "There will be no meeting in Baghdad … I'm closing the door," Baker said.
Initially, Bush suggested Baker visit Saddam in Iraq, but the two sides could not agree on a date. "That proposal … is now off the table since the Iraqis themselves rejected it," Baker said.
Nevertheless, Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell, D-Maine, pointed out events could prompt a change in Baker's schedule. "What's ruled out today can be ruled in tomorrow," he said on CBS-TV's "Face the Nation."
And Iraq's ambassador to the United States said there was still a possibility of a Baker-Saddam session. "Mr. Baker is welcome to go to Baghdad," said Mohammad Al-Mashat on NBC-TV's "Meet the Press."
On his trip, Baker said he will try to gauge the reaction of allies in the anti-Iraq coalition to engaging in a war. "One of the reasons for this final swing of mine into the region and into Europe is to explore questions" such as the commitment of the Europeans.
The United States has deployed more than 300,000 troops in the gulf, while Baker said others have a total combined force of about 200,000.
Baker, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and Brent Scowcroft, the national security adviser, appeared separately on television talk shows in an effort to drive home the Bush administration's message.
Despite the administration's hard line, The Washington Post reported in Sunday's editions that efforts are under way to negotiate an Arab solution to the crisis.
Citing unnamed Western diplomats based in Baghdad, the report said one plan calls for Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait. In return, the Kuwaitis would cap a disputed oil field and lease islands to Iraq, giving Saddam access to the sea.
U.S. officials have denied they are prepared to negotiate with Saddam and say they have detected no softening on Saddam's insistence of maintaining his troops in Kuwait.
Cheney called the report about possible deals involving Saudis, Kuwaitis and Iraqis a "misstatement."
"Everybody's on the same wavelength and that is Saddam Hussein must get out of Kuwait and must not be rewarded for his aggression," he said.
Scowcroft, meantime, said Saddam has been sending "mixed signals but we detect no weakening" of his position.
In a speech Sunday in Baghdad, Saddam urged his nation to prepare for "great sacrifices" and said his forces are prepared for a long battle against the "tyranny represented by the United States."
Saddam also repeated his insistence that the Persian Gulf crisis be tied to the Arab-Israeli conflict. The United States has rejected linking the two issues.
Also facing Bush is a clash with Congress over the president's powers to go to war should he decide to unleash firepower against Iraq.
Mitchell said Congress plans to open a full-scale debate on the gulf Thursday, the day after the Baker-Aziz meeting, and should have a resolution in hand by Jan. 15.
House Speaker Tom Foley, D-Wash., predicted Sunday the Democrat-controlled House would narrowly pass a resolution supporting the United Nation's authorization of force if a vote were taken today.
Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole, R-Kan., gave the same assessment for the Senate.
But Mitchell said the debate in the Senate will focus on whether "force should be used early or whether it should be a last resort after all other means have been exhausted."
Many Democrats have urged Bush to give U.N. economic sanctions against Iraq more time to work before launching an attack.

 

End of Document
