

Ban the World Bank? Strengthen the IMF? Merge the Two?
The Associated Press
September 25, 1994, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 544 words
Byline: By LARRY THORSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BERLIN
Body




Pressure for change is high as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund head into their annual meetings in Madrid.
One suggestion: Merge the two. They've been separate for 50 years, but it's argued that both institutions work in international economic development and use some of the same tools, and it would be more efficient to fold them into one.
In the other direction, some want the two to be made more distinct and powerful. The 179 member governments should prepare to give the IMF power to manage currency values and exchange rates, according to the Bretton Woods Commission, chaired by former U.S. Federal Reserve head Paul A. Volcker.
"This is the time for the major industrial countries to review arrangements for global economic cooperation and to begin designing an improved international monetary system," the commission said in July.
It argued that world economic performance has been unsatisfactory for a long time because major industrial powers have failed to coordinate policies, and the IMF should be given a strong role in keeping the U.S. dollar, Japanese yen and German mark from wild fluctuations.
The commission said the World Bank must be streamlined and made more open and democratic, focus more on lending to the private sector and concentrate on the poorest countries.
Radical critics, however, would eliminate the World Bank or drastically curtail it. The Britain-based Oxfam private aid organization blames the World Bank for forcing poor countries in Africa and Latin America into ever worse poverty during the 1980s.
"Many of these problems can be traced to a single cause: namely, the profoundly undemocratic character of the World Bank," Oxfam said, blaming the IMF along with the bank for increasing the debt of the poorest lands.
Critics from the hundreds of NGOs, or nongovernmental organizations, that run aid projects say the problem lies in the economic adjustment policies imposed as conditions for loans by the World Bank and IMF.
"In short, these adjustment programs are killing Africa," Douglas Hellinger, managing director of the Development Group for Alternative Policies, testified to a U.S. Senate subcommittee on Africa.
The World Bank replies that countries have more growth later if they accept the conditions and discipline their economies.
The World Bank and IMF admit they've made mistakes - especially in ignoring environmental and social impact of giant development projects such as hydroelectric dams. But they say they're constantly learning and ready to embrace change.
The two institutions are constrained by the wishes of their member countries. Change comes slowly, but this year there is pressure from the top: The Group of Seven - the United States, Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Italy and Japan - have asked for a review of the World Bank and IMF.
The Madrid meetings will air criticisms and proposals for new directions, and at least limited change is likely.
Randall C. Henning, research associate at the Institute for International Economics in Washington, a close follower of the World Bank and IMF, expects credit facilities to be enlarged for poor countries and formerly communist countries.
The IMF is likely to get a greater role in monitoring capital flows to developing countries, he said.
 Load-Date: September 25, 1994

 

End of Document
