

Battle Shaping Up Over Power of the Purse
The Associated Press
June 26, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 716 words
Byline: By BRYAN BRUMLEY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




A political battle over the power of the purse is shaping up as the main obstacle in a draft Union Treaty designed to hold the Soviet Union together, according to news reports Wednesday.
Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, who initiated the Union Treaty, wants to give the power of taxation to the national, republic and local governments, what he calls a "three-channel system."
But Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin and leaders of other republics that back the treaty want a "one-channel system," giving their governments exclusive right to levy taxes. They would pay a fixed amount to Gorbachev's central government.
The legislature of the Russian Federation already has adopted a law fixing its contribution to the national budget at 23.4 billion rubles ($$39.8 billion at the official exchange rate), Yeltsin told the Russian legislature Wednesday.
The latest version, which Gorbachev has submitted to the legislatures of the republics, calls for direct presidential elections, but does not settle other controversies.
It does not contain the word "Communist," and it uses the term "Socialist" only once - to note that it would be replaced by "sovereign" in the formal title of the country: The Union of Soviet Sovereign Republics.
Leaders of nine of the 15 republics have endorsed the latest draft. It is based in part on the agreement they struck on April 23 with Gorbachev, who agreed to transfer much of the nation's natural and industrial wealth to the republics if they would sign the Union Treaty.
The Russian Federation is by far the wealthiest republic. Leaders of three other powerful republics also object to giving the Kremlin the right to levy taxes: Leonid Kravchuk of the Ukraine, Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan and Vyacheslav Kebich of Byelorussia, the state news agency Tass reported.
Leaders of poorer republics, especially the four in Central Asia, favor central taxation because for decades they have relied on subsidies from the central government. They fear that under the "one-channel system" Russia and the other relatively prosperous republics would turn off the tap, and that would mean economic disaster, according to Western diplomats who follow the issue.
Taxation is the stumbling block of the treaty, Tass quoted legal expert Vladimir Kudryavtsev as saying. Kudryavtsev, vice president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, warned that the tax dispute might prevent the treaty from being signed this summer, as Gorbachev and Yeltsin have urged.
The new Union Treaty would replace a 1922 agreement that created the Soviet Union after the Bolsheviks won a bloody Civil War.
Six secessionist republics, Armenia, Georgia, Moldavia, and the three Baltic republics, have declined to take part in the treaty negotiations, saying they want independence.
Although previous drafts said the secessionist republics would be governed by the treaty, the current text does not mention them, or define what their relationship would be with the new union.
The treaty describes the union as "voluntary," and gives members the right to leave it freely, in an orderly fashion.
It gives the central government control over the following: defense; border security; coordination of the foreign affairs of the member republics; pursuit of foreign commerce and coordination of the foreign commerce of the member republics; control over the money supply and the national budget; control over national communications networks; and regulation of the atomic energy industry.
It gives the national and the republican governments joint responsibility for defining military policy and running defense industries. Yeltsin and the reformers want control of military factories on the territories of their republics.
The draft says the state will allow all forms of property ownership, but does not specifically mention private property. Land, mineral resources, water and other natural resources belong to the republics.
The treaty reserves the state's right to control natural resources needed to exercise its authority, but does spell out which ones.
The central government keeps the gold, diamond and foreign exchange reserves and issues a single currency to be used by all republics.
Disputes are to be solved by a newly created constitutional court. But the draft does not say how the court will be chosen.

 

End of Document
