

Behind-the-Scenes Friction at the Warren Commission
The Associated Press
October 16, 1993, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 723 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




In distant memory, the Warren Commission was a tribunal of wise men who dismissed political concerns, even personal animosities, for their inquest into the assassination of a president. The strains are showing 30 years later.
They are reflected in memos, White House telephone transcripts, and a new book, "Colleagues," about the intertwined careers of President Lyndon B. Johnson, whose chose the commission, and Sen. Richard B. Russell, an unwilling member.
"I couldn't serve on it … with Chief Justice Warren … I don't like that man," Russell told Johnson on Nov. 29, 1963. "I don't have any confidence in him at all." The conservative Georgia Democrat had already said no once. Johnson told him he had just announced both Russell and Warren were on the commission.
"Well of course you don't like Warren, but you'll like him before it is over with," Johnson said.
But the friction persisted as the commission began its investigation of the assassination of President John F. Kennedy. "Remember Warren's blanket indictment of the South," Russell jotted in his notes, reflecting resentment that dated from the Supreme Court ruling against racially segregated schools in 1954.
And later: "For some reason Warren is stacking this staff with extreme liberals."
In "Colleagues," author John A. Goldsmith recounts those handwritten memos, and writes that Russell later objected to initial draft reports, although he signed the final version finding that Lee Harvey Oswald fired the shots and acted alone.
But at his insistence, the 1964 report was included a clause saying any evidence of possible conspiracy was beyond U.S. reach.
As Johnson moved, reluctantly at first, to set up the commission, he told aides and congressional leaders he was worried about assertions there was Soviet or Cuban involvement in the assassination.
He said "it could be very dangerous" to have rival congressional inquiries before television cameras with "a lot of loose testimony" blaming the assassination on the Soviet Union or Cuba because of Oswald's links to those Communist states. He said it was vital that there be a judicious, factual inquiry.
"This thing is so touchy from an international standpoint that every man we've got over there is concerned about it ...," Johnson said.
"We just don't want to leave any doubt that any foreign nation had anything to do with this," he said in one telephone conversation, and in another:
"We just can't have House and Senate and FBI and other people going around testifying Khrushchev killed Kennedy or Castro killed him. We've got to have the facts …
"We've got to take this out of the arena where they're testifying that Khrushchev and Castro did this and did that and check us into a war that can kill 40 million Americans in an hour," Johnson told Russell.
The telephone transcripts released by the National Archives show that the new president hesitated to have a federal panel take over the investigation of the assassination in Dallas, worried that Texans would see outside investigators as carpetbaggers. But advisors urged him to create a presidential commission, bipartisan and above politics, and Johnson soon decided that would be better than "a bunch of congressional inquiries."
As he set up the commission, Johnson wondered in one conversation whether it had too many Republicans, five, and in another, whether there were too few Southerners.
"Ford … I guess … is he a pretty vicious Republican?" Johnson asked Rep. Carl Albert, D-Okla., after deciding to name Gerald R. Ford to the commission.
"Well … he's kind of level-headed, you know," Albert said.
"Pretty judiciary?"
"Yes, he is."
After settling on the commission members, Johnson hurried his announcement because Rep. Hale Boggs, D-La., had said in the House that there was going to be such an inquiry. "Some jerk got up and said something … so he thought he had to show his knowledge," Johnson complained to Abe Fortas.
"I guess we have to talk to these fellows before we announce we're going to appoint them … I think we ought to order them to do it and let them bellyache."
None did.
"We've got to have the facts ...," Johnson said. "You don't have a president assassinated once every 50 years."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.
 Load-Date: October 16, 1993

 

End of Document
