

Blame Saddam for the War, But Not for the Recession
The Associated Press
April 27, 1991, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 998 words
Byline: By DIRK BEVERIDGE, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




It turns out America can't blame Saddam Hussein for the recession.
The National Bureau of Economic Research, which makes the official determination on recessions, says this one started back in July.
During the fall, in the days before the White House dared to utter the dreaded "R-word," some economists believed the nation had been on the brink of recession and was pushed over the edge by the Persian Gulf crisis. Iraq's invasion of Kuwait sent oil prices soaring and stirred uncertainty among businesses and consumers.
But Saddam's aggression didn't come until Aug. 2, the month after the recession began. So much for using the mustachioed dictator as a scapegoat.
Now that the nation knows when the recession started, everyone is still waiting to find out when it will end.
The numbers that came out this past week were anything but encouraging.
The government said the recession grew worse during the first three months of 1991.
The gross national product, which is the total output of goods and services, tumbled during the first quarter at an annual rate of 2.8 percent, according to the Commerce Department. That was far worse than the fourth quarter drop of 1.6 percent.
The Labor Department said the nation's unemployment lines grew longer, as measured by the weekly claims for benefits. Car sales kept skidding.
Business failures are booming. Dun & Bradstreet said they jumped 54 percent during the first quarter - their biggest rise in seven years.
During the first three months of the year, 20,811 businesses collapsed, compared with 13,577 in the first quarter of 1990. The troubles spread across the country and into every major industry except mining.
Amid the bad news, the Bush administration began pressing for cuts in interest rates, both at home and abroad, saying it was trying to avert a worldwide recession.
 
 BANKS: Bank of New England Finds an Owner
 
 If the economy turns around anytime soon in the Northeast, Fleet-Norstar Financial Group Inc. is poised to take advantage.
Fleet, based in Providence, R.I., will become the largest bank in New England after coming away the winner in the bidding for the failed Bank of New England, seized by regulators in January.
Fleet teamed up with takeover artists Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. to make the successful $$625 million bid.
As it unloaded BNE, the govermment learned the fund protecting the nation's bank deposits has shrunk so small it might not be able to handle a large bank failure.
Charles A. Bowsher, head of the General Accounting Office, said the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.'s fund could be broke by next year unless it is quickly - and massively - replenished.
He said banks ought to pay an extra $$15 billion into the fund this year - an amount nearly equal to the industry's profit in 1990.
 
 EARNINGS: Big Pay Days for Oil and CEOs
 
 Big Oil's first-quarter earnings were big enough to draw a chorus of profiteering charges from the industry's vocal foes.
Exxon Corp., the nation's biggest oil company, said earnings jumped 75 percent to $$2.24 billion.
Exxon may need the money. A federal judge in Anchorage, Alaska, threw out the oil giant's criminal plea bargain in the Valdez case, saying the proposed fines of $$100 million weren't enough.
The plea agreement also called for Exxon to pay $$900 million to deal with environmental problems caused by the nation's worst oil spill.
Airlines showed more huge losses. UAL Corp., the parent of United Airlines, said it lost $$157 million in the first three months of the year.
Something that may or may not bother United's bean counters is the amount the second-largest U.S. airline is shelling out for executive pay.
The same day United reported its loss, a survey in Business Week magazine said UAL Chairman Stephen M. Wolf was the nation's highest-paid chief executive during 1990. Wolf raked in $$18.3 million, even as profits tumbled by 71 percent.
The nation's top executives spent much of 1990 cutting spending and laying off workers, but some of their own paychecks weathered the storm. Despite a 7 percent drop in corporate profits, the average chief executive's salary, bonus and long-term compensation rose by 7 percent to $$1.95 million, the survey found.
 
 PEOPLE: Murdoch, Trump In Retreat
 
 Not all of the rich are getting richer. Some are selling assets as the banks get antsy.
Australian media baron Rupert Murdoch's News Corp. Ltd. agreed to sell eight magazines and the Daily Racing Form for about $$650 million to a partnership controlled by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts. The magazines on the block include Seventeen, New York, Premiere and Soap Opera Digest.
The sale will help News Corp. reduce its $$8.2 billion debt, as required by a recent refinancing agreement.
Also in retreat was developer and casino operator Donald J. Trump, who faced up to the reality of dismantling his empire to pay off his towering debts.
Bankers who loaned The Donald some $$2 billion were working out a deal that would strip Trump of much of his real estate, as well as the airline shuttle and yacht that bear his name.
 
 NUMBERS: The Other Side of Homelessness
 
 No wonder it seems like the homeless are everywhere. The Census Bureau reports there are 10.3 million vacant houses, townhouses, apartments and condominiums in the United States.
That's one of every 10 dwellings that the bureau checked. It's also the highest rate of vacancies in a half-century, and about 2 million more than the government found in 1980.
 
 TRENDS: Fish Fresh Redefined
 
 If trendy Tokyo seafood restaurants say they're serving live lobster, you can believe it.
The newest rage in Japanese cuisine is live seafood, which is literally wiggling on the plate when it is served. Waiters quickly slice open the midsection and gut the fish, so it is ready to eat. Diners dip the slices in a mixture of soy sauce and horseradish.
Toshio Fujii, an X-ray technician, likes his fish live because "they don't come any fresher."
"But eels are kind of gross," he said. "I had them in my beer one time. Too many little bones."

 

End of Document
