

Bush Pledges $ 645 Million To Help Former Cold War Enemies Make The Leap
The Associated Press
January 22, 1992, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1055 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Bush pledged $ 645 million in new U.S. aid Wednesday to the beleaguered people of the former Soviet Union as they struggle to "make the leap" from communism to democracy and free market economies.
Bush's unexpected gesture at a 47-nation conference on emergency relief to the Soviet people could inspire others to hike their own contributions even though Secretary of State James A. Baker III had said there would not be a bidding contest.
In fact, several of the governments participating in the conference came forward later in the day with offers of new assistance, said U.S. officials who spoke on condition of anonymity. The prospective donors and the amounts were not disclosed.
At a luncheon, meanwhile, Baker singled out oil-rich Saudi Arabia, Australia and New Zealand for private consultations.
The United States "cannot and will not falter at the moment that these new states are struggling to embrace the very ideals that America was founded to foster and preserve," Bush said in opening the conference.
His aid proposal, which must be approved by Congress, marked a shift in emphasis since the new aid would not have to be repaid. Bush told the gathering that the United States has pledged more than $ 5 billion in various forms of assistance, but most has been in the form of agricultural credits that will benefit U.S. farmers.
"Let us join together to give these people a reason to hope," Bush said at the ceremonial opening of the two-day summit. "Let us commit ourselves this morning to work in full partnership as we proceed."
The bulk of the new aid would be used to set up a $ 500 million account for humanitarian assistance. Another $ 25 million would purchase badly needed pharmaceuticals, and $ 20 million will help farmers become private entrepreneurs after more than a half-century of communism. Money will also go to technical assistance and development projects.
Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin saluted the participants in a message declaring "humanitarian and other forms of assistance by the international community will no doubt help alleviate the difficulties our population is facing as we move to a market economy."
Yeltsin offered assurances that Russians have made an irrevocable decision to create a civilized, democratic state. "However," he said, "one has to pay dearly for past mistakes and delusions."
Deputy Prime Minister Yegar Gaidar, Russia's top economic official, said help was essential "to prevent economic collapse."
"Aid offered now can help prevent this," he wrote in Wednesday's editions of London's Financial Times. "It would be much more valuable than aid offered later."
Bush, Baker and other senior U.S. officials were under pressure from Germany, the leading donor to the former Soviet Union, some other European allies and critical investment bankers here at home to be more generous and also less demanding that the new nations swear allegiance to capitalism.
Sounding this self-help theme, Baker in his own speech, said "these newly liberated peoples know the ultimate responsibility for their success lies in their own hands."
British Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd agreed at a news conference: "We're not in the business of creating a dependence culture… we've got to encourage the economic reforms that are underway."
Once the immediate problems are overcome, Hurd said, the next goal must be getting Russia, Ukraine and the other republics into the International Monetary Fund "and getting down to working out with them the bigger questions of their economic reforms and whether we can help make sure that they are a success."
But with winter exacerbating food shortages and transportation snarls, the plight of the nearly 300 million people in what was once one of the world's most powerful countries apparently has gripped the administration.
"If this were a war we would call this Operation Provide Hope," Baker said. "Yet this is not a war to defeat aggression, but a peacetime battle to support democracy and freedom."
The sense of urgency was also conveyed in a parallel two-day conference here of about 200 nonprofit organizations sponsored by Citizens Democracy Corps, a group initiated by President Bush in 1990 to mobilize assistance by American corporations.
The group's executive director, Sol Polansky, said participants were attempting to identify the most pressing needs of the former Soviet Union and how best to distribute aid.
Polansky said the situation was worse in some areas than in others and there was "a general feeling that over the past several months the situation has deteriorated."
The State Department conference was called primarily to coordinate assistance among the donor nations. Three neighbors of the former Soviet Union - Hungary, Poland and Czechoslovakia - made a joint pitch for channeling some of the assistance through them. Priority would be on food and medicines.
Norway's foreign minister, Thornvald Stoltenberg, urged an even more ambitious approach. He said the Washington conference should only be a first step toward a comprehensive strategy for assistance and cooperation similar to the Marshall Plan, the U.S.-led program for Europe's recovery after World War II.
Major nations have agreed that another conference on large-scale aid to the former Soviet republics should be held in Lisbon, Portugal, probably in May, said Elizabeth Guigou, French minister for European Affairs.
By then, she said, the problem of immediate help may be less important. "There is a problem infinitely more vast - the total reconstruction of these countries' economies," she said.
And Rep. Les Aspin, D-Wis., chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, said that while he commended Bush's aid proposal, "He could have had $ 1 billion almost three months ago when a number of us first proposed it in Congress. He failed to offer support, and the resulting legislation provided only half the funds."
But Bush said the success or failure of the commonwealth rests with the new nations that emerged from the old Soviet Union.
"The battle is really theirs to win," he said.
At the same time, "let us help the people throughout the independent states to make the leap from communism to democracy, from command economies to free markets, from authoritarianism to liberty," he said. "And then let us pull together to win the peace in this post-Cold War era."

 

End of Document
