

Bush To Iraq: Withdraw Or Face The 'Terrible Consequences'
The Associated Press
January 5, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 974 words
Byline: By RITA BEAMISH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Bush said Saturday that his secretary of state will forgo secret diplomacy this week to demand that occupying Iraqi troops leave Kuwait "or face the terrible consequences."
The president, in a hardline radio address to the nation, issued his ultimatum that Iraqi President Saddam Hussein pull his troops out or face U.S. forces in battle.
"Time is running out," the president said. "It's running out because each day that passes brings real costs," as Saddam continues developing his biological and nuclear capability, entrenches his troops in Kuwait and disrupts the worldwide flow of oil.
NBC News reported Saturday night that Bush was sending a letter to Saddam through Secretary of State James A. Baker III, warning the Iraqi president to comply with United Nations resolutions calling for a pullout.
"You have only two choices: comply with the resolutions or risk the destruction of your country," the network quoted the letter as saying.
The report said the letter was translated into Arabic on Saturday and was to be delivered by Baker at his meeting Wednesday in Geneva with Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz.
White House spokesman Bill Harlow noted that it has been announced that Bush was sending a letter with Baker, but said he could not comment on its contents.
Bush's pretaped radio address was broadcast Saturday as he met at the presidential retreat in Camp David, Md., with United Nations Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar.
The meeting served as a review of the current situation, and did not produce new initiatives, said an administration official.
The two, during three hours of talks "discussed the general situation in the gulf including diplomatic activities aimed at resolving the current crisis in a peaceful manner," according to a White House statement.
One of those initiatives was rejected by the Iraqis.
The official Iraqi News Agency reported that Aziz declined a European Community invitation for talks on the crisis. The invitation, issued Friday, would have brought Aziz to Luxembourg next Thursday. The White House had no comment on the news that Iraq rejected the EC initiative.
After the meeting with Bush, Perez de Cuellar told reporters, "The president wants very much to find a peaceful solution of this problem but at the same time he maintains his firm commitment, in the sense of having the United Nations Security Council resolution fully implemented."
Perez De Cuellar has urged world leaders to work diplomatically to solve the Persian Gulf crisis before the U.N.-imposed Jan. 15 deadline for Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait.
He said he would await the outcome of this week's U.S.-Iraq meeting in Geneva before deciding whether he should go to Baghdad to further seek a solution.
"Everything depends of course on the meeting which Mr. Baker will have with the foreign minister of Iraq," he said.
Bush said in the radio address that Baker will carry no secret agenda.
"This will not be secret diplomacy at work. Secretary Baker will restate, in person, a message for Saddam Hussein: Withdraw from Kuwait unconditionally and immediately, or face the terrible consequences," Bush said.
The president said Baker's mission was "one more step" before committing U.S. troops to battle, but he added that holding off has its costs.
"We risk paying a higher price in the most precious currency of all - human life - if we give Saddam more time to prepare for war," he said.
"Each day that passes, Saddam's forces also fortify and dig deeper into Kuwait," Bush said in the message he taped Friday afternoon.
Each day, he said, brings more terror and suffering for the people of Kuwait.
The Jan. 15 deadline, he said, is "not a deadline for our own Armed Forces," whose numbers in the gulf are expected to reach 400,000.
But he said that U.S. troops have high morale, know their mission, and "will do their job courageously, professionally and in the end decisively" if war breaks out.
The president, who spent Thanksgiving with the troops, said he decided "to go the extra mile before asking our servicemen and women to stand in harm's way," and thus is sending Baker to Geneva to meet with Aziz.
Bush also blamed Saddam in part for the worsening U.S. economy and the struggling economies of Eastern Europe and Latin America. "Our own economy is suffering, suffering the effects of higher oil prices and lower growth stemming from Saddam's aggression," Bush said.
"At stake is not simply some distant country called Kuwait. At stake is the kind of world we inhabit," he said.
"America and her partners in this unprecedented coalition are sharing the burden of this important mission, and we are ready to use force to defend a new order emerging among the nations of the world, a world of sovereign nations living in peace."
As the Jan. 15 deadline nears and tensions mount, Bush decided to take his case directly to the American people via radio after keeping an uncharacteristically low public profile since his return Jan. 1 from his long Camp David holiday.
"We just simply felt that the radio is an important force for communicating with the American people," his press secretary Marlin Fitzwater told reporters Friday. "This gave us an opportunity for the president to elaborate at a little more length on the given subject," directly to the American people via radio.
Baker will leave on Sunday and stop in Western European capitals before going on to Geneva. After seeing Aziz, he will visit countries in the Middle East and gulf region who are U.S. partners in the gulf crisis.
The president will send a letter with Baker for Aziz to give to Saddam. He has not disclosed the contents.
Meanwhile, the official Iraqi News Agency reported that a "Pan-Arab" speech by Saddam will be televised Sunday morning over Iraqi radio and television. The speech will mark the 70th anniversary of the establishment of the Iraqi army.

 

End of Document
