

Bush: Coalition Has the Initiative; Kuwait Will Soon Be Free
The Associated Press
February 25, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 968 words
Byline: By WILLIAM M. WELCH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Bush said today that coalition forces "have the initiative and we intend to keep it." As troops moved ever deeper into Kuwait and Iraq, Bush telephoned his praise to Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf, the Desert Storm commander.
The 11-minute call, which Bush placed from the Oval Office shortly before noon, was his first conversation with the leader of the U.S. forces since before the war began on Jan. 16, said presidential spokesman Marlin Fitzwater.
"The president called to compliment him on the initial thrust of the campaign, and to thank him for the work that's been done by our military staff in these opening days," Fitzwater said.
He said that Schwarzkopf, in turn, told the president "the command structure was working very effectively and (he) said that the overall war was going very well."
Bush then met with his war advisers this afternoon, getting a "straight briefing on the status of forces" from Gen. Colin Powell, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Fitzwater said.
Earlier, Bush told a White House audience the two-day-old ground war to oust Iraqi forces from the oil-rich kingdom is "on course and on schedule."
"Kuwait will soon be free," the president said. But he cautioned against excessive optimism, and said "there are battles yet to come and casualties to be borne."
While Bush did not mention the Iraqi leader, the fate of Saddam Hussein was being debated across the capital. Sen. Richard Lugar said, "We should be bold enough to suggest to Iraqis that democracy is a good idea." House Speaker Thomas Foley said Bush would be "ill-advised" to make Saddam's departure a distinct goal of the war.
"It might be difficult to actually topple him without invading Iraq itself and occupying the country and we should be very careful about that," said the Washington Democrat.
The president was on the phone to the White House Situation Room at 5:30 a.m., EST, for an update on the war. Again today, there were drumbeats of opposition from a few antiwar protesters nearby.
In his first public appearance since announcing the ground campaign Saturday night, Bush said the news from the war front is good.
"Coalition air and ground forces are advancing on their objectives. Enemy prisoners are surrendering in large numbers and thus far, thank God, U.S. and coalition casualities are few.
"Make no mistake," he said, speaking of the war that began 40 days ago with a massive air bombardment of Iraqi targets, "we will prevail and Kuwait will soon be free."
In his comments, Bush offered no prediction of how long the Gulf War might last.
But he said that American troops would soon "return home to the thanks and respect of a grateful nation."
Envisioning an allied victory, he said, "Our success in the gulf will bring with it not just a new opportunity for peace and stability in a critical part of the world, but a chance to build a new world order, based upon the principles of collective security and the rule of law."
Bush said he had spoken a short while earlier with Gen. Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Cheifs of Staff and the nation's ranking military officer. "The liberation of Kuwait is on course and on schedule," he said. "We have the initiative and we intend to keep it."
Half a world away, thousands of U.S. and coalition troops were said to be advancing on their targets by land and air in a massive attempt to encircle Iraqi troops and destroy the occupying army.
Administration officials and key members of Congress sought to dampen initial euphoria over the pace of the Gulf War and the ease with which the massive allied ground assault sliced through Iraqi fortifications in Iraq and Kuwait.
"The Republican Guard … that's the real test yet to come," Rep. Les Aspin, D-Wis., chairman of the House Armed Services Committee. Military officials in Saudi Arabia said the first confrontation with the Guard had gone very well.
The administration clearly was looking ahead to a post-war Middle East after a swift allied victory. Officials said Saddam would be stripped of his offensive military capability by the invasion force, and that perhaps he would tumble from power as well.
Foley said that if Saddam "continues inside Iraq to fire Scud missiles at Israel or Saudi Arabia or Kuwait then it might be necessary to go farther. I think it would be ill-advised at this point to make it a definite war aim to topple him."
The House speaker said he foresees a U.S. presence in the Persian Gulf after the war ends "but not a very large one."
"The region should be protected by peacekeeping forces from the region, from neutral countries," said Foley.
Administration officials expressed mild surprise at the weak resistance Iraqi troops provided.
Pentagon officials described the war as practically a one-sided conflict. Indeed, the biggest problem they pointed to was handling the throng of eagerly surrendering Iraqi troops, and television pictures showed one new prisoner of war kissing his Saudi captor.
Cheney said he expected the ground war to end fairly quickly. Aspin, appearing on CBS, said it could be over in three or four days.
At the same time there were warnings that Iraqi troops could still inflict damage from fall-back positions, and that Saddam's Republican Guards in southern Iraq, believed to be his most potent fighting force, had barely been encountered.
National security adviser Brent Scowcroft called for caution.
"My fears are that there's too much optimism. The operations are going well. But he still does have a very formidable army and I think we need to be cautious about euphoria," Scowcroft said on NBC.
Confident the U.S. and allied power was succeeding, Bush had no diplomatic communications with the Soviets, who failed in efforts to broker a peaceful Iraqi withdrawal, Fitzwater said. Bush had no response to Soviet disappointment over the allied invasion.

 

End of Document
