

Bush: The Liberation of Kuwait has Begun"
The Associated Press
January 16, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1071 words
Byline: By TOM RAUM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Persian Gulf exploded in war Wednesday night as President Bush marshalled American and allied forces into Operation Desert Storm against Iraq. "The liberation of Kuwait has begun," Bush said in a statement read by his spokesman.
Marlin Fitzwater, in brief remarks, quoted Bush as saying the American forces were taking action against Iraqi troops both inside Iraq and Kuwait "in conjunction with the forces of our coalition partners."
Bush acted after summoning a potent international alliance to challenge Iraq's occupation of the oil-rich kingdom of Kuwait, and more than a million forces were massed against one another in hundreds of desert deployments.
The Pentagon was silent but the plan was well known in advance.
Gen. Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told restive U.S. troops last month they would not have to wait long past the Jan. 15 deadline for Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait.
"When we launch it, we will launch it violently, we will launch it in a way that will make it decisive so we can get it over as quickly as possible and there's no question who won," Powell said.
The Gulf crisis lingered for months until diplomacy violently gave way to war in the skies over Iraq and Kuwait. By unleashing an overnight aerial bombardment, Bush attempted to take advantage of air superiority arrayed against the massive ground forces of Iraq.
The crisis began Aug. 2 when Iraqi President Saddam Hussein sent troops to invade Kuwait.
The anti-Iraq alliance - including the United States and the Soviet Union, a host of NATO powers and such Arab countries as Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Syria - was fighting to enforce a United Nations resolution calling on Iraq withdraw from Iraq and restore its government.
The deadline lapsed at midnight, as Tuesday turned to Wednesday and final preparations turned to war. President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt and Francois Mitterand of France were among those who spoke in solemn endorsement of hostilities.
Fitzwater's appearance before reporters in the White House briefing room followed a military announcement in Saudi Arabia and came well after television correspondents had been on the air describing the first moments of hostilities in Baghdad.
"The liberation of Kuwait has begun," he said, quoting Bush. "In conjunction with the forces of our coalition partners the United Sates has moved under the code name Operation Desert Storm to enforce the mandates of the United Nations Security Council.
"As of 7 o'clock p.m. Operation Desert Storm forces were engaging targets in Iraq and Kuwait." The deployment of U.S. forces had been code-named Desert Shield.
The president pledged in advance that this war would not turn into another Vietnam - an interminable conflict that the United States could not win. To that end, he ordered the most massive American military buildup since the war in Indochina.
A few antiwar protesters maintained a peace vigil outside the White House in a heavy rain as the war began.
With the president preparing his address, congressional leaders were in their offices as first rumors, then official word spread through the capital that war was under way. Bush phoned congressional leaders with word of war.
The House and Senate both voted authorization last Saturday, but many members - and many Americans - held hope that diplomacy might yet sway Saddam to move out of Kuwait without the use of force.
There were more than 1 million troops in the war zone as the hostilities began. Bush was commander in chief of an American force totalling 425,000 assembled in the region, backed by the most sophisticated ships, aircraft, tanks and weaponry in the Pentagon's arsenal.
He also issued his orders as head of an unlikely international coalition that included troops from more than a dozen allied nations. Iraqi forces in the region totalled more than 500,000, almost certainly equipped with chemical weapons.
The prospect was for a war inflamed by age-old grievances in the Middle East. Iraq said in advance its immediate response to American hostilities would be to attack Israel in an apparent attempt to split the international coalition that included Arab nations such as Egypt and Syria.
Bush acted with the consent of Congress as well as the blessing of the Soviet Union and other members of the United Nations. But already there were daily anti-war protests across the street from the White House and elsewhere in America.
The 425,000 US troops were backed by thousands of modern tanks and armored personnel carriers, most of them deployed in the desert sands of Saudi Arabia across the border from Kuwait. The United States has 2,000 aircraft in the region, and six of its aircraft carriers, as well as dozens of other ships.
Officials said Iraq had roughly 550,000 troops in the war zone, more than 1,000 tanks and about 700 aircraft. Roughly half the planes were deemed a threat by U.S. officials.
Earlier Wednesday, Fitzwater said Saddam had "turned his back on the possibilities" of averting war. Bush brushed off reporters' questions at an early afternoon picture-taking session with education advisers, saying that "life goes on" on other matters.
Asked about his mood, he said: "What you see is what you get." When a reporter told him he looked grim and unhappy, Bush laughed and said, "Lighten up."
Before the shooting started, Fitzwater issued what he called a personal appeal to U.S. journalists remaining in Baghdad to get out at once. "We cannot guarantee their safety nor of anyone else there."
Sources said that Bush, after watching news accounts on television, had contacted Fitzwater at least three times over the past 24 hours to relay his concern for reporters remaining behind.
In other earlier developments Wednesday:
- All public tours of the White House were suspended. Officials cited fear of terrorist attacks. "Tours offer the most immediate opportunity for unwarranted intrusion into the White House," Fitzwater said.
- A section of the Pentagon, which had suspended public tours the day before, was closed by the fourth bomb threat in recent days.
- Fitzwater said "we don't know for sure" whether Iraq has a crude nuclear bomb" although added "We have said for some time the will is there and probably the capacity for some kind of primitive nuclear device."
- Administration and congressional sources said Bush planned to reward Turkey for its support by transferring $$82 million in ammunition and military equipment from U.S. stocks.

 

End of Document
