

Call In The Marines, But Don't Forget The Ornithologists
The Associated Press
December 7, 1994, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 372 words
Byline: By ERIC TALMADGE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TINIAN, Northern Marianas Islands
Body




Fifty years ago, when the Marines landed here in one of World War II's most crucial battles, they didn't have to worry about much of anything besides the enemy.
Now they have to time military exercises according to the mating cycle of turtles.
As hundreds of U.S. troops fan out in a mock assault on tiny, jungle-covered Tinian island this week, their equipment includes detailed maps marking the habitats of rare birds and turtles. Those sites are off-limits.
Planners have also worked their strategies around historically or archaeologically significant areas. The military even commissioned bird and lizard specialists, archaeologists and historians to conduct an environmental impact study.
"The environment is something we have to take into account," said Commander Steve Burnett, a spokesman for the U.S. Navy's Seventh Fleet.
He said that some vehicles had to be removed from the exercises last year for fear of disrupting the mating season for some sea turtles. A practice landing with a high-tech hovercraft was likewise nixed because of the possibility of harming a coral reef.
More than 2,000 Marines and Army soldiers are on the island. The exercises began Nov. 26 and are scheduled to run through Thursday.
As one Marine, Lt. Col. John Theeuwen, awaited his landing orders on the USS Belleau Wood, he said all the talk about the environment for this exercise didn't surprise him.
"Even in a battle situation, if we were going into a foreign country that had asked for our help but said they didn't want us to hurt a certain reef, we would have to plan around that," he said. "There were a lot of concerns like this during the Gulf War."
The secluded south Pacific island has an important place in WWII history.
After securing Tinian from its Japanese occupiers in 1944, the U.S. military built an airfield there that became the launching point for intense bombing raids on the Japanese islands.
On Aug. 6, 1945, the B-29 Enola Gay took off from Tinian carrying Little Boy, the atomic bomb that virtually obliterated the city of Hiroshima. Three days later, Bock's Car flew from Tinian on a similar mission to Nagasaki.
The pits where workers loaded the bombs onto the planes remain intact, and have been designated historical monuments.
 Load-Date: December 7, 1994

 

End of Document
