

Christopher Finds Luck in the Middle East on the 13th Try
The Associated Press
June 12, 1995, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 674 words
Byline: By DONALD M. ROTHBERG, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: SHANNON, Ireland
Body




For Secretary of State Warren Christopher 13 proved a lucky number. His 13th trip to the Middle East resulted in progress on several fronts of the difficult and delicate process of moving the region toward peace.
"There has been significant progress and renewed movement on the various tracks," Christopher said Sunday in Amman, the last stop before he headed back to Washington.
Suddenly there is movement in the negotiations between Israel and Syria after a long deadlock. The Israelis and Palestinians are talking seriously about arrangements for Palestinian self-government, and Christopher succeeded in getting Palestine Liberation Organization Chairman Yasser Arafat to back away from his demand that an agreement must be reached by July 1.
The secretary helped patch up a potentially damaging quarrel between Israel and Egypt, the first Arab country to exchange ambassadors with the Jewish state, and he assured Jordan that there is a financial benefit from making peace with Israel.
But even as the positive developments unfolded over the past four days, Christopher felt the need to warn repeatedly, "there is lots of tough work ahead."
One reason for his caution was the tragic history of the region. Another was the volatile politics of Israel and the United States and among the Palestinians.
In the past, progress in the peace negotiations has prompted extremists on all sides to turn to terrorism as a means to derail progress. They've been only partially successful, slowing the process, but not halting it.
Israel and the United States hold elections next year, a fact Christopher used to prod the parties to speed up their efforts.
A new wave of violence could make it much harder for Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin to survive a challenge from opponents who believe Israel should not return the Golan Heights to Syria.
Rabin called terror the main obstacle to peace.
"I have to explain to the people of Israel why, instead of the peace I promise them, there is terror," Rabin said in Cairo. "Would you buy it if you were an Israeli?"
Questions for Christopher during interviews with Israeli television stations reflected the concerns expressed by the prime minister.
"Can you promise the Israelis - all those Israelis that are watching us now - that Israel would be secure and safe after full withdrawal from the Golan Heights?" one interviewer asked Christopher.
"Of course, there are risks for peace," he replied, voicing the United States' "steadfast commitment to the security of Israel."
Syria and Israel agreed to send their top military officers to Washington for talks beginning June 27 to work out ways of ensuring the Golan won't again become a battlefield or a staging area for Syrian attacks on Israel.
Christopher warned the parties that the 1996 U.S. presidential campaign will limit President Clinton's ability to become personally involved in the process.
Both Rabin and Christopher praised Arafat for taking stronger steps against terrorism.
After meeting with Arafat in Jericho, Christopher said he detected "a real difference in the security situation here."
In Amman, Christopher tried to reassure the Jordanians of the Clinton administration's support for legislation writing off that country's $ 275 million debt to the United States.
The proposal was made part of a broader Republican budget measure that Clinton found so distasteful he vetoed it.
"President Clinton is determined to work with the Congress to forgive all of the debt of Jordan to the United States," Christopher said. "Through one legislative vehicle or another, I'm sure it will get done."
But there could be another political complication: Jordan is ready to sign an agreement with Iran that would double trade - from $ 25 million to $ 50 million - between the two countries.
Asked about the development, Christopher said only, "our views on Iran are well known." He said the matter didn't come up during his meeting with King Hussein of Jordan.
But it has the potential for raising questions in Congress when it's time to vote on financial help for Jordan.
 Load-Date: June 12, 1995

 

End of Document
