

Clark Clifford: He Knew Every Curve in the Oval Office
The Associated Press
March 30, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 2422 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




For close to half a century he served presidents as one of those indispensable insiders who make Washington work. Now Clark Clifford has written his memoirs.
He was a backstage negotiator, a confidant, a member of the establishment.
He knew every curve in the Oval Office. He took part in 11 presidential campaigns and knew nine presidents personally.
He masterminded Harry Truman's upset victory in 1948, was John F. Kennedy's personal lawyer (and selected some of the quips behind the Kennedy wit) and persuaded Lyndon Johnson to give peace talks a chance in Vietnam.
Even romance engaged Clifford's talents. He played the role of White House matchmaker, introducing Truman's 71-year-old vice president, widower Alben Barkley, to a widow 33 years his junior, whom Barkley joyfully wooed and wed.
Yet Clifford drew a government salary for only six of his 45 years in Washington, for four years as a member of Truman's staff and for 10 months as secretary of defense in the last days of Johnson's presidency. The rest of the time he operated behind the scenes, unpaid, stealing time from his law practice.
Clifford, at 84, practices law under a cloud these days. Investigators are looking into whether he was duped - or duplicitous - when he denied that First American Bankshares Inc., the Washington bank holding company he heads, was under the control of Bank of Commerce and Credit International of Luxembourg, an Arab-owned bank that has admitted laundering drug money.
Clifford says he was misled by BCCI's owners and passed on to federal regulators their assurances that the two institutions were separate entities. "No event in my entire career caused me greater anger and outrage," he says.
The matter coincides with what should be the crowning achievement of a full life, publication of "Counsel to the President."
Written with the collaboration of Richard Holbrooke, the memoirs will be issued by Random House at the end of May, marking the coming out of an ultimate insider who says he kept rejecting big jobs in the government.
Clifford turned aside Truman's suggestion that he take a seat on the Supreme Court and Johnson's efforts to make him ambassador to the United Nations, national security adviser, CIA director, attorney general and undersecretary of state.
But he couldn't say no when LBJ offered him the Defense Department, he says; after all, under Truman, he had drafted the legislation that created the department.
Clifford says his first instinct was right. Once inside the administration, he could no longer be the outside agitator.
A once-friendly Johnson became suspicious of his efforts to turn LBJ toward a negotiated way out of the Vietnam quagmire. The struggle, Clifford says, matched him and a few allies against Secretary of State Dean Rusk and the military establishment.
An agonized Johnson swung first this way, then that. He was torn, Clifford says, "between a search for an honorable exit and his desire not to be the first president to lose a foreign war."
As a result, Clifford says, Johnson "sent conflicting signals and possibly lost the opportunity to end the war during his term in office."
Clifford was widely thought to be a hardliner when Johnson asked him to replace Robert McNamara, who had been brought to tears of frustration by his inability to conclude the war.
Clifford says he privately had been dubious about getting into Vietnam, but advocated bombing North Vietnam when winning seemed to him the fastest way out.
The turning point, he says came just as he was preparing to take over the Defense Department in the spring of 1968.
The U.S. command asked for 205,000 more troops, which would require mobilization of the reserves. Clifford went to the Pentagon and asked the generals to brief him on the plan for winning the war.
"I was told there was no plan for victory in the historic American sense," he writes. "Although I kept my feelings private, I was appalled: nothing had prepared me for the weakness of the military's case."
Johnson decided he would address the nation once he'd reached a decision on the troop request. That gave Clifford just a month to work on converting Johnson toward extricating the United States from Vietnam. He says he managed to reverse the thrust of Johnson's address.
"At my suggestion," Clifford says, the speech's opening line went from "I speak to you tonight in a time of grave challenge t our country" to, "Tonight I want to speak to you of the prospect for peace in Vietnam and Southeast Asia..."
In the same speech, Johnson surprised the country - and Clifford - by inserting a final paragraph in which he renounced re-election intentions.
But with time running out, LBJ resisted a further gesture that summer and fall to get peace talks moving in Paris - a bombing halt.
The president dragged his heels, even though by now Rusk and the generals had given their reluctant assent, Clifford says.
Johnson said the world would view such a move as an attempt to bolster Democratic candidate Hubert Humphrey in his campaign against Republican Richard Nixon.
Privately, Clifford says, he found himself wondering, "In his heart of hearts, does Lyndon Johnson really want Humphrey to win?"
When Johnson finally climbed aboard, it was too late - either to end the war or to do Humphrey much good. Nixon won narrowly and the war dragged on for seven more years.
The struggle among aides for "the president's heart and mind" comes across as the dramatic high point in his career, but Clifford relishes telling how Democratic presidents, from Truman to Carter, sent for him in moments of crisis.
Truman needed him for a plan to win the 1948 election against odds that everyone in Washington (even Clifford, he hints) thought were hopeless.
Kennedy summoned him after the Bay of Pigs debacle and took his suggestion to create an independent presidential board to oversee the intelligence community, which had misled Kennedy on the Cuban adventure. Clifford served on the board for years. Carter, who ran as an outsider and came to Washington initially deeply suspicious of the capital's insiders, used him to help win Senate ratification of the Panama Canal treaties.
Clifford was born in Fort Scott, Kan., son of an auditor for the Missouri Pacific Railroad, nephew of a crusading editor of the St. Louis Post Dispatch. After practicing law in St. Louis for 10 years and joining the Navy, he was brought to Washington to be the assistant to Truman's naval aide, a St. Louis friend.
One task was to help unescorted women to their seats at ceremonial occasions, but soon he was doing more important work.
Clifford says he became so indispensable to Truman that at the press corps' Gridiron Club dinner of 1947 - the second of 46 he would attend - he was embarrassed to be portrayed as a ventriloquist, with Truman as his dummy.
He wrote tough speeches in Truman's showdown battles with organized labor and drafted Truman's groundbreaking civil rights measures.
He tells how George C. Marshall, Truman's secretary of state and one of the most highly regarded Americans of the century, never talked to him again after the two of them argued on whether the United States should recognize the new state of Israel in 1948, a course Clifford favored and Marshall opposed.
One of Clifford's duties was to organize poker evenings on the presidential yacht, the Williamsburg, or at private homes. That assignment continued even after he left the White House in 1950.
One memorable poker session occurred on the train ride, with Winston Churchill aboard, to Fulton, Mo.,, where Churchill was to deliver his "Iron Curtain" speech.
Truman told his aides to make sure that their guest did not lose his shirt. They reluctantly threw enough games, Clifford says, to make sure Churchill lost only a few hundred dollars.
Clifford says he wrote a 43-page memo that gave the low-in-the-polls Truman a strategy for winning in 1948: ignore Republican opponent Thomas E. Dewey and attack the Republican Congress which took office in 1946.
Clifford says he also proposed that Truman summon Congress into special session - from the rostrum of the Democratic convention - gambling that the Republican majority would ignore Truman's program and make his "do-nothing" label stick.
That dramatic gesture, says Clifford, was a "masterstroke."
And, Clifford says, it was he who came up with the idea for Truman to campaign from the rear platform of a train, gamely speaking at any hour (sometimes in pajamas) at little towns - "whistlestops," as Dewey disdainfully described them.
It fell to Clifford to counter the political damage after Truman burst out, during a whistlestop speech in Eugene, Ore., that "I like Old Joe" and went on to describe Josef Stalin, the Soviet dictator, as "a decent fellow" - a faux pas of the first order. He and others persuaded Truman to speak not quite so extemporaneously.
After the Truman years and the Eisenhower presidency, Clifford was eager to reclaim the White House for a Democrat, even if that involved so mere an assignment as putting jokes into Kennedy's mouth.
When the budding candidate was invited to give the Democratic speech at the Gridiron dinner in 1960, the Kennedy team went on a relentless chase for one-liners.
The quip operation went on for weeks, Clifford recalls, and at one session five advisers voted on 112 potential jokes, up or down, funny or not funny enough.
After Kennedy was elected and putting together his cabinet, he gave Clifford a most delicate mission.
Joseph Kennedy was demanding that son Robert be installed as attorney general. But JFK resisted, knowing the political damage of such a cronysome appointment. Kennedy asked Clifford to talk the old man out of it.
The elderly Kennedy would have none of it.
"All of us have worked our tails off for Jack," he told Clifford, "and now that we have succeeded I am going to see to it that Bobby gets the same chance that we gave Jack."
Clifford confesses to performing what may have been a disservice for another Democratic president. He says he came up with the word "malaise" to describe the melancholy that Carter felt in July, 1979 - a term that clung to Carter thereafter.
Carter, feeling his administration was drifting, had retreated to Camp David and for 10 days and summoned some of the country's heavy lifters - Clifford among them - to the mountaintop to tell him where he had gone wrong.
When Clifford returned, he says, he used "malaise" in describing for a reporter what was going on at the presidential retreat. The term gave a name to that damaging interlude.
Years later, Clifford coined another term that caused a momentary sensation. At a dinner party, unaware he was being tape recorded, he referred to then-President Ronald Reagan as an "amiable dunce."
The remark showed up on the front page of the Wall Street Journal. Democrats loved the description, but Clifford says he was embarrassed.
Clifford says his greatest regret is that he did not fight FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover's 1946-47 "loyalty program."
What Hoover started, "a 20th century witch-hunt for 'disloyal' Americans," Clifford says, paved the way for the antics of Sen. Joseph R. McCarthy and provided "a launching pad into national politics" for Nixon and Ronald Reagan.
Clifford also faults McNamara, architect of Kennedy and Johnson's Vietnam war campaigns, for concealing from Johnson until late in 1967 his growing conviction that U.S. military power could not win the war.
"If he had spoken earlier, it would have had an enormous effect on the policy which he had done so much to create," Clifford says.
"Under his controlled exterior," Clifford writes, "Bob McNamara suffered as much as any man I ever knew. I cannot think of what he went through without an intense sense of sadness - for his pain, for his sincerity and commitment, for the dreadful cost in lives and national treasure of the policies that he and his colleagues followed for too long."
On occasion, Clifford faults his own performance.
In a lengthy footnote, Clifford deals with the investigation into his role at First American, the Washington area's largest bank.
After the discovery that BCCI controlled at least a 25-percent share of First American, the largest stake of any owner, a New York grand jury opened an investigation into Clifford's statements to regulators about the true ownership of the bank.
"My repeated assurances to both Washington and New York authorities that First American and BCCI were two separate entities had been made in good faith," Clifford writes.
"I knew nothing of any secret loans or other financial arrangements that may have existed overseas between First American investors and BCCI and that may have resulted in BCCI's control of some of First American stock.
"If the Federal Reserve Board and other authorities had been deceived, so had I. It was possible I had been used, I realized with a combination of outrage and deep concern."
Clifford says he got into banking, at age 75, "because I wanted a new challenge in my life."
As for his mistakes in government, he says he failed, while serving as a member of Kennedy's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, to investigate the contradiction between dour press reports coming out of Vietnam and rosy government evaluations.
"It was a serious oversight on our part," he says.
And on a 1965 trip to Vietnam, he says, he allowed himself to be swept away by "the dedication of the young Americans briefing me" and failed to see "that the Vietnamese role in their own war was declining - or the danger this posed for both countries."
But it is not Clifford's style to ponder the what-ifs. He draws one broad observation from his years of service: that the role of an outside adviser to presidents is important.
"Even if he ignores the advice," Clifford writes, "every president should ensure that he gets a third opinion from selected and seasoned private citizens he trusts. (The second opinion should come from congressional leaders.) Though Cabinet members and senior White House aides often resent outside advisers, a president takes too many risks when he relies solely on his own staff and the federal bureaucracy for advice. Each has its own personal or institutional priorities to protect.
"An outside adviser can serve the role of a Doubting Thomas when the bureaucracies line up behind a single position, or help the president reach a judgment when there is a dispute within the government. They can give the president a different perspective on his own situation; they can be frank with him when White House aides are not."
That's the advice of an old hand at giving it.

 

End of Document
