

Clinton's First Day - the Business at Hand is Shaking Hands
The Associated Press
January 21, 1993, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1077 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




On the first working day of his presidency, Bill Clinton opened the doors of his new home for almost four hours today to a long stream of fellow citizens. He had a greeting, a handshake, a hug or a good word for each of them.
Far away, an inherited problem arose. Two American warplanes fired on an Iraqi air defense radar site after the Iraqi installation turned on its air defense radar, a Pentagon official disclosed.
The incident occurred despite the cease-fire that Saddam Hussein declared as a goodwill gesture in honor of Clinton's presidency and the departure from Washington of George Bush.
The military development - fourth in a week involving Iraq - did not disrupt Clinton's open house. He cheerfully welcomed all who came calling. An aide introduced the visitors and Clinton greeted them by name.
Before the president finally quit, he - along with Vice President Al Gore and their wives, Hillary Rodham Clinton and Tipper Gore - greeted well over 800 visitors with a handshake and some small talk.
"I've got to tell you, I love your ties, I just love your ties," one man told the president.
"God bless you, Mr. President, we're glad to have you here in Washington," a Catholic priest told Clinton.
"You were great to do this," a woman told Clinton,
"Are you kidding, I love this," he replied.
At lunch time, Clinton and Mrs. Clinton donned overcoats and went outside to those still waiting to get in. They and the Gores made the rounds to greet them. About 200 people were left waiting for their turns when Clinton begged off.
"We just had a party and half the country showed up, that's all," Clinton told the crowd, using a loudspeaker.
"You're citizens, too, and this is your house and I'm just a tenant here. "
All over Washington, the new administration started to settle in:
-Rep. Barney Frank, D-Mass., who is gay, said Clinton intends to reverse the Defense Department's ban on accepting or keeping gays in uniform. Dee Dee Myers, the new White House press secretary, said "we'll announce the policy within a week," but did not say if it is to be achieved through the issuance of a presidential executive order.
-Secretary of State Warren Christopher met with South African black leader Nelson Mandela and the Rev. Jesse Jackson. Asked about his new duties, Christopher said: "It's a daunting task and I feel a real sense of enthusiasm and hope about it."
-The Senate confirmed eight more of Clinton's Cabinet members as well as a number of other appointees to top-level jobs. The secretaries of state, defense and treasury were confirmed Wednesday.
-Zoe Baird, the corporate attorney Clinton wants as attorney general, rejected suggestions that she step aside because she hired a Peruvian couple to care for her children even though they were in this country illegally. She told a hearing of the Senate Judiciary Committee: "I think that my overall record gives me the potential to be a great attorney general."
-Gore arranged to act in his capacity as presiding officer of the Senate and swear in Bob Krueger as Lloyd Bentsen's successor as senator from Texas.
-The new administration was slow in getting started. New administrations always are. For the most part, the Clinton people were feeling their way along, and the government was in the hands of Bush administration holdovers and career civil servants.
The Clintons' and Gores' citizen-guests were welcomed before a crackling fire and a portrait of George Washington in the White House Diplomatic Reception Room.
An Army sergeant told Clinton: "I want you to know that as far as your not going to Vietnam and everything, you did what you had to do."
"Thank you, sergeant," Clinton replied.
Some 85,000 had sent in post cards asking for invitations to the open house. Some tourists who had not taken part in the lottery but only expected a White House tour found themselves shaking hands with the new leader of the free world.
Some of the proceedings were carried on television by C-SPAN, the public events cable network, and Clinton had a microphone on his lapel so his every word was broadcast.
Clinton and Gore started alone, but after an hour, Mrs. Clinton and Mrs. Gore joined their husbands in the receiving line. Chelsea Clinton was nowhere to be seen.
Some who met Clinton pressed him to keep his campaign commitment to open the military to homosexuals.
"The gay community is so excited to have you as our president," one man told him. "Keep your chin up," Clinton responded.
Many of those in the line were servicemen. To each, Clinton had the same message: "I appreciate your service."
One pair of parents introduced the president to their daughter, Stephanie, and told him she was 12 years old today. The Clintons and the Gores gathered around Stephanie and serenaded her with a rendition of "Happy Birthday."
Stephanie, wearing an orange, yellow and blue ski jacket, smiled - shyly.
Clinton laughed. "Will you ever forgive us?"
"Hi, Gail!" he told one. "Are you a schoolteacher? I've heard good things about your school system."
One visitor told the president he looked good for someone operating on only a few hours' sleep.
Almost everyone was on best behavior. The Clintons did not have to worry that the proceedings would resemble those of 1829, when Andrew Jackson - America's first populist president - threw open the White House to all and sundry.
Old Hickory's mob of well-wishers stood on chairs in their muddy boots, fought for the refreshments and generally trashed the executive mansion.
There was one disruption. A man in a rumpled tan overcoat who had gone through the line turned at the door and shouted: "The Lord God has spoken in the name of the Messiah!" He was quickly escorted from the room.
Clinton stopped the line of march for a moment so White House maintenance workers could tape down the rug.
"One of you might trip over it and break a leg," Clinton explained with a grin. "Then you'd sue us and it would run up the deficit."
Clinton's visitors had warm words.
"Marvelous speech," said one. "You're an amazing man; you're going to have a terrific presidency," another said.
"Nice mustache," Clinton told another guest. "I like that."
Occasionally he patted a guest on the shoulder.
One visitor noted: "Your voice is getting hoarse."
Clinton agreed: "The answer is lots of water today."
One further bit of transition business remained. Socks, the family cat, was still in Arkansas. Clinton's aides said they thought it would be best if things settled down in the White House before Socks moved in.

 

End of Document
