

Clinton Salutes Gulf Troops: 'The Steel in the Sword'
The Associated Press
October 28, 1994, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 856 words
Byline: By TERENCE HUNT, AP White House Correspondent
Dateline: DOHA, Kuwait
Body




Flanked by battle tanks in the desert, President Clinton saluted American troops Friday as "the steel in the sword" that forced Iraq to retreat from Kuwait's border. To loud cheers, he all but promised U.S. ground forces they'd be home by Christmas.
"Don't forget to do your Christmas shopping," Clinton teased more than 1,500 Americans at a dusty encampment known as Tactical Assembly Area Liberty 50 miles from the Iraqi border.
Military officials said, however, a sizable American presence would be maintained to carry out "near continuous" exercises even as ground troops are rotated home.
In a scene made for television, Clinton spoke from a camouflage-draped lectern on a platform suspended between two M1A tanks, their machine guns manned by helmeted soldiers.
Facing toward Iraq, Clinton declared that Baghdad would not be allowed to intimidate its neighbors or disregard U.N. mandates. He said U.S. troops were "the steel in the sword of American diplomacy."
He said that because they got to the region in such a hurry, "Iraq got the message in a very big hurry."
Though far from home, Clinton was thinking about domestic politics 11 days before elections in which Democrats fear heavy losses. From the desert, Clinton went to talks in Kuwait with the emir, Jaber al-Sabah, and then borrowed a room in the presidential palace to tape a statement for U.S. consumption.
"We had good news from the home front today, Clinton said, noting that economic growth was 3.4 percent in the third quarter while inflation remained low. "I'm very, very encouraged by this. We have growth, better jobs. Low inflation."
Asked when troops would return home, Clinton said he'd base his decision on the advice of military officials, who already are arranging withdrawal schedules. "We'll make a decision pretty soon," said the president, who was due back in Washington Saturday morning.
On the last leg of a six-nation Middle East trip, Clinton flew from Jerusalem to Kuwait for six hours and then to Saudi Arabia. Clinton urged the Persian Gulf allies to set up a fund to repay the United States for defending Kuwait.
The trip to Kuwait was something of a victory lap for Clinton, who ordered the buildup of American troops in the Gulf this month to force a withdrawal of 70,000 Iraqi troops massed at the border of Kuwait.
Persian Gulf encounters and foreign policy triumphs have been a tonic for presidential poll ratings. Former President Bush's approval ratings shot above 90 percent immediately after the Gulf War, and the beleaguered Clinton has strengthened in the polls after this month's showdown with Iraq and successes with Haiti and North Korea.
Clinton was bestowed with medals both in Kuwait and Saudi Arabia. He joked that he planned to wear them at press conferences to "get more respect. I'll just wait until a difficult question arises and then I'll put it on and hope it serves as a shield," the president said.
In the aftermath of Jordan's peace agreement with Israel, the emir was asked by reporters when Kuwait would open negotiations with Israel and exchange ambassadors.
"I don't think this will be very far," he replied. "As soon as the peace process has finished successfully, this will be achieved."
Addressing U.S. troops at a camp in the Kuwaiti desert, Clinton said, "One of the things that will go down in the history of this encounter is that you got here in a very big hurry."
"And because of that," he said, "Iraq got the message in a very big hurry. It withdrew its forces that were massed near the Kuwaiti border."
Clinton's hint at withdrawals was welcome news to the troops, some of whom had their first showers Thursday in three weeks.
"That was the signal we wanted," said Staff Sgt. John Williams of Smithfield, N.C.
Clinton also drew cheers from the troops, mostly from the 24th mechanized infantry division of Ft. Stewart, Ga., when he said he had signed an order to "right a wrong" and restore an allowance of $ 210 a month to pay for enlisted personnel's food.
At home, they receive the subsistence allowance, and it has come to be seen as part of their regular pay. But it was withdrawn in Kuwait under previous rules covering troops in field zones who receive free food packages.
"It means a lot to me," said Sgt. 1st Class Larry Rattig of Edgewater, Fla. "I have six kids and just learned from my wife the hot water tank is broken."
Gen. J. H. Binford Peay III, commander of the U.S. forces in Kuwait, told reporters that two brigades - 6,000 to 9,000 troops - would leave before the year-end holidays as the Pentagon draws down its 28,000-strong contingent in the region.
"I think you'll find that the ground combat troops are gone by Christmas with a quick recall capability," the general said.
And yet, he said, "We intend to have a little more exercise in terms of frequency and in terms of size over the next year. … You're buying the same kind of grand capability by near continuous exercise."
While 150,000 troops had been on alert for deployment in a potential ground war, only a fraction of them were sent overseas. Peay said the United States will keep an aircraft carrier in the Gulf with strengthened air power.
 Load-Date: October 28, 1994

 

End of Document
