

Contains items on Bill Cowher, the Charlotte Hornets, the Southeast Asia Games, Luis Sharpe and Barney Ewell
 The Associated Press
December 12, 1995, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 573 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: PITTSBURGH
Body



Names In The Game
 Pittsburgh Steelers coach Bill Cowher is normally all business during his weekly news conference. But what he saw at this week's meeting gave him pause.
When Cowher and media members filed into a Three Rivers Stadium meeting room Monday, they discovered that dogs owned by players Chris Oldham and Greg Lloyd had been there first.
The news conference is broadcast live on both radio and TV and could not be delayed. So Cowher tried to keep a straight face - and nose - until assistant publicist Ron Miller arrived with broom and dustpan.
"These really are the dog days of December," Cowher said.
Upon seeing Miller at work, Cowher uncharacteristically broke down laughing and cut off the news conference five minutes early.
"I wish the people at home could see this," he said.
Oldham admitted his pit bull terrier, Dibo, was the guilty party.
---
CHARLOTTE, N.C. (AP) - The Charlotte Hornets don't have to worry about trading away the star of their next gigantic mural.
The NBA club said Monday that mascot Hugo the Hornet will be featured in a new nine-story painting. The teal-and-purple bug will replace three players whose images appear on the side of the First Union Bank building.
The original mural needed to be changed after the October trade of one of its three subjects, center Alonzo Mourning, to the Miami Heat. The first mural also features current Larry Johnson and Muggsy Bogues.
---
CHIANG MAI, Thailand (AP) - Thai soccer coach Thawatchai Sajjkul let his players wear warmups saying "Singha Dream Team" before a Southeast Asia Games match Sunday because he thought it would bring good luck.
Bad call, coach.
Thawatchai, who has since been fired, apologized today before a meeting of games officials and representatives of Carlsberg Beer, a Singha rival that paid nearly $ 2.5 million for exclusive sponsor rights.
Damri Triaporn, special event manager for Carlsberg, said Thawatchai has been forgiven. In fact, Damri said, Carlsberg has offered to pay each Thai player $ 4,000 if they win the final.
Thawatchai has not, however, been reinstated. That must await approval of the Thai Olympic Committee.
---
PHOENIX (AP) - A former Arizona Cardinals offensive lineman has left a county mental facility to undergo private outpatient care.
Luis Sharpe, 35, was admitted to the Maricopa Medical Center's psychiatric unit Dec. 3 under emergency action initiated by family members.
His outpatient treatment will be monitored by the mental health division of Maricopa County Superior Court. Under a court order issued Monday, he can be hospitalized again without a hearing if he fails to continue treatment.
Sharpe was arrested during the past month on charges of assault, drug possession and violating a court order. He was robbed and shot recently while in an area police say is frequented by drug dealers.
Felix Sharpe, Luis' brother, said in court documents Luis threatened to kill himself, his wife, his children and other family members; that he has forced himself sexually on women; and has threatened to rob a bank.
---
LANCASTER, Pa. (AP) - Barney Ewell, a U.S. sprinter who won a gold and two silver medals in the 1948 Olympics, underwent surgery Monday to amputate his left leg because of circulation problems.
Ewell, 77, of Lancaster, was in stable condition Monday night at Lancaster General Hospital, a nursing supervisor said. The National Track and Field Hall of Famer's right leg was amputated in 1993 for similar reasons.
 Load-Date: December 12, 1995

 

End of Document
