

Cup Countdown: Iraq Prepares For 'The Mother of All Soccer Battles'
The Associated Press
August 8, 1993, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 923 words
Byline: By DILIP GANGULY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAGHDAD, Iraq
Body




At dawn, twice a week, 28 Iraqi men board a blue bus with tinted windows and leave for the sand dunes of the Arabian desert.
The men - some in their teens - jog for miles in 122-degree heat. Exhausted, they are made to swim across the ancient Tigris river. Sometimes it is the Euphrates.
The Iraqis are preparing for battle - in the final round of World Cup soccer qualifying.
If the team qualifies for the 1994 World Cup, Iraq could face the United States on American soil next summer.
"We really want our team to go to America and thrash the U.S. team at least," said Mohammad Adnan, a soccer fan in Baghdad.
Inside a heavily protected, specially designed soccer field, the players dribble balls for hours, leap wooden hurdles and shoot balls into a goal post half the size of a standard goal post to increase accuracy during a real game.
The Iraqi campaign to make it to the United States is being led by Saddam's eldest son, Odai, who is the president of Iraqi Olympic Committee.
Iraq surprised the soccer world last month by winning Group A in the first round of Asian World Cup qualifying. It will join five other teams in a second round Oct. 15-28 in Qatar, with the top two finishers gaining a trip to the United States.
Many experts think Iraq has a good chance.
"From what I hear they're very good. My European contacts expect them to qualify," said Sunil Gulati, World Cup USA vice president of International Affairs.
Iraq, which lost a 43-day war against a U.S.-led coalition three years ago, is one of several Asian hopefuls that could pose political and security problems for the American hosts. Iran and North Korea, neither of which have good diplomatic relations with Washington, also remain in the running for qualifying berths.
Besides those three, South Korea, Japan and Saudi Arabia also will compete in the second round.
In 1987, The United States government, as part of the U.S. Soccer Federation's bid to get the World Cup, pledged cooperation with visas and work permits for all qualifying teams in a personal letter from then-President Ronald Reagan.
That doesn't mean they would like to see Iran, Iraq or North Korea qualify.
"I'm rooting for Saudi Arabia and Japan," World Cup USA chairman Alan Rothenberg joked recently.
Qualification will not necessarily mean Iraq will play the United States. The 24 qualifying nations will be seeded and placed into six, four-team groups at the World Cup Draw on Dec. 19 in Las Vegas.
Iraq could play the United States in the first round or later in the single-elimination, or knockout rounds. But if they aren't drawn into the same group and one gets eliminated in the first round, they won't meet.
"We are sure to make it to the World Cup and we are doing everything possible for that," said Mohammad al-Doria, manager of Zarwa, one of Iraq's top soccer clubs with 300,000 members.
Soccer is as prevalent in Iraq as baseball or basketball in the United States. In every available patch of land in Baghdad, children undernourished by the 3-year-old, U.N.-imposed trade embargo wear torn track suits and juggle soccer balls with their feet.
There are more than 500 soccer clubs across Iraq and an estimated 100,000 people actually play in various tournaments - from the prestigious national league to village events.
"Soccer is in our blood," said Anwar J. Sam, one of the top Iraqi coaches.
It is followed with such fervor that nine people were killed and 120 injured during celebratory gunfire in Baghdad after last month's victory over China in the first round of World Cup qualifying.
Understandably, the Iraqis won't disclose their strategy for the second phase of qualifying.
But in Baghdad, Iraq's head coach, Adnan Dirjal, a former captain of the national team, is taking extraordinary measures to prepare his side. He has selected 28 probable players, which he will pare to 22.
The players' regimen includes running across sand dunes to increase their endurance and swimming against river currents to increase their strength. Legend has it that a dip in either the Tigris or the Euphrates brings celestial blessings and strength.
Dirjal even tries to encourage soccer dreams in his athletes by making them watch videos of legendary players just before going to bed.
Kim Won-Shik, assistant international manager of the South Korea Football Association, sees Iraq as a formidable opponent.
"For South Korea, Iraq is the biggest hurdle to jump over," he said in Seoul.
Iraq played two exhibition matches with South Korea in April, drawing 1-1 and 2-2. Iraq and South Korea qualified for the 1986 World Cup in Mexico - the only time Iraq made the finals.
South Korea is the most World Cup experienced nation of the six hopefuls, making the finals in 1954, '86 and '90. North Korea made it in 1966 and Iran in 1978. Japan and Saudi Arabia have never qualified.
"Iraq is one of the teams that I see as having a high potential," said Munther Al-Sa'id, the chief coach of Jordan's national soccer team.
"The Iraqis are a well-coordinated team with strong physical, technical and tactical points. They have the physical ability to stay on the course and their defence and attack tactics are well coordinated," said Al-Sa'id, one of the few experts who have access to Iraqi training.
Iraqis compare the team's quest to the country's ongoing struggle against the Gulf War allies.
And, "The Mother of All Battles" - the phrase that Saddam Hussein coined days before the U.S.-led allies drove him out of Kuwait - now has an added word for the Baghdadis.
Every Iraqi now waits for "The Mother of All Soccer Battles."

 

End of Document
