

Day in the Life of the U.N.: Protests, Paper, Unheard Debates
 The Associated Press
October 30, 1995, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 825 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Outside the U.N. back door, a "protest paddlewheeler" bobbed in the river. Out front, six Tibetans weakened hour by hour in a sidewalk hunger strike. Inside, diplomats debated yet another international crisis, before breaking for lunch.
The United Nations' 18-acre world was returning to normal after three heady days last week as the meeting ground of global leaders.
That special session, marking the world body's 50th anniversary, produced a string of stirring, if brief, speeches from presidents and other leaders of more than 180 nations. It also produced a declaration promising a United Nations that "will work with renewed vigor."
But a look at a routine U.N. day Thursday, two days after the heads-of-state meeting, showed how its vigor is being sapped by financial problems, and its renewal could bog down in debate and documents. It showed, too, how the U.N. system still can get things done to help people:
By 10 a.m., youth delegates from a dozen nations were converging on the General Assembly Hall, as two days of discussions opened on a "program of action for youth."
The sessions were designed, a U.N. official declared, "to turn the spotlight on young people, our future."
In a basement conference room, meanwhile, other U.N. officials looked not over the horizon, but at the here and now.
Kofi Annan, undersecretary-general for peacekeeping, had gathered 120 of his officers for a weekly closed-door session reviewing U.N. peace operations. He focused on the former Yugoslavia, where he soon takes over as chief U.N. representative, and on Rwanda, where an aide reported tension increasing among refugees huddled in the Lake Kivu region since last year's civil war and genocide.
Back upstairs, diplomats from the 15 Security Council nations assembled for private talks about another African crisis, in Liberia, where peace finally may be taking hold after six years of civil war.
They had before them a fresh report from the U.N. secretary-general, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, proposing that money be poured into an operation to help maintain the Liberian peace, "notwithstanding the acute financial crisis currently facing the organization."
The "acute financial crisis" touches everything at the United Nations these days, including prospects for expanded peacekeeping missions. Governments are $ 3 billion in arrears on their U.N. assessments, led by Washington, which owes $ 1.3 billion.
Boutros-Ghali, the money crisis in mind, traveled to Washington on Thursday to meet with members of the House International Relations Committee, key players in U.S.-U.N. affairs.
Back at headquarters, delegates at a meeting of the General Assembly's Special Political Committee spoke of the need to overhaul the U.N. image.
"The public information culture could be a crucial asset in gaining support for this organization," one told his colleagues.
But at other meetings nearby, the debates illustrated why the world body has an undying reputation as a "talk shop" and swollen bureaucracy.
In Conference Room 4, the Latvian delegate seized on an arms control discussion to criticize Russian military policies. In Room 2, a Chinese diplomat reprised a ritual complaint - that the Western powers are keeping the U.N. Economic and Social Council powerless. And when Room 2 emptied for the diplomats' standard two-hour lunch, it was quickly filled again with a meeting of U.N. Staff Union members, mobilizing to block efforts to whittle away more of the bureaucracy.
But, somewhere in between, delegates heard something positive: a report from a World Health Organization representative on progress the U.N. health arm is making against malaria.
Everywhere, the scenes were U.N. standard:
Interpreters were deployed in their glass booths, translating the dull and the diatribe alike from one of six official languages to another. A tide of fresh white documents swept over each room - resolutions, reports, agendas, more than 2 million document pages per day produced in the vast underground U.N. printing plant.
While China complained inside about U.N. organization, protesters outside complained about China.
On a First Avenue sidewalk, six Tibetans were on a hunger strike, seeking U.N. help in gaining independence from China. But by evening they had given up, ending the fast in its 13th day at the request of the Dalai Lama, Tibetan Buddhists' spiritual leader.
On the East River, meanwhile, an excursion "paddlewheeler" had been converted into a floating protest. A broad sign on its port side demanded that Taiwan, expelled in favor of China 24 years ago, be readmitted to the United Nations.
Protests, blizzards of paper, little-noted debates - a typical U.N. day after three days in the limelight.
One youth delegate who was there saw it this way:
"There were nice words from the prime ministers, but they have to do more than that," said Norwegian Anne Binderkranz, 20.
First on her to-do list: "I think it's really important that countries pay up what they owe."
 Load-Date: October 30, 1995

 

End of Document
