

Day-by-Day Chronology of the Gulf War
The Associated Press
March 1, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1126 words
Body




Day 40, Sunday Feb. 24:
The Screaming Eagles of the 101st Airborne Division, with more than 300 attack helicopters blasted deep into Iraq. Officers called it the largest helicopter assault in military history. It was aimed at cutting Saddam Hussein's supply lines. There were no initial reports of American casualties and the 101st encountered only minimal Iraqi fire, officers said.
Two columns from the U.S. 2nd Marine Division pushed 35 miles north from the frontier, an AP correspondent reported from the front, putting them in near-linkup with airborne troops.
By day's end, U.S. paratroopers were reported holding outer edges of Kuwait City. A U.S. military official cautioned that despite the early reports of success, more than a week of tough combat - including street-to-street fighting for Kuwait City - may lay ahead.
President Bush heard prayers for peace at service at St. John's Episcopal Church across Lafayette Park from the White House.
 
 Day 41, Monday Feb. 25:
Iraqi President Saddam Hussein ordered his forces early Tuesday to withdraw from Kuwait, Baghdad radio reported. It said the order to withdraw was taken in accordance with a Soviet peace proposal that the allies had rejected before the start of the ground offensive.
The White House reacted icily to the Baghdad radio dispatch. White House press secretary Marlin Fitzwater said, "We've heard the radio reports. … The war goes on."
The Iraqis scored a direct hit with a Scud missile attack on a U.S. barracks in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia. The missile demolished a barracks housing about 100 American soldiers. The U.S. military said 28 troops were killed.
The U.S. command said 18,000 Iraqi troops were taken prisoner in the first two days of the all-out ground offensive to free Kuwait of Iraq's control. U.S. losses were "extremely light" - four Americans killed and 21 wounded, the U.S. command said. It also reported the loss of four U.S. aircraft, three of whose pilots were rescued.
 
 Day 42, Tuesday Feb. 26:
Kuwaiti resistance leaders declared late in the day they were in control of their smoke-filled capital following nearly seven months of Iraqi occupation. They said fleeing Iraqi troops had taken thousands of Kuwaiti captives with them and left behind an armory of tanks and loaded weapons.
Hundreds of surrendering Iraqis shouted "Salaam! Salaam!" - "Peace! Peace!" - as they raised their hands to advancing troops. More than 30,000 Iraqis have now been taken prisoner, the U.S. command said.
A majority of U.N. Security Council members insisted that Baghdad accept all 12 council resolutions on the Persian Gulf crisis before a cease-fire can be considered, diplomats said. Iraq has announced it was withdrawing all its forces unconditionally from Kuwait in accordance with Security Council Resolution 660.
President Bush declared the war would go on. "Saddam is not interested in peace, but only to regroup and fight another day," Bush said in a tough statement to the press.
 
 Day 43, Wednesday Feb. 27:
President Bush declared: "Kuwait is liberated, Iraq's army is defeated" and announced that at midnight EST "all United States and coalition forces will suspend offensive combat operations." In a dramatic televised address, Bush warned the fighting would begin anew if Iraq's forces - shattered and in retreat - fired on allied troops or launched Scud missiles at Israel and Saudi Arabia.
"This war is now behind us," Bush said. "Ahead of us is the difficult task of securing a potentially historic peace."
The cessation of offensive action came after a tank battle in southern Iraq ended any serious threat from Iraq's ballyhooed Republican Guard.
Earlier, Baghdad announced it was willing to drop all claims to Kuwait if the allied assault would only stop.
In Kuwait City, the U.S. Marine whose forces routed Iraq's army in Kuwait rode triumphantly past thousands of jubilant residents as Kuwaiti flags fluttered over the capital for the first time in seven months. Kuwaitis cheered, fired rifle bursts into the air and shouted "Thank you, USA!" as Lt. Gen. Walter Boomer, standing atop an armored car festooned with the American and Kuwaiti flags, rode through the war-ravaged city.
 
 Day 44, Thursday Feb. 28:
Allied military officials said the cease-fire was holding in the 43-day Persian Gulf war. They reported a few violations, including an incident in which Iraqi tanks exchanged fire with U.S. forces. Some truce violations were probably due to poor Iraqi communications, they said.
The U.S. military cautioned it will "take us longer to bring the troops home than to get them over there." With 537,000 Americans serving in the gulf, a withdrawal would take months, and some soldiers might be replaced by fresh troops with different skills, military officials said.
Allied troops attacked Iraqi positions until the truce took effect at 8 a.m. (midnight EST), 100 hours after the ground war started, U.S. commanders said. The fighting was concentrated near Basra and in northern Kuwait, where demoralized Iraqi troops were trying to head home.
Far to the northwest of Basra, troopers of the U.S. 101st Airborne Division stood less than 150 miles from Baghdad, in the deepest allied penetration of Iraq.
President Bush said a permanent cease-fire depends upon the actions of Iraq. The administration ordered its ambassador to Kuwait, Edward Gnehm, to take his post in Kuwait City.
 
 Day 45, Friday Mar. 1:
A three-person U.S. Army medical team driving a humvee vehicle inside Iraq saw some Iraqi soldiers surrendering, drove over to render assistance and hit an Iraqi landmine, the U.S. command reported.
A male doctor was killed by that blast, and a female medical specialist who got out of the vehicle, apparently to help him, was killed by a second mine explosion, the command said. The third American was unhurt.
Although the cease-fire generally held, the command reported continuing incidents of gunfire. In one, an Iraqi army bus headed west on Highway 8 - a road out of the southern city of Basra - fired on U.S. troops, and the Americans returned fire, destroyed the bus and took nine Iraqi prisoners. There were no American casualties.
On the highway from Kuwait to Basra, American troops worked to clear away a huge crush of Iraqi army trucks and commandeered civilian vehicles that were caught by allied warplanes as they tried to flee north earlier in the week.
President Bush, trying to transform a six-week war into a permanent peace, said "conditions are now better than ever" to settle deep and longstanding differences in the Middle East. "I want to move fast," he said.
In a pointed message to Iraq's war-weary people, Bush called for the overthrow of President Saddam Hussein. "Put him aside," Bush said, and Iraq can rejoin the community of peace-loving nations.

 

End of Document
