

Dick The Hound Dog Tags Along With The 82nd Airborne
The Associated Press
January 21, 1991, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 568 words
Byline: By BOB DVORCHAK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WITH THE 82ND AIRBORNE
Body




An artillery unit with the 2nd Brigade of the 82nd Airborne Division is moving north with a local recruit.
He has an Airborne patch, a camouflage desert scarf, a name tag, the rank of command private first class, marching orders and a place to sleep in the back of a vehicle. He also has a fondness for MREs - "Meals, Ready-to-Eat."
His name is Dick, a rawboned hound dog adopted three months ago by Alpha Battery, 2nd Battalion of the 319th Airborne Field Artillery Regiment.
"He's been living with us so long he's one of us," said Sgt. 1st Class Philip Lemon, 33, of Denver.
"Everybody calls him, knows him, feeds him. He lends an air of normalcy to the place," said Lemon, the dog's owner. He found the skinny mutt three months ago.
Dick is a saluki, a cousin of the greyhound. His orders were signed by the commander of the artillery regiment, Lt. Col. Gerald Cummins. The dog has a place on the Air Force manifest for the flight north to a tactical assembly area near the border.
Dick travels light. He has a rubber ball and a food dish for leftover Spam and MRE's.
"His favorite is leftover chicken a la king. It works out for both of us. He gets plenty to eat. We get rid of the stuff we don't want," Lemon said.
---
The most unusual weapon in the brigade may belong to Sgt. 1st Class Cameron Woodson, 35, a mess sergeant from Detroit, Michigan. It's a polished axe handle engraved with his sobriquet "Hog Head."
"I'm going to carry this through the war," he said. "This is my ticket home."
"If it comes down to hand-to-hand (combat), I'm going to bust one of them Iraqis with this axe club. They're ruthless. They're barbarians. They caused me undue hardship.
"We been locked up too long. It's like being in prison. The only way out is to fight."
---
Bad weather had grounded the C-130 Hercules transport planes ferrying the 2nd Brigade north. Flights resumed Monday carrying men and equipment. Other elements of the brigade were moving by convoy.
"If I had a choice between going home and going north, I'd go north," said Sgt. 1st Class Aubrey Butts, 31, of Elizabeth City, N.C. "Somebody's going to pay for this suffering."
---
One of the few members of the brigade who hasn't had to wait long for the move north was Pvt. Robert Kiscaden, 18, of Delano, Minn.. He arrived Sunday as a replacement and was packing Monday.
"I'm kind of excited and scared at the same time," he said. "You go through a lot of feelings coming in."
He joined the Army July 17, completed basic and advanced infantry training on Oct. 25 and graduated from jump school in mid-November. Now he's an assistant machine gunner with Alpha Battery of the 319th Airborne Field Artillery Regiment.
"My family doesn't even know where I am," Kiscaden said. "But I'm glad I didn't have to sit around for six months like these guys did."
---
Soldiers waiting for the move north huddle around TVs or radios for news of the air war, and they're glad to see it coming.
"It's like a boxer with a 44-inch reach against one with a 36-inch reach," said Maj. Baxter Ennis, 38, of Coats, N.C., public affairs officer for the 82nd Airborne Division. "We're just going to stand off and hit him, pop, pop, pop."
---
A poster at brigade headquarters has the Airborne logo and the writing "Think War."
A paratrooper on K.P. wrote on his mess cap, "Baghdad or bust."
The driver of a five-ton truck going north painted on his vehicle a picture of the scythe-carrying Grim Reaper.

 

End of Document
