

DIEN BIEN PHU, Vietnam: the French.
The Associated Press
May 1, 1994, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1012 words
Body




Cao Xuan Du, 65, dug trenches with hand tools, so determined was he to defeat the French. "We had been dominated by the French for over 80 years and that caused our hatred," he says. "We were just determined to win."
The Vietnamese surrounded Dien Bien Phu with a network of trenches stretching hundreds of miles from the high mountains to the plains, cutting French supply lines and gradually tightening the noose around their camp.
From their fortified trenches, barefooted Vietnamese shock troops assaulted French strongholds day and night, even under French bombardment. They secured their artillery in emplacements in the surrounding mountains and built roads for trucks to carry shells to each gun position.
As thousands of soldiers and civilians hauled rice and ammunition through the jungle and high mountain passes, the Vietnamese battle cry became, "Everything for the Frontline, Everything for Victory."
"The greatest surprise we had in store for the enemy was our refusal to engage in all-out lightning clashes with the elite entire strength of the (French) Expeditionary Corps, firmly dug in their solidly built forts," Giap wrote in one account of the battle, "Dien Bien Phu: The Most Difficult Decision."
"We decided to destroy pockets of resistance one by one," Giap wrote, "and gradually, in our own way, at a time and place of our own choosing, launch attacks with overwhelming superiority in each battle and at the same time consolidate our bunker system and cut the enemy's supply line until the base camp was strangled."
President Dwight D. Eisenhower was ready to order U.S. air strikes against Vietnamese positions at Dien Bien Phu in support of the French because he believed Indochina was vital to American interests. But he was unable to get approval from U.S. allies.
The defeat of the French brought to a close the first Indochina War. The Geneva Agreement of 1954 that followed divided Vietnam along the 17th parallel into North and South.
The communist victors at Dien Bien Phu held the North with Hanoi as the capital. A U.S.-backed non-communist regime controlled the South with the seat of power in Saigon.
Both the United States and France sought political influence in the new government in Saigon in the year following the Geneva Agreement. But the United States emerged as the new Western power when Ngo Dinh Diem, an anti-communist leader, ousted French-backed Emperor Bao Dai.
Diem became president of the newly formed Republic of Vietnam in the South. France had withdrawn all of its troops from South Vietnam by 1956. The United States remained the only foreign power supporting Diem.
But in 1956, both the United States and South Vietnam refused to honor a key provision in the Geneva Agreement that called for national elections to be held that year to reunify the country. They feared the Communists would win and gain control of South Vietnam, upsetting the balance of power with China and Russia.
That refusal marked the beginning of the second Indochina War. Giap would repeat his Dien Bien Phu strategy against the United States, locking it into its most divisive war that took a toll of nearly 60,000 American dead and as many as two million Vietnamese killed.
The first American military advisers arrived in Saigon in July 1950. The first U.S. combat forces arrived in South Vietnam in March 1965. Over the next three years, American forces grew to more than half a million troops.
For many, Dien Bien Phu stirs memories of an old American battlefield, Khe Sanh, near the Laotian border just below the old Demilitarized Zone that divided the warring Vietnams.
For 77 days in 1968, Giap's North Vietnamese forces laid siege to the American fortress, hammering it daily with cannon fire from mountain positions surrounding it.
But Khe Sanh held with the support of massive U.S. air strikes that unleashed nearly 100,000 tons of explosives against North Vietnamese positions, one-sixth of the total tonnage dropped by U.S. planes during the entire three years of the Korean War.
A relief column of 12,000 American and South Vietnamese soldiers reached the battered base on April 5. The North Vietnamesee had withdrawn into the jungles.
What had been billed as the showdown battle of the war never came off, but the cost of holding the base had been high, with more than 200 U.S. Marines killed and 1,600 wounded.
The late historian Bernard B. Fall says in his book about the first Indochina War, "Hell in a Very Small Place: The Siege of Dien Bien Phu," that a major American air effort there in support of the French would have achieved desirable military and political results.
Fall writes that the communist Vietnamese Army was getting stronger by the day and it became imperative for the French to destroy at least a large part of the main battle force as quickly as possible.
"This was feasible only if the French could induce the enemy to face up to them in a set-piece battle, by offering the Viet Minh a target sufficiently tempting to pounce at, but sufficiently strong to resist the onslaught once it came," Fall wrote. "It was an incredible gamble, for upon its success hinged not only the fate of the French forces in Indochina and France's political role in Southeast Asia, but the survival of Vietnam as a non-communist state..."
Like Dien Bien Phu, Khe Sanh became synonymous with failed French and American military strategy. It was a consideration that eventually led the United States to withdraw its military forces in 1973 under terms of the Paris Peace Agreement. The war between North and South ended on April 30, 1975, with a communist victory.
In the cemeteries of Dien Bien Phu, wives and daughters and sons come to light joss sticks and pray for the fallen.
Tran Thi Yen came here for the first time on this 40th anniversary to search for the grave of her father. She was only 2 years old when he was killed.
The earth of Dien Bien Phu also embraces the remains of American airmen, missing in the second Indochina War during missions over the valley.
They lie far from family and home, missed and mourned by their loved ones.
 Load-Date: May 1, 1994

 

End of Document
