

Economic Boom In The South Could Be A Crisis For Beijing
The Associated Press
September 22, 1991, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 961 words
Byline: By JOHN POMFRET, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CANTON, China
Body




A free-market Frankenstein in China's back yard is creating a formula to change the world's last communist giant.
With Guangdong province in the lead, southern China is rocketing headlong into capitalism, presenting Beijing's aging leadership with what could be its final challenge.
"They've created the beginning of their own end," said American businessmen John Kamm, who has worked for 19 years in the province. "Old-style communism - and the ideological baggage that went with it - is nearly dead in Guangdong."
The collapse of the Soviet empire has obviously worried China's hard-line leaders. After all, the Soviet Union had been a sometimes mentor, sometimes model, to the Chinese state.
But many analysts argue the real threat to Chinese communism comes not from the changing Soviets but from Beijing's underbelly - the prosperous south.
The catalyst for the change hasn't been glasnost, or free speech, but money. Billions of dollars in foreign investment and billions more in foreign trade.
China's leader, Deng Xiaoping, allowed the south to experiment with private ownership 12 years ago when he opened his country to the outside world. That decision has created tensions that Beijing's hard-liners may not be able to control.
The central government used to treat coastal Guangdong as a front-line province in its Cold War against the Nationalists in Taiwan. It invested little because of fears that one Nationalist bombing attack would wipe the province off the map.
Since China's opening in 1979, however, $ 12.3 billion in investments has poured into Guangdong, tops in China.
The province, with 5 percent of China's population, now churns out 21 percent of the country's exports, more than double that of its nearest competitor, Shanghai.
Last year, its industries grew 27 percent, twice the national total. Private and collective enterprises jumped 48.5 percent, and economists say the economy is now almost 90 percent controlled by market forces.
Increasingly, China's engines are stoked by the south. The central government has gone from tolerating its "capitalist road" to depending on the south to bale out money-losing state-run factories that devour an estimated $ 30 billion a year in subsidies.
Beijing also faces a frightening prospect in the 1990s, when more than 10 million workers a year will enter the labor force. Those jobs can only be created by private and collective enterprises, structured along the Guangdong model.
The political ramifications of more and more workers laboring outside state control and greater entrepreneurial zeal must be worrying to Beijing.
"When people are free enough to choose between Coke and Pepsi, one day they will want to choose between one premier and another," says Pauline Loong, head of China research for the Jardine Fleming investment firm in Hong Kong.
No place more than Guangdong, 1,200 miles away from Beijing, better illustrates the Chinese proverb: "The heavens are high and the emperor is far away."
Most of Guangdong's investment comes from the neighboring capitalist enclave of Hong Kong, whose companies employ about 3 million Chinese workers in the province.
Radio and television broadcasts from the British colony, considered a bastion of capitalist subversion by the leaders in Beijing, reach the homes of half of Guangdong's people.
Watches tick to Hong Kong time, an hour earlier than Beijing summer time. And Hong Kong's currency is increasingly the cash of choice.
A $ 1 billion six-lane highway will tie Guangdong even closer to Hong Kong when it's finished in 1994. Already 21,000 cars and trucks cross the land borders from Hong Kong and the Portuguese colony of Macao everyday.
"The hard-liners can't turn back the clock," said Gordon Wu, the Princeton-educated mogul who is developing the highway. "It's a revolution from the bottom up."
In economic terms, the province's financial independence means that it can decide what to do with its money.
In the past six years, for example, provincial authorities have built 1,000 bridges in Guangdong - all of them toll-levying, considered anti-socialist in Beijing.
"As long as there's no rule against something, I will do it," said Chen Yuehua, the straight-talking vice director of the Commission of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade of Guangdong Province. "We have a responsibility to be creative in Guangdong, to use our imagination."
But Guangdong's export orientation is also its Achilles heel. Any change in the U.S. government's Most Favored Nation trading status with China would hit the province hard.
American businessmen have testified before the U.S. Congress that it's silly to use trade as a weapon, especially since it would severely hurt China's fledgling capitalists.
Politically, the province is considered by many to be the freest in China. While the central government in Beijing often jams Chinese-language radio broadcasts of the British Broadcasting Corp. and the Voice of America, provincial authorities don't bother with their Cantonese equivalents.
Satellite dishes, banned elsewhere in China, dot Canton's cityscape and crown the tops of hundreds of private homes throughout the province.
The Communist Party is absent from hundreds of factories - a casualty of economics and also a clear violation of ordinances mandating one party member for every 100 workers.
Death, too, has come to China's job-for-life scheme that guaranteed workers a paycheck whether they hustled or not.
"We're not an iron rice bowl here," said Zhai Chi, the deputy director general manager of an electronics factory in the boom town of Dongguan. "If a worker doesn't satisfy me, he's out the door."
"I believe the rest of the country is slowly becoming like us," said Lei Yu, a deputy mayor of Canton. "It should have been like this from the beginning."
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto planned

 

End of Document
