

Egypt's Latest Islamic Battle - With the Avowed Moderates
The Associated Press
June 16, 1995, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 818 words
Byline: BY SALAH NASRAWI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO, Egypt
Body




As police fight armed extremists trying to force strict Islamic rule on Egypt, a less dramatic but possibly critical battle is shaping up between the government and a Muslim group that wants to challenge it at the ballot box.
Until recently, the Muslim Brotherhood was thought to be too powerful for the government to confront. It is the country's largest and best organized fundamentalist movement, and indulging the group was seen as the government's way of undercutting the radicals.
Now, dozens of Brotherhood supporters have been jailed just months before parliamentary elections. That raises questions about whether President Hosni Mubarak will deny a role in government even to Islamic activists who accept the democratic process.
The issue of fundamentalists in politics is one of the most crucial in the Arab world. In Algeria, a fundamentalist movement was squelched as it was about to win elections, leading to three years of bloodshed. In Jordan, King Hussein allowed his Muslim rivals into parliament, then outfoxed them.
But what happens in Egypt could have broader implications. With nearly 60 million people, it is the most populous Arab country and traditionally a leader in the region. It also is a close ally of the United States in the Mideast peace process.
The Brotherhood makes clear it wants an Egypt ruled by Islamic law. But the group's leaders say that unlike the extremists - whose three-year campaign of violence is aimed at destroying Egypt's secular system - they believe change should come by persuading the voters.
Liberal intellectuals distrust the Brotherhood's supposed moderation. They charge that the group also would force Islamic strictures on all Egyptians.
Although the Brotherhood would not expect to win control of the 444-member Parliament, it could rob Mubarak of the two-thirds vote needed for him to seek a fourth term in 1999 - in case he is thinking of that.
Egypt's Brotherhood is a political oddity. It is officially illegal and cannot run candidates because the constitution forbids religious parties. But in fact, the Brotherhood operates openly, and its supporters have served in Parliament under the banner of other parties.
It also controls more than half of Egypt's powerful professional unions. The Brotherhood is estimated to have 100,000 members and perhaps 1 million supporters.
Nabil Abdel-Fatah, an analyst at the Al-Ahram Center for Strategic Studies, said the Brotherhood's biggest achievement is its considerable backing among middle class Egyptians disenchanted by economic problems and government corruption.
"It's safe to say that we are facing a social movement much bigger than what was believed," he told The Associated Press.
The Brotherhood has no doubt that the growing number of arrests since January is an attempt to link it to the radicals and then keep its supporters out of elections for the People's Assembly. The vote is expected in November.
Spokesman Mamoun el-Hodeibi said the Brotherhood will put forward candidates in any way it can - such as again running under other parties' labels - but does not want a confrontation with the government.
"It's not in our interest to have a conflict or a fight … although we believe the elections are an arena for political and cultural struggle which every citizen should have the right to participate in," he said in an interview.
Government officials maintain that those arrested gave money or support to the violent radicals who are trying to topple Mubarak. More than 740 people have died in the struggle.
Officials have begun referring to the Brotherhood as "terrorist." Mubarak - without using the Brotherhood's name - has talked about "hypocrites who do not hide their sympathy for these (radical) groups."
The Brotherhood denies it supports the radicals, and none of the arrests has led to formal charges tying the group to extremists. Meanwhile, the government is actively trying to undercut the group's control of professional unions.
The Brotherhood was founded in 1928 by Hassan al-Banna, who rejected democracy and advocated violence to achieve his goal - an Islamic empire like that which once ruled much of the world from Spain to India.
President Gamal Abdel Nasser outlawed the Brotherhood in 1954 after it was blamed for an attempt on his life. His successor, Anwar Sadat, rehabilitated the group as a foil against his leftist opponents. In the process, the Brotherhood renounced violence and entered politics.
The Brotherhood has sometimes been vague about what it wants for Egypt. But to define its views for the election, it has issued position papers saying it accepts Egypt's minority Coptic Christians as equals and would not force women to wear the veil.
El-Hodeibi, the spokesman, has said certain strictures, such as a ban on liquor, are absolute under the Koran, Islam's holy book. But he says 80 percent of Islamic law can be interpreted to fit the circumstances of the times.
 Load-Date: June 16, 1995

 

End of Document
