

Excerpts of the Islamic Jihad Statement Given to Perez de Cuellar
The Associated Press
August 12, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 953 words
Dateline: GENEVA
Body




Here are excerpts from the Islamic Jihad statement that former hostage John McCarthy delivered to U.N. Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar. It was translated from the Arabic by the United Nations:
 
 Mr. de Cuellar, Secretary-General of the United Nations.
We wish you every success.
You are well aware of the great importance of your role and position as secretary-general of the United Nations in the eyes of the peoples of the world, particularly the oppressed and downtrodden peoples who, even while we are on the verge of the 21st century, are still groaning and suffering under the yoke of tyrants, butchers and plunderers throughout the world.
You are also aware of the beneficial effect of your backing and support for the movement of the oppressed and persecuted peoples in the Islamic world, Africa and South America who are endeavoring to achieve independence, freedom and self-determination. Accordingly, your role must always be to support the struggle and jihad (holy war) of these peoples against the imperious and the usurpers. This is what those peoples have expected and still expect of you in order to prevent the United Nations and its secretariat from being transformed into a perjured witness…
Mr. de Cuellar,
The role that the United Nations has played in our contemporary history, and primarily the approach that it has adopted towards the causes of the oppressed peoples of the world, particularly the cause of the Muslim people of Palestine, the usurpation of their land from which they have been evicted, the attempts of the Zionist enemy to exterminate them, the question of the occupied territories in Jordan, Syria and Lebanon and, subsequently, the Gulf crisis, gives us an extremely unfavorable impression of the situation of the United Nations, which has become a plaything in the hands of the superpowers, particularly America, the Great Satan, since your organization has become merely a cover to protect the interests of world imperialism and suppress the movement of the oppressed peoples yearning for the achievement of their independence. … Where can we find justice, democratic principles, freedom, equality and human rights in resolutions that are dictated by the interests and ambitions of the superpowers and protected by the iniquitous right of veto? … The slogan of the need to combat international terrorism, which has been raised by America and its supporters, is a spurious slogan designed to leave them with drawn swords in their hands, which they can use whenever they feel that their interests are being threatened by the actions of rebellious oppressed peoples on the pretext of putting an end to the terrorist threat to international peace and security.
However, the uprising of peoples seeking to achieve self-determination, recover their stolen freedom and independence, sever their links of dependence on the imperious states and ensure that the principles of justice are put into practice is not terrorism; it is a legitimate right.
If the slogan of the need to combat international terrorism is an attempt to divert us from our course of jihad in the face of international arrogance, we will continue along the difficult path that we have chosen for ourselves without giving an inch.
If its purpose is to maintain the state of open warfare between us and them, we are fully prepared to pursue this confrontation until we achieve one of the two divine rewards: victory or martyrdom. If struggle, jihad and resistance against the superpowers is terrorism, we and the oppressed peoples throughout the world are proud to be terrorists combating injustice and striking terror into the hearts of the enemies of God and mankind as long as they interfere in the internal affairs of oppressed nations and peoples anywhere in the world.
We are part of the worldwide Islamic movement; the causes of the Muslims are our causes and we share their sufferings and jubilations. By the grace of almighty God, we shall always remain in the vanguard of the defenders of the causes of Islam and the Muslims and, in the cause of God, we do not fear the reproaches of anyone.
Mr. de Cuellar,
The question of detainees and prisoners in the world today is one of the consequences of the confrontation between us and the forces of international arrogance led by America, the mother of iniquity throughout the world, and its offspring Israel. …
In view of our belief in the need for action to secure the release of our freedom-fighters from prisons in occupied Palestine and Europe and also to solve the question of the detainees whom we are holding and the problem of their families, we call upon you to make a personal endeavor, within the framework of a comprehensive solution, to secure the release of all detainees … in the world. In such an eventuality, we would be perfectly willing to complete the process that we began today and to release the persons whom we are detaining within 24 hours.
We are sending this letter to you today by hand of a special emissary, John McCarthy, whom we have chosen from among the persons whom we are detaining, in the hope that this matter will elicit, on your part, the earnest and responsible endeavors that it merits.
We are awaiting a practical response from you that will lead to the desired fruitful solution. We are waiting and praying that our incarcerated fellow freedom-fighters will obtain freedom with honor and that the peoples of the world will obtain the security and justice which we believe will inevitably prevail through Islam at the hands of the expected Mahdi, who will arise among the descendants of Mohammed.
For him, we are ready to sacrifice our lives.
Peace be upon those who follow the right guidance.
The Islamic Jihad Organization

 

End of Document
