

Farmers Return to Fields, But Not Even The Land Is The Same
The Associated Press
October 9, 1993, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 328 words
Byline: By RANJAN ROY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KILLARI, India
Body




Tilling the fields after an earthquake, farmers and plow animals are picking their way around fissures that weren't there before.
Not even the land is the same nine days after the killer quake that leveled dozens of villages in southwest India.
Officials say the ground has been scarred by cracks several inches wide and up to 70 feet deep. What had been flat farmland is now undulating with mounds one foot high.
"I have to start sowing tomorrow, but I am careful not to plough too deep because I think the earth has cracked," said Mahadev Sambaji Bhosle, walking behind two hump-shouldered white cows.
It was the first time Bhosle returned to his farm since the quake brought down his house and crushed his three children to death before dawn Sept. 30.
Now he lives at a relief camp one mile from the ruins of Killari, along with 5,000 other survivors.
The Indian government says more than 10,000 people were killed, but some unofficial estimates put the toll nearly three times that. About 120,000 people were made homeless.
On Saturday morning, shortly after midnight, a powerful aftershock - the 14th since the quake - rumbled through the makeshift shelters and tents, spreading new panic. The tremor toppled walls weakened by the quake.
The government is encouraging people to go back to their land. Farmers are getting free seeds of millet, wheat and sunflowers for the winter season. Sowing has begun.
"At some places the ground has risen so high that it is impossible to till the land," said S.D. Padsalgi, the head of Killari's village council.
Aid has been pouring into the region. On Saturday, officials distributed bundles of blankets, cooking utensils and plastic containers that were unloaded from U.S. Air Force cargo planes earlier this week.
Chief Minister Sharad Pawar of Maharashtra state, where the quake hit hardest, said $ 43 million has been received in donations and foreign aid. The World Bank has made a $ 300 million loan available for disaster relief.
 Load-Date: October 9, 1993

 

End of Document
