

Fed Gallops To The Rescue with Cash for Banks
The Associated Press
August 10, 1991, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 1109 words
Byline: By DIRK BEVERIDGE, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The Federal Reserve tried to come to the rescue of the ailing economy, injecting cash into the banking system in a bid to push interest rates down.
Despite a few encouraging numbers, it looks like the economy could stand some rescuing.
Analysts say there is a danger that the nation could slide back into recession, after the Fed reported that the economy is going through a "slow, uneven" period of growth.
That bleak assessment was out Wednesday in the Fed's "beige book." The survey of business conditions concluded that the economy is still suffering from sluggish factory demand, a lifeless commercial real estate market and more layoffs among such sectors as banking, transportation and government.
Retail sales are also declining in some regions, and weak economic statistics have fueled concerns that the 0.4 percent economic growth in the April-June quarter could give way to another round of recession.
Not all the news has been bad, however.
The Labor Department reported this week that fewer Americans were filing for unemployment benefits. But analysts pointed out that other recent reported drops in joblessness turned out to be statistical flukes.
Those Americans who still have jobs are apparently working harder at them.
The Labor Department said worker productivity rose this spring at an annual rate of 1.9 percent. It was the largest increase in nearly three years, but analysts were not sure it means much.
They think it stems fropm the slight upturn in growth during the spring rather than a reversal of the nation's chronic lag in productivity growth.
One bright spot in these dark economic times has been inflation, which has largely stayed under control.
The Labor Department said Friday that wholesale prices dipped 0.2 percent in July, with food prices showing their biggest decline in more than four years.
The July decrease in the Producer Price Index marked the second consecutive monthly drop, following a 0.3 percent decline in June. For all of 1991, wholesale prices have fallen in five months and risen in just two.
 
 BCCI: The Sleaze Spreads
 
 The worst banking scandal in history got worse.
The Bank of Credit and Commerce International was not only involved in laundering drug money; new information indicates it helped several companies, including Pakistan, in attempts to develop nuclear weapons.
New questions are being raised about the actions of Clark Clifford, defense secretary under President Lyndon B. Johnson, and Clifford's protegee and law partner, Robert Altman.
A federal report says BCCI placed at least three executives at First American Bank of New York, despite assurances from Clifford that BCCI would play no role in managing the bank.
Meanwhile, the banking debacle has stirred rumors around the globe, leading to runs on deposits in some Hong Kong banks.
 
 AIRLINES: Pan Am Free-For-All Likely, New Braniff Goes Way of The Old
 
 The airlines better keep their selt belts fastened, because they haven't made it into clear skies yet.
The pioneer of commercial aviation, Pan American World Airways, is about to run into some bouncy turbulence, when the industry's biggest players show up in U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan on Monday to try to divvy up the remaining assets.
Pan Am had originally agreed to sell most of its routes across the Atlantic Ocean and beyond to Delta Air Lines in a $ 310 million package.
But competing offers have come in from Trans World Airlines, which is teamed up in an odd arrangement with American Airlines, and from United Airlines. Northwest Airlines, too, is nibbling for a few of the morsels, and investors Jay Pritzker of Chicago and Kirk Kerkorian of Los Angeles have expressed an interest.
The offers prompted Delta to sweeten its offer to a $ 904 million package on Friday.
Pan Am is believed to have been seeking a graceful way to close out its business, but it looks as if courtroom chaos is about to erupt.
A not-so-proud name in aviation, Braniff, may still be jinxed.
Investors who dusted off the Braniff name and began a small airline in July landed in Chapter 11 barely a month later. Bankruptcy court is, of course, where two previous incarnations of Braniff stopped flying.
The new Braniff International Airlines blames its troubles on outside interference and says it plans to file lawsuits.
 
 BANKING: Changing of Guard at FDIC
 
 President Bush is said to be in no hurry to name a new chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., because Congress is out of session, but it looks like career regulator William Taylor may get the nod.
The president won't say who is under consideration for running the fund that insures bank deposits, but a year ago Bush had said he was "very high on" Taylor.
Taylor, 52, already has undergone the extensive background check required of presidential appointees and his name could be quickly forwarded for confirmation when the Senate returns from recess in September.
FDIC Chairman L. William Seidman, 70, told Bush he will step down in October as his six-year term comes to an end.
In that time, Seidman has presided over the worst banking troubles since the Great Depression. His agency handled more than 1,000 banking failures.
 
 FAST FOOD: The Mother of All Burger Kings
 
 As far as Burger King restaurants go, the one in Budapest, Hungary, is definitely a whopper.
The Burger King that opened Thursday in the heart of the Hungarian capital occupies three levels and 15,000 square feet at the intersection of Budapest's two main thoroughfares.
It's the biggest Burger King outlet anywhere, far larger than the chain's typical restaurant of just 2,800 square feet.
 
 TICKER: Oakland May Soon Obtain Dubious Distinction, If Paper Folds
 
 Publisher Bob Maynard of The Oakland Tribune says the 117-year-old California paper will close next week, leaving Oakland the largest U.S. city without a daily, if it can't strike a debt deal with former owner the Gannett Co.  … General Motors Corp.  is raising prices on some compact cars, but two European makers of luxury cars, Sterling Motor Cars and Peugeot , pull out of the U.S. market … Car sales rose in late July, but they remain well below figures from a year earlier … Chrysler Corp.  plans to sell about $ 420 million in new shares, but still may need to sell off some assets if business doesn't pick up …
 
 Sara Lee Corp.  will become the nation's largest maker of women's intimate apparel with the completion of a $ 575 million deal to acquire Playtex Apparel Inc… Hitting the top spot on a
 
 New York Times best-seller list: a book on how to kill yourself. "Final Exit," by Derek Humphry, executive director of the Eugene, Ore.-based Hemlock Society, offers detailed advice on committing suicide.

 

End of Document
