

Fifty Years Later, Aleuts Still the 'Forgotten' Internees
The Associated Press
February 17, 1992, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1077 words
Byline: By JULIA RUBIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ANCHORAGE, Alaska
Body




Fifty years after they were evacuated from their homes and left to languish in internment camps, Alaska's Aleuts fear history may neglect them just as the U.S. government did.
The Aleuts' tragedy, played out on the periphery of the continent during a world war, is not as well known as that of Japanese-American internees.
There were fewer Aleuts: 880 interned, compared with 120,000 Japanese-Americans. And the Aleuts were interned not because of their heritage, not for fear that they might be subversives, but because their homes on the Aleutian and Pribilof islands were in a war zone.
Yet these residents of nine villages were held for years in drafty, old southeast Alaska fish canneries, in primitive conditions that killed about 10 percent of them and scarred survivors.
Those who returned home after the war found their houses and churches destroyed or ransacked, often by the U.S. troops who had lived in them. Some had been exposed for the first time to life off the islands, and found their lifestyle forever changed.
"A lot of people think we're making this up - it's not in the history books," said Alice Snigaroff Petrivelli, interned as a child and now president of the Aleut Corp., a Native regional corporation in Anchorage.
"Everybody knows what happened to the Japanese, but nobody seems to know what happened to the Aleuts. Remember - we were citizens of the U.S. then, too."
Little about the internment camps was known to anyone but survivors until Japanese-Americans began resurrecting the memory of their own camps and asking the government for compensation.
In 1982, the Commission on Wartime Relocation and Internment of Civilians investigated the five Aleut camps in southeast Alaska and condemned government "indifference" to "deplorable conditions" there.
The report cited crowding; rotting buildings; and a lack of furniture, clean or running water, electricity, medical care or government supervision.
Although the war in Alaska essentially had ended by late summer 1943, the Aleuts were kept in camps as late as 1945.
"The standard of care which the government owes to those within its care was clearly violated by this treatment, which brought great suffering and loss of life to the Aleuts," the report said.
In 1988, Congress authorized reparations to the Aleuts as well as to Japanese-Americans, and issued a formal apology.
Each Aleut survivor received $ 12,000, and a $ 5 million trust fund was set up under the Interior Department to help them and their descendants. Another $ 1.4 million was earmarked for restoring churches in six villages.
The Aleut Corp. was given $ 15 million as compensation for Attu Island, which was occupied by the military after the war and remains closed to its former inhabitants. Attuans, seized by Japanese troops in June 1942 and taken to POW camps in Japan, were resettled after the war at Atka, more than 500 miles from their home.
Reparations helped ease the pain, but were too little too late, according to Harriet Hope of Unalaska. She was 5 when her family was evacuated.
"The people who really deserved any kind of recognition for the hell they were put through are gone now, like my parents," Hope said between tears as she recalled her childhood at the Burnett Inlet camp near Wrangell.
But she said her parents never complained.
"It never occurred to anybody to tell the government that they were treated wrongly. They just stuffed their feelings I guess," said Hope. "It was something - patriotism, I guess - shining through. It was something they had to do, give up for their country."
Hope said she didn't recognize her own anger until years later. Her father, a non-Native who stayed behind in Unalaska to help troops, was quite a bit older than she, and she feels robbed "of the best days of my life with him because when I came back he was old and became ill. And we were never able to recapture it."
To mark the 50th anniversary of the evacuation, in June, some villages are planning ceremonies, said Dimitri Philemonof, director of the Aleutian-Pribilof Island Association. The association is trying to raise money for a documentary on the "Untold War Story," and hopes to get the evacuation included in Alaska schools' history curriculum.
"It's not to make people feel sorry for us, but we want people to be aware that such a thing took place, so maybe it will never happen again," he said. Emil Berikoff, who was born during the internment and is supervising Unalaska's observance, said many survivors find their experience too painful to talk about. "It's been 50 years of forgetting, I guess," he said.
Petrivelli was 12 in June 1942 when she watched American troops burn her village, Atka, and its church. No one told the villagers what was going to happen, that the tropps were instituting a scorched-earth strategy. Villagers were put on a boat; no one told them their destination.
She and her family were taken to a dilapidated former cannery in Killisnoo, about 60 miles south of Juneau. They felt abandoned and confused.
"They kind of dumped us and left us on our own," Petrivelli said.
The Aleuts were without hunting or fishing gear, or even boats, and could not continue their subsistence lifestyle, she said. Tlingit Indians helped teach them how to live off the unfamiliar land. This was a rainforest, and many of the Aleuts had never before seen trees.
Petrivelli said the government provided less than the bare essentials. Atka lost 17 of its 85 people at Killisnoo to disease and malnutrition, she said.
"I think it moved us real fast into Western society - from a subsistence economy to a Western economy," said Petrivelli. "It disrupted our lifestyle in the way we knew it. We've never been the same since."
The evacuation may have had special impact on the Pribilof islanders. In peacetime they were virtual wards of the federal government, which controlled their seal harvest and with it most aspects of their lives, including whether they could leave the islands.
Some were even taken back to the islands by their government bosses for seal harvesting during internment.
Philemonof said the government kept a tight rein on Pribilof islanders in the camps "because they didn't want to lose a handle on them. They didn't want the Aleuts to see, hey, there is life out there, outside the Pribilofs - to see they could have worked for better wages."
But they did see, and this exposure kindled a desire for independence. Finally, in 1983, the government loosened its hold on the Pribilofs.

 

End of Document
