

Five Minutes for the U.N.; Four Days on the Schmooze Beat
 The Associated Press
October 22, 1995, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 706 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




If you can make it here, the crooner says, you can make it anywhere. And some pretty good troupers are giving it their best shot this week: Yasser Arafat. Fidel Castro. Pier Mularoni?
Names big and small, the multinational cast of the U.N. 50th anniversary celebration, are using their short run in the Big Apple spotlight to do business, raise money, sell a cause - and cement ties to the emigrant groups that can help them do all three.
"New York is the capital of world commerce," U.N. Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali reminded presidents and prime ministers at a sparkling Wall Street dinner Saturday night. As if they needed reminding.
Before, between and after the chicken, lamb and vegetarian pot stickers, served in the cavernous glass-roofed lobby of the World Financial Center, the dining dignitaries "schmoozed" with the American business establishment, led by David Rockefeller and including heavyweights from the likes of Citibank, Time-Warner and American Express.
But the visitors are doing more than dining out. They're packing their four days in New York with meetings, luncheons and power breakfasts that might just give their countries an edge in the race for foreign investment.
The paunchy man in the charcoal-gray suit Sunday was Fidel Castro, the onetime "young rebel" who lately has taken to sipping martinis with visiting U.S. business executives in Havana.
Under cover of tight security and secrecy, the Cuban president is embarked on a New York whirl of working sessions with U.S. business leaders who see a future in Cuba - if the American embargo is ever lifted.
"They see opportunities. They see a country of 12 million people," said John Kuvalich, head of the U.S.-Cuba Trade and Economic Council
Who are they? "They're from construction, from tourism, from communications, consumer products, energy," Kuvalich said.
In a way, as the man offering "virgin territory," Castro has an easy sell. More typical is the hustler's schedule put together for another Fidel - Philippine President Fidel Ramos.
Morning to night on Monday and Tuesday, Ramos will rush through a marathon of one-on-ones with the bosses of Caltex, Texas Instruments, Chemical and Chase Manhattan banks and Salomon Brothers, and top it off with a dinner with the all-powerful from the West Side's Garment District, the textile industrialists who are tapping the Philippines' rich vein of cheap labor.
And somewhere on the Ramos schedule, five minutes were set aside for a United Nations speech.
For those who can't run after the big-money guys until they learn to walk, this metropolitan melting pot, the city of 200 nationalities, offers ready-made support.
"No matter where you go in this city, you're going to find people from your country," Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, a son of Italy, assured the Wall Street diners. "You're even going to find people from your town or village."
Greek President Constantinos Stephanopoulos found them, traveling to the well-known Greek district in Astoria, Queens. Pier Natalino Mularoni, leader of tiny San Marino, also found compatriots in this vast city, sharing dinner with a group in the Bronx.
And Yasser Arafat certainly landed among friends.
When he was left off the guest list for the Wall Street dinner, Arafat's supporters quickly organized a Saturday night bash right across the street, at the glass-and-brass Vista Hotel.
Palestinian emigrants streamed in from the Arab strongholds of Brooklyn, after plunking down hundreds of dollars each to see the legendary "Father of the Struggle."
"The Arabs here will give him support," said storekeeper Fayez Ahmed, who paid $ 150 for his filet mignon dinner. "For the first time we feel we have a stake, now that the Israelis are pulling out of the territories."
But Arafat, addressing the well-dressed audience of more than 1,000, betrayed some disappointment over the $ 290,000 raised for Palestinian hospitals.
"I feel good about it, but it is not enough," he said.
Soon one patriot passed a fresh check for $ 10,000 up to the rostrum. It was kissed by Arafat. Then another topped him - with a check for $ 50,000.
"I thank you all in New York," the Palestinian chief beamed.
"And New Jersey!" someone shouted.
"And New Jersey," Arafat added. "I'm learning my geography."
 Load-Date: October 22, 1995

 

End of Document
