

Flood Forecasts: Today the Nile, Tomorrow the Mississippi?
The Associated Press
March 3, 1994, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 569 words
Byline: By RANDOLPH E. SCHMID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




American scientists scored a success with a detailed flood forecast last summer - for Egypt's Nile River.
Now, the same new technology, which might have improved warnings when the Mississippi devastated middle America last year, is being installed in the United States.
The "Water Resources Forecasting System" went into operation on the Nile first because "they had the need and the money," said Curtiss Barrett, manager of international technology transfer for the National Weather Service's Office of Hydrology. "It's hard to beat that combination."
Portions of the system are being tested on the Colorado River, and new computers are being installed in Minneapolis for flood forecasting on the upper Mississippi River.
But America's complex weather and geography, and the costs involved in installing a new system, mean that it could take years for the system to be operational nationwide.
Meanwhile, Barrett, fresh from his success in Egypt, is preparing to help set up a similar flood forecast system on the seven major rivers in China - where half the population lives in flood-prone areas.
The new technology permits forecasting river flows months in advance and was developed to assist planning efforts in the many nations that face water shortages, Barrett said.
But forecasting river flow can benefit more than people worried about lack of water - it can also warn those facing potential floods.
Before the new system was installed, Nile flood forecasts were good for about two weeks, Barrett explained. "Now we can forecast for over three months," he said.
Using the same system in an area like the U.S. Midwest could have helped save lives and property, he said. For example, the forecast could have given a probability for the flooding of the Des Moines, Iowa, water treatment plant, which was put out of service by floods last summer.
Current forecasting systems depend on information from rain and river gauges. The problem, Barrett explained, is "nobody lives at a gauge, so we have to relate the gauges to where flood-prone areas are and that's not easy to do under the present system."
The new forecasting system uses computers to quickly combine information from satellites, radar, rain and river gauges, historical records and other sources. The flood forecasts can look farther into the future and do a better job of relating flooding to specific areas along the river, Barrett said.
The system used in Egypt combines weather data collected by a European Space Agency satellite with records of past rainfall and flooding to produce complex formulas that calculate long-range prospects for river flows.
In the United States, forecasters also will have access to rainfall information from the new Doppler weather radars being installed around the country.
But the key is the information gathered by the satellite, said Barrett, who pointed out that weather forecasters never have enough rain gauges to satisfy their need for information.
For example, Barrett said, there are only five regularly checked rain gauges along the Blue Nile. By using the satellite, forecasters can estimate rainfall every 30 minutes at 20,000 points in the river basin.
The first Nile forecast was "near perfect," he said.
Otherwise, added National Weather Service Director Elbert W. Friday, they wouldn't be bragging about it.
The Egyptian system was paid for by a United Nations agency and the U.S. Agency for International Development.
 Load-Date: March 3, 1994

 

End of Document
