

Floodwater Attacks St. Louis Area - And Still the Rivers Rise
The Associated Press
August 2, 1993, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 925 words
Byline: By GEORGE ESPER, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: ST. LOUIS
Body




After days of waiting, the water came.
Two of America's biggest rivers swelled to record levels and assaulted the city from all sides Sunday, cascading over a levee in a pre-Revolutionary War hamlet to the north and threatening hundreds of homes to the south.
Urgent appeals went out for sandbaggers all over Missouri's largest metropolitan area, where residents spared the flooding saw live television pictures of foaming water gushing through levees and swallowing farmhouses in seconds.
And still the water rose - faster and higher than anyone expected - with crests on the Mississippi and Missouri rivers forecast for a Sunday night collision at their confluence north of the city.
"We're fighting a war," said fire Chief Neil Svetanics in the emergency command post downtown. "The war in Iraq lasted four days. The Israelis won a war in seven days. We've been in this campaign for 25 days and haven't reached the pitch of battle yet."
A floating fast-food restaurant broke free from its moorings on the Mississippi River late Sunday and slammed into a nearby bridge.
The Burger King restaurant, closed along with other St. Louis riverfront attractions since the flooding began, hit the Interstate 55-70 bridge and broke up.
Witnesses said there was a loud noise when the cable snapped, and then the boat bumped into another vessel.
"It hit the bridge and the top cracked off, and then it split apart," said a witness, Terrell Wilson, 14. "The whole boat is gone. Whatever isn't under the water will be in the Gulf of Mexico tomorrow."
There were no injuries reported. The bridge apparently was not seriously damaged.
St. Louis now is the focal point of the months-long flooding in nine Midwestern states that has contributed to 45 deaths and caused $ 10 billion in damage.
The area came under siege late Friday when water burst through a Missouri River levee in the Chesterfield suburb west of downtown, flooding hundreds of businesses and a commuter airport.
By Sunday, the Mississippi had reached a level of 49.2 feet, 19.2 feet above flood stage. It was expected to crest at 49.7 feet.
That level would be just 2.3 feet from the top of the city's 52-foot floodwall, which sprang a leak at its northern end during an earlier crest on July 20.
Workers repaired that section of the wall, which protects an industrial area north of downtown, and officials prayed it would hold.
Downtown St. Louis and the city's famous Gateway Arch sit on higher ground, safe from the flooding.
But in the south end of the city, leaks sprang all along a 4-mile levee protecting homes on the River Des Peres, ordinarily a narrow drainage channel that feeds the Mississippi.
Water also rose through the sewer system in the River Des Peres area, threatening hundreds of wood-frame tract homes, many of which were flooded during the last crest. Officials went door-to-door Sunday telling people to leave.
Thousands of volunteers converged on the neighborhood to heighten the sandbag levee. Their efforts were aided by a surprising 1-foot drop in the River Des Peres, but authorities warned that was misleading.
The river drop was only temporary, they said, caused by busted levees downstream on the Mississippi where some 15,000 acres of Illinois farmland were flooded with up to 15 feet of water. St. Louis water levels were forecast to rise as the flooded farmland filled up.
Northwest of the city, levees burst Sunday morning in St. Charles, a town of red-brick roads and gaslights founded by a French-Canadian fur trader in 1769.
Already soaked in some areas from previous, smaller crests of the Missouri, St. Charles took another big hit as water crashed through sandbags atop a levee and struck mobile homes, houses and businesses. Antique shops in the French district also were threatened, and authorities evacuated 1,000 people.
Tears rolled down Lori Hanson's face as she prepared to leave her home with her husband, three children and three dogs. As the sun beat down, water was pouring into her basement and creeping up her front yard.
"We heard it rumbling," she said of the levee, "and then we looked out and saw water."
The water turned city streets into rivers. Sandbags delivered by boat or trucks large enough to forge through the muck were stacked everywhere in front of homes and shops.
Betty Silverberg and her husband Richard, who has family roots in St. Charles dating back 100 years, vowed to stay at their home and battle the rising water. She said the town would suffer, but ultimately would recover.
"(People) have lost so much," said Mrs. Silverberg. "They'll be back. For a lot of them, it's their home place."
Northeast of St. Louis, in Alton, Ill., the Mississippi swept over a sandbag levee protecting a water treatment plant, cutting the drinking water supply for 73,000 people.
And in historic Ste. Genevieve, 60 miles south of St. Louis, a levee broke and floodwaters threatened about 50 homes, including two built in the 1700s.
Even people whose homes were away from the flooding shared the heartache through the barrage of live television pictures, including footage from helicopters of levee breaks on the rural Illinois side of the Mississippi, southeast of St. Louis.
In the most dramatic scene, a barrier broke near Columbia, Ill., and a torrent of chocolate-brown water swirled around a picture-perfect large, white farmhouse, uprooting trees three stories tall and quickly turning the fields into a lake.
The house held for several minutes. But then it broke from its foundation and was jostled downstream. Almost immediately, it folded. There was nothing left.

 

End of Document
