

For The Peacemakers, A History of Frustration
The Associated Press
September 11, 1993, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 926 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




It involved oil. It involved religion. It involved terrorism. It involved the Cold War. It involved domestic politics and "the Jewish vote."
It involved endless American diplomacy - shuttles by one secretary of state after another from Washington to Tel Aviv, Tel Aviv to Cairo, Cairo to Damascus, Damascus to Amman, Amman to Tel Aviv, Tel Aviv to Cairo …
The effort to broker a peace in the Middle East involved so many things it often seemed beyond the reach of God or man.
It has engaged America since the first moments of that region's painful modern history, which began on May 14, 1948, when, under United Nations sponsorship, the state of Israel declared its existence as a homeland for the Jews.
Exactly 11 minutes later, President Harry S. Truman, in a 41-word statement, extended diplomatic recognition over the misgivings of the man he most admired, his secretary of state, George Marshall.
With that, the United States became a partner - reluctant often, backstage sometimes, silent rarely - in the Byzantine affairs of the Middle East.
Now the pursuit of peace takes that region and this country to a new turn: On Monday, on the White House grounds, Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization will sign an agreement.
It provides for limited Palestinian self rule in the Gaza Strip and in the town of Jericho, places seized by Israel in the war of 1967.
It's more than that. It's acceptance by the Palestinians of the notion that the Jewish people have a legitimate claim to the land, a narrow strip of the Mediterranean coastline, to which they have laid claim since the second millennium before Christ. The first clash there between Jews and Arabs occurred in the year 636.
Appropriately enough, President Clinton has invited all his living predecessors - Richard Nixon, Gerald Ford, Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan and George Bush - to the ceremony. They had all been involved, all been burned, in Mideast diplomacy.
The lowest point, from America's viewpoint, occurred in Lebanon just before dawn on Oct. 23, 1983. A terrorist drove a TNT-laden truck into the barracks in Beirut where U.S. Marine "peacekeepers" slept. In the cause of Mideastern peace, 241 young American Marines were killed . A few months later, Ronald Reagan brought the Marines home.
The high point, of course, occurred five years earlier, in September 1978, when Jimmy Carter brought two stubborn men, President Anwar Sadat of Egypt and Prime Minister Menahem Begin of Israel, to the woodsy presidential retreat at Camp David, Md.
He assigned each to a cabin and doggedly shuttled back and forth between cabins for nearly two weeks. He got them to agree on a framework for peace after 30 years of distrust and four wars.
Israel would give up the Sinai Desert, taken in war. Egypt would give up refusing to recognize Israel's existence.
Carter celebrated with the biggest party in White House history, held under a tent. Sadat and Begin each toasted Carter, each proposing him for the Nobel peace prize. Instead, it went to them.
Nonetheless, this remains the shining moment of the Carter presidency.
The following March, Carter went to the Middle East himself, in a display of personal diplomacy. He shuttled. And he came home with a peace treaty. It was amazing.
But those were moments of maximum drama. Just an abbreviated rendering of the record reflects the much more frequent moments of maximum frustration:
1948 - War No. 1: Israel's neighbors greet her birth by going to war against her.
1953 - Secretary of State John Foster Dulles tours the Mideast in search of peace.
1955 - Eisenhower Administration tries to negotiate an agreement for sharing fresh water in the Mideast.
1956 - War No. 2: Israel, Britain and France attack Egypt in the Sinai.
1962 - Kennedy Administration mission to resolve Palestinian refugee problem fails.
1967 - War No 3: Egypt's Gamel Abdel Nasser ejects U.N. peacekeepers from the Sinai. Israel goes to war, captures the Sinai, Gaza Strip, West Bank and Golan Heights in six days' fight.
1971 - Secretary of State William P. Rogers fails to gain agreement between Egypt and Israel.
1973 - War No. 4: Egypt and Syria attack Israel in Yom Kippur War; Arab oil states impose an embargo.
1974 - Secretary of State Henry Kissinger fails to negotiate an Egypt-Israel agreement.
1977 - Breakthrough No. 1: Sadat shocks the world on Nov. 19 by visiting Jerusalem.
That event is worth recalling: Camp David the next year and all steps of progress since have been in Sadat's footsteps.
Egypt and Israel were still in a state of war. Sadat stepped off his plane at 8:03 p.m. to a 21-gun salute. He walked a red carpet, shaking hands with old antagonists - Begin and Moshe Dayan, Golda Meir, Yitzhak Rabin, Ariel Sharon. He and Begin went to a hotel. Every eye in the Mideast watched.
Begin emerged: "I have already had a private discussion with him and I can say that we like each other."
Sadat prayed at the Al Aksa Mosque, built on the site where the Prophet Mohammed is believed to have ascended to heaven, and visited the Church of the Holy Sepulcher, built over the site where Jesus is believed to have been buried.
In a surprise gesture, he placed a wreath at a memorial to Israeli war dead before going into the Knesset to address the Israeli parliament.
He spoke for an hour. He held out the prospect of Arab recognition of the Jewish state. And - significant to today's developments - he uttered these words: "There can be no peace without the Palestinians."
Now come the Palestinians.
"The path ahead will not be easy," Clinton said on Friday. The record supports him.
 Load-Date: September 11, 1993

 

End of Document
