

France, Britain and the U.S. to Sign Nuclear-Free Pacific Treaty
 The Associated Press
October 20, 1995, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 650 words
Byline: By AMY BARRETT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




France, scolded globally for its nuclear tests, joined the United States and Britain on Friday to announce a treaty banning blasts in the South Pacific - but only after France finishes testing there next year.
The three countries released a joint statement at the United Nations and at home saying they would sign the treaty "during the first half of 1996." France's current series of underground nuclear tests in French Polynesia is due to end by May.
The agreement establishing the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone, known as the Rarotonga Treaty, was negotiated by the countries of the 15-member South Pacific Forum in 1985. France's only active nuclear test sites, Mururoa and Fangataufa atolls, are both in the South Pacific.
Of the five declared nuclear powers, only Russia and China have so far signed the accord, though the United States had already said it would do so even before Friday's announcement.
The accord bans nuclear arms stockpiles and nuclear testing in the region but would still allow nuclear-armed and nuclear-powered ships to travel through the area.
The timing of the announcement - just days before the three countries' leaders meet in New York to mark the 50th anniversary of the United Nations - seemed aimed at defusing criticism of their stance on nuclear testing.
France has been roundly condemned by governments and environmental groups worldwide for resuming nuclear tests, but the United States and Britain have been muted in their criticism.
The environmental group Greenpeace, which has led worldwide demonstrations against the French tests, called the announcement "historic but cynical."
"It is a gesture in the right direction, but it is an empty one since it ignores the nuclear testing being carried out in the region now," Greenpeace spokesman Damon Moglen said in a telephone interview.
"If the U.S., France and the U.K. are really committed to seeing the end of nuclear testing they will sign the treaty now, not after the French have finished testing. It's a bit like shutting the door after the horse has gone."
France has detonated two nuclear devices since September, after announcing the resumption of testing in June after a three-year moratorium. A third test is considered imminent.
Altogether, it plans seven or eight tests before the end of May, after which it has pledged to sign a global test ban treaty.
By signing the Rarotonga Treaty, Britain may hope it will escape criticism from its former colonies at next month's Commonwealth summit in New Zealand for its mild reaction to the French tests.
"Today's decision allows us to advance our position by sending the strongest possible signal of support for a nuclear weapons-free zone in the South Pacific," the British Foreign Office said.
"The decision also reflects our wish to respond in a practical way to the concerns of those in the region and elsewhere about nuclear testing. It confirms our belief that an end to nuclear testing is in sight."
In London, Greenpeace spokesman William Peden said he regretted Britain's backing of the treaty had come so late.
Even if the Pacific became free of nuclear weapons testing, he said, "the radioactive and toxic legacy of hundreds of atmospheric and underground nuclear tests by Britain, France and the U.S. will remain."
He also pointed out that the treaty would not stop the transportation of nuclear weapons and materials through the region.
Nonetheless, the Rarotonga Treaty signing will be an important step toward getting the five declared nuclear powers - the United States, France, Britain, China and Russia - to sign a comprehensive test ban treaty by the end of 1996.
In New Zealand, where opposition to French testing has been the most strident, the government welcomed the decision to sign the Rarotonga Treaty. Prime Minister Jim Bolger and Foreign Affairs Minister Don McKinnon said New Zealand had been urging the three to sign the accord for years.
 Load-Date: October 20, 1995

 

End of Document
