

From the Field
The Associated Press
January 28, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1722 words
Dateline: NEAR THE KUWAITI BORDER
Body




Allied forces are setting up new bases in the desert even as troops make final preparations for a ground assault on Iraqi forces occupying Kuwait.
Capt. Tim Knight, nicknamed "Captain Construction," has been supervising the building of logistics bases, command posts, helicopter pads, repair shops, roads, airstrips, among other projects.
"One of the biggest frustrations when I get home is going to be trying to describe what it's like over here," said Knight, 26, of Massillon, Ohio.
"The convoys, the sheer volume of supplies being moved, the distances, the amount of equipment needed to do this job … It's indescribable."
Many soldiers in Knight's 937th Engineering Group have done similar work in Honduras, Bolivia and Panama, but the scale undertaken here has dwarfed Latin American projects.
But Knight said roadbuilding in Saudi Arabia was easy, pointing to the hard, flat soil of red clay covered with a layer of jagged gravel-size rocks.
"We can build roads fast out of this stuff," he said. "We basically grade it and go," putting only oil on the surface to harden it temporarily.
But Knight is also looking ahead to combat, preparing soldiers to carry on building air strips and other projects once fighting begins.
"Since we're going to need to fly in supplies and evacuate casualties, they're measuring our work in hours, not days," Knight said.
 
 AN AIR BASE IN THE PERSIAN GULF (AP) - Air force ground crews must be resourceful to repair some damage suffered by warplanes in combat - and not all damage is inflicted by the Iraqis.
Technicians with the Royal Air Force just completed rebuilding by hand the leading edge of the left wing of a Tornado bomber that hit a buzzard on recent mission.
"It took three days to repair in the end because the damage was really bad when we got inside to have a look," said Chief Technician Gary Livings, 36, who had to make a bolt on a lathe because there were no spares.
"I was using skills I hand't used for 20 years. … A lot of the work relied on your own hands. She's top line now."
 
 IN NORTHERN SAUDI ARABIA (AP) - Maj. Frank Timmons has continued a military tradition made famous by the legendary supply officer Milo Minderbinder in "Catch-22," whose aircraft ferried goods to all sides in World War II.
The 42-year-old New Mexican, of the 937th Engineering Group who came to the Saudi desert from an assignment at Ft. Riley, Kansas, has become an expert scrounging.
You want plywood? Timmons has about 45,000 sheets, and not just any old plywood. He's got finished mahogany plywood in different sizes from Brazil, Malaysia, Indonesia and Canada.
"I've probably given 11,000 sheets to all my units, including what I've swapped," he said.
When Timmons landed in Saudi Arabia, he discovered that his carefully planned transfer of his unit's supply channel had disappeared into the bowels of a bureaucratic computer system.
So Timmons started trading: plywood for oil and air filters. Plywood for long underwear. Plywood for better rations for his troops. Plywood for the use of a forklift. Plywood for five trucks.
Now, Timmons and his unit are heading north, leaving the precious plywood behind - under guard.
 
 NEAR THE SAUDI BORDER (AP) - The U.S. Army's 1st Cavalry Division has been moving fast, sometimes 300 miles in one jump.
"For all intents, we are totally mobile," said Lt. Col. Richard J. Fousek, of Baltimore, commander of the division's support command.
Unlike many armies, with separate transport units, most U.S. Army divisions move 80 percent of their equipment and supplies themselves, he said. The remaining 20 percent is either taken by other brigades or subcontracted to civilians.
"Most of the supplementary transport is for things not used for combat, what we call life support," he said.
The approximately 13,000 men in the division have been moving with their 66-ton M1-A1 tanks, their Bradley armored fighting vehicles, helicopters and up to 100 different kinds of ammunition.
"Part of that moving factor is fuel," Fousek said. "You need to be able to refuel. It's not just a straight transportation problem."
He said the distances traveled here are far greater than in Germany, where many units are based.
"Synchronization is the key. there's only one road across the top" of Saudi Arabia, he said.
 
 IN CENTRAL SAUDI ARABIA (AP) - Working as a gas jockey on a tanker plane might be the best job in the U.S. Air Force for an enlisted airman.
The so-called boom operators, who maneuver long nozzles into the tanks of thirsty jets, have to stretch out on their stomachs and look through a window beneath the tail to make the right connection.
Col. Rick Salisbury, commander of the 1700 Air Refueling Squadron Provisional, said it's a great thrill for junior enlisted airmen.
"Imagine - you're just out of high school, maybe 19 or 20, and your job is to lay down on your belly and have three officers drive you to work," he said.
The near-absence of the Iraqi air force from the Persian Gulf war has prompted allied planners to seek other targets, a senior British air commander said.
"We're still not seeing any sign of his air force, so he has got them locked up somewhere," Group Capt. David Henderson, commander of the British Royal Air Force detachment here, said Sunday.
"When we see some evidence of them, we will go back again and attack his air fields. Until we do, we'll concentrate on other targets, which have a higher priority."
Those targets would include communications facilities, ammunition dumps, artillery batteries, supply lines and missile sites.
His comments support those made Friday by the commander of the British forces, Gen. Sir Peter de la Billiere, who said since Iraq's air force "had been grounded," Britain could switch to higher-level bombing missions.
The general said Britain was dispatching Buccaneer bombers to the gulf to be used in such raids.
The change eases pressure on Britain's low-flying Tornado bombers, which have suffered high losses in relation to U.S. planes, in making highly dangerous bombing raids on enemy airfields.
The British Tornados were used because only the Royal Air Force owns JP 233 attack weapons needed to ruin airfields. Six British Tornados have been lost.
De la Billiere said low-level tactics won't be completely abandoned, and Henderson also said he was keeping his options open.
The pattern of British aircraft involved in the bombing remains the same, he said. Jaguar fighters fly during the day, Tornado bombers fly at night and Victor air-to-air refueling tankers fly in support both day and night.
It was not known how many of the Buccaneers would be sent to the gulf from Britain, how long they will stay or what role they would play.
The combat jets are used to "spike" - or mark with laser beams - targets so that other bombers or Buccaneers themselves can release "smart bombs" which follow the beams to the targets.
 
 WITH THE 82nd AIRBORNE (AP) - Lead scouts of the 82nd Airborne Division, who are close enough to see where Iraqis are dug in across the border, have a simple motto:
"Our mission is to see and not be seen," said Capt. Mike Lerario of Damascus, Md., commander of Delta Co., 2nd Battalion of the 325th Infantry Regiment.
To do that, the scouts probe, listen and watch with sensors that defeat darkness. "We're like the old cavalry on the western frontier," said Lerario, 30. "We're a picket line of sorts to provide early warning to the brigade."
But this modern cavalry has humvees, today's enlarged, improved equivalent of the all-purpose army jeep, as its workhorses. And its scouts patrol the desolate ground on foot to detect any Iraqi activity.
"We're out in front of everybody. We're the eyes and ears of the battalion," said Staff Sgt. David Angerhofer, 37, of Milbank, S.D. "It's an eerie feeling. You don't take anything for granted. It's stealth at its utmost."
Most of their work comes in the dead quiet of the inky night when they peer through the thermal sight of their TOWs (tube-launched, optically controlled, wire-guided antitank missiles).
The sight picks up heat; a man will appear in the darkness as a red splotch at distances of three miles and desert creatures can be spied at closer distances.
But brigade scouts can do more than watch and listen. Their humvees have the antitank missiles and .50-caliber machine guns plus grenade launchers. They also have a laser finder that can pinpoint a target for Copperhead guided artillery rounds and Hellfire and Maverick missiles.
Frigid blasts of north wind swoop across the wastelands. It's so desolate at night that you can hear a man cough from 400 yards away and vegetation is so sparse that a gnarly piece of brush becomes a landmark known to all as "the tree."
A sort of war of nerves has settled in between the opposing armies.
"We know they're there. They probably know we're here," said 1st Sgt. Jim Southerly, 39, of Harrisonburg, Va., of Delta Company, which calls itself the "Junkyard Dogs."
"We're keeping a low profile. If you want to stay alive, don't advertise," Southerly said.
That means lights and noise are kept to a minimum. Burlap sacks are placed over humvee windshields and windows to keep down reflections. Vehicles are covered with dirt so they blend in better.
 
 IN THE PERSIAN GULF (AP) - The U.S. Navy flew Kuwaiti sailors to a tiny island reclaimed from Baghdad last week so the Kuwaitis could raise their flag over their homeland's sands for the first time since Iraq's invasion.
A Sea King helicopter carried the sailors to Qaruh, a speck 24 miles from the mainland, after it was captured in battle Friday. The otherwise unihabited island had been used as a listening post by Iraqi troops.
Three Iraqis died, 51 were taken prisoner, and two Iraqi minesweepers were sunk in the battle, according to the U.S. military.
The Kuwaitis, who asked their names be withheld to protect relatives at home, described the raising of the flag as an emotional moment.
"I kissed the sand and raised the flag of my homeland. We are the first Kuwaitis to return to our country since Saddam invaded, but soon many more will follow," a 29-year-old captain said. "We have liberated the island of Qaruh and we are now looking forward to liberating the whole of Kuwait."
The captain's commander, a marine corps major, said: "It was a feeling I have never felt before. I was happy, I was excited. I was so emotional that I kissed the sand."

 

End of Document
