

From the Roar of War to the Sound of Silence, Few Kuwaitis Come Home
The Associated Press
May 20, 1991, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 928 words
Byline: By GREG MYRE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KUWAIT CITY
Body




Three months after the drama of the Gulf War, Kuwait has grown listless. It is likely to stay that way through the summer as most Kuwaitis remain abroad and leave their country's rebuilding to foreigners.
Standing on the downtown beachfront that was fortified with mines and Iraqi soldiers in cinderblock bunkers in February, one hears barely a sound today from a battered city that has fallen strangely silent.
Rows of smoke-blackened stores are closed, and schools don't plan to reopen until autumn at earliest. Piles of garbage and stripped cars dot vacant lots throughout the city. Few Kuwaitis seem eager to begin the task of reconstruction.
"The general impression I have is that most people are not happy with conditions and many want to leave," said Essa al-Shaheen, a leading opposition figure.
"People were active during the occupation, collecting garbage, distributing food, doing so many things," said al-Shaheen. "But now, many people have not even gone back to their offices. The people seem to have relaxed too much."
One frustrated American businessman who's been waiting for a government decision on a contract for two months said foreigners seem to be "in a bigger hurry to fix things up than the Kuwaitis."
Essential services like water, electricity and hospitals are all working and most government offices are open, even if many desks remain empty. The emirate's oil wealth has eased the hardships of war and its aftermath.
Supermarket shelves at the huge Sultan Center are stocked with all the staples, including French bread, Perrier water and imported spices.
But the riches that made life comfortable for Kuwaitis also helped breed a casual attitude toward work that hampers rebuilding.
"I thought Kuwaitis didn't work very hard, and I hoped the hardships of the occupation would change that," said Yousef Behbehani, from one of the country's wealthiest families.
"We are determined to rebuild what we've lost, but many people just want the government to give them the money," he said.
At most, one-third of the prewar population of 1.5 million are in Kuwait City, which has the feel of a lazy Sunday afternoon seven days a week.
Activity is concentrated in a few select areas. The huge fruit and vegetable market bustles with hundreds of sellers and customers from dawn to dusk.
Nightfall brings flashing neon and groups of teen-agers in sports cars to the Salmiya District to hang out, or maybe get an ice cream cone to relieve the heat.
Some of the busiest places in Kuwait are foreign embassies, where hundreds of Kuwaitis line up every day to get permission to leave the country temporarily.
After initially telling citizens to remain abroad, the government has begun a campaign to fly Kuwaitis home free for a one-month period.
About 5,000 are returning daily - only half of what the government expected. And that figure is misleading. Many appear to be coming back just for a quick look.
Bankers say many Kuwaitis are returning, withdrawing large sums of money, then leaving for their traditional long summer vacations.
Al-Shaheen, leader of the Islamic Constitutional Movement, said Kuwait's prime minister, Crown Prince Saad al-Abdullah al-Sabah, expressed disappointment at the slow return during a recent meeting.
"The prime minister said we need these people to come back and start working," al-Shaheen said. "He seemed annoyed that so many people have delayed their return."
Many Kuwaitis cite the summer heat, pollution from 500 oil well fires, dangers of unexploded bombs and increased crime for their continued absence. Others say the government seems largely invisible and has not inspired confidence that it is fully in control.
In one sign of its returning authority, the government has begun summary trials for 300 defendants accused of helping Iraqi invaders. Six men were sentenced Sunday, including one who received 15 years for wearing a Saddam Hussein T-shirt.
The Western governments that drove Iraqi forces out of Kuwait are watching the trials closely but have yet to respond to complaints by defense lawyers that they were assigned on the spot and given no time to prepare a defense.
At the same time, Kuwait's ruler has kept a low profile. Since returning from exile in March, Sheik Jaber al-Ahmed al-Sabah has made only one public appearance - a 10-minute television address.
The emir spends his days on the grounds of the opulent Bayan Palace, often meeting foreign dignitaries. But the country's media make no mention of his daily activities.
His quiet style, popular while Kuwait hummed along in seemingly perpetual properity fed by oil revenues, has left Kuwaitis complaining they lack direction in the first national crisis they have faced.
"The government tells us nothing," said businessman Mohammed al-Dashti. "We have to ask foreigners what is going on in our own country."
Kuwaiti men spend long hours in the traditional gathering room of their homes, the "diwaniya," often debating the need for greater democracy and a restoration of the Constitution and Parliament suspended by the emir in 1986.
The emir has promised elections next year and says he is thinking about granting voting rights to women.
But authorities have shut down one newspaper critical of the government. At the New Dawn newspaper, the only daily currently publishing in Kuwait, a censor was installed recently, according to staff reporters.
"This is a golden chance to decide how we are going to build our future," said al-Shaheen, the opposition leader. "But we have not seen the changes that so many people are asking for. We must not waste this opportunity."

 

End of Document
