

From the Home Front
The Associated Press
January 21, 1991, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1598 words
Dateline: INDIANAPOLIS
Body




A member of an Indiana-based Air Force Reserve unit serving in Operation Desert Storm said Monday the spirits of people in the unit are "real good."
Some members of the unit are working 12-hour shifts at an air base and spend the rest of their time sleeping, playing cards and watching Cable News Network, said Staff Sgt. Joe Brown, 29, of Wheeling, Ind., an aircraft mechanic with the 434th Air Refueling Wing out of Grissom Air Force Base, said from Saudi Arabia.
"We need beer," he said. U.S. servicemen are forbidden from drinking alcohol there because it is not allowed under Islam.
Asked how they were reacting to the initial stages of the war against Iraq, he said, "Real good. It was more or less, 'It's about time, so let's do it and get it done.'
"I think for the most part they expect it to be fairly short," Brown said.
Of the television accounts of anti-war protests at home, Brown said, the unit members "knew there was a chance something like this could happen when they signed up. No one was forced into the military by the draft, so no one should be complaining."
However, the members of the 434th feel they are receiving good support from the American public as a whole, he said.
---
 
 Arab Youngsters Fighting Barbs from Insensitive Classmates
AURORA, Colo. (AP) - A Muslim and Islamic support group here is helping young Arab-Americans deal with racial taunts from classmates and a sense of confusion resulting from the war in the Persian Gulf.
Several young people of Arab ancestry met Sunday at the Colorado Muslim Society and Islamic Center in Aurora.
Many said they have endured sarcasm and stereotypical comments about their religion, heritage and homeland.
Tariq, a 10-year-old whose parents are Palestinian, said classmates have taunted him. "It's hard to defend yourself when there's so many against you."
Sulttana, a 16-year-old Denver high school student, said she often feels outnumbered among American classmates. Sulttana is a Muslim whose father is a native of Afghanistan.
"They call me a Communist, a terrorist," she said. "They say all Arabs are dirty."
Some youths said the war is forcing them to choose between their ancestral faith and their adopted country.
"I don't agree with everything that Saddam Hussein is doing," 13-year-old Jihan said. "But I don't agree with all that Bush is doing, either. I'm a Muslim. I'm in the middle."
---
 
 Marine Baptized Before Shipping Out
AUSTIN, Texas (AP) - Alongside the babies and children being baptized at St. Mary's Roman Catholic Cathedral was 21-year-old Roger Mendoza, a machine gunner in the Marine Corps Reserves.
As a rule, adult baptisms at the church are performed only at Easter.
But Mendoza's circumstances were extraordinary - "danger of death," said the Rev. Michael J. Sis.
Mendoza's unit had been told to report for active duty at 6 a.m. Monday.
"We've been called up. We haven't been told officially that we're going to Saudi Arabia, but it's pretty obvious," Mendoza said.
Mendoza left college last year to join the reserves and just completed his training last month.
He said he hadn't been particularly active in the Catholic Church for some time, but during the rigors of basic training found comfort in it.
When he found out last week that he was being called up, Mendoza decided to be baptized Sunday. "I just wanted to make sure, in case anything happens. I just wanted to make sure I made my peace with God," he said.
---
 
 Group Offers 10 Times Iraqi Bounty for Rescued Pilots
NEW YORK (AP) - In response to Iraq's $$32,000 bounty for captured allied pilots, a group on Monday offered 10 times that to anyone who saves a downed pilot and returns him to allied forces.
"This is a very good morale booster, and maybe there will be an organized effort to save them," said Leonid Roytman, who hastily organized Save American and Allied Pilots after hearing of the Iraqi offer.
Roytman, a professor of electrical engineering at City College, said he called two dozen colleagues, friends and neighbors on the affluent north shore of New York's Long Island on Saturday night and got pledges totaling $$1 million to back up the reward offer.
Saddam Hussein's government has announced rewards ranging up to $$32,000 for anyone who captures downed allied fliers.
Speaking of Saddam, Roytman said: "If this idiot offers $$32,000, we'll offer 10 times that. If money talks, let's do it."
 
 Editors: Save American and Allied Pilots, Port Washington, N.Y. 11050
---
 
 Maryland School Officials Halt Field Trips
BALTIMORE (AP) - School officials in two Maryland counties have banned student excursions to Baltimore and Washington for field trips or athletic events because of feared terrorist attacks.
"We feel there is the potential for worldwide terrorism, especially in the Washington and Baltimore areas," said Noel Farmer, superintendent of schools in Frederick County in western Maryland.
The superintendent in Carroll County, northwest of Balitimore, Edward Shilling, also canceled trips. Montgomery County officials have canceled all student foreign travel scheduled for the spring break.
Frederick County high school track teams missed Saturday's Maryland National Guard Indoor Track Scholastic Games in Baltimore.
"Not only were we eight teams short, but we ended up short on officials," said meet director Ed Walker. "We also had no electronic timer at the finish line, because people from Frederick County were supposed to bring that."
Other administrators say they are reluctant to take steps that might frighten students unnecessarily.
"We're certainly not going to keep kids from going to the nation's capital or on any other field trips," said Richard Bavaria, spokesman for the Baltimore County schools. "We've had no indication of unsafe situations."
A Marine pilot in Saudi Arabia helped coach his wife through the birth of their first child … in Hawaii.
Eric Levesque got through to Tripler Army Medical Center in Honolulu three times to urge his wife on. His second call came in the midst of heavy labor.
"He said, 'Breathe, Sarah, breathe...in, out, in, out. … I was listening to him. I needed to hear it," said Levesque's wife, Sarah.
"I told him I really wanted him to be there," she said.
The baby, named Corrie was born Thursday and looks like her dad, Mrs. Levesque said. "I wanted her to look like him. It comforts me."
Two or three babies are born each day at the military hospital to women whose husbands are in the Persian Gulf, hospital officials said.
Several were born Wednesday, the day U.S.-led forces attacked Iraq. Among them was Richard Davis Jr., born at just 2 pounds, 12 ounces.
"The doctor said stress isn't a factor (in the premature birth)," said mother Kelly Davis, "but it played a lot on me."
Davis' husband, Marine Cpl. Richard Davis, received orders to return to Hawaii and was expected to arrive sometime Monday.
The women whose husbands are at war receive special attention, said 2nd Lt. Linda Stanley, a charge nurse in one of the hospital's obstetrical units.
"Many times we end up crying with them. We spend more emotional time on them,"' Stanley said.
---
 
 Telethon Disrupted by Gulf War
LOS ANGELES (AP) - United Cerebral Palsy officials worked Monday to ensure a vital fund-raising telethon that was pre-empted by war coverage gets to the TV screens of contributors nationwide.
David Myers, director of development for the UCP affiliate in Los Angeles, said agreements with 80 stations to broadcast "Star-athon '91: A Weekend With The Stars" collapsed as stations turned to covering the war.
Stations in Fresno, Las Vegas and Sarasota, Fla., were among the few that went ahead with the 21-hour national telethon Saturday and Sunday.
Last year's telethon raised $$24 million nationwide, Myers said. A figure for this year's event was not immediately available, in part because individual stations and UCP affiliates handle telephone pledges.
Cerebral palsy is the leading disabling condition among children. It affects roughly 700,000 Americans.
Myers said the telethon was taped and that the national UCP was working with its affiliates to decide how and when to have it broadcast by local stations.
Program hosts included Henry Winkler, John Ritter, Joanna Kerns, Ben Vereen and Florence Henderson, among other celebrities.
---
 
 Call from a Pen Pal in the Gulf
BOSTON (AP) - An early-morning call from Saudi Arabia brought 10-year-old Matthew Burke closer to his pen pal, serviceman Homer McFadden, who asked him what people think about the war at home.
"When he comes home he might come to our house," Matthew said Monday.
Matthew first wrote to McFadden, 22, in November as part of a fifth-grade project at his elementary school in nearby Rockland. The Jackson, Miss., soldier works on communications and computers in the Persian Gulf.
"I personally don't think there's going to be a war and I am praying every day for one not to happen," McFadden said in his initial letter to the boy, received Dec. 12. "Let's start a beautiful friendship."
Denise Burke, Matthew's mother, said the family sent a package filled with candies, cookies, checkers, trick cards and other games.
And on Sunday morning, at about 6 a.m., McFadden called from the Persian Gulf.
"He wanted to know what everybody knew about here," Mrs. Burke said.
The family does not know what unit McFadden is serving with, and they have no idea how to contact his family.
When the family asked him what else they could send, McFadden told them "a ticket home."
"He asked what people think of the war over here," Matthew said. "I told him people care about them. He said 'that's great,' that the people over there appreciate us caring about them."

 

End of Document
