

Gore's Military Record Reflects Struggles of the Times
The Associated Press
July 29, 1992, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 1062 words
Byline: By WILLIAM M. WELCH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Vice presidential nominee Al Gore's experience as a Vietnam veteran may counterbalance concerns about Democrat Bill Clinton's efforts to avoid military service. But Gore's decision to serve was not an easy one, made as his father faced re-election to the Senate burdened by an unpopular anti-war record.
Gore's official military records, released to The Associated Press by the Army, show he spent a little less than five months in Vietnam as an Army information officer in 1971.
He was discharged two months early as the United States wound down its involvement in the war. His tour of Vietnam was less than the year that was routine for many soldiers.
Just as the Vietnam War remains an object of debate long after its unsuccessful conclusion, there are unanswered questions about why Gore, the son of a senator, spent more than a year based at Fort Rucker, Ala., awaiting orders to go to war.
The answers may be unknown to Gore, too.
His press secretary, Marla Romash, said Gore himself was given no explanation. "That's when his orders came in," she said.
At the U.S. Army Central Records Center in St. Louis, spokeswoman Joyce Wiesner said Gore's files do not reveal a reason.
"They didn't send him right away. There's no indication why," she said.
Once in Vietnam, Gore was an information officer assigned to the Army Engineer Command and, until it was deactivated in April 1971, to the 20th Engineer Brigade.
In essence, Gore was a military journalist, writing accounts of the engineers' activities for a company newspaper and magazine. It was a role that he has said brought brushes with enemy fire, if not direct combat.
In 1988, when he was campaigning unsuccessfully for his party's presidential nomination, Gore told The Washington Post that he had wanted to go to Vietnam and was delayed by the Army.
"People try to make something out of the fact that I was there for only six months," Gore said then. "Well (expletive). That just infuriates me. I wanted to go."
At the time, Gore's father Albert Sr., the Tennessee senator, was facing a difficult re-election battle. He was vulnerable in part because his strong opposition to the Vietnam War did not sit well with his conservative state.
The younger Gore had just graduated from Harvard and shared an opposition to the war with much of his generation. According to many accounts, Gore carefully weighed his options, even briefly considered fleeing to Canada as many did to avoid the draft.
An important consideration was his father's campaign. A draft-dodger son would hardly have helped re-election chances in Tennessee. According to some accounts, Gore made his decision on an introspective walk around the rolling Middle Tennessee hills of his family's farm, near where the Caney Fork meets the Cumberland River.
Gore enlisted in the Army on Aug 7, 1969, for a two-year hitch. He reported at Fort Dix, N.J., for basic training 11 days later.
He was assigned to Fort Rucker as an information officer for the U.S. Army Aviation School, and reported on Oct. 31, 1969. He was there until Christmas 1970.
Military records show Gore reported to Vietnam on Jan. 8, 1971; he returned to the United States and was discharged on May 24, 1971.
In its 1988 interview, the Post asserts Gore's family believes but cannot prove that his orders to Vietnam were delayed by the Nixon administration, reasoning that his death or injury might help his father's re-election prospects. Some close to Gore have also offered that as a possible explanation.
"All I know," Gore told the newspaper, "is I was not allowed to go until the first departure date after the November election."
Gore appeared in uniform in one of his father's campaign advertisements, with a narration in which the elder Gore said, "Always love your country, son."
In his 14 months at Fort Rucker, Gore followed his earlier pattern as a serious, earnest young man. He was named post soldier of the month in April 1970.
Wade W. Ladue, a retired lieutenant colonel and Army aviator, was a major and head of the information office where Gore was assigned. He recommended Gore for the honor, and recalls Gore fondly now.
In an interview, Ladue said he recalls "no qualms … whatsoever" by Gore about the prospect of going to Vietnam. Ladue said he doesn't remember Gore ever trading on his prominent parentage.
To earn the post honor, Gore had to appear before several boards of noncommissioned officers. "It was a pretty big deal," Ladue said. "You had to study for it. You were asked questions about military and current events."
In Vietnam, Gore was assigned to the 20th Engineer Brigade. It was headquartered at Bien Hoa, an air base 20 miles northeast of Saigon, until it was deactivated in April of 1971. He was reassigned to the engineer command, which was headquartered at Long Binh, the large Army logistical base also near Saigon.
Gore wrote an account for the Castle Courier, the newspaper of the engineer command, about a Viet Cong attempt to overrun Fire Support Base Blue, a small compound that had been directing artillery fire into Cambodia. Thirty-five engineers were among the 135 troops at the base.
Gore visited the base after the attack, interviewed the men and wrote a narrative of how they fought the enemy inside the compound. His picture ran with his byline.
The account included this scene:
"The explosions kept up. And they all seemed to be hits. The eight-inch (gun) was already gone, one of the dusters was now in flames, an entire row of hootches was destroyed. Either they were damned accurate shots or … 'VC in the compound! VC in the compound!' Suddenly everyone was yelling it. And dogs were barking.
"Instead of panicking, the engineers coolly readjusted to the new situation ..."
In his 1988 Post interview, Gore said he was shot at but did not claim to have actually been in combat.
During the presidential campaign, Gore defended his use of a brochure with a picture of him carrying an M-16 rifle in Vietnam. "I carried that rifle all over Vietnam and walked like that in every part of the country," he said.
When he announced as a candidate in 1987, reporters who were allowed into his home in rural Carthage saw a photo of him with the rifle, prominently displayed on a wall.
He told reporters later in 1987: "I was not involved in fire fights. I was not in the infantry. I was in areas where combat took place. I did not see combat myself. I was fired upon."

 

End of Document
