

Guadalcanal: Where the Tide of War Reversed and Marine Tradition Grew
The Associated Press
July 19, 1992, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1724 words
Byline: AP Photos, By ROBERT DVORCHAK, AP National Writer
Body




At 9:09 a.m. on Aug. 7, 1942 - exactly eight months after Pearl Harbor - the first wave landed on Guadalcanal's Red Beach. The 1st Marine Division, mostly apple-green and carrying bolt-action Springfield rifles from an earlier world war, waded in.
Over the next six months and two days, history would be written in blood on this 90-mile-long junk of island jungle.
"Guadalcanal is not a name but an emotion," wrote historian Samuel Eliot Morison, "recalling desperate fights in the air, furious night naval battles, frantic work at supply or construction, savage fighting in the sodden jungle, nights broken by screaming bombs and deafening explosions of naval shells."
Guadalcanal was a turning point - the original steppingstone for later invasions of Tarawa, Saipan, Peleliu, Iwo Jima, Okinawa, each island a hopscotch step closer to Tokyo Bay.
And it was on Guadalcanal that a leatherneck legacy dawned in World War II. It provided the first indelible images of Marines assaulting a beach and raising the U.S. flag on Japanese ground - the blueprint for Pacific victory.
"I can't say we started the Marine Corps reputation, but we burnished it a bit," said John B. Sweeney, a native of Columbus, Ohio, and a company commander of Marine Raiders on Guadalcanal.
"A lot of the guys - the fighters, the privates - they stuck at their posts and did everything that was asked, sometimes almost impossible tasks," Sweeney said. "And a lot of people got killed along the way. A lot of good men. You can't forget them."
To be sure, Guadalcanal wasn't just a Marine Corps show. Every branch of the U.S. military - the Navy, Coast Guard, Army and combined air forces - had a hand in the battle on the ground, in the skies and on the seas.
This was total war, and it took bullets, bayonets, battleships, bombers and bulldozers to pay the first horrible installment on the price of victory.
 
 Guadalcanal was the first U.S. offensive of World War II, and the first time the Japanese Imperial Army lost a piece of ground. It was an obscure place for one of history's turning points.
Located in the lower Solomon Islands, Guadalcanal was a largely uninhabitable British protectorate. The Japanese seized it and cobbled an airstrip out of the jungle from which they could menace Australia, 1,000 miles to the southeast.
To stop them, President Roosevelt dispatched the Marines. They captured the airstrip and named it after Maj. Lofton Henderson, a Marine dive bomber pilot killed in June at the battle of Midway, the turning point at sea.
The full force of the Tokyo war machine tried to take back Henderson Field. Three times, the Japanese scheduled U.S. surrender ceremonies, only to be thwarted by Marines.
During a dozen charges in a Sept. 12-14 battle, the Japanese came within 1,000 yards of capturing the field. But Marine Raiders and paratroopers held on their last line of defense - Bloody Ridge or Edson's Ridge, named for Col. Merritt A. Edson, the commander of the 1st Raider Battalion.
"We were told we had to stay until you die to hold the line," said Thomas Mullahey, a platoon leader on the ridge. "We never felt we'd get out of it, actually. We thought we'd either be paraded in cages in Tokyo or be pulling rickshaws somewhere. It came out our way. By the skin of our teeth."
For a hint of how tough it was, every Marine who wasn't on the island knew the rhyme: "Say a prayer for your pal on Guadalcanal."
For starters, a 76-ship Navy task force withdrew on Aug. 9, with half the Marines equipment and too much of their food still aboard. Tokyo Rose taunted the marooned Marines, who ate palm tree roots and cocoanuts to augment their meager rations. On average, a combatant lost 25 pounds.
The slop and scum of Guadalcanal featured clouds of mosquitos, jungle rot, dysentery, leeches and tropical downpours. Grunts who survived combat faced the alternating fever and chill of malaria; a Marine wasn't pulled off the line unless his temperature soared past 104 degrees.
And then there were the Japanese - screaming "Banzai!" or "Long live the emperor!" - as they charged. They were flushed with Bushido, the ancient samurai code of preferring death to the disgrace of surrender.
The Japanese had pushed the Americans off Guam, Wake, Bataan and Corregidor, and they figured to do the same at Guadalcanal. In 97 minutes on one night, Japanese battleships hit Henderson with 918 rounds from their 14-inch guns.
"It seemed like it lasted forever. Day after day of getting bombed, shelled, shot at. You never got any real sleep, never got any real food," said Victor Croizat, a retired Marine colonel.
"But nobody was going to drive us out, god damn it," Croizat said. "We were there to stay. You're damned if you're going to let the Marine Corps down and damned if you're going to let your outfit down. "
When things were at their worst, commanders quietly drew up plans to have troops melt into the jungle and fight as guerrillas.
But reinforcements arrived to beat the last and largest Japanese offensive Oct. 23-27. The Sendai Division tried a three-pronged assault supported by naval and air power. Their first general order was: "Do not expect to return, not even one man, if occupation is not successful."
One of the last Japanese assaults failed in front of Mitchell Paige, a machine-gunner who won the Medal of Honor. Near the end of a seven-hour battle, Paige cradled his 42-pound, water-cooled gun in his arms and draped two belts of ammo around his neck. He yelled to some infantrymen: "Fix bayonets and follow me." Then he charged.
"It took me 15 years before I could talk about it," said Paige. "A Marine is like a well-oiled machine. You know in your own heart and your own mind the guys on your left and your right are going to fight to the death. It's your job. I felt confident we could whip any fighting force in the world."
On Guadalcanal, uncommon valor was a common occurrence.
Of the 30 men in Lt. Paul Moore's platoon, only six survived unscathed. Ten were killed and the others were wounded or sickened. Moore - awarded the Navy Cross, Silver Star and Purple Heart - took a bullet through his chest, made his confession and commended himself to God.
"If I get out of this, maybe it means I should do something special," Moore thought.
He did. The warrior was ordained an Episcopal priest, and as a man of God, he later became bishop of New York.
"It was a just war, if there is any such thing," Moore said. "There was a real sense of camaraderie among us. You were really fighting more for the Marine Corps than for the United States. We were stuck there, so we had to stick together. What the hell are you going to do? You life is in each other's hands every moment of the day. It's a terrible responsibility."
Air power was pivotal in the way things turned out. Henderson Field opened Aug. 20 under the name Cactus Air Force. With the help of the construction battalions, the planes kept flying, sometimes with fuel or parts taken from wrecked aircraft.
Among the 15 Medals of Honor awarded during the Guadalcanal campaign, five went to Marine aviators. One was Capt. Joe Foss, who bettered Capt. Eddie Rickenbacker's World War I record of 25 kills to become the new ace of aces.
"Marines have the best espirt de corps. The thing that a lot of people don't realize was the dedication of the people that were there. They put their lives on the line everyday," said Foss, later the governor of South Dakota and president of the National Rifle Association.
"From the generals to the privates, we had one thing on our minds - get the job done and go home. The historians called it a turning point. Of course, we didn't know it at the time. We were just battling to knock those suckers down."
At sea, seven major battles were fought. So much war junk from both sides went to the bottom that the turquoise waters around the island were called Ironbottom Sound.
The U.S. Navy suffered perhaps the worst defeat in its history on Aug. 9, when three American cruisers and an Australian one were sunk in less than 60 slam-bang minutes off Savo Island.
But in the naval battle of Guadalcanal in mid-November, the Japanese lost two battleships, a cruiser, three destroyers and 10 transports funneling men and equipment to the island.
"We've got the bastards licked!" declared Admiral William "Bull" Halsey, who took command in the South Pacific on Oct. 18.
Back on the ground, the 1st Marine Division was relieved Dec. 9 by the Army's Americal and 25th Divisions and elements of the 2nd Marine Division.
The fresh troops pushed the Japanese off the island. It was declared secure Feb. 9, 1943, after the last 13,000 Japanese fled to transport ships.
In the end, naval losses were roughly equal; each side had 24 warships sunk. In the air, Japan lost 682 aircraft, 446 of them combat planes. U.S. air losses were 615 planes, including 264 combat planes.
The human cost was greater. The U.S. death toll included 1,769 ground forces (1,207 of them Marines), 4,911 men at sea and 420 in the air.
But Japanese fatalities were four times greater. The Japanese lost 25,600 troops on the ground, 3,500 at sea and 1,200 in the air.
And that is how the Japanese came to call Guadalcanal the Island of Death.
 
 "It set the stage for the rest of the war. Once we were able to hold on, it gave everybody a lift," said George MacGillivray, then a Marine corporal.
The amphibious tactics were a model for getting troops ashore in North Africa, Sicily, Anzio and Normandy. And even in later years, every Marine shared the lore and myth of Guadalcanal.
If these gung ho fighters could take on the Rising Sun's empire, commanders didn't hesitate to use them - some would say misuse them - at Inchon in Korea, at Da Nang as the first U.S. combat troops sent to Vietnam in 1965, at Beirut as an ill-fated 1983 peacekeeping force and at Kuwait City as liberators.
Fifty years later, Guadalcanal's capital city of Honiara, a sleepy port that didn't exist in 1942, sits near Red Beach.
Japan's money, not its military, exert influence. Honiara's only hotel, the Mendana, is owned by the Japanese. So is half the island's tuna factory. The Japanese are building a new terminal at Henderson International Airport, the landing strip that so many men died for.
And demolition crews still uncover and detonate leftover bombs that litter the island, their explosions a distant echo of what happened 50 years ago.

 

End of Document
