

Guard Makes Contact In Trip To The Kitchen Table
The Associated Press
January 13, 1991, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1055 words
Byline: By STEVE KLINE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: OMAHA, Neb.
Body




Bob Hunter thought he had a prospect in Bill Verzani, so he went to the kitchen table three times.
Hunter is a sergeant and recruiter for the Army National Guard. The trip to the kitchen table, in recruiter's parlance, is a visit to the prospect's home - an opportunity to spend an hour or so pitching the benefits of Guard service and to chat with the teen-ager's parents.
Hunter is a traveling salesman, but one whose product is suddenly newsworthy. Units of the National Guard - reservists who have often been denigrated as weekend warriors - are serving in the Persian Gulf.
This has complicated the life of a recruiter. While Hunter is eager to describe the financial benefits of joining the Guard, the prospect and the prospect's parents sometimes envision the sands of the Saudi desert.
Hunter has been pitching Verzani, an 18-year-old freshman at University of Nebraska-Omaha, for more than a year. Verzani is interested, but the Persian Gulf crisis has given him second thoughts: "I wouldn't want to end up over there, because that would screw up my education."
"Last year at this time, we were encouraging him to sign up," said his mother, Rosemary. "We still do think it's a good thing. But it's just so scary with the chance of war. We're telling Bill to just wait and see."
Hunter, 43, insists he rarely hears a parental concern about Operation Desert Shield. "It's an irritation - not much more," he said.
Only two Nebraska Guard units - the 24th Medical Company and the Nebraska contingent of the 1267th Air Ambulance - have been mobilized, Hunter notes. That's 140 people of the state's 4,521 Army and 1,086 Air Guard members.
His 18-year-old son Matthew serves in the Guard. "I'm not worried (about the gulf), but his mother is petrified," Hunter said.
Nationally, Army Guard recruiting is down about 14 percent from a year ago, said John Hoffman, spokesman with the National Guard Bureau at the Pentagon. But officials blame budget cuts, not Desert Shield.
Still, Staff Sgt. Ron Marshall concedes that parents ask about the gulf.
"I tell them there's no guarantees. There's always the possibility they might be called up," said Marshall, 27, a recruiter based in Norfolk, Neb.
"My initial reaction was 'Oh, my goodness, we're fighting a war. I don't want you to go to war,"' said Jean Schmeckpeper, whose 18-year-old son, Matthew, signed up with the Army National Guard in November. "I wanted him to realize six years is a long time out of his life."
But the financial package was irresistible, offering the chance for up to 75 percent of college tuition, a monthly student stipend of up to $$140, regular entry level pay of $$92.96 a month, plus a $$2,000 signing bonus. There's also a plan under which the Guard will pay some student loans.
Over the regular six-year enlistment period, the total reimbursement can add up to more than $$20,000. As the recruiters like to say, that's for a part-time job, just one weekend of drills a month.
Unless, of course, the unit is mobilized for duty.
Even without the threat of war, the life of a recruitment officer is not an easy one. Marshall covers a huge rural region in northeast and north-central Nebraska; he can't waste a home visit on someone who isn't going to sign up, because the trip to the kitchen table is hundreds of miles.
So he focuses on schools. Six months a year, he works 60 hours and travels 1,000 miles a week. He offers workshops on self-esteem, financial aid, employability skills and military careers in junior and senior high schools.
He tries to build his identity in the community so that when a student graduates and needs a job or financial help with college, he or she will remember Marshall and the Guard.
Marshall, clad in sweater and slacks (he says civilian clothes help build trust), spent a recent afternoon talking to sophomores at Norfolk Catholic High School about military careers. Of the eight students, four boys and four girls, only Nate Adams, 17, expressed interest.
The gulf crisis does not bother a youth who is undecided about his future: "It's kind of exciting, I guess. If it were up to me, I'd go over there," he said.
Earlier in the day, Marshall spent nearly two hours at Norfolk High School under a banner that read: "Do You Need Money To Go To College?"
Of the hundred or so students who passed by, two stopped to talk. Marshall got their names, but no commitments.
"This type of prospecting doesn't pay off overnight," Marshall said.
"It's taken me over two years to build this kind of relationship with the schools. While other people have struggled during the Persian Gulf, I've had my best year yet," he said.
Hunter works a more populous territory. He relies on telemarketing, making cold calls to high school students from lists supplied to him by the schools.
Hunter says about one out of every five phone calls ends with a trip to the kitchen table. And of every five trips, he signs up a Guard enlistee.
That's one enlistee out of 25 contacts. Hunter signed up - or "put in" as he says - 51 recruits during the last year, the result of about 1,275 contacts.
When Hunter called Charles West, 19, the Omaha Central High School senior expressed interest. So Hunter visited West at home.
West, about 6 feet tall and wearing a white sweatshirt, jeans and a baseball cap, greets Hunter at the door. His parents are not home.
A television drones quietly in the next room as the uniformed Hunter and West sit at the dining room table.
Hunter asks West what he plans to do after graduation. West wants to attend the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, which opens the door for Hunter to expound upon the Guard's financial benefits.
West is interested in the tuition aid, but he's resistant to military recruiting. "I already talked to the Marines and the Army, but I didn't like what I heard," he says.
Hunter wants to know why.
"They're too violent," West says.
Guard service requires only one weekend a month for drills, unless a unit is mobilized, Hunter says.
"I sleep in on weekends," West replies.
After about 45 minutes, Hunter tells West to think about it, shakes the young man's hand, and departs.
A week later, West was clearly backing away from signing with the Guard.
"I talked with my older brother's friend, who just got out of the Navy, and he said it wouldn't be a good idea, because of the trouble we're having" in the Persian Gulf, he said.
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto AH1 of Jan. 9.

 

End of Document
