

Half-Century Later, Will U.N. Finally 'Seize the Moment'?
The Associated Press
December 6, 1992, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1401 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Fast-forward this turbulent planet to the year 2000, late in a second Clinton administration.
One African nation is menacing another. The nervous neighbor appeals to New York, where the Security Council gathers at midnight. From a 36th-floor U.N. operations room, the order goes out to North Carolina and the North Caucasus: Gear up.
Within hours, American and Russian paratroopers are airborne, converging on central Africa, the threatened border and possibly a bloody spell of combat under the baby-blue flag of the United Nations.
Going to war for peace.
One Cold War ago, the United Nations' founding fathers envisioned a muscular world body that would "unite our strength" to crush any aggressor. But the promise of 1945 was soon eclipsed in the long twilight of U.S.-Soviet rivalry and suspicion.
History now has circled, the great powers are again a team, and the United Nations wants to reclaim its birthright. The new U.N. chief has laid out a bold plan for a military arm that would punish cease-fire violators, guard endangered borders, roll back aggression.
"Now is the time … to seize the moment for the sake of the future," says Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
President-elect Clinton sounds like a supporter. Ordinary Americans seem to agree: A new Associated Press poll finds that a strong majority believes the United Nations can be relied on to combat at least some aggressors.
But the push to make the United Nations the heavily armed point man of a new world order will stir bitter debate in the months to come, because the Third World is worried. It fears that the Security Council, the U.N. "board of directors" that dispatches peace missions, will become a mere tool of U.S. foreign policy.
"If you look at the council, in reality, you will see that only one or two are making the decisions," said Nugroho Wisnumurti, Indonesia's U.N. ambassador and a Third World spokesman.
To dilute "northern" power in the Security Council, the poor nations of Asia, Africa and Latin America are demanding a makeover of the aging U.N. structure. In a world once split between East and West, a new North-South divide may soon open up, beginning in mankind's debating hall on the East River.
The United Nations has been in the "peacekeeping" business - keeping watch on truces - since 1948. But only lately, as the Cold War thawed, did business get brisk.
Today, more than 40,000 blue-helmeted troops from 61 nations are doing U.N. duty in a dozen operations on four continents. They have become more than truce observers: In El Salvador, for example, they are monitoring human rights, and in chaotic Somalia thousands of soldiers, Americans and others, will soon be delivering food to the starving.
In Cambodia, after 13 years of civil war, the United Nations has taken on its biggest job, trying to disarm four armies, organize elections and, in effect, run the country. But the 17,000-member U.N. contingent has hit a major obstacle: The Khmer Rouge guerrilla group refuses to disarm.
Elsewhere, too, the realities of war, politics and money are hobbling a revived United Nations.
In disintegrating Yugoslavia, for example, U.N. peacekeepers hunker down amid ethnic warfare while the big powers agonize over taking tougher U.N. action. At New York headquarters, U.N. members are $ 844 million in arrears in peacekeeping contributions. Auditors, meanwhile, tell of waste in peace operations.
Against this troubled background, President Bush, Russia's Boris Yeltsin and other leaders met last January in the first summit conference of the 15 Security Council nations and asked Boutros-Ghali to draft a plan for a stronger U.N. military role. Five months later, he produced his "Agenda for Peace."
The secretary-general's plan promotes financial reforms guaranteeing a cash flow for peacekeeping, and more active U.N. diplomacy in heading off conflicts. But at its controversial heart lies the U.N. Charter's Article 43, which in 1945 asked governments to formally commit specific military forces for U.N. call-up.
Boutros-Ghali recommends that such Article 43 agreements, a paper dream for 47 years, finally be negotiated to give the Security Council a permanent standby force to fight aggression.
Until they establish forces to push back all-out aggressors, he says, U.N. member states should at least take the half-step of authorizing military action to restore broken cease-fires.
His approaches would nudge U.N. peacekeeping permanently into the field of battle for the first time. Although the U.S.-led Gulf War coalition of 1991 had the Security Council's blessing, it was not a U.N. operation.
Others have more detailed plans. The private U.N. Association of the USA proposes three tiers: a few thousand elite troops from one or two nations under permanent U.N. command, backed up by a rapid deployment force of tens of thousands on call from a few nations, backed up further by larger contingency forces available from many countries.
The Bush administration reacted cautiously to Boutros-Ghali's call for Article 43 commitments. But Clinton told the U.N. Association he favors exploring the possibility of a U.N. rapid deployment force. "We must do more than talk about a new world order," he said.
Now, said a key ambassador, "everyone at the U.N. is waiting for Clinton. The Clinton people seem to have an optimistic, helpful view."
Support can be found in surprising places. Some say the U.S. military will always resist putting its troops under multinational command, but a former U.S. Army chief of staff dismisses that.
Such U.N. operations are "going to be one of the central roles of all forces, but particularly U.S. forces, because of what U.S. forces can do," said retired Gen. Edward Meyer, who helped develop the U.N. Association plan.
A veteran Finnish peacekeeping commander agreed.
"The world has changed," Lt. Gen. Gustav Hagglund, now Finland's chief of staff, said in a telephone interview from Helsinki. "There's a much wider consensus that conflicts should be limited before they get out of hand."
On the floor of the U.N. General Assembly, such members as Russia, France and Israel have endorsed the core of Boutros-Ghali's proposals. France offered 1,000 standby troops immediately.
The French U.N. ambassador, Jean-Bernard Merimee, said U.N. forces had to move into Somalia in a big way, to suppress the clan wars and alleviate the famine there.
"The same thing could well happen elsewhere," he said in an interview. "And the question is: Will the U.N. be up to the task?"
Support may appear broad, but a large bloc stands in the way.
Third Worlders fear a United Nations dominated by big powers would order "unjust interventions," said Indonesia's Nugroho, whose country leads the 108-nation Non-Aligned Movement.
"Until there is a more democratic scheme of things in the United Nations, then it's difficult for us to accept a more far-reaching military role," he said.
The South wants some of its giants - India, Brazil and Nigeria, for example - to get permanent Security Council seats. Meanwhile, Nugroho said, the Council should at least consult more closely with the 179-member General Assembly on intervention questions.
The General Assembly may vote soon on "Agenda for Peace," and another Security Council summit is proposed.
While diplomats debate, history creates facts. The professional staff of the new U.N. Department of Peacekeeping Operations will soon grow to 30. Peacekeeping spending has ballooned to almost $ 3 billion this year. And even Nugroho acknowledged that the disorder and death in Somalia demanded a major U.N. military intervention.
In the end, the true meaning of a U.N. "peace army" may not hit home until body bags come home from far-off skirmishes over obscure causes.
Robin Higgins knows the meaning. Her husband, Marine Col. William R. Higgins, was kidnapped and killed by terrorists while serving as a U.N. peacekeeper in Lebanon.
A Marine major herself, she sounds both rueful and realistic about the world's headlong rush into a new order.
Decision-makers bear a heavy responsibility for peacekeepers' safety, she said. But she noted, too, that America has much to gain from a less turbulent planet: "It's important to us as an international power to take an interest in ensuring peace and democratic principles around the world."
And if she, the peacekeeper's widow, were summoned to some distant embattled border?
"I would serve."
 
 End Adv for Sunday Dec 6

 

End of Document
