

He Legitimized Opposition to the War, Was 'Halfbright' to Enemies
The Associated Press
February 9, 1995, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1080 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Former Sen. J. William Fulbright, whose criticism of America's "arrogance of power" in Vietnam gave intellectual substance to the anti-war movement, died Thursday at 89.
Fulbright was an early mentor to Bill Clinton, who worked as clerk in his Senate office while a student at Georgetown University and who, years later, awarded him the nation's highest civilian honor, the Presidential Medal of Freedom. If it weren't for Fulbright, Clinton said Thursday at the White House, "I don't think I'd be here today."
And Fulbright was the architect of the Fulbright scholarships, an international exchange program in which tens of thousands of students and teachers from more than 120 countries have gone abroad to study. He considered its creation, first financed by the sale of U.S. war property left overseas after World War II, among his finest achievements.
Because of it, he was particularly revered in Japan. The Arkansas Democrat was one of the few American legislators of this century whose name was known around the world.
Fulbright died of a stroke in his Washington home near the embassies of Massachusetts Avenue. He had been in frail health; an earlier stroke in 1993 limited his speech and his movements. He used a wheelchair.
As chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Fulbright presided over televised hearings in 1966 and 1967 that gave the stamp of legitimacy to anti-war sentiments then sweeping through the streets and campuses of America. The hearings helped turn the country against the war.
While others said the fall of Vietnam would threaten U.S. security, Fulbright said the war had choked domestic reform and was "turning the Great Society into a sick society."
The hearings made Fulbright an unlikely hero to a generation a third his age - and brought him the wrath of Lyndon Johnson, who considered him a "Nervous Nelly" and vowed not to be the first president to lose a war.
Fulbright laid out his views on the war and America's world role in a 1966 book, "The Arrogance of Power."
"Gradually but unmistakably," he wrote, "America is showing signs of that arrogance of power which has afflicted, weakened, and in some cases destroyed great nations in the past. In so doing we are not living up to our capacity and promise as a civilized example for the world. The measure of our falling short is the measure of the patriot's duty of dissent."
Fulbright's greatest dismay - he said so often - had been his role in steering through the Senate the Tonkin Gulf resolution in August 1964, after two U.S. Navy vessels reported they had come under attack in that body of water off the coast of North Vietnam.
The resolution authorized Johnson to "take all necessary measures to repel an armed attack," and was cited by Johnson as the equivalent to a declaration of war. Only two senators opposed it. The genuineness of the attack has been questioned ever since.
"I should have been more alert at the time," Fulbright said 20 years later. "Not that it would have made the slightest difference in the course of affairs, but I'd feel better about myself."
On the other great issue of his times, Fulbright dragged his feet or opposed civil rights legislation. He felt he could not remain in the Senate if he championed the cause of black Americans.
After serving one term in the House, he won the first of five Senate terms by defeating an Arkansas governor, Homer Adkins, in a runoff after a vicious primary campaign. Each candidate tried to outdo the other in identifying with the white race.
But Fulbright stood up early to Sen. Joseph R. McCarthy, whose readiness to label any critic a communist sympathizer made colleagues cringe.
In 1954, Fulbright cast the only vote against providing money to McCarthy's investigations committee. He later led the successful fight for the Senate vote of censure that broke McCarthy's power. He said he thought taking on McCarthy would hurt him politically, but didn't.
Of McCarthy, Fulbright said: "He was just an accident."
For Fulbright, McCarthy coined an epithet: "Halfbright."
Ten years ago, Fulbright summed up his philosophy about the use of national power:
"The British were able for a few decades to survey an empire over which the sun never set, but that did not make Liverpool a beautiful place to live in, nor did it make the children of Welsh coal miners healthy and strong. On the contrary, it consumed resources that might have been gone for these purposes. And then - after all - the sun did set."
Views like those, he said, made him a realist, not the romantic his critics so often decried.
In May 1993, in honoring Fulbright, Clinton said, "The American political system produced this remarkable man, and my state did and I'm real proud of it."
Last May, Fulbright told a reporter that Clinton was doing a fine job "but I don't think he realizes how difficult it is."
Fulbright's legislative career closed in 1974 when he lost the Democratic nomination to the Senate to Dale Bumpers. Speaking in the Senate Thursday, Bumpers said the two of them had patched up their differences about five years ago during a two-hour lunch.
"I never heard him express any idea that wasn't noble," Bumpers said. He said Fulbright "loved his country beyond love of anything else."
Fulbright became a lobbyist, representing a number of foreign interests, several of them from Arab countries. In the Senate, he had been a sharp critic of U.S. support for Israel.
James William Fulbright was born April 9, 1905, and grew up in Fayetteville, Ark. His father was a banker, farmer and businessman. His mother wrote a column in the family-owned Fayetteville newspaper.
Young Bill slopped hogs at age 17 for $ 60 a month, clerked in his father's mercantile, washed soft-drink bottles and worked in the family-owned wagon-making factory.
He became a halfback for the Arkansas Razorbacks and a Rhodes Scholar. He toured Europe, obtained a law degree, married, became a law professor at Arkansas, and, in 1939 at 34, was appointed university president.
He lost that job after his mother wrote in her column that in electing Homer Adkins as governor, Arkansans had "preferred a backslapper to a statesman."
Fulbright's first wife, Elizabeth, died in 1985 after a marriage of 53 years. They had two daughters. His second wife, Harriet, and her parents were at his bedside when he died.
The Washington National Cathedral said a funeral service would be held Feb. 17. The University of Arkansas said Gov. Jim Guy Tucker would speak at a service there on Feb. 24.
 Load-Date: February 9, 1995

 

End of Document
