

Historic at the End, But Senate's Debate Was a Snooze in the Middle
The Associated Press
August 6, 1993, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 569 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Simpson of Wyoming stared into space. Kennedy of Massachusetts took off his glasses, put them on, took them off. Kerry of Massachusetts - not the mystery Kerrey of Nebraska - slapped McCain of Arizona on the back.
It may have been historic and, at the end, dramatic, but in the middle Friday it was a Senate debate. Which is to say a debate in which no blood flows, voices rarely rise, no passion flares, not much new is said and few listen anyway.
At 1:35 p.m., Sen. Connie Mack read aloud a letter from a small-business constituent expressing concern about the impact of any new taxes. John McCain put a Wall Street Journal article into the Congressional Record. Slade Gorton read a sheaf of papers.
Wars are authorized in this place, flood damage paid, abortions banned or unbanned, judges impeached, the Constitution amended, crops subsidized, crime deplored, liquor taxed and ambassadors confirmed, but the Senate hardly changes. It does the people's business with an abstract, offhand air.
Change comes hat in hand. Television cameras came but the senators chose to pretend they hadn't. Microphones came and the mumblers on the Senate floor could, for once, be heard in the galleries.
The stenographers who followed the senators about, taking down every word for the next day's Congressional Record, were allowed to take their words down on keyboard machines, balanced on a board strapped across their chests.
The biggest change, the oldtimers say, was central air conditioning, which came in 1937. No Senate would have allowed itself to be here, in session, in August without air conditioning. The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 would have had to have been dealt with in June or would have waited until September.
Friday's debate was even more desultory than most because 99 of the 100 Senate minds were not only made up but announced publicly.
Only Bob Kerrey, D-Neb., was undeclared, and maybe - he wouldn't say - undecided.
Without him, it was universally said, President Clinton's deficit-reduction bill, and, to hear some say it, the promise of his presidency, would go down. With Kerrey voting with the Democrats, the president's program could be saved on a vote by Vice President Al Gore to break a 50-50 tie.
Kerrey in indecision was in character. When the Senate voted to support George Bush's line-in-the-sand against Iraq, Kerrey agonized until the end. When Clinton's bill, in different form, was before the Senate in June, he hesitated long until finally voting yes reluctantly.
In midafternoon, the Senate took a vote on a Republican point of order to declare the bill unconstitutional. All Democrats but one voted against the point of order; all Republicans but one voted the other way. Kerrey voted with his fellow Democrats, who prevailed.
The bells rang. Senators pushed through swinging doors to cast a vote.
The clerk called the roll: "Mister Akaka! Mister Baucus! Mister Bennett!..."
Senators voted "aye" or "nay" (where else is "aye" and "nay" part of an everyday vocabulary?) or with their thumbs, up or down.
Kerrey the mysterious took a seat by Wendell Ford, D-Ky., but none of their colleagues slipped over to eavesdrop, to inquire how he might vote. This was the Senate.
The vote over, the chamber all but emptied. Feinstein of California delivered a speech. Byrd of West Virginia, hands in pockets, engaged Danforth of Missouri in conversation. Hollings of South Carolina read a paper…

 

End of Document
