

How the Trade Deficit News Affected the Dollar, Stocks, Bonds
The Associated Press
September 20, 1994, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 281 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




News of a sharply higher U.S. trade deficit in July unnerved the financial markets Tuesday, as many investors saw the figures as an unexpected sign of American economic weakness. A glance at what happened:
 
 CURRENCY:
The dollar sank to 97.65 Japanese yen in New York, down from 98.53 late Monday, its lowest U.S. close since hitting a post-World War II nadir of 97.50 on July 12.
The dollar has lost 13 percent of its value vs. the yen this year, making Japanese products ranging from cars to computers more expensive for American consumers. The widening trade gap, combined with signs that U.S.-Japanese negotiations on opening Japan's markets were faltering, convinced currency investors that the dollar would cheapen further.
 
 STOCKS:
Prices tumbled in brisk trading as anxiety over the dollar's weakness raised the chances that the Federal Reserve would be forced to raise interest rates a sixth time this year. Higher rates tend to strengthen a currency but make stocks a less attractive investment. The Dow Jones industrial average sank 67.63 to 3,869.09, its worst one-day point drop since March. Market measures comprising a wider range of stocks also posted substantial losses.
 
 BONDS:
Prices initially fell sharply and sent long-term yields to the highest level in more than two years. But bargain hunters purchased bonds later in the day, viewing them as underpriced, and helped erase much of the market's weakness by the close of trading. The Treasury's main 30 1/8-year bond ended down 1/8 point, or $ 2.50 per $ 1,000 in face value. The yield, which moves in the opposite direction and is an indicator of interest rate trends, rose to 7.77 percent from 7.75 percent late Monday.
 Load-Date: September 20, 1994

 

End of Document
