

How the Nation's Newspapers Handle the War
The Associated Press
February 4, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1044 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Body




When the Gulf War broke out, this nation's newspapers knew they had on their hands one of the biggest stories of these times.
In one way or another - or many - newspapers responded to what their editors generally say was an enormous, almost an insatiable, appetite for news of the war.
Editors across America report that:
-In the first days of the war, they sold about as many copies of their papers as they printed.
-Although some papers devoted as much as 70 percent of their news space to war news, they could not satisfy the public's appetite for even more. "They want to know everything they can, and we want to give them as much as we can," said Ken Amundsen, managing editor of the Loveland (Colo.) Reporter-Herald.
-Intense and immediate coverage of the war by television only seemed to increase readers' interest in printed accounts, and in maps and other graphics illustrating what was going on.
"The most dominating story I've seen since I've become a working journalist," is how Dave Greenfield, executive editor of the Daily Mail of Charleston, W.Va., characterized the story. "I don't think readers can get enough of it."
-People particularly responded to news about local men and women in the war zone and local units sent to Saudi Arabia.
-Readers wanted their views to be noticed. "We've experienced a spurt of letters to the editor, from both sides," said Bob Gallagher, editor of the Globe-Times of Bethlehem, Pa. "On a couple of days we've had to drop one of our regular columnists to fit in the volume of reader mail."
What characterizes the American press is its localness. Every day, across the continent, about 1,600 daily newspapers are manufactured in their own communities, each with a different mix, each made distinct by its choice of what to print.
So when war started in the Persian Gulf, 1,600 editors found a local way to tell the story to their communities.
A handful decided to print the American flag.
The Fargo (N.D.) Forum was one of them, and its full-page flag now can be seen on front doors all over Fargo and its sister city, Moorhead, Minn., said the managing editor of The Forum, Terry DeVine.
The Coeur d'Alene (Idaho) Press and The Dominion Post of Morgantown, W.Va., also ran full-page flags. The Dominion Post's Old Glory was printed on heavy paper as a one-page insert; 2,000 extra papers were sold. "We're still getting calls for it," said city editor John Pastor.
The flag that ran in the Washington (Pa.) Observer-Reporter covered two pages and bore the names and addresses of 167 local men and women serving in the Persian Gulf. Since then the list has grown.
The Visalia Times-Delta in California prints a running daily account of how three Visalia families are coping, mostly in quotations, intended to show the war's effects at home on a family with a son or daughter in the battle area. One day's installment told how the mother of a soldier in the gulf spent her day taking a bike ride and attending a support group meeting.
For some editors, the war had them doing what they'd only heard about, or seen in old newspaper movies. They put out an extra.
"I've been here 37 years and I don't ever remember us running a bona fide extra," said Tony Vella, managing editor of the Utica (N.Y.) Observer-Dispatch. The extra ran on Jan. 16, the day the war started, and sold 9,000 copies, a virtual sellout. The paper's normal circulation is 57,000.
The Orange County Register in California published four extra editions in the early hours of the war. On the first night 70,000 were sold, and on the second night 130,000, said Pat Elster, vice president of circulation. Street sales are still running 15 percent above normal.
The Omaha (Neb.) World-Herald published a 40,000-copy extra the morning after war broke out.
The Santa Barbara (Calif.) News-Press reduced the ratio of advertising to news to create more space for news.
It was a good decision journalistically, but not economically, said David McCumber, executive editor; revenue from increased sales of the paper didn't cover the extra cost of printing more pages of news. "That has not been an easy decision to make, economic times being what they are," McCumber said.
A complaint about the war, of sorts, came from Kurt Wanfried, managing editor of the Carlisle (Pa.) Sentinel. He said his paper would like to print color war photographs, "but so many of the photos from the desert are all tan, tan, tan."
The Kansas City Star has been devoting about three-fourths of page one to the war. "Just as the war was seeming to settle into something of a cruising speed and we considered pulling back a little, there were developments and events overtook us," said Monroe Dodd, managing editor.
The Durango (Colo.) Herald has devoted 70 percent of its news space to the war. "We have a (National Guard) medical company from this area deployed to the Persian Gulf, so interest is very high," said Dan Partridge, managing editor.
The Daily Sparks (Nev.) Tribune ran an earthy banner headline when the war started: "We Kicked Ass."
Explained Managing Editor Chris Smith: "We looked around that morning and all the headlines said, 'War.' We thought, 'Let's give them an update on how we did."'
Twelve subscribers, offended, canceled. Others telephoned their unhappiness.
The war story had to compete with big local stories at some papers. In Porterville, Calif., the other story was the citrus freeze, which cost 3,000 jobs in a city of 29,500. To handle both stories, "we cut down the size of stories," said managing editor Rick Elkins of the Porterville Recorder.
In Florida, some papers had to balance war coverage against the Super Bowl. "It turned into a pretty good patriotic event rather than a football game," said William Dunn, managing editor of The Orlando Sentinel. "America really needed that."
And the war competed against the Super Bowl fortunes of the Buffalo Bills on the pages of the Democrat & Chronicle of Rochester, N.Y., not far from Buffalo.
"It was awkward trying to merge the Bills and the war," commented James Memmott, managing editor. "I was awfully glad to get the Super Bowl done with."
Editors say the public's fixation on the war news whetted, rather than reduced, their interest in printed accounts that could help them make sense of what they'd seen on television.

 

End of Document
