

Hussein, The Great Survivor, Looks Back On 40 Turbulent Years
The Associated Press
May 1, 1993, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 913 words
Byline: By ED BLANCHE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: AMMAN, Jordan
Body




King Hussein, the Arab world's longest-serving ruler, marks his 40th year on the Hashemite throne Sunday, a unique survivor of Middle East tempests.
The 58-year-old monarch's longevity in the cutthroat politics of the region is remarkable. When he was crowned on his 18th birthday - May 2, 1953 - the boy-king of an impoverished desert state, few believed he would last long in the Middle Eastern cauldron.
He has survived countless assassination attempts, a Palestinian attempt to oust him, Arab-Israeli wars and political confrontations.
When Hussein returned last September from the United States after surgery for cancer, more than 1 million people, a quarter of the population, packed Amman's streets in an ecstatic welcome.
The king's illness has raised nagging doubts about his health and with it the future of the Hashemite dynasty and Jordan's hard-won stability.
Hussein himself has raised intimations of his own mortality. But in an exclusive AP interview on Thursday, he appeared in good health, if slightly weary after a hectic day of meetings. He still smokes.
Sitting in an ornate, chandeliered audience room in the Basman palace, its sandstone walls blinding white in the spring sunshine, the compact, wiry king looked back on his turbulent reign with his usual disconcerting habit of calling his interviewers "sir."
"There have been many happy memories, and many sad and terrible, tragic ones," he said.
Among them the death of Queen Alia, third of his four wives, in a helicopter crash in 1977 and his decision to join Egypt in a disastrous military alliance only days before the 1967 Arab-Israeli war broke out.
That cost him the West Bank and east Jerusalem, the city that is a potent religious symbol for his monarchy and for his dynasty that traces its line back to Fatima, daughter of the Prophet Mohammed.
"I've never taken any decision without giving it as much of the thought that was available at the time," he said. "And so, given the circumstances, I couldn't have reversed anything.
"The sadness comes from crises that affected this region, where one could see a disaster in the making but lacked the ability to influence matters in a way that could have prevented them happening time and again."
These days, in a rapidly changing world order, he foresees upheaval if the peace talks with Israel fail and if Arab states do not move toward democracy, respect for human rights and tackle the problems of mushrooming populations, dwindling resources and widespread poverty.
With an almost missionary zeal, he has launched a program of democratic reform in Jordan which he hopes will serve as a model for other countries in a region where political pluralism is in little evidence.
"The greatest achievement in these 40 years that we have lived through, through all the setbacks … is the last four years .. . and our return to democracy and parliamentary life," the king said.
"I think we've taken the right steps to lay firm foundations for the future … and maybe transform Jordan into a beacon of hope in the region.
"Others still look at us with suspicion and regard this as a luxury they cannot afford. But without this, the Arabs will remain a broken people," Hussein said.
The British-educated Hussein inherited a kingdom arbitrarily summoned into existence from the wilderness between Saudi Arabia and Palestine by the British in 1921 for his grandfather Abdullah.
Abdullah was a leader of the Arab revolt against the Turks in World War I.
When Hussein succeeded his father Talal, who abdicated in 1952 because of mental illness, British-supported Jordan was the last remnant of the old order in the Middle East, ringed by states that were hostile at that time - Saudi Arabia, Syria, Egypt, Israel.
But Hussein, by necessity, matured quickly and developed the political dexterity he needed to stay in power.
He survived assassination attempts and coup plots - including poison in his nose drops - several Arab-Israeli conflicts and a 1970-71 war against the Palestinians who challenged the monarchy.
His first brush with death came when he was 16. His revered grandfather, King Abdullah, was assassinated by a Palestinian gunman outside the Al-Aqsa mosque in Jerusalem on July 20, 1951, after he had annexed the West Bank, part of historic Palestine.
After slaying the king, the assassin fired a shot at Hussein. The bullet ricocheted off a medal he wore over his heart.
It was a traumatic introduction to the bloody realities of political life in the Middle East, where changes of government invariably came through assassinations or coups.
But by his own admission, "the narrowest escape from death I have ever had," happened Nov. 11, 1958.
Two Syrian MiG-17 fighters intercepted Hussein's plane as he flew to Switzerland for a holiday. The British pilot, his longtime friend Wing Commander Jock Dalgliesh, dived to ground level and outflew the jets.
Hussein, a born soldier courageous and cautious in turn, inherited his grandfather's Pan-Arab ambitions and has always trod his own path, usually to the dismay, and often hostility, of others.
As the man in the middle of the Arab-Israeli conflict, he could do nothing else.
His refusal to join the U.S.-led coalition against Saddam Hussein after the 1990 invasion of Kuwait, favoring diplomacy over military action, left him dangerously isolated internationally.
By contrast, it made him a hero in the eyes of his people. These days, few Arab leaders command the genuine affection and respect of their people that he does.

 

End of Document
