

If the Gulf War Wasn't a Quagmire for the U.S., The Post-War Is
The Associated Press
April 1, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 573 words
Byline: By GEORGE GEDDA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




There was a time last January when critics opposed to the use of force in the Persian Gulf had an apocalyptic vision. "Goodness," they whispered, "what happens if we win?"
One month after the humiliation of the Iraqi army by the allied coalition, President Bush is learning about the agonies of victory. The New World Order he has been touting doesn't seem that much more promising than the old one.
None of the alternatives the administration faces in Iraq seems palatable. If Saddam Hussein is forced from power, the northern-based Kurdish population could opt for independence from Baghdad - no small consideration because that could fuel separatist tendencies by their Kurdish brethren in Syria, Turkey and Iran.
To avoid such chaos, the administration has come out firmly in opposition to the dismemberment of Iraq.
The notion of a Shiite Muslim-dominated Iraq would cause grave apprehension in Saudi Arabia, which is dominated by Sunni Muslims. Some in the Saudi hierarchy even believe that their best bet is a continuation in power by an enfeebled Saddam - against whom the allied coalition was arrayed in Saudi Arabia in the first place.
The region is rife with possibilities for instability even though the coalition has achieved its objectives of liberating Kuwait from Iraqi occupation and eliminating Saddam's ability to threaten his neighbors.
To those who argue that administration policy seems muddled, officials point out that U.S. diplomats are working feverishly at the United Nations for a permanent cease-fire that will enable American troops to come home soon.
The administration also seems committed to avoid involvement in Iraq's internal strife.
"We're not going to take a position," White House press secretary Marlin Fitzwater said last week. "You can find scenarios that say inaction helps the Kurds, helps the Shiites, helps Iran, helps Saddam, helps everybody. We simply aren't going to take a position."
It also constitutes a shift from Bush's stand in January when he invited the Iraqi people and the Iraqi military to force Saddam "to step aside."
But U.S. inaction does carry a price. While American forces sit idly by, Saddam's forces are massacring Kurdish and Shiite rebels, who have been trying to do precisely what Bush had been recommending in January. The rebels have even been denied high-level access to administration policymakers.
The U.S. decision not to become embroiled in the Iraqi turmoil is being attacked by human-rights organizations.
Andrew Whitley, of Middle East Watch, said: "As the occupation of Iraq was an action authorized by the U.N. Security Council, it is inappropriate for the United States to stand back on a temporary cease-fire line and to allow abuses on a widespread scale to take place a short distance away from them without intervening,"
The best-case scenario for the administration is the emergence of post-Saddam coalition government comprised of all the major groupings in the country - the army, the Kurds, the Shiites and the Sunnis - that would be able to carry out the terms of a permanent truce.
But the tradition of peaceful compromise is not deeply rooted in Iraq, and that outcome is therefore not considered to be likely. Beyond that, the administration believes the time has passed whereby renewed U.S. military intervention would advance the goal of a stable, peaceful Iraq.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - George Gedda has covered foreign affairs for the Associated Press since 1968.

 

End of Document
