

In Baghdad, Despair And Anger Stalk The Streets
The Associated Press
February 22, 1991, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1158 words
Byline: By DILIP GANGULY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAGHDAD, Iraq
Body




Every night Adnan Aswad herds his family into one of the bedrooms of their suburban home to sit out the allied bombing raids.
"We all sleep in the same room. It's too scary to sleep separately," he said. "My son tells me that if we die, we should all die together and I agree with him. But we don't want to die. We want this war to stop."
The awesome high-tech firepower of the allied air force, unchallenged except for the anti-aircraft guns that stitch streams of tracer across the dark sky, has demoralized many of the people of Baghdad and frayed their spirit.
The warplanes are bad enough. But the nightly hammering brings computer-guided Tomahawk cruise missiles, fired by U.S. warships hundreds of miles away, searing in with fiery tails, obliterating buildings with their 990-pound warheads.
Many now question the wisdom of Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait. Few question the legality of it, but they wish he'd pull his army out of that plundered emirate and end the war.
Before the bombing began, Baghdadis were confident they could take anything the allies threw at them. "Did we not survive the Iranians' missiles for eight years?" they would boast.
But nothing had prepared them for what they've been taking in recent weeks. Fear and fatalism are abroad in this ancient city of the caliphs, founded in 762 A.D. on the banks of the Tigris River.
The Americans say they're not deliberately targeting civilians. But civilians are being killed.
No one knows for sure how many. Officials have said 20,000, mostly civilians, have perished.
But the death toll multiplies as word makes its way around. There is anger, deep and strong, against the United States and its allies.
At least three of downtown Baghdad's six bridges over the Tigris have been destroyed. All over the city gutted, blackened buildings, or piles of rubble are left where structures once stood.
Few Iraqis fully understand just how totally and swiftly the allied bombers have systematically destroyed the country's infrastructure.
They know it's bad though, because there's no electricity and no water and food's scarce for those who didn't stockpile while they could.
Baghdad's sewage system is overflowing, raising the specter of disease. People are cutting down the city's trees for fuel.
Gasoline is virtually non-existent because the refineries have been knocked out. What fuel there is goes to the military. People have been reduced to using horse-drawn carts.
Civilian hospitals are acutely short on medicine. Surgeons operate by candlelight.
There is frustration at not being able to hit back. Few people believe the military communiques broadcast by Baghdad Radio that talk of shooting down some 150 allied bombers.
Most people now tune in to the Arabic language broadcasts from Voice of America or the British Broadcasting Corp. to find out what's happening, something they would never have openly done a few weeks ago.
But the anger and frustration is not enough to overwhelm the fear that is seeping into the nation's fabric.
Every evening, this city of 4 million people begins the ritual of preparing for another night of bombing.
At dusk, in the 14-story al-Rashid Hotel on the palm-fringed bank of the muddy Tigris, housekeepers with lanterns and a master key visit each occupied room to ensure they're blacked out.
They lock all the windows, pull the curtains and check for any hidden candles. If they find any, they're confiscated.
"No light please. No opening of curtain. No go out," one nervous housekeeper advised guests, mainly foreign correspondents, in broken English.
All over the city, Iraqi soldiers who man hundreds of anti-aircraft guns on rooftops and on conical earthen flak towers, finish their evening prayers, eat their rations, check their weapons for the hundreth time and wait for the darkness.
In the Karadha Dakhil neighborhood, Aswad, his wife and three children sit down early to eat their dinner of Arabic bread, boiled potatoes and hummus before retiring to one of their three bedrooms to wait for the bombers.
Aswad calms his teen-age son and two young daughters with tales of the ancient glories of what is now Iraq, of the early civilizations under great kings which produced the first writing, the first code of laws, the magnificent cities of Ur, Babylon and Nineveh.
Before he lies down for a fitful sleep, Aswad checks a small suitcase he keeps next to his bed. It's the family's quick getaway bag. It contains money, some of his wife's gold jewelry and the family's identification papers.
"The destruction's a real nightmare for me. I'm an architect and for me a bombed building's like the corpse of a son, of a child" he said. "This war must end."
More and more Iraqis now talk openly like this.
Even government officials, normally the most reticent of men, talk in hushed voices about how Saddam is bringing down ruin on Iraq.
Those who have never lived in a police state may have difficulty understanding how much of a psychological barrier these Baghdadis have crossed since the bombing began.
Only a few weeks ago, if you asked people if they were afraid, they'd laugh and boast how they fought the Iranians for eight long years and came out on top.
When the ruling Revolutionary Command Council offered to withdraw from Kuwait last week, the capital erupted as people took to the streets to celebrate what they thought was the war's end.
Militiamen fired whole clips from their Kalashnikov rifles in the air. They were joined by information ministry officials at the al-Rashid firing their pistols in jubilation. Troops unleashed a storm of tracer shells skyward.
It was as though a civil war had broken out.
Their reaction turned out to be premature, as allied leaders rejected Iraqi conditions. When they realized their ordeal was not over, their faces were wrought with disbelief and distress.
When dawn breaks, often with pillars of smoke billowing over the minarets of the mosques from burning buildings hit during the night, the Aswads and other Baghdadis venture out of their homes or shelters.
At the al-Rashid coffee shop, weary information ministry officials who spent the night in the bomb shelter emerge and ask reporters who stayed in their rooms: "How was it last night?"
As they sip their Arabic coffee from tiny cups they talk about what it will take for Saddam to relinquish what he calls Iraq's 19th province.
Despite the wringing of hands and the questioning of Saddam's actions, the discontent and the fear does not yet appear to have hardened into hostility toward Saddam for leading Iraq into war for the second time in a decade.
Years of brutal suppression of dissent by the secret police, who are so pervasive they even spy on each other, has cowed this nation of 17 million people, conditioned them to talk in whispers - and never to strangers who might be informers.
But as an Iraqi friend noted: "Open dissent is very hard to find in Iraq. But if one person talks against the government, he's probably speaking for 10,000 others."

 

End of Document
