

In Earthquake's Wake, Counting the Dead, Contemplating the Cleanup
The Associated Press
July 14, 1993, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 740 words
Byline: AP Photos TOK112,120,123, By ERIC TALMADGE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: OKUSHIRI, Japan
Body




Weeping villagers searched for missing relatives in wreckage strewn with rice bowls and family photos, after a major earthquake crumpled buildings and set off fires and huge tidal waves in northern Japan.
The death toll climbed to 99 Wednesday, two days after the deadliest Japanese quake in a decade.
The latest death toll came from the National Police Agency, which said nearly 100 people were still missing.
Six fresh aftershocks were recorded Wednesday morning, with more than 70 in all reported since the initial quake, which measured 7.8 on the Richter scale.
Tidal waves generated by Monday's quake had swept hundreds of cars and homes out to sea.
"I never had much, but what I had, I lost it all," said Fujiharu Hatsuzuka, speaking a day after the quake as he walked around a pile of smoking ashes that used to be his wooden house in Aonae village on the Sea of Japan island of Okushiri.
The 63-year-old squid fisherman also lost his life savings of about $ 2,700 in the fire that raged after the quake.
But Hatsuzuka was more fortunate than some - at least he knew that his wife and two sons were alive and sheltered at a local school. Villagers who did not have that comfort wandered amid the ruins in search of the missing.
Okushiri, located off the west coast of Hokkaido and just 30 miles south of the epicenter, was hardest hit.
On Hokkaido, Japan's northernmost main island, huge tidal waves smashed villages, buckled roads and sucked cars out to sea with some occupants thought to be still inside.
It was the deadliest quake in Japan since at least 1983, when 104 people were killed after tidal waves hit the north. In intensity, it matched a 7.8 quake in January that was the strongest to hit Japan in 15 years. That quake killed two people.
Japan's Meteorological Agency broadcast tsunami warnings within five minutes after the quake hit at 10:17 p.m. Monday, but many victims did not have time to reach higher ground.
Death and destruction came from landslides and collapsing buildings as well as 16-foot tidal waves and fires.
Gas stoves apparently started the fires, which leveled an area the size of six football fields in Aonae at the opposite end of the island of 4,600 people.
"After the tsunami, the whole area here just caught on fire in about 20 minutes," said Hatsuzuka. "People just got out. When you know there's a tsunami coming, you don't worry about whether your gas stove is on or not."
Fires destroyed about half the 680 homes in Aonae, and 200 other houses were destroyed or damaged by tidal waves, Kyodo said.
Residents sobbed as they wandered around the wreckage, which was strewn with metal roofs, twisted buses, overturned cars, bedding, rice bowls and family photographs.
Villagers carrying sticks and blankets formed shore patrols to look for bodies.
Okushiri was without running water or electricity Tuesday, and its small airport was closed because of damaged runways.
Tidal waves swept people from the west coast of Hokkaido.
One 46-year-old man yelled to two people on the beach to evacuate and was running away when a tidal wave swept him out to sea, the newspaper Asahi reported. He drifted on a wooden beam for 90 minutes before the waves receded and he returned to shore.
The National Maritime Agency, Japan's coast guard, said more than 200 vessels were washed away or sunk nationwide in the tidal waves.
Houses were knocked off their foundations and splintered and store shelves emptied of their contents. Landslides cut off 16 roads on Hokkaido, and 15 ports on the island were damaged.
In the coastal town of Esashi, the tidal wave smashed cars against nearby rocks and sucked about 30 vehicles into the town's harbor. Some cars had their lights on and may have been occupied when washed away.
In Russia, three people were missing after 16-foot tidal waves hit Nakhodka, a coastal town near Vladivostok, a regional civil defense official told the Interfax news agency.
Tidal waves wrecked about 60 small fishing boats along South Korea's east coast, more than 600 miles from the quake's epicenter, said Central Anti-Disaster Headquarters.
A 7.8 quake also struck Hokkaido on Jan. 18, killing two people, injuring 425 and causing widespread damage.
No stronger quake has hit Japan since 1978 when a 7.9 temblor killed 52 people on Hokkaido.
The Richter scale is a gauge of the energy released by an earthquake. A temblor of magnitude 7 is a major quake, capable of causing widespread heavy damage in populated areas.

 

End of Document
