

In Japan Quake's Wake: Counting the Dead, Contemplating the Cleanup
The Associated Press
July 14, 1993, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 636 words
Byline: By ERIC TALMADGE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: OKUSHIRI, Japan
Body




The toll from Japan's deadliest earthquake in years climbed to 103 today as hopes faded of finding survivors in the rubble of burned homes, sunken cars and a collapsed hotel. Ninety-one people were reported missing.
More aftershocks today rocked northern Japan, where tidal waves generated by Monday's quake swept scores of cars out to sea. Six fresh shocks were recorded this morning. The initial quake measured 7.8 on the Richter scale.
The devastation revived the long-running debate about the state of Japan's emergency preparedness. The country is the world's most earthquake-prone, rattled by about 1,000 tremors a year.
"It's about time for (the government) to make a serious commitment to take the initiative in building a nation with basic disaster-prevention programs," said the Nihon Keizai, Japan's leading financial newspaper.
Added the national Asahi newspaper: "Even though it is difficult to forecast natural disasters, we can minimize the damage wrought by them."
Japan's Meteorological Agency broadcast tsunami warnings within five minutes after the quake hit Monday night, but many victims had no time to reach higher ground.
Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa, facing parliamentary elections in four days, flew to this northern island today to inspect the damage.
Clad in a khaki jacket and military-style cap, he toured the site of the ruined Yoyoso hotel, which was crushed by a landslide and was believed to have people buried inside.
"This is extremely painful," the Kyodo News Service quoted Miyazawa as saying. "Representing the government, I would like to do as much as I can."
The earthquake was centered 30 miles under the Sea of Japan, about 50 miles west of Hokkaido, Japan's northernmost main island.
Okushiri, a tiny island 30 miles southwest of the epicenter, took the brunt of the temblor, which matched a 7.8 quake in January that was the strongest to hit Japan in 25 years.
Most of the deaths Monday occurred on Okushiri. In fishing communities, bereft villagers searched for missing relatives, while others huddled in the collapsed remnants of their homes.
The wreckage was strewn with twisted buses, overturned cars and family photographs.
Villagers carrying sticks and blankets formed shore patrols to look for bodies.
Thousands left homeless by the quake took refuge in temporary shelters. In the island town of Aonae, many residents slept in their cars.
In a crowded gymnasium, families spread bedding on the wooden floor, and lined up their shoes neatly outside the door. Old women, babies and young mothers huddled close together, some of them sobbing.
The island was without running water or electricity, and officials were bringing in drinking water and other supplies by boat today.
In shock, people poked through a vast field of smoking rubble that had been a neighborhood of 600 homes in Aonae.
"I never had much, but what I had, I lost it all," said Fujiharu Hatsuzuka, a 67-year-old squid fisherman, walking around a pile of smoking ashes that had been his wooden house.
Police said 151 people were injured in the quake and resulting fires and tidal waves that hit as far away as South Korea and Russia. In all, 284 houses were destroyed by tidal waves, and about 300 houses were burned in fires triggered by the quake.
In the coastal town of Esashi, frogmen grimly searched for people trapped in dozens of cars that were swept into the harbor. Cranes mounted on barges hauled cars and debris out of the bay.
The quake was the deadliest in Japan since 1983, when 104 people were killed after tidal waves hit the north.
More death and destruction came from landslides and collapsing buildings as well as 16-foot tidal waves and fires.
Gas stoves apparently started a chain reaction of fires on Okushiri, which leveled an area the size of six football fields in Aonae on the island of 4,600 people.

 

End of Document
