

In Presidential Elections, October Is the Month for Surprises
The Associated Press
May 26, 1991, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 801 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




It was October, a presidential election looming, the Republican candidate favored, his outlook clouded only by the chance of a foreign policy surprise that could keep a Democrat in the White House.
Afterward, defeated Democrats alleged that the Republican campaign had intervened secretly to sabotage negotiations that might have turned the election.
Unproved, but never conclusively dispelled, those charges still linger.
That is the scenario congressional Democrats are warily investigating about the 1980 election. The inquiry followed a renewal of assertions that Ronald Reagan's campaign dealt with Iranian contacts to delay the release of U.S. hostages in Teheran until after the election. The hostage issue was a campaign-long handicap for President Jimmy Carter; the Americans finally were freed moments after Reagan was inaugurated.
The evidence that the Republicans interceded to block an "October surprise" is circumstantial; there is no smoking gun, acknowledged Gary Sick, the Carter White House aide who revived the issue by writing that he now thinks the charge to be true.
But the 1980 "October surprise" controversy wasn't the first. It parallels almost step by step the case of alleged Republican interference in the negotiations of a Democratic administration to wind down the Vietnam war during the 1968 campaign.
Even the phrase dates from those days.
The favored Republican then was Richard M. Nixon; the "October surprise" that worried his campaign was the prospect that President Lyndon B. Johnson would halt the bombing of North Vietnam. He did, five days before the election.
The later charge was that the Nixon camp had interceded with the South Vietnamese to stall peace talks that could have boosted Democratic nominee Hubert H. Humphrey, who lost narrowly to Nixon after a late campaign surge.
Clark Clifford, Johnson's secretary of defense at the time, reopens that case in his book "Counsel to the President." Clifford says flatly that the Johnson administration learned "through intelligence channels of a plot - there is no other word for it - to help Nixon win election by a flagrant interference in the negotiations."
The central figure was Anna Chennault, widow of the World War II flier, a Washington hostess, Nixon fundraiser and campaigner, who had close contacts at the South Vietnamese embassy and other lines to Saigon. Her role and her contacts were known at the time and have been recounted before.
The question that wasn't, and isn't answered is whether she acted at the behest of the Nixon campaign as she sought to stall October peace efforts by telling her connections that South Vietnam would get a better deal by waiting for a Republican administration.
The Nixon camp insisted, and Nixon himself told Johnson, that neither he nor his staff authorized or encouraged her.
Clifford contends that she was representing the Nixon campaign in contacts with South Vietnamese President Nguyen Van Thieu. "What was conveyed to Thieu through the Chennault channels may never be fully known, but I have no doubt that she somehow sent a simple and authoritative message from the Nixon camp which was probably decisive in convincing President Thieu that he should defy President Johnson, and which thus delayed the beginning of the negotiations and prolonged the war," Clifford writes.
While Clifford says the Johnson White House "had positive evidence" that Mrs. Chennault and other people purporting to speak for Nixon were encouraging Saigon to delay peace negotiations, the Democrats made no campaign use of it.
Clifford suggests one reason for silence: "...The information had been derived from extremely sensitive intelligence-gathering operations of the FBI, the CIA and the National Security Agency - operations that included surveillance of the ambassador of our fighting ally and an American citizen..."
He also says there was no evidence to show that Nixon was involved. "No proof - in the terminology of the Watergate era, no smoking gun - has ever turned up linking Nixon directly to the messages to Thieu," Clifford writes. "...The whole incident has been relegated to the status of a permanent, unsolved mystery."
The October surprise came on Oct. 31, when Johnson announced a bombing halt, to be followed by peace talks beginning the day after the election. It added to the Humphrey surge, but it was undercut when the Saigon government announced it would boycott the negotiations.
Nixon wrote in his memoirs that it was a predictable reaction to a bad bargain for Saigon.
In the end, he suffered for the diplomatic impasse. Johnson's war became Nixon's war, a conflict that outlasted his truncated presidency.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 25 years.

 

End of Document
