

In Tough Times, Making Friends Is Easier If the Money's Right
The Associated Press
October 6, 1991, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 1091 words
Byline: By JAMES M. KENNEDY
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The new love fest in the business world would be almost sickening, if it didn't make so darn much sense.
Dollars and cents, actually, are what's behind the alliances that began to take shape this past week.
The leaders of Apple Computer and IBM staged an elaborate press event to display a signed document launching their joint venture to develop more compatible computers.
Two big Japanese companies, meanwhile, said they were discussing an investment in U.S. media giant Time Warner Inc., worth an estimated $ 1 billion.
The common theme linking these blockbuster story lines was Corporate America's desperate search for investment capital.
Blame the economy, the credit crunch, or the mega-cost of running a big business these days. All of the above have forced companies to consider strategies once unthinkable - including sidling up to archrivals and foreign investors.
The venture between Apple and International Business Machines Corp. - off the scale for big deals - has produced more than its share of publicity since it was first announced three months ago. On Wednesday, when executives of the two companies linked arms for the cameras for the first time, the hyperbole accelerated.
But even amid the hoopla, it was impossible to miss the spectacular potential of this deal. If all goes as planned, or even somewhat as planned, computer users of the future may be able to plug the same software into IBM and Apple PCs. Standards also may emerge for more powerful workstations and larger computers.
It did not stretch the imagination to conclude, as computer newsletter editor Richard Shaffer did, that the Apple-IBM marriage would write a new chapter for business-school texts. Another analyst, Sam Albert, coined the term "coopetition" to describe the new-wave pairing of competitors.
It was at least a "sign of the times," as IBM President Jack Kuehler more modestly characterized the deal. You had to look no further than the next story on the business page to find more evidence.
The potential investment in Time Warner by Japanese electronics maker Toshiba Corp. and trading company C. Itoh & Co. mirrored previous deals that have linked Sony Corp. and Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. with American entertainment houses.
As with Apple and IBM, it is mutual benefit, not admiration, that inspires such investments. The Japanese get entertainment software for their electronic hardware; the Americans get capital to grow or reduce debts.
In some cases, the motivation is simple survival. Among other deals revealed during the week, Wang Laboratories Inc. agreed to share technology with Computer Associates International Inc. that could help boost sales and stem big losses at troubled Wang.
The creditors of Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc., a West Coast retailer mired in bankruptcy court, OK'd a proposal to unload the company's debts for 47 cents on the dollar to Chicago investor Sam Zell.
In the auto industry, struggling Chrysler Corp. brought new stock to market to raise money for research and development, and Los Angeles investor Kirk Kerkorian snapped up a big chunk.
 
 ECONOMY: Call for Easier Credit Grows Louder
 
 Economic signals flashed during the week were mixed as usual. The September unemployment rate dropped by a tenth of a point to 6.7 percent, but new hiring was sluggish.
A private monthly survey of corporate purchasing managers showed the industrial sector crept slowly ahead in September, but the latest reading from the government's index of leading indicators was flat suggesting more trouble ahead.
A survey by Dun & Bradstreet Corp. showed business executives turning pessimistic about the prospects for the fourth quarter.
Auto sales improved in late September, but the spurt was attributed to the usual rush of sales at the end of the model year. Overall sales for the model year totaled 12.5 million, the worst since 1983.
Economists speculated that another round of interest rate cuts was in order to give the economy another kick, but Federal Reserve chief Alan Greenspan could wait to see the next batch of inflation numbers before acting.
 
 SCANDALS: Milken's Scream and More Salomon Cheating
 
 A new book on the insider trading scandals of the 1980s provided an intriguing look behind the scenes of Wall Street's darkest days. "Den of Thieves" by James B. Stewart of The Wall Street Journal said dirty deals by Michael Milken and Ivan Boesky went far beyond the crimes to which they pleaded guilty.
The book claims Milken routinely traded on inside information as head of junk-bond trading at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and used Boesky as his main conduit for making secret, illegal trades.
Stewart also reported that Milken misunderstood his 10-year prison sentence when it was handed down in court last year. According to the book, Milken and his wife let out "bloodcurdling screams" in a witness room when they realized the term was for 10 years, not concurrent two-year terms on five felony counts.
Fast forwarding to the scandals of the moment, Salomon Brothers Inc. said it completed an internal investigation of its Treasury bond activity over the past two years and discovered one more instance of cheating not previously disclosed. In an off-shoot of the Salomon scandal, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. fined several banks and brokerage houses for violating bidding rules in agency debt sales.
In Japan, Finance Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto offered his resignation to take responsibility for a slew of financial scandals in that country.
 
 TICKER: Old Crayons Come Back Like Classic Coke
 
 In other business headlines, Binney & Smith Co.  said it would temporarily bring back eight Crayola crayon colors cast off last year … Exxon Corp.  agreed to a new $ 1 billion settlement of environmental damage claims from the Valdez oil spill … India's highest court revived the possibility of criminal charges against
 
 Union Carbide Corp.  for the 1984 Bhopal gas leak … British authorities suspended sales of Halcion sleeping pills made by
 
 Upjohn Co.  … American Express Co.  said it would eliminate about 1,700 jobs and scale back its Optima credit card business in response to rising card delinquencies … RJR Nabisco announced a plan to further shrink its debt load from history's biggest leveraged buyout … Texaco Inc.  was ordered by a jury to pay more than $ 20 million to a woman who says she was denied a promotion because of her sex … Georgia-Pacific Corp.  faced $ 21 million in penalties for tax evasion … ConAgra said it would introduce a new lean hamburger bolstered with oat flour at $ 2.79 per pound.

 

End of Document
