

In The End, Arafat Won - But It Was Tough Going Behind Closed Doors
The Associated Press
September 10, 1993, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1022 words
Byline: By MONA ZIADE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TUNIS, Tunisia
Body




With 259 words typed on a sheet of PLO stationery, a bone-weary but elated Yasser Arafat renounced terrorism and opened the way to end nearly a half-century of bloodshed between Palestinians and Israelis.
But the angry, unwritten exchanges between him and his own lieutenants during the long private hours before that historic act underline the perils that peace still faces.
Answering Arafat's letter Thursday on behalf of the Palestine Liberation Organization, Israel's Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin agreed to recognize the movement, his country's mortal foe for the last three decades. Rabin has his own hard-liners to contend with. He signed early Friday.
The pact took months of secret meetings in a host of countries to arrange.
But the dramatic last 48 hours took place inside PLO headquarters, a nondescript arabesque villa in the Yoghourthe suburb of Tunis where the organization's executive committee gathered. Participants, speaking on condition of anonymity, gave an account of what transpired.
Outside, armed Tunisian and Palestinian bodyguards stood outside the fenced gardens around the three-story, stone villa, eyeing cars zigzagging through barbed-wire barriers on the two-lane street.
Inside, in a first-floor, green-carpeted conference room, the Council meeting commenced at 10 a.m. Wednesday. The timing was unusually early for the PLO leadership. Arafat invariably starts his meetings late at night.
For the first few hours, Arafat was not there. He was finishing a sweep of Arab capitals drumming up support for a plan that starts with limited self-rule for Jericho and the turbulent Gaza Strip, a cauldron of resistance to Israel's 26-year occupation. The recognition agreement with Israel was needed for the self-rule plan.
At 5 p.m. Arafat arrived in Tunis, wearing his usual green fatigues, his pistol on his hip, his trademark black-and-white checkered kaffiyeh headdress covering his bald head.
He took his place at the head of the U-shaped table and set up a telephone link with Paris, where trusted adviser Ahmed Qurei'a was negotiating the final language.
Arafat kept the line open the next eight hours.
At the table Arafat could count on three men: Yasser Abed-Rabbo, his information chief and longtime advocate of dialogue with Israel; Mahmoud Abbas, the PLO's number two official; and Jawid Ghossein, head of the Palestine National Fund, the PLO's "finance ministry."
Five of the 18 committee members were missing, they had resigned or were boycotting the meeting.
Five who were there were bitterly opposed to him and were unlikely to be swayed. They were Farouk Kaddoumi, the PLO's "foreign minister," Mahmoud Ismail, Abdullah Hourani, Ali Ishaq, and Kaddoumi's close friend, Jamal Sourani.
Arafat needed to win over four others - Suleiman Najjab, Samir Ghosheh, Mohammed Zohdi Nashashibi and Yasser Amro.
Putting on his reading spectacles, Arafat joined the heated debate. Almost immediately, the argument grew hotter.
Kaddoumi and his group berated him for his willingness to formally renounce terrorism.
They argued that was tantamount to admitting that the PLO was a terrorist group, as the Israelis had always branded it, and was now changing its course. Then came the explosive subject of whether Arafat should agree to call for a halt to the nearly six-year-old Palestinian uprising against Israel in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
The silver-haired Kaddoumi, one of the PLO's old guard, conservative leaders, objected vehemently.
"That contravenes the basic commitment we have made to our people to keep up the struggle until the liberation of Palestine," he later said.
At 1 a.m. Thursday, with nothing decided and the fate of Arafat's plan still hanging in the balance, the meeting broke up.
The PLO leaders got into their black BMWs and dark blue Mercedes limousines, all with tinted windows, and drove off.
At 10 a.m. Thursday, Arafat, Abbas and Abed-Rabbo met with Kaddoumi for five hours, trying to win him over.
Around 3 p.m. a grim-faced Kaddoumi, wearing a blue safari suit and leaning on a walking stick, left the meeting. He refused to talk.
The others went to Tunis airport to greet Norwegian Foreign Minister Johan Jorgen Holst, a key mediator in Arafat's secret talks with Israel. He was arriving to witness Arafat's signing of the letter.
Just after 5 p.m., the meeting resumed. Kaddoumi wasn't there.
Several committee members argued that stopping the uprising would strip the PLO of its last bargaining chip if Israel reneged on proposed Palestinian self-rule.
But Arafat, stubborn as ever, held his ground. The little the Israelis were offering was better than nothing and the offer might never come again, he argued.
A snag arose: annulling clauses in the PLO's 1968 charter calling for destroying Israel and establishing an Arab state in all of pre-1948 Palestine, as defined by the British mandate, could not legally be done without the approval of the Palestine National council, the 468-seat Palestinian parliament-in-exile.
The proposed solution: a promise in the letter to Rabin to convene the PNC to ratify the decision later. In return, Arafat's opponents would accept a renunciation of violence.
Unacceptable, Israel said through its negotiators in Paris. Nothing short of a full commitment would do.
Arafat's voice grew hoarse. After six more hours of fierce debate, his patience grew short. He demanded a vote.
Najjab and the other three middle-grounders caved in. They backed Arafat. It gave him eight votes. Ismail, Hourani and Ishaq voted against. Sourani abstained.
At 11:15 p.m., Abed-Rabbo, pale and clearly exhausted, emerged from the villa.
He stood in a late-night drizzle coming in off the Mediterranean as he solemnly announced the outcome. Arafat had won. Holst would carry the letter to Rabin.
After Abed-Rabbo's announcement, Arafat signed the document that could end one of the world's most intractable conflicts.
It was 15 minutes to midnight. There was no elation. Everyone was too tired - unlike the visibly excited Arafat who appeared some time later.
"I have signed. I have signed the letter," he declared, struggling to mask his exhaustion behind a broad victory smile.

 

End of Document
