

India Remembers the Day the Sky Turned to Poison
The Associated Press
December 2, 1994, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 651 words
Byline: By DILIP GANGULY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BHOPAL, India
Body




It was as if someone had turned the already wretched slum into a gas chamber, unleashing a toxic brew that doomed thousands of people in a matter of hours by making them gulp the air that killed them.
Tens of thousands of people crawled or ran, panic-stricken, from their homes that miserable night in Bhopal 10 years ago, victims of a lethal gas leak from a subsidiary of U.S.-based Union Carbide.
Hazara Bee was one of the survivors of the world's worst industrial disaster.
"Everyone was fleeing. I ran and ran and fainted. When I regained consciousness, I remember someone asking me if my husband's name was Abdul Latif," Mrs. Bee, 50, said Friday.
A hospital staffer was trying to identify her. Her husband, Abdul Latif, was already dead - one of 4,000 who died that night. By official count, about 3,000 others died later from illnesses caused by the disaster at the pesticide plant.
That night, hundreds of corpses lay where they fell, their mouths and eyes covered with a white froth formed by the reaction of the poison gas with the oxygen the victims had tried so desperately to breathe in their last minutes.
Most had their mouths open in a last gasp. Street dogs gnawed at the corpses that lay all over the slum, which adjoined the Union Carbide factory that had employed thousands in Bhopal, then killed them.
On Friday, police arrested 11,000 people on their way to Bhopal to mark the anniversary with a rally demanding compensation, organizers said. Officials could not confirm the number of arrests.
Police arrested the demonstrators on trains at stations outside Bhopal and charged them with traveling without tickets - a common violation that is rarely enforced.
A decade after the tragedy, the visible scars have all but faded from Bhopal, an 11th-century city built around two lakes.
A parking lot was built on land outside Hamidia Hospital where, 10 years ago, hundreds of bodies were laid out, cardboard name cards placed at each head. The potholed roads leading to the Union Carbide pesticide factory, where victims lay struggling for breath or blinded, have been repaved.
Once, the plant's tall smokestacks symbolized opportunity.
Today, the smokestacks are rusty and the metal tank that leaked the deadly methyl isocyanate just before midnight on Dec. 2, 1984, is smothered with weeds. Union Carbide, whose parent company is based in Danbury, Conn., sold off the last of its Indian holdings this summer.
But though the physical reminders have been erased, pain and poverty still stalk many of the half million survivors in Bhopal, a city of 500,000 in central India.
Many don't like to talk any more about the tragedy that ruined their lives. For the past 10 years, they have discussed their agony with so many doctors, lawyers, officials and reporters that the exercise of recollection has become an exercise in futility.
The last hope for any redress - monetary compensation - is snarled in a tangle of red tape.
As dawn breaks on any given day, men, women and children line up outside the claims court to complete paperwork for receiving compensation.
The effects of gas poisoning are still claiming victims, like Savitri Singh.
"She had been sick off and on since 1984, often complaining of chest pain and breathlessness," said her husband, Daulat Singh, as he prepared the funeral pyre Thursday.
"The doctors said she was sick because of the gas, but she died before getting any compensation and proper medical care."
"These poor and uneducated people can't prove that the death occurred due to long-term aftereffects of the gas," said Abdul Jabbar Khan, head of the Bhopal Gas Victims Organization.
"Our estimate is that 25,000 people have died until now directly or indirectly due to the gas leak."
In 1989, Union Carbide paid $ 470 million - one-twelfth of India's original claim - in an out-of-court settlement. About 94,000 compensation claims have been settled and $ 20 million paid to victims.
 Load-Date: December 3, 1994

 

End of Document
