

Islamic Group Criticizes U.N. Sanctions Against Libya  A 46-member Islamic organization on Sunday criticized what it called the U.N. Security Council's hasty decision to impose sanctions against Libya, giving a boost to Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi. The Organization of Islamic Conference, based in Jiddah, acts as the political umbrella for Islamic nations.
The Associated Press
April 5, 1992, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 267 words
Dateline: JIDDAH, Saudi Arabia
Body



It has been involved in mediation efforts to resolve the standoff over demands by the United States and Britain that Libya turn over two suspects in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 in 1988.
Gadhafi rejected the demands, and the U.N. Security Council imposed the sanctions last week.
On Saturday, the Libyan leader appealed for Muslim support to help Tripoli against the "new Crusaders."
The secretary-general of the Islamic organization, Hamid al-Gabid, issued a statement Sunday that said his group "notes with deep regret the inexplicable precipitousness with which the Security Council was led to vote on Resolution 748 and adopt sanctions against Libya."
He called the sanctions an "outright rejection … of all appeals for restraint and moderation made to the different parties concerned and no doubt could lead to a pointless and dangerous intensification of the crisis."
Gabid said he hoped there would be renewed diplomatic efforts to resolve the crisis peacefully.
Also Sunday, Tunisian President Zine Al-Abidine Ben Ali said the special Arab League committee appointed to mediate between Libya and the West will meet Tuesday in Cairo.
The committee, appointed by the league in March, includes representatives from Egypt, Syria, Algeria, Morocco, Mauritania, Libya and Tunisia.
Last November, U.S. and British authorities accused Libyan intelligence agents of involvement in the Dec. 21, 1988, Pan Am bombing over Scotland in which 270 people perished.
French authorities accused the Libyans of involvement in the September 1989 bombing of a French UTA airliner over Niger in which 171 people were killed.

 

End of Document
