

Israel Handing Over Jericho To the Palestinian Police
The Associated Press
May 13, 1994, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 941 words
Byline: By KARIN LAUB, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERICHO, West Bank
Body




Israel lowered its flags over Jericho today, ending 27 years of occupation in the West Bank town that will be the seat of the PLO's government.
Red, black, green and white Palestinian flags shimmied up poles to replace the blue-and-white Israeli Star of David. Soon after, 400 Palestinian police in green fatigues and berets rolled into the center of the Biblical city, igniting a frenzy of flag waving, cheering and horn-honking.
Residents handed policemen Palestinian flags and took their guns, thrusting them in the air. Women threw candy.
With the additional transfer of much of the southern Gaza Strip, Palestinian police were deployed this morning in more than half of the area that is to be ruled by Palestinians under their accord with Israel.
The PLO takeover of Jericho, where Yasser Arafat is expected to set up his headquarters, was a milestone in implementing the autonomy plan for Gaza and Jericho, which has been beset by tortured negotiations and violence since it was signed eight months ago.
"We hope we can tackle the huge obstacles, the challenges that await us," said Saeb Erekat, a member of the PLO autonomy council that is to govern the self-rule areas and Jericho resident. "This is a very small step on a very long road.
"It is a nice feeling to see the soldiers leave the building where I was jailed," he added. "Jericho is Palestinian now."
Brig. Gen. Gadi Zohar, the Israeli military governor of the West Bank, said the handover was a "special day" for Israel, too.
The arrival of the Palestinian police about 2 p.m. capped days of delays and confusion. The police came in a flag-bedecked convoy of eight buses, one bearing a huge poster of Arafat, the Palestine Liberation Organization chairman, and trucks carrying luggage and equipment.
By the end of the day, more than 1,500 armed Palestinian police brought in since Monday should be on duty in Jericho and Gaza, where self-rule is to start by Wednesday.
The marketplace was nearly deserted at 5:45 a.m., when the initial transfer took place in Jericho.
When word spread in the town of 15,000 that the police station, the most visible symbol of the occupation, was in Palestinian hands, residents headed for the main square.
"This is the best day of my life," said Mohammed Abdel Karim, as women let out a stream of joyful ululations. "God willing we will see this throughout the West Bank."
At the main military base, Israeli soldiers lowered their flag for the last time. The Palestinian police quickly raised flags at the post office and other public buildings they were guarding with their Kalashnikov assault rifles.
The southern Gaza Strip area was transferred to Palestinian police with a brief handover of building plans at a Khan Younis brigade headquarters about 4 a.m.
The last Israeli soldiers pulled out before dawn, avoiding leaving with Palestinians looking on - or throwing stones.
No ceremony was held. An Israeli lieutenant colonel handed a few papers to Gen. Yusef Abu Awdeh, the local Palestinian police commander.
Israel seized both territories - the West Bank from Jordan and Gaza from Egypt - in the 1967 Six-Day War.
Some 20 years later, the Palestinian uprising began in Gaza and quickly spread to the West Bank. Repeated clashes and deaths on both sides convinced many Israelis it was time to negotiate a withdrawal.
Limited self-rule in Jericho and Gaza is to be a test case for a wider autonomy in the West Bank and Gaza.
In Jericho, not everyone viewed the handover celebrations with the same joy.
A 25-year-old activist from the Islamic Resistance Movement, or Hamas, looked on with distaste as men and women danced together in the public celebrations, breaking a religious taboo.
"The latest blow against us was the blow of peace, call it the blow of surrender," said the man, who identified himself as Abu Islam.
Hamas, along with smaller secular and religious groups, opposed the accord and has vowed to continue attacks on Israeli soldiers despite the peace treaty pledge of the Palestinian forces to stop such violence.
A 25-year-old Palestinian policeman, Salem Al-Akhras, cried after he arrived from Yemen to be reunited with relatives. He admitted the future was murky.
"I have fears," he said. "Today people are respecting us and kissing us. Tomorrow, I don't know what is in our future."
The sites the Palestinian police were to guard included a synagogue that has been the focus of right-wing Israeli protests against Palestinian autonomy.
Jews will continue to have access to the site, and a group of 50 seminary students and settlers attempted to pray at the site. But the army banned Israelis from entering the town indefinitely as a security measure, physically carting out anyone found sneaking in - including Israeli journalists.
The two forces also conducted joint patrols.
At the entrance to town, an Israeli border police jeep and a GMC Blazer of the PLO, each flying their own national flag, were parked side-by-side near the main road - a visible sign of the new order.
Part of the Jericho transfer ceremonies included signing over the buildings and responsibilities for the various departments of civilian administration.
After a meeting in Gaza on Thursday, PLO official Khalid Al-Qudra said he hoped the Palestinians would be able to take over all civil powers by Tuesday. The self-rule plan includes Palestinian control of health, education, tourism, taxation and social welfare in all the occupied territories.
The Israeli daily Hatsofeh reported that Israeli and PLO representatives had started secret talks in Vienna on the final status of all the occupied territories, an issue left open for up to five years in the agreement on self-rule.
 Load-Date: May 13, 1994

 

End of Document
