

Israeli Supreme Court Acquits Demjanjuk as 'Ivan the Terrible'
The Associated Press
July 29, 1993, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1101 words
Byline: By KARIN LAUB, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




The Israeli Supreme Court unanimously acquitted retired Ohio autoworker John Demjanjuk today of being the sadistic Nazi death camp guard "Ivan the Terrible" and threw out his death sentence.
In ordering him set free, the five judges said his guilt could not be proven beyond reasonable doubt, though they were convinced he had belonged to a Nazi unit whose mission was to exterminate Jews.
Outside the court, the ruling was met with shouts of disbelief and anguish. Inside, Demjanjuk, 73, listened impassively in the dock as Chief Justice Meir Shamgar announced the acquittal. Demjanjuk's son, John Jr., wept and said he was "glad to see that they (the judges) actually had the courage to stop the injustice."
Demjanjuk had argued that his 1988 conviction was a case of mistaken identity and steadfastly denied that he had been the brutal guard who tortured Jews as they went to their deaths at the Treblinka death camp.
His conviction had been based on dramatic testimony by five Treblinka survivors who said he was Ivan, but documents that emerged after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 offered conflicting evidence.
Israel said it will not pursue additional charges and served him a deporation order immediately after today's ruling, but it was not clear where Demjanjuk would go. He has been stateless since the United States stripped him of his citizenship in 1981, and the Israeli Interior Ministry said he was returned to an Israeli jail until a country could be found to take him.
Demjanjuk's family has appealed to U.S. authorities to let him return. in Washington, a Justice Department official said today that the grounds for Demjanjuk's deportation from the United States were still valid because he lied about his wartime activities on immigration papers. But he did not rule out that Demjanjuk could be readmitted.
A likely destination for Demjanjuk is his native Ukraine, and officials there said he probably would be admitted.
Israel televison late today quoted defense lawyer Yoram Sheftel saying that Demjanjuk was granted a passport, but he declined to name the country. Sheftel could not immediately be reached for comment.
About 150 people watching on closed circuit television outside the courtroom screamed in anguished disbelief when Demjanjuk was cleared. Shouts of "Can you believe it?" rang out inside the Supreme Court building. One spectator was arrested for throwing a rock at defense attorney Sheftel's car.
"I am in shock, deep shock," said Josef Czerny, one of the Treblinka survivors who identified Demjanjuk as "Ivan" in court. "The judges have made a mistake. They have committed an injustice. That is him, the war criminal."
Holocaust survivors set up telephone hot lines in advance of the session for people whose old wounds may be ripped open by the decision.
Nazi hunters had said an acquittal could dampen efforts in the West to try Nazi war criminals.
In Los Angeles today, Rabbi Marvin Hier, founder of the Simon Wiesenthal Institute, said he feared the acquittal "will discredit survivor testimony." Hier's institute initiates searches for Nazi war criminals.
The Demjanjuk case was Israel's second major war crimes trial. Twenty-five years ago, Holocaust mastermind Adolf Eichmann was hanged after Israeli agents kidnapped him in Buenos Aires and brought him to Israel for trial.
Demjanjuk, wearing a brown prison uniform and surrounded in the docket by police, appeared tense before the decision. He glanced around the oval courtroom packed with journalists and spectators, including three Treblinka survivors who had testified against him.
But when the decision was read and translated to him, he showed no emotion.
When ushered into the courtroom, Demjanjuk had said: "I miss my wife, I miss my family, I miss my grandchildren. I want to go home."
At the family home in Seven Hills, Ohio, his daughter Lydia was jubilant. "It's a happy day," she jsaid. "We're just waiting for him to come home."
Demjanjuk's wife, Vera, 67, and his other daughter, Irene, were in seclusion.
Demjanjuk, who has been in an Israeli jail since 1986, was sentenced two years later to hang for crimes against the Jewish people after a 14-month trial. His conviction was based largely on the survivor testimony. Prosecutors also submitted an SS identity card in Demjanjuk's name issued at the Trawniki training for death camp guards.
But he contended he was a victim of mistaken identity and had spent most of the war in German captivity.
Ultimately, he was cleared by a KGB file.
Midway through his two-year Supreme Court appeal, Israel won access to Soviet archives that yielded depositions by 37 Treblinka guards and forced laborers who said "Ivan" was another Ukrainian guard, Ivan Marchenko. Some identified Marchenko in photographs and there was no resemblance to Demjanjuk.
The fate of Marchenko, who operated the Treblinka gas chambers where 890,000 Jews perished between 1942-43, is not known.
Hinting at the difficult moral dilemma of weighing survivor testimony against Treblinka guard depositions, the judges wrote: "True, the memory of the Holocaust shakes every Jew to the bone, but a judge must overcome these emotions when seated in a ruling."
The court, however, found convincing evidence that Demjanjuk was a guard at Trawniki, the Sobibor death camp and the Regensburg and Flossenburg concentration camps.
"The facts proved the appellant's participation in the extermination process," a written summary said.
These charges were not listed in the original indictment, which focused on Treblinka. Under Israeli law, a court has the discretion to convict on charges emerging during a trial on condition the accused was given reasonable chance to defend himself.
The court found Demjanjuk was not given that chance. The judges said they rejected the option of ordering a new trial because that would mean "an additional extension of the hearings beyond an acceptable limit."
Demjanjuk's son reacted angrily when asked about the court's finding that his father belonged to a Nazi guard unit "whose purpose was murder."
"This nonsense should stop right now," the younger Demjanjuk said. "It would be unthinkable to say that now, after 16 years of proving his innocence, he should be left with a label that has never been tried in a court of law."
Demjanjuk's son also said he hoped U.S. Attorney General Janet Reno would issue an administrative order permitting his father to return to the United States immediately.
"They extradited him here to … face charges of being Ivan the Terrible," the younger Demjanjuk said. "The court has found he is not. He should be sent back to the United States."

 

End of Document
