

Israeli Generals Show Christopher the Lay of the Land
The Associated Press
February 24, 1993, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 541 words
Byline: By MARCUS ELIASON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MANARA, Israel
Body




The sunshine reflected off the fishponds below, and Mount Hermon glistened under a blanket of snow. The scene was relaxed and pastoral, right down to Warren Christopher's open-neck shirt.
A perfect morning for discussing war and peace in the Holy Land.
Since arriving Monday to begin the latest American attempt at unraveling the Middle East tangle, the new secretary of state has been at pains to demonstrate attentiveness to Israel's existential fears.
On Wednesday, Christopher took a helicopter tour of northern Israel - covering half the country in less than an hour - and traveled up the Galilee panhandle where Syria and Lebanon converge around Israel.
On the way, he was whisked over the 11 miles that separate Israel from the West Bank at the narrowest and most populous region of the Jewish state.
Landing at the edge of a plateau near Kibbutz Manara, Christopher and his entourage sat down for a panoramic view of the terrain. Eastward across the six-mile-wide Hula Valley lay the Golan Heights. Westward, a few hundred yards away, was Lebanon.
Israel captured the Golan from Syria in the 1967 war and later annexed it. The territory is the high ground from which Syrian forces, in a worst-case scenario, could swoop down and punch deep into the Galilee before Israel mobilized the reservists who are the backbone of its army.
Thus Israel's offer to relinquish at least part of the Golan is conditioned on Syria agreeing to a full peace with open borders and diplomatic relations - a peace that will render war obsolete.
Christopher's geography lesson was given by Maj. Gen. Yitzhak Mordechai, the gruff commander of the northern front, with maps and firepower charts.
Syria has 4,000 tanks, 600 warplanes, 2,000 artillery pieces and "more than 600 missiles capable of hitting every target in Israel," he said.
Moreover, he said, Syria has a standing army while Israel depends on speedy mobilization of reserves - so it needs extra time to deploy against a surprise attack. Syria has 12 divisions facing Israel, while "we have just a few units in the Golan Heights and the northern area," he said.
"This is a very complicated situation. We have a very, very short and closed area in the Golan," said the Iraqi-born general.
However, Syria is dissuaded from attacking because Israel has one of the world's best equipped and most efficient armies. It is widely believed to have nuclear weapons that can be fired up to 600 miles by missile.
Mordechai pointed to Lebanon and recalled the Palestinian guerrilla attacks of the 1970s: 'In Kiryat Shmonah they attacked a school. Eighteen children were killed. In Avivim they attacked a children's bus. Thirteen were killed. In Maalot … 25 civilians were killed."
Therefore, Israel kept control of a self-declared security zone in south Lebanon when it pulled out the bulk of its troops in 1985 after a three-year occupation of the area. Now the enemy is Lebanese Shiite Muslim fundamentalists backed by Iran.
Christopher occasionally asked a question to clarify a point of geography, but made no judgments except to say he was glad he could see the situation firsthand.
"I'm an old-fashioned person who really doesn't think I can understand it until I can see it, and I understand it so much better," he said.

 

End of Document
