

Its a New War, But the Captain Still Has Nothing on That
The Associated Press
February 7, 1991, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1163 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The young military briefer, crisp in his combat outfit, stood before a sullen press corps, reciting statistics by the barrelful - so many sorties flown, so many trucks and depots and ammunition dumps taken out - but offering facts, hard facts, by the eyedropperful.
He'd come up with ever more innovative ways of saying he couldn't, wouldn't deal with various questions.
"I have nothing on that."
"You'd have to ask the Pentagon."
"We do not discuss advance operations."
"I'd rather you put that question to our allies."
"I don't want to speculate."
"I can't look into the mind of the other side."
Could be Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 1991.
Or it could have been Saigon, South Vietnam, 1968.
Much has changed about war, but the briefings have the same old air.
They are still struggles between the military, anxious to put out a sanitized report on the battle, and the press, anxious not to be the military's lackeys.
In Vietnam, someone labelled the briefings the "Five O'Clock Follies," and the name stuck, although they were moved to 4:45 p.m., Saigon time - 5:45 a.m. EST - to better accommodate deadlines.
The "Follies" attracted about 75 journalists, lasted five to 45 minutes and were conducted with maps and pointers - no snappy TV pictures of "smart" bombs in those days.
The briefers were mid-level officers, rotated about every three months, not the one- to four-star generals who often show up these days at Riyadh.
Four-star Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf has given more briefings in Riyadh on the Persian Gulf war than Gen. William Westmoreland, his Vietnam counterpart, conducted in the four years he commanded U.S. forces.
The Saigon "Follies" were initiated early in the war by U.S. spokesman Barry Zorthian, who, tiring of constant interruptions, invited journalists to drop by his office any afternoon at 5.
Those sessions became a seven-days-a-week institution in an auditorium in the old Rex Hotel, complete with mimeographed communiques giving the day's activities on land, air, sea and waterway: often several pages, a paragraph for every significant clash.
Zorthian, now a Washington public relations consultant, was given the pompous title of minister-counselor for information, suggesting the importance attached to getting out the government's version of the war.
"I must say I get a degree of sympathy for some of these briefers today; they are on a short leash," says Zorthian. "An air war is much more difficult to brief on than a ground war. You deal with numbers of sorties, bombs or missiles dropped. Even when you get the damage assessment it is from a distance and it's very general, devoid of color and flavor and therefore, from a journalist's viewpoint, uninformative."
The Saigon briefings weren't broadcast, although tapes were later piped back to Washington.
Now, like anyone with access to cable television, Zorthian can watch the Riyadh briefings on Cable News Network. Held in a hotel ballroom, it generally starts around 10 a.m. EST, early evening in Riyadh.
Because correspondents had free, uncensored access to the battlefield in Vietnam, the Saigon briefings were less important as a source of news than they have been in the Persian Gulf War.
Under Pentagon ground rules, journalists in the Persian Gulf are not permitted to go off to battle solo, hitching a ride on an army helicopter, answerable only to themselves. Instead they must travel in organized pools, seeing only what the military permits, and must submit their stories to military review.
So far, the atmosphere at Riyadh is far less strained than it became in Saigon.
"There was enormous hostility between the press and the briefers, a complete lack of trust," said Robert Sims, a Navy public affairs officer in Vietnam and now senior vice president of the National Geographic Society.
Still, said Robert Burke an executive with the American Newspaper Publishers Association who was military information chief in Vietnam, "I can see the frustration on the faces of the briefers in Saudi Arabia, knowing they're getting questions they are not allowed to answer. It's a frustrating experience for both sides."
After two weeks, the format of the briefing was changed slightly: The first 30 minutes are on-the-record and on television. After that, the broadcast stops and briefers speak on condition they not be quoted by name, a change both sides intended to produce greater candor from the military.
Sims and Zorthian both cite a factor that tended to undermine the Saigon briefers' credibility: a reporter would go into the field, witness a fierce firefight, then catch a plane back to Saigon in time to attend the briefing.
What he heard often didn't square with what he'd seen and he get up, furious, and say, in effect, "You don't know what you're talking about. I was there, buddy."
The problem, Zorthian said, was that the briefer had access only to summarized information. The reporter might have had access only to a small segment of the overall picture, but he had seen war in the flesh. He had smelled the smells and heard the sounds and felt the fears of combat.
Also, bad news had a way of not getting put out at the briefings.
Associated Press veteran reporter George Esper, who may have attended more Saigon briefings than any other journalist, said, "If there were civilian casualties, caught in the cross-fire of war, or if American troops were hit by their own bombs, you'd have to ask. They never volunteer that sort of information. The briefers had a series of answers marked 'only if asked.' And you had to ask the question exactly the right way to get an answer."
In the Vietnam war, the daily tabulation of the number of Communist troops killed - "the body count" - was considered an important test of the war's progress.
Retired Col. Harry G. Summers Jr. in his "Vietnam War Almanac," writes: "Because success soon became measured in these terms, this practice led to inflated reports and a widening credibility gap. In addition, measuring success in such grisly terms further eroded American public support for the war."
Having learned from that experience, the military is downplaying Iraqi casualty reports in the gulf war. "I'm anti body count," Schwarzkopf told the Riyadh briefing a few days ago. "It just puts undue pressure on commanders to come up with numbers that are unreal."
There was one other big difference - Lyndon Johnson, who was so involved in management of the war, he even picked targets for bombing raids.
Zorthian recalls instances when an AP or UPI reporter would cover a fierce fight and file his story by phone to his bureau in Saigon, which transmitted it within minutes.
Johnson had wire service tickers in his office and often, said Zorthian, was on the phone to Saigon, demanding Westmoreland's account of a battle action the general knew nothing about.
As far as is known, that hasn't happened in this war, yet. But President Bush has a TV set in his office, and can watch the U.S. Central Command briefings. For that matter, so can Schwarzkopf. He has CNN, too.

 

End of Document
