

Japan's Media In the News, On the Defensive
The Associated Press
October 27, 1993, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 541 words
Byline: By ERIC TALMADGE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TOKYO
Body




An empress collapses. A right-wing extremist kills himself. An election is lost. All these events had one thing in common: the news media were blamed.
The Japanese media - normally seen as conservative, even docile - are embroiled in a controversy over whether they have gone too far in allowing opinionated, aggressive reporters abuse the freedom of speech.
"I feel sick whenever I see articles claiming freedom of expression these days," wrote retiree Zenjiro Ishiguro in a letter typical of the op-ed pages this week.
"The media should show dignity and restraint."
A sensational series of events set off the tempest:
- Last Wednesday, Empress Michiko collapsed in what palace officials hint was a nervous breakdown caused in part by magazine articles criticizing her as short-tempered and overbearing. She remains unable to speak.
- That same day, rightist Shusuke Nomura killed himself as the president of the Asahi Shimbun, one of Japan's most prestigious newspapers, looked on in his office. Nomura was seeking an apology for a cartoon in a magazine published by the Asahi that denigrated the political party he had founded. Asahi officials had apologized for the cartoon, which was widely criticized as excessive.
- On Monday, a former executive of the Asahi National Broadcasting Corp. was called before parliament to answer allegations that he ordered reporters to slant their coverage against Japan's long-ruling Liberal Democratic Party in elections last summer. The LDP lost, but the executive denied issuing any such orders.
So far, the "Michiko-bashing" weeklies appear to have drawn the most emotional, and negative, reaction from readers. On Tuesday, the palace also lodged a formal complaint, saying many of the reports were false.
Criticizing the imperial family remains a delicate matter in Japan, and since Michiko's collapse the weeklies have done a complete about-face with a chorus of sympathetic, praise-filled articles. None, however, has run corrections or apologies for previous reports.
Debate continues over the TV Asahi affair, and newspapers have been quick to fan the flames with strident editorials.
"This is not only a matter that concerns TV Asahi," commented the Yomiuri Shimbun, Japan's largest newspaper, in an editorial Tuesday demanding a deeper investigation into the network's election coverage. "The very principles of democracy are at stake."
Another major daily, the Sankei Shimbun, defended Japanese laws that limit freedom of the expression for television broadcasters - but not for newspapers - because TV "makes use of our precious air waves."
Media critics have questioned the motives of such comments, since both the Yomiuri and Sankei belong to media conglomerates with TV networks that compete with Asahi's. They fear an important chance to discuss freedom of speech is being lost as business rivals take pot shots at one another.
"The parliamentary questioning was clearly a case of political meddling in the freedom of speech, and yet the media couldn't even come together to mount a unified opposition," said Hideo Shimizu, chairman of the Program Research Board of the Commercial Broadcasters' Association.
Shimizu and four other members of the board resigned en masse after the network executive's testimony.
 Load-Date: October 27, 1993

 

End of Document
