

Kerrigan Attack: The Plotters Were a Feckless Bunch
The Associated Press
February 4, 1994, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1113 words
Byline: By BOB BAUM, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: PORTLAND, Ore.
Body




About the only person who used his head in the scheme to attack Nancy Kerrigan was hit man Shane Stant. Trapped by a chained exit door at the ice arena where he had just whacked Kerrigan in the knee, he escaped by butting his way through a plexiglass window.
For a conspiracy that rocked the world of international sports, the plotters turned out to be a remarkably hapless and inept band of amateurs.
They made phone calls from their own homes. Stayed in motels under their own names. Used their own credit cards. Astonishingly, recorded their plotting on tape.
For a brief time, while investigators and reporters feverishly speculated that the attacker might be a deranged Kerrigan fan, the three men who carried out the attack gloated over the riches they felt certain would come their way.
"They did it … for the rewards that would follow by being the world bodyguard service to the stars," said Ron Hoevet, the lawyer for Tonya Harding's former husband, Jeff Gillooly.
Gillooly, for his part, was primarily motivated by outrage at the low scores awarded Harding at a skating event in Japan in December and his conviction that the U.S. Figure Skating Association favored Kerrigan, according to his statements to officials.
All four men charged in the case have confessed to their parts in the crime. Gillooly, who pleaded guilty to racketeering, said Harding was in on it from the start. Harding insisted she learned of the plot only after she returned from her victory in the U.S. championships in Detroit, where Kerrigan was assaulted just six weeks before the Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway.
A look at Gillooly's henchmen, called "the three stooges" by District Attorney Michael Schrunk:
- Shawn Eckardt, Gillooly's 310-pound friend, who calls himself a bodyguard and makes outlandish claims about his experience in unconventional warfare and surveillance. According to his boasts, Eckardt, now 26, would have been 16 when he was supposedly supervising protection activities for a Swiss corporation by training agents in counterterrorism and coordinating intelligence.
- Derrick Smith, a friend and former business partner of Eckardt, was contacted to carry out the plot hatched by Eckardt and Gillooly, according to court documents. Eckardt told Gillooly he could trust Smith because Eckardt had previously bought marijuana from him.
- Shane Stant, an Arizona bodybuilder and former football player hired by Smith, his uncle, to attack Kerrigan. He told authorities he bought the collapsing baton used in the assault at a store called Spy Headquarters in Mesa, Ariz., near his home. At his first meeting with fellow plotters, Gillooly recalled, Stant wore "a hat, black Australian outback coat and black fingerless gloves" - and never removed them.
Detailed statements that Gillooly, Smith and Stand gave to the FBI were released this week when Gillooly pleaded guilty.
Gillooley told authorities Smith agreed to do the job because Eckardt convinced him and his nephew that frightened skaters would sign them to hefty contracts as bodyguards after Kerrigan was attacked.
"We're going to make a lot of money. We're going to make a lot of money," Gillooly recalled Eckardt saying before the two men hugged at the end of one of their planning sessions.
The plotters were so sure of their plan, which eventually cost less than $ 5,000 to execute, that they gave Gillooly a money-back guarantee and promised to have cost proposals ready for the bodyguard work they were certain to win from the figure skating association, Gillooly said.
From the outset, the plan went awry. Stant first flew to Boston to stalk Kerrigan. He checked into the Logan Airport Hilton under his own name Dec. 28 but couldn't rent a car for two days because his sole credit card, for an account shared with his girlfriend, carried only her name and signature.
By then, Stant knew Kerrigan was practicing at the Tony Kent Arena on Cape Cod, and checked into a second hotel about 12 miles away. Despite repeated visits to the rink, he never saw Kerrigan on the ice. On Jan. 4, someone at the arena told him Kerrigan had already left for Detroit.
Stant tried to buy a train ticket but learned no trains were going to Detroit at that time. So he boarded a bus. It took 29 hours.
According to Gillooly, Stant had run out of money in Boston and had nothing to eat on the bus trip. As Gillooly tells it, he and Eckardt discussed what to do while the big bodyguard's mother made fudge. Then they went to a grocery store to wire $ 725 to Smith in Phoenix, who could forward it to the hungry hit man.
The clerk at the Western Union office asked for a test question Smith could be asked when he picked up the money; Eckardt asked what she meant.
"She explained that a test question would be a question that only Smith would know the answer to," Gillooly's statement reads. "Eckardt thought about it and then said, 'I know. What city is Shane in?' The lady wrote the question down and then asked Eckardt what the answer was. Eckardt said, 'Detroit."'
Smith flew to Detroit on Jan. 5. He and Stant abandoned their first plan, to assault Kerrigan in her hotel room and bind her with duct tape, choosing to attack her the next day after practice at Cobo Arena.
As Kerrigan lay writhing in pain by his baton blow, Stant broke through the window with his head, then threw the weapon into the snow, he told investigators. Police found it in a waste container behind the arena.
After the attack, Gillooly told authorities, Eckardt suggested that Gillooly call New York Yankees owner George Steinbrenner, who had contributed $ 10,000 toward Harding's training expenses, and ask for $ 50,000 to cover full bodyguard service for the skater.
"Eckardt talked about how he could set up security at Gillooly's home, and he talked about a perimeter radar thing, which was a military surplus item that had small green pods in the yard and a radar screen," according to the transcript of Gillooly's testimony.
In fact, Eckardt was doing a lot of talking. To impress a female classmate in his paralegal class, he'd bragged about his role in the Kerrigan attack. He also played a tape recording of the planning sessions he'd had with Gillooly and Smith for another classmate, a young lay minister. Both classmates went to police.
Gillooly said he knew something was up three days after the attack, when Detroit Detective Dennis Richardson asked him if he knew Derrick Smith.
In the interview, the detective remarked that Gillooly must be very proud of Harding. Gillooly said he was. He said Harding had skated "really good."
Richardson then suggested Gillooly should feel proud of himself, too.
"Behind every great woman," the detective said, "is a great man."
 Load-Date: February 4, 1994

 

End of Document
