

Korean Tensions Are the Same But Global Realities Much Different
The Associated Press
June 23, 1994, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 795 words
Byline: By ROBERT DVORCHAK, AP National Writer
Body




There was no escalating tension, no prolonged diplomatic chess match, no guessing game played with a strongman's whims.
When the Korean War started, 44 years ago Saturday, it was a surprise. Only one thing was the same - Kim Il Sung was the leader of North Korea, and the United States had no idea what he was going to do.
"It is remarkable how little we understand this regime," said Thomas McNaugher, a military strategist with the Brookings Institution in Washington. "There's no more wisdom about what it might do than there was in 1950."
But 1994 is not 1950. Militarily and politically, so much is different from the days of the Korean War that the North would likely cause its own annihilation if it resumed its attempt at conquest.
"It's almost a 180-degree difference," said retired Col. Harry Summers, a Korean War veteran and a distinguished fellow at the U.S. Army War College.
"North Korea is isolated in the world. It may have the force to take Seoul in one leap, but it could not overrun the entire peninsula. It would destroy itself in the process," he said.
On June 25, 1950, the North sent seven Soviet-trained assault divisions and 150 T-34 tanks against a virtually defenseless South. Seoul, located just 25 miles south of the 38th parallel, fell in four days.
But the aggressors lost a gamble that America wouldn't intervene; it did, as leader of a United Nations coalition.
Although the North eventually captured all but a small pocket of the Korean Peninsula, its army was thrown back to the northern border of the Yalu River within five months and had collapsed.
But when the Chinese entered the war, the result was a stalemate not far from where the war started three years, one month and two days earlier.
Four million men, women and children were killed or wounded during the war; the United States had 54,246 dead and 103,284 wounded.
In the aftermath, America stationed 37,000 troops in South Korea - combat-ready professionals that are a far cry from the ill-equipped, ill-prepared U.S. forces rushed into combat in 1950 - as a tripwire to deter future invasions. And it rebuilt South Korea's army into a more formidable fighting force, while the country's economy flourished.
But across the 38th parallel, the adversary is the same: Kim Il Sung - the self-proclaimed Great Leader.
A Soviet officer in World War II, he remains in power as the world's last Stalinist leader. President Clinton, who was 6 years old when the war started, is the 10th man to occupy the White House since 1950.
And no one knows what Kim Il Sung will do next, whether it's building a bomb or seizing the reconnaissance ship USS Pueblo, blowing up a South Korean airliner or assassinating South Korean cabinet officials.
Korea was partitioned at the end of World War II to disarm the defeated Japanese, which had occupied the country since 1910. According to a U.S. proposal, the Americans administered the South; the Soviets patrolled the North.
Elections to establish a single government were set by the United Nations in 1947. But by that time, the Soviets had cut rail lines and set up roadblocks along the man-made demarcation, and two Koreas emerged.
Kim did not accept partition, and turned to war. Forty-four years later, it seems, he still does not accept partition.
But if a shooting war again erupts, the situation is much different than in 1950, when President Truman's response to the invasion was: "We've got to stop the sons of bitches no matter what."
U.S. soldiers already are on the firing line, South Korea's defenses are much stronger and North Korea is less likely to get military assistance from China or the successors of the Soviet Union.
American air superiority is unquestioned and, because three-fourths of Korea is surrounded by water, the U.S. Navy could mass its firepower. Army and Marine reinforcements could respond much more quickly.
Still, Korea is blanketed with craggy mountains that render most of it unsuitable for tanks. And its terrain is ideal for concealing guerrillas.
Former Secretary of State Dean Acheson recognized the difficulties in 1950 when he wrote: "If the best minds of the world had set out to find us the worst possible location to fight a war, the unanimous choice would had to have been Korea."
For now, the North and South are technically still at war because no peace treaty ever came after a 1953 cease-fire. Soldiers peer across each other across a 2.5 mile-wide demilitarized zone, a jagged scar running across the country, which went up eight years before the Berlin Wall and endures long after the collapse of communism.
And experts have little doubt about the outcome of a second conflict.
"There'd be a very bloody fight. But they'd lose. It would be suicide," McNaugher said. "It wouldn't end again with the status quo."
 Load-Date: June 23, 1994

 

End of Document
