

Lafayette Park: Gulf War Just the Latest Protest Magnet
The Associated Press
February 6, 1991, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 888 words
Byline: By W. DALE NELSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Bush's lighthearted news conference remarks about drumbeating in Lafayette Park refocused attention on seven acres of carefully kept parkland that have been a magnet for demonstrators from Vietnam to the Persian Gulf War.
"It is virtually the Hyde Park Corner of the U.S. in many ways," said Arthur Spitzer, legal director of the American Civil Liberties Union in Washington.
Like London's Hyde Park Corner, the park across Pennsylvania Avenue from the White House has been the scene of protest in peace as well as war: against U.S. policies in Southeast Asia and Latin America; against nuclear power; in favor of the homeless, and now against the gulf conflict.
It is also a park, and its users have often disagreed over whether the aesthetic delights that it offers should outweigh its importance as a forum for free speech.
The matter came up in Bush's news conference Tuesday when a reporter asked about the arrest of protesters for loudly beating drums at all hours.
The demonstrators had first been told that the drums were structures, and thus prohibited in the park, but would be all right if they held them instead of putting them on the ground. They complied by putting their toes under the edges of the drums.
Later, however, when the day and night drumming grew louder, several people were arrested for violating a noise regulation that applies to all national parks.
Bush told reporters that the drums could be heard from part of the White House but did not disturb his sleep. He said the arrests were made after complaints from guests in a hotel on the other side of the park.
The muffled thump of drums could be heard as he spoke.
"It is one of America's premier parks," said Richard C. Robbins, the National Park Service's assistant solicitor for national capital parks. "It gets a high use by national and international visitors. At the same time, it in a unique situs for people wishing to express their views."
The Park Service says it has tried to walk a line between these values by adopting regulations limiting the size of signs, prohibiting structures in the park and outlawing camping.
Another proposed regulation, now awaiting final action, would limit the goods a demonstrator could bring to the park to three cubic feet in order to eliminate the bundles of bedding, clothing and household wares often carried by protesters who virtually live in the park.
"When I first got here, everything that I was doing was protected absolutely by the law," said William Thomas, an anti-nuclear and pro-peace demonstrator who has been arrested about 40 times in the past 10 years and has challenged the regulations in court.
"The law was like a wall between the police and myself," Thomas said in a recent interview, "and with each succeeding regulation, the wall got moved back further and further, 'til now the wall is behind me and the police have got us up against the wall."
Park Police Major David Hines said about 121 people have been arrested in the park or on the sidewalk across the street, fronting the White House, since the Gulf War broke out. The most frequent charge is demonstrating without a permit. They are taken to a police station and usually pay a fine of $$50.
The property making up the park was purchased by the federal government in 1791 for about $$469. It was part of the White House grounds until Thomas Jefferson decided it made the president's front yard too big. Jefferson authorized its separation into a park, and Pennsylvania Avenue was later cut through in front of the White House.
In 1797, a race track was laid out beginning at the west end of what is now the park. The property was used for workmen's huts while the White House was being built. Soldiers camped there in the War of 1812 and troops guarding the White House used the site in the Civil War.
The land was first known as the President's Park, but was renamed Lafayette Square in 1824 after the Marquis de Lafayette, the French hero of the American Revolution, visited the United States.
Since 1933, when the Park Service took it over, it has been officially called Lafayette Park. Statues of Lafayette and other revolutionary heroes stand at the corners of the park, with an equestrian statue of Andrew Jackson in the middle.
Its heyday as a protest site began during the Vietnam War, and the Park Service adopted regulations that required a permit and limited the number of demonstrators to 500.
After the ACLU challenged the rules, the U.S. Court of Appeals upheld some of them, but increased the 500-person limit to 3,000.
The next major test came in 1981, when advocates for the homeless set up a tent city called "Reaganville" in the park. Park police dismantled it. Three years later the Supreme Court upheld by a 7-2 vote the regulations prohibiting sleep-in demonstrations at Lafayette or other parks near the White House.
Camping was out. But big signs were still in - signs saying "Stop the Arms Race" and "Wanted, Wisdom and Honesty." Some stood 12 feet high and 10 feet wide and were supported by scaffolding.
"We can't see the president face to face, so we put up the signs across from his front yard," said demonstrator Mark Parker.
But others said the signs were destroying the beauty of the park.
On April 4, 1986, under newly adopted regulations, the Park Service removed them and imposed size limits for new signs.

 

End of Document
