

Life On The Margin: Village Life In The Philippines
The Associated Press
October 2, 1994, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 460 words
Byline: By ROBERT H. REID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SALACAFE, Philippines
Body




It was a lazy afternoon in the mountains of South Cotabato province until Dog showed up with the new basketball.
Villagers were loitering around the bamboo shack where Dog Yatan and his wife, Bite, run the local general store. Suddenly, Dog appeared on horseback with the basketball, purchased in the nearest town, 15 miles away. Basketball in hand, bystanders scampered off to shoot a few hoops to pass the time.
Life in remote Philippine villages such as Salacafe, on the southernmost island of the Philippine archipelago, moves at a timeless pace. One day is little different from the others.
Basketball is one of the few diversions in Salacafe, which means "Eagle's Nest" in the Tiboli language. There are no shops except for Dog's place, which sells little more than soft drinks and cigarettes.
The store has no bottle opener, so customers open their soft drinks by biting off the cap or pounding it free with whatever tool is available.
There is also no electricity, no restaurant, no movie theater, no newspapers, no running water and no plumbing. One or two households in the village of 2,000 people own a transitor radio, which can receive static-ridden signals from two commercial radio stations.
"I have never seen a movie in my life," Juan Talan, 43, said.
Until about two years ago, the village was controlled by Communist rebels led by "Commander Rambo." Soldiers and civilian militiamen drove out "Rambo's" boys.
Now, the village's main attraction is Dog's pig, which was born with five-cloved hoofs, two cloves more than normal.
Families live in crude huts made of bamboo slats and thatched roofs. Beds of red and yellow flowers are the only decoration.
Time is about the only thing that villagers have in abundance. They subsist by farming a few acres of rice and corn, which they consume or sell.
Most are perpetually in debt to usurers who lend money for seed and fertilizer. Women spend their days rearing children, tending gardens or cooking the usual fare - rice mixed with root crops and an occasional can of sardines.
The women, dressed in full length, wrap-around malong skirts, pass the time beneath the mango tree at Dog's general store, chatting with Bite, who pronounces her name "Bi-teh."
Getting out of the settlement is no mean feat. The only road is about two yards wide, rutted, unpaved and strewn with boulders.
The sole means of public transport is a motorcycle service, which someone with a curious sense of humor dubbed "the Skylab."
Skylabs appear a few times a day. Up to five people, including women holding infants, cram aboard and pay 75 pesos - about three days' wages for a farmhand - for a ride into town.
Those who cannot afford the fare hitch rides with military trucks that occasionally travel the backroads.
The rest just walk.
 Load-Date: October 2, 1994

 

End of Document
