

Live, From The Archives, It's 20 Years of Grief to the Chief
The Associated Press
October 25, 1994, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 558 words
Byline: By HARRY F. ROSENTHAL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




It is a different Ronald Reagan. This president impatiently dismisses the Girl Scout cookie-sale champion of the year so he can get back to plotting intricate troop movements in Iraq. This Reagan gets Syrian President Hafez Assad on the telephone and chews him out in Arabic.
This president exists only on "Saturday Night Live."
So does this one. As press secretary (the real one) Ron Nessen tries to raise a problem in the Oval Office, this Gerald Ford is swinging at a golf ball with a tennis racket.
And this one: Bill Clinton, wearing an Arkansas Razorback sweatshirt, jogs into McDonald's with his two Secret Service agents and works the breakfast crowd, all the while pigging out on every hamburger and fry in sight.
He complains that the media are perverting Arkansas's record in education, which was rated 50th in the nation."I'm proud to say we shot ahead of Alabama last year," says the make-believe Clinton.
The august National Archives, whose next noontime luncheon series speaker will be the biographer of Hugo Black, gave over its stage Tuesday to plug a new history called "Saturday Night Live: The First Twenty Years." It's pushing things a bit because the NBC program is now in its 20th season.
Al Franken, a writer, producer and sometime actor on the comedy program took the easy way out. He showed clips from the show's presidential sketches and talked a little in between. That fit in with the Archives' "Humor and the Presidency" series.
The show started in 1975, the year after Richard Nixon resigned, so it didn't have Nixon to kick around. It made up for it in a 1977 skit that spoofed Nixon's in-depth, five-part interview with David Frost.
Dan Aykroyd, as Nixon, is asked about his childhood. The president recalls with pleasure and punctilious detail his introduction to a two-handled faucet. "You turn the right one and cold water would come out," he said. "You turn the left and it's warm." Said the actor playing Frost: "Nineteen hours of this should be fascinating."
The lecture included not only sendups of presidents but of men who want to be president. Aykroyd as Sen. Bob Dole, a 1988 presidential contender, has a menacing patter: "I know it, you know it, and I know you know I know it," says Dole in a staccato voice.
A presidential debate skit featuring Dana Carvey as George Bush and Jon Lovitz as Michael Dukakis opens with Dukakis practically disappearing behind the lectern and pushing a button that makes him taller than Bush. Bush delivers a platitude and can't think of anything else to say while the moderator tells him he has nearly two minutes to go.
Says Dukakis: "I can't believe I'm losing to this guy."
Franken said Bush was pounded harder than any other president because of Carvey's dead-on caricature. Bush took it so well, he once invited Carvey to stay at the White House. The actor entertained the staff after walking into the East Room to the strains of "Hail to the Chief."
Bush appeared on the show last Saturday, speaking in Carvey's clipped Bush-persona. "Know him well," said the real Bush. "Bar and I had him up to the White House. Walked off with a pen that had belonged to James Madison. Secret Service beat him up pretty good."
Franken had a standing-room crowd in the Archives Theater. "Let's see hands," he said at one point. "How many of you are going to be here for the Hugo Black lecture?"
 Load-Date: October 25, 1994

 

End of Document
