

McNamara Rekindles The War Over The War, Gets a Blistering
The Associated Press
April 12, 1995, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 759 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




By waiting three decades to admit he was wrong about Vietnam, former Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara has opened himself to criticism as bitter as any since he ran "McNamara's War."
"We were wrong, terribly wrong," McNamara wrote in the book, published Monday, and he came in for an immediate blistering for not having said that while he was still in office and able to alter events. He left in 1968 to take over the World Bank.
Fewer than 7,000 Americans had died in the war when McNamara concluded in 1966 or 1967 that the war was a mistake. More than eight times as many had died before the United States ceased military action in August 1973. South Vietnam fell to the communists in April 1975.
"Mr. McNamara must not escape the lasting moral condemnation of his countrymen," The New York Times said Wednesday in a sharply personal editorial.
The Times added: "Three million Vietnamese died. Fifty-eight thousand Americans got to come home in body bags. Mr. McNamara, while tormented by his role in the war, got a sinecure at the World Bank and summers at the (Martha's) Vineyard (in Massachusetts)."
In The Los Angeles Times, cartoonist Paul Conrad portrayed McNamara as standing before the engraved names on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial and saying, "Sorry about that."
And in a Los Angeles Times column, Robert Scheer wrote, "While I respect the moral angst reflected in this memoir, one must ask why McNamara compounded his crime of complicity with the crime of silence."
"What bothers me about it is the fact that he seems to have reached the conclusion no later than the end of 1965 and probably earlier that the war was unwinnable and yet he did not confront this head on in his recommendations to President Johnson," said George Herring, a Vietnam War historian at the University of Kentucky.
McNamara ran the Pentagon under Presidents Kennedy and Johnson. In the book, "In Retrospect: The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam," he wrote that he still does not know whether he quit or was fired by Johnson.
The reaction to his words recalled the emotion aroused by the war itself. Tens of thousands of Americans - including a college student named Bill Clinton - protested the war, burned draft cards or fled to Canada to escape the draft.
Even McNamara's son, a Stanford University student, joined the protests. McNamara once fled a student mob at Harvard through underground utility tunnels.
McNamara, 78, has been in Asia since the book appeared. But he will get plenty of opportunity to answer questions. Times Books, publisher of "In Retrospect: The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam," has scheduled him on a book tour that will take him to interviews in New York, Chicago, Boston, Washington, Dallas and Austin in Texas, Atlanta, Seattle, San Francisco and Los Angeles.
Publisher Peter Osnos, who worked with McNamara for two years as his editor, said the book is selling heavily. An additional 20,000 were ordered after a first printing of 80,000.
Osnos said McNamara knew what he was in for.
"The fact that there still is rage does not come as a surprise to anyone," Osnos said. "He was prepared for people to say he was responsible. He is not in any way, shape or form trying to escape that responsibility. What he is trying to do is to provide for the first time the fullest accounting of how it happened."
John Mueller, a University of Rochester political scientist who specializes in studying wars and presidents, said that even The New York Times - and almost everyone but "extremists" - supported the war in the Kennedy and early Johnson years.
Even David Halberstam, whose book "The Best and the Brightest" asked how official Washington could have gone astray, wrote in an earlier book that Vietnam was "perhaps one of only five or six nations in the world that is truly vital to U.S. interests," Mueller noted.
By 1967, McNamara disclosed in his book, his misgivings were deep enough for him to write a memo to President Johnson saying, "The picture of the world's greatest superpower killing or seriously injuring 1,000 noncombatants a week, while trying to pound a tiny backward nation into submission on an issue whose merits are hotly disputed, is not a pretty one."
But he kept his dissent publicly silent over the years.
The initial commentary on McNamara's book was not all critical. USA Today said McNamara "has belatedly shown us how to avoid repeating his mistakes."
"Where was he when we needed him?" a Boston Globe editorial asked, but added: "One has to admire his courage in coming forth now with such an honest and accurate reflection."
 Load-Date: April 12, 1995

 

End of Document
