

Meet Hairy Potato, the Bug-Killing Star of the Green Revolution
The Associated Press
October 27, 1992, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 455 words
Byline: By NICK LUDINGTON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




It has the prestige of an international award. It can help solve the world's food problem.
Is it a bird?
Is it a grain?
No. Meet the bug-killing hairy potato.
The potato - the world's fourth most important food crop - is a patsy for pests and now needs torrents of insecticides, many highly toxic.
The newly developed variety fights off aphids, leaf-hoppers, thrips, mealy bugs, tuber moths and mites with a non-toxic, built-in defense.
Scientist K.V. Raman of the International Potato Center said the new spud has hairs on the leaves and stalks that secrete a sticky substance, trapping and killing small pests as they feed or reproduce.
A larger threat, the Colorado potato beetle, common in the United States and Europe, eats the leaves and gets constipated from the gummy secretion. Its stomach bloats, crushing its ovaries and blocking reproduction.
Raman said at a news conference here Monday that the hirsute spud's self-defense mechanism is good for the farmer who grows his crop with less of the costly pesticides, and good for the environment, which is spared the toxic chemicals.
Of the world's major food crops, potatoes require the heaviest application of agricultural insecticides costing developing countries alone $ 300 million a year, the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research said in a statement.
While the tufted tater will reduce such environmental and financial costs, it tastes like a normal potato, said Prof. Robert Plaisted of Cornell University, which has been developing hybrids under contract to the potato center.
The new potato has the same nutritional value as currently cultivated potatoes, and similar yields and growing characteristics, Plaisted said.
The center has tested the shaggy tubers in the United States, Asia, Africa, Latin America and Europe. Next year it will be introduced for cultivation in 30 to 40 countries.
Plaisted said the new potato species is "the best method yet to give a broad spectrum of resistance to insects." The non-toxic adhesive material on the potato hairs will control various pests from 50 percent to 95 percent, he said.
Plaisted and Raman said scientists have high hopes the potato will be a new star in the "green revolution" to feed growing populations in the developing world.
The news conference was called by the U.N. and World Bank-sponsored Consultative Group to announce that the International Potato Center, based in Lima, Peru, had won the biennial King Baudouin International Agricultural Research Award for its 20 years of work to develop the hairy potato and other safe pest-management systems to protect the potato and the environment.
The award, which carries a prize of $ 30,000, is funded by Belgium and named after that country's monarch.

 

End of Document
