

Merchant Ships Ply the Gulf Despite the War
The Associated Press
February 21, 1991, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 573 words
Byline: By COTTEN TIMBERLAKE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Merchant ships carrying oil and other cargo continue to ply the southern Persian Gulf despite earlier fears that they would be caught in the cross-fire of war.
Chris Horrocks, secretary-general of the International Chamber of Shipping, estimates that more than half of the ports in the southern gulf are trading normally.
"After the initial tremors and concerns, it's certainly better than might have been expected," he said Wednesday.
Horrocks said the risk to commercial shipping has turned out to be minuscule largely because the Iraqi air force has been grounded by the war and because Iraqi targets include allied warships, not commercial vessels.
The danger is in the northern half of the gulf, beginning at Jubail, Saudi Arabia, according to the International Chamber of Shipping.
Most merchant ships are staying out of those waters, and Horrocks said the chances of hitting a mine in the south are remote.
"You're basically advised to travel in daylight hours and keep a mine lookout," he said.
There has been some decline in trading because of the war, and Horrocks attributed it generally to lower demand.
Bruce Farthing, a director for the International Association of Dry Cargo Ship Owners, said: "There has not been a tremendous amount of disruption except for one or two small ports. People have been able to continue trading despite higher crew costs and higher insurance costs."
Some shipowners may even have profited from carrying military supplies, Farthing said.
John Prescott, shipping correspondent for the Lloyd's List shipping newspaper, said in a telephone interview: "Confidence is returning and it is getting better by the day."
India, which for a time banned its fleet from the gulf, is allowing ships into certain oil terminals, Prescott said.
Japan has relaxed a restriction banning its ships from Saudi Arabian ports, although the northern gulf is still off-limits, he said.
The United States, Britain and Norway also have advised merchant ships to stay away from northern waters.
Iraqi and Kuwait ports are effectively sealed by the United Nations embargo on trade with Iraq and by the allied naval blockade.
LLoyd's List said earlier this month that there have been more than 380 "deep sea ship movements" in the gulf since the war began on Jan. 17.
Ports in the southern and western regions of the gulf, including in the United Arab Emirates, have been particularly busy, Lloyd's List said.
Shipments in and out of Saudi Arabian ports have been unaffected by the war, although its oil terminals are within the range of Iraq's Scud missiles, Lloyd's List said. More than 30 ships have arrived at the major Saudi Arabian oil terminals of Ras Tanura and Juaymah, it said.
"Almost definitely it's an improving picture," Prescott said. "We're getting largely back to normal."
Horrocks said Jordan's Red Sea port of Aqaba has suffered the most and is operating at about 20 percent of capacity because allied ships are stopping and searching commercial vessels to enforce the U.N. embargo.
Jordan has sided with Iraq in the war, and the United States has accused it of violating the embargo. Jordan has denied the claim.
Egypt's Suez Canal has suffered a bit too, with the usual number of 60 ships a day dropping to 50, Horrocks said.
Ships are advised to approach Iranian ports, which are in the northern gulf, with great caution, he said. Ships are still going to Iranian ports, mainly Kharg Island in the north, to pick up oil, he said.

 

End of Document
