

Mideast Peace: The Men Of Violence Lurk In The Shadows
The Associated Press
September 14, 1993, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 739 words
Byline: By ED BLANCHE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NICOSIA, Cyprus
Body




Lurking in the shadows as Yasser Arafat and Yitzhak Rabin exchanged handshakes over their historic peace treaty are extremists on both sides who feel betrayed and have vowed to wreck the agreement.
Whether they will be able to is not yet clear. But many insiders fear the long hoped-for era of co-existence between Arab and Jew will, at the very least, be ushered in by inter-Palestinian bloodshed.
The Arab hard-liners could also launch a new wave of terrorism against Israel, the United States and countries that pump economic aid into Arafat's ministate in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.
Arafat's aides, swept up in the euphoria of events, are scoffing - publicly at least - at threats by his radical rivals and firebrand Muslim fundamentalists to destroy the peace agreement and assassinate the PLO chief.
The bewildering speed with which events have unfolded since Arafat's secret negotiations with Israel were disclosed Aug. 28 has left his opponents little time to organize a coherent counterstrategy beyond noisy street protests.
But Arafat faces not just traditional Palestinian hard-liners opposed to any dealings with Israel, but close, longtime comrades who believe he has sold out the Palestinian struggle.
Two of the PLO's biggest factions, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine and the Marxist Democratic Front, are considering quitting the movement and joining forces with the fundamentalist Hamas, possibly to form an alternative PLO to give coherence to the anti-Arafat opposition.
Many Palestinians in Jordan believe that a power struggle and bloody in-fighting will erupt when Arafat takes control of Gaza and Jericho. Gaza, a Hamas stronghold, is likely to be a flashpoint.
"It's going to be a bloodbath. Many people don't like what's happening," warned political analyst Jamal Shaer, a former Cabinet minister. "The radicals and fundamentalists will fight him, maybe attempt to overthrow him and take over."
Labib Kamhawi, a political science professor at Jordan University, noted: "Violence can be expected if Arafat curbs these people.
"He's more inclined to use force than the opposition, just to confirm his authority. But he'll face a lot of difficulty containing acts of violence."
Thousands of armed Israeli settlers in the territories have also sworn to fight the peace plan and could be joined by their hard-line countrymen, many of them army veterans, if Arafat fails to keep the lid on.
Palestinian hawks say the nearly 6-year-old Palestinian uprising in the occupied territories will go on, despite Arafat's agreement to halt it.
They could provoke an Israeli backlash by terrorist attacks on the Jewish state or the settlements.
"If Arafat goes by the agreement which calls for … protecting Israel from any violence, that will lead to direct conflict with Palestinians who don't want to surrender their arms. Fighting Israel is an act of freedom for them," Kamhawi said.
The slaying Sunday of three Israeli soldiers in Gaza underlined the potency of that threat.
Theoretically, Arafat has the firepower to tackle any Palestinian insurrection against him - and could even find himself backed by the Israelis, although that could inflame even the moderates.
The Palestine Liberation Organization has about 10,000 fighters being trained as a police force in the autonomous areas. PLO sources say 20,000 men from the widely dispersed Palestine Liberation Army are being mobilized as a security force to support the self-rule authority.
Arafat's aides do not believe there will be a Palestinian civil war. They argue that the international backing he is winning will boost his influence and prestige in the occupied territories.
He is betting on large amounts of money pouring into the territories to lure back those who have defected to Hamas in recent years out of financial desperation and political frustration.
Although Arafat's Arab partners in the peace process - Syria, Jordan and Lebanon - are miffed at being outmaneuvered by him, they are unlikely to support his opponents.
The Iranians have thrown their weight behind the rejectionists - including Hamas; the Palestinian guerrilla faction under radical commander Ahmed Jibril; and Lebanon's fundamentalist Hezbollah - and could stir trouble. Iraq, thirsting for revenge but isolated, remains a wild card.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Ed Blanche, The Associated Press' Middle East news editor based in Nicosia, has covered the region since 1985.
 Load-Date: September 14, 1993

 

End of Document
