

Mideast Parley: For Israel, a Pudding Whose Proof is Entirely in The Eating
The Associated Press
August 3, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 981 words
Byline: By MARCUS ELIASON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TEL AVIV, Israel
Body




Golda Meir, the late Israeli prime minister, used to say that when the Arabs finally agreed to negotiate face to face with Israel, there would be dancing in the streets.
There may indeed be rejoicing come October, if the peace conference proposed by President Bush becomes a reality and Arabs and Israelis actually sit down to talk face to face. But meanwhile, the feeling is that Israel has begun a long march into the unknown.
After 43 years of hot and cold war, suspicion is an ingrained Israeli trait. Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's "yes" to the conference is carefully conditioned, and could become a "no" if he doesn't like the Palestinian delegation that comes to the talks.
Hard-line nationalists like Housing Minister Ariel Sharon are aghast, fearing the conference will squeeze Israel into yielding strategically valuable land. But the public seems broadly behind 75-year-old Shamir, probably because this hard-as-nails prime minister is perceived as having had things almost entirely his way so far.
Israelis are being told that the conference will be a brief ceremony, not the international steamroller Shamir feared; that the United Nations, which the Arabs hoped would play a key mediating role, will be represented by a single, mute observer; that Israel is not being asked to stop building settlements in the occupied territories.
Equally important, Israelis are being told that their arch-enemy, the Palestine Liberation Organization, is "outside, in the rain, without an umbrella," as Ehud Yaari, Israel television's respected Arab affairs commentator, put it.
But the biggest prize, in Israeli eyes, is the promise that the conference will immediately lead to direct negotiations.
Shamir's ideological mentor, Zeev Jabotinsky, theorized in the 1920s that to achieve peace in the Middle East, the Jews had to build "an iron wall" - a country so strong, entrenched and resolute that the Arabs would abandon hope of defeating it in war.
The wall has withstood five wars. Now comes the ultimate test: direct negotiations. That, say the Israelis, explains why they were so wary of the Arab demand for a full-scale, decision-making conference. They suspected an Arab ploy to keep Israel at arm's length, subject to the dictates of superpowers and U.N. delegates.
Instead, Israelis are promised that the conference will be carefully scripted, last a day or two, and break up into direct negotiations, never to reconvene except with Israel's assent.
Direct talks would be "a big breakthrough" because they would signal Arab acceptance of Israel's existence, says Deputy Foreign Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. "Direct negotiation is not procedure. It's substance. It's recognition."
Beyond the conference itself, the future is murky. Israel is unlikely to yield on the West Bank, which Shamir sees as part of the God-given Land of Israel. It may show some flexibility regarding the Golan Heights of Syria, but subject to stringent demilitarization.
Its terms for Palestinian representation reflect its overall view of the issue: no PLO; no east Jerusalem Arabs, because that would imply the city is negotiable; none from outside the occupied territories, because that might legitimize the Palestinian diaspora's claim on land that is now Israel's.
As some Israeli officials concede, anything may happen once negotiations get under way. That's why the proof of this pudding is entirely in its eating.
For Israel, the proof of the Arabs' sincerity will be their willingness to discuss not just the issue of Israeli-occupied territory, but all the other ingredients of peace: trade, embassies, open borders, shared water resources.
If the Palestinians accept Israel's offer of limited self-government for a three-year period, and use the time to demonstrate peaceful intentions, that too might make Israelis more amenable to giving them the statehood they seek.
All this points to as sort of rough sliding scale, whereby the more the Israelis trust the Arabs' intentions, the more flexible they will be, especially knowing that the conflict-weary Israeli voter won't forgive them for missing a chance of real peace.
Ben-Dror Yemini, who writes perceptively about Israeli mood swings, sees a profound change in the Likud's main constituency, the disadvantaged Sephardics of Middle East extraction.
Yemini, a young native-born Israeli of Yemenite descent, believes they vote Likud not out of attachment to the West Bank, but because Likud gives them identity and self-respect.
Yemini said he recently attended a seminar at which young Likud voters told Michael Eitan, a Likud purist, "in a very loud, clear voice" that they saw no point in refusing to yield an inch of land.
It may be no accident that the prime exponent of flexibility is Foreign Minister David Levy, who is Moroccan-born.
Israel has much to gain: if not full peace, at least detente that will cut its crippling military spending. Another gain would be U.S. and European good will as Israel seeks its place in the new world economic order and absorbs the Soviet immigrant influx.
Amnon Dankner, a columnist for the daily Hadashot, believes a settlement with Syria could give Israelis a sense of geographic freedom they have never known. He imagines hordes of Israelis on holiday driving through Syria via Turkey to Europe.
"It would make us really feel connected to the world and we would cease to be an island," he says.
Dankner's dream may be far off. Few Israelis can imagine Syria, its most implacable enemy, going the way of Egypt and signing a full peace with open borders.
The peace with Egypt is 12 years old and going strong, with diplomatic ties and open borders. Egypt is playing a key mediating role in bringing the conference into being.
The Israel-Egypt treaty ultimately may turn out to be the best precedent for the October peace conference.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Marcus Eliason is Chief of Bureau of The Associated Press in Israel.

 

End of Document
