

Mikhail S. Gorbachev, Eighth Leader of the Soviet Union
The Associated Press
December 20, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1175 words
Byline: By ALAN COOPERMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




One of the 20th century's pivotal leaders, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, transformed the political system of the Soviet Union and helped end the Cold War. But he became a victim of his own reforms.
During his final months in office, Gorbachev lacked real power and suffered the humiliation of presiding over a collapsing empire of 285 million people.
He struggled in vain to preserve the central government and reluctantly accepted a transition to a commonwealth, even though it meant his demise as the Soviet Union's eighth - and final - leader.
He even lost his Kremlin office, which rival Boris Yeltsin took control of Thursday along with most Soviet central government agencies as he moved to close down the Soviet Union that existed for 74 years.
In nearly seven years in power, first as general-secretary of the Communist Party and later as president of the Soviet Union, Gorbachev introduced tumultuous reforms that transformed and fascinated the world.
He freed political prisoners, allowed open debate and multi-candidate elections that ended the Communist Party's monopoly on power.
He gave Soviets freedom to travel and emigrate, halted religious oppression, reduced nuclear arsenals, established closer ties with the West and allowed the fall of Communist regimes in Eastern Europe.
In the process, he won the Nobel Peace Prize and accolades from world leaders.
But in a bitter irony, Gorbachev was more admired abroad than at home.
Soviets blamed him for hesitant economic reforms that caused a disastrous drop in production and severed the old supply network, resulting in bread lines, gasoline shortages and rationing unseen since World War II. The ruble became a worthless currency.
In contrast to his immediate predecessors, Gorbachev radiated energy and drive when he took charge of the economically troubled superpower in 1985. His press-the-flesh politicking initially enchanted crowds at home and set off "Gorbymania" abroad.
In the late 1980s, after they tasted freedom, all 15 Soviet republics demanded more autonomy. Ethnic conflicts caused hundreds of deaths in Azerbaijan and other trouble spots. Coal miners repeatedly went on strike. Industrial production plummeted, inflation soared.
Gorbachev agreed to decentralize power and negotiated a new Union Treaty to shift some economic authority to the republics, while maintaining a strong central government. It was scheduled for signing Aug. 20.
A day before the planned ceremony, hard-liners who bitterly opposed the Kremlin's loss of authority announced they had taken power. Among them were the men Gorbachev chose - his chief of staff, the Soviet vice president, prime minister, defense minister and the head of the KGB. For three chilling days, they held Gorbachev and his family under house arrest in the Crimea.
Yeltsin rallied the opposition to the coup and tens of thousands of Muscovites gathered outside Yeltsin's Russian government building to show solidarity. When the military refused to attack, the coup collapsed.
Yeltsin was the hero. Many Soviets felt sorry for Gorbachev, but his authority had been permanently damaged along with the credibility of the Communist Party, which appeared to be supporting the putsch.
In the power vacuum that followed, most of the republics declared full independence.
Gorbachev recognized the statehood of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia. Ukraine broke away politically and joined a commonwealth with other republics that left no place for Gorbachev's central administration.
Gorbachev was one of the generation of Soviet leaders born in the 1930s and '40s who lived through the crisis of World War II, the Stalinist years and the era in which the Soviet Union attained superpower status and international prestige.
The Soviet Union was 14 years old when Gorbachev was born March 2, 1931, and baptized in Privolnoye, a village 125 miles from Stavropol in the rich southern Russian grainlands.
His father, Sergei, was a party member and combine driver. His mother, Maria, still lives in Privolnoye, where she attends Russian Orthodox church services. Gorbachev was 10 when the Nazis launched their blitzkreig on the Soviet Union.
Gorbachev drove a combine after school as a teen-ager. His performance earned him the Red Banner of Labor in 1949, a rare distinction for an 18-year-old.
His good grades and the party background of his parents gained him a place at Moscow University. He studied law and joined the Communist Party when he was 21. At school he met philosophy student Raisa Titorenko, and they married in 1954.
After graduating in 1955, Gorbachev returned to the Stavropol region as an official of Komsomol, the Communist youth league.
According to an official biography, Gorbachev's rise was due to his ability "to captivate people with his brilliance. … His originality of thought and his charm attracted people to him."
In 1970, at age 39, Gorbachev was named party first-secretary for Stavropol province, becoming Moscow's viceroy in an area the size of South Carolina. Under Leonid Brezhnev's leadership of the Communist Party, granting such a powerful post to a man in his 30s was exceptional.
In Stavropol, Gorbachev met high officials who vacationed at local spas, including KGB chief Yuri Andropov.
In 1978, Gorbachev moved to Moscow as top party official for agriculture, apparently with Andropov's backing. Two years later, at age 49, he was named the youngest full member of the ruling Politburo.
When Brezhnev died in 1982 and Andropov became party leader, Gorbachev helped lead a drive against corruption.
After Andropov died in 1984, Gorbachev was a candidate to succeed his former mentor. But the party's old guard picked Konstantin Chernenko, a feeble 72-year-old Brezhnev protege.
Chernenko died after less than 13 months. Chosen party chief on March 11, 1985, Gorbachev became the country's youngest leader since Stalin.
Gorbachev likened his sweeping reforms to the 1917 Bolshevik revolution, calling them a revolution "without the bullets."
The keystone was "perestroika," or restructuring. Its main thrust was to reduce central planning and allow entrepreneurs to open quasi-private cooperatives.
"Glasnost," or openness, allowed candid discussion of social ills.
Seeking closer ties, Gorbachev met former President Reagan five times and agreed to eliminate the superpowers' medium-and short-range nuclear missiles.
Domestically, he revamped the political system, persuading the Congress of People's Deputies to elect him to the new presidency in 1988. Later that year, the Congress invested him with extraordinary powers. Warning that the country was sliding toward dictatorship, Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze resigned.
In 1989, Gorbachev withdrew Soviet troops from Afghanistan, ending a demoralizing and unpopular war. When unrest swept Communist regimes from power in Eastern Europe, Gorbachev did not intervene.
In 1986, Gorbachev lifted the internal exile of physicist and dissident Andrei Sakharov, the 1975 Nobel Peace Prize winner. In 1990, Gorbachev himself won the prize for his role in arms treaties and ending the Cold War.

 

End of Document
