

Military Lands: Changes in the Ranges
The Associated Press
November 16, 1992, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1226 words
Byline: By FRED BAYLES, AP National Writer
Dateline: YAKIMA FIRING CENTER, Wash.
Body




As the helicopter crested a ridge line along the high desert plateau, Col. John Nelson leaned out the open door and points to a subtle change in landscape.
'See where it changes from green to gray," he shouted. "That's the old boundary."
The green hue, a thin cover of bluebunch wheat grass, color codes the 261,000-acre Yakima Firing Center, a major Army training area in central Washington. The land beyond, grazed to volcanic gray, is part of a 62,000-acre addition recently approved for the Army.
In a way, the line also marks the boundary between the Army of the past and that of the future. Despite plans to shrink the military at least 25 percent and close some 70 installations, the armed services want more land.
But opposition groups and congressional pressure have already forced a temporary moratorium on new land acquisitions, and hard questions are being asked about adding land to an already huge military inventory.
"It isn't peaceniks who are opposing this. It's ranchers and farmers asking why is this happening in my backyard," said Grace Bukowski, coordinator for Citizen Alert, a Nevada-based coalition that monitors government land use.
"We're saying if you need a place to train, tell us what you need. Until you prove you don't have enough, you're not going to get anymore," she said.
The military's justifies its hunger for more land with one simple argument: the increased speed and mobility of the high-tech combat that won the Gulf War requires realistic training on huge amounts of real estate.
Indeed, troops fresh from fighting Iraq's Republican Guard said combat was easier than the grueling exercises at the 636,000-acre National Training Center outside Fort Irwin, Calif.
"People believe the Army trains by marching in quadrangles and somehow magically acquires skill on the spot when it goes to fight," said Gen. Paul Schwartz, the former deputy corps commander at nearby Fort Lewis who led the charge for the Yakima land.
"That's not how it works," he said. "You train your butt off for long periods of time. War is a science where you pass or fail depending on the standards of training."
The average World War I battlefield was about 1,630 acres, or 2.5 square miles; by World War II, air power, motorized infantry and accurate long-range artillery nearly tripled the size of a battleground.
Today's smart munitions, supersonic aircraft and tanks that fire twice the distance have stretched battlelines to 80,000 acres - about 125 square miles. That will increase with new technologies that see and shoot farther.
"The advantage you want over your enemy is to find him and engage him over greater distances than he can do the same to you," Schwartz said. "We beat the Iraqis because we knew where he was and could engage him at greater and more effective ranges than his T-72 Soviet tanks could find, fix and engage us."
Troops who fought in Desert Storm trained in vast reaches of the West. Armored units fought mock battles at Fort Irwin; Pilots flew out from Fallon Naval Air Station to attack targets along a 224,000-acres of ranges and supersonic corridor in central Nevada; the Air Force held regular Red Flag exercises over 3 million acres in southern Nevada, an area larger than Kuwait.
Military leaders say these and other training areas need expanding even as the military shrinks. With some 70 bases closing and troops returning from overseas, they fear large training areas like the NTC will be jammed.
"There are too many units competing to use it," Schwartz said. "If you go there every two years, it's not enough."
Other bases are feeling crimped.
Nearly two thirds of the 101,000-acre Fort Riley, Kan., home of the 13,000-member 1st Infantry Division, is now expanded firing ranges. Housing and other facilities take up another third, leaving 7,000 acres for maneuver training.
Army doctrine says battalion-sized units of 600 soldiers need 82,000 acres to practice in.
"The range expansion took away the maneuver space. With what's left we can maneuver a company-sized unit" of about 200 soldiers, said post spokesman Mark Meseke.
So wish lists totaling 2 million to 3 million acres circulate through the Pentagon. They include large chunks of desert and mountains: 190,000 acres for Nevada bombing ranges, 265,700 acres for desert warfare in California; 200,000 to 1 million acres of Air Force ranges in Idaho.
Costs would be low; most of the land would simply be transferred or leased from the Department of Interior.
But after studying Riley and other U.S. bases, the U.S. General Accounting Office recommended a hold on new land purchases.
"The Army is going to have to rely more and more on simulators," said Charles Bonnano, a GAO assistant director. "The idea is that when you get to a place like the NTC, it is a scarce opportunity and you should be ready to take advantage of the opportunity."
The GAO report minimized the need to train big units on large training areas. It was being printed as six U.S. divisions - about 15,000 soldiers each - charged through hundreds of miles of desert to outflank Iraqi forces in the largest movement of troops since World War II.
"There are some philosophical questions about the size of training, but Desert Storm showed us that it wouldn't be a bad idea to get out and practice in larger units," said Nelson, who retired as Yakima commander this summer.
Established in World War II, the Yakima range is used by troops from nearby Fort Lewis, National Guard units, the Air Force, British and Canadian forces.
There is room for elements of a battalion to move and shoot into a computerized firing range in the center of the land.
The push for the 100-square-mile addition began five years ago when the Army said it wanted land to train three battalions at the same time.
Sixty percent of the sage land is publicly owned. The Army will spend $ 18 million on the land, including flood control and reseeding projects.
Local and state officials opposed the plan. So did diverse groups like the state cattlemen's association and chapters of the Audubon Society.
"They said they need training lands when they already have comparable bases in California," said Donna Nylander, a member of the Ellensburg, Wash., City Council that opposed the acquisition.
Nylander said opponents talked of traffic, noise and safety. But the larger issue was the loss of a large swatch of open land.
"It takes land from our county for reasons the Army has never really proven," she said. "You wonder when they are going to ask for more."
Such opposition makes it likely that the Yakima expansion may be the last big parcel the military gets for a while.
The Pentagon put a moratorium on new land acquisitions in 1990. Instead of the old system of the Army, Navy and Air Force snatching up lands when they want, each must submit proposals to the Pentagon office coordinating future needs.
Congress is also getting involved. Rep. Bruce Vento, D-Minn., has proposed legislation to tighten legislative oversight over military lands. Congress must now approve land transfers of over 5,000 acres, but loopholes in the laws still allow the military to take some lands without approval.
"It's a question of process. The way the law works now is they take what they want and no one in the administration stops them," said Vento. "We're trying to put more rationality in the process because they are chewing up more and more land."

 

End of Document
