

Month After the Storm, Reminders of the Tragedy Always in the Air
The Associated Press
May 30, 1991, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 891 words
Byline: By MORT ROSENBLUM, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: CHUNUA PARA, Bangladesh
Body




It's been a month since the cyclone struck, but it remains riveted in memory by the paralyzing stench of submerged bodies that villagers still cannot find.
"Here, another one," Mohammed Sayed Noor, imam of the mosque, said Wednesday through a red kerchief knotted over his nose. Asked who it might be, he just shrugged.
Ten relatives from Noor's house are missing from the April 29 storm, but he suspects they are scattered in other people's flooded yards, miles away.
The emergency is nearly over, but the tragedy is settling in for a long run.
Bangladeshi officials put the cyclone's death toll at 139,000, though they say it will take months to know for sure. Victims were washed out to sea or piled into common graves in flood embankments.
On dry plots of land, the occasional human skull lies among the coconut husks in the tangled debris from waves that rose 20 feet over some settlements.
Meanwhile, some people are still dying, and survivors are in difficult straits.
Although Chunua Para is only a few miles south of Chittagong, reaching it now takes two hours' drive on precarious dikes because a floating crane destroyed the bridge. It typifies a wide sweep of Bay of Bengal coastline and islands.
When the demon winds died down, the tidal surge subsided. Now the killers are putrid ponds and polluted wells.
"Diarrhea is terrible here," Noor said. "One man died a few minutes ago. He is the second. We have one well, but it is not enough. We get some food relief, but no rice will grow this year, maybe not for years."
Breached embankments allowed saltwater to seep into rich ricefields. Whole life-support systems were washed away: markets, fisheries, small factories, draught animals, seed stocks.
Makeshift thatch shelters will ward off the coming monsoons, but villagers have no materials to rebuild their flattened homes. They sleep among piles of sticks where they used to live and spend their days scrounging for fuel and food.
Noor hitched a ride down the dike to Raipur to perform Moslem funeral rites for one-third of the village's population of 500. Islam requires immediate services, but people have been too busy surviving the past month.
Mohammed Abu Taher matter-of-factly recounted how he went down to check his boat when the storm began and ended up in a mango tree. The next morning, he found nothing where his house had stood. His parents were safe in a cyclone shelter, but seven relatives were washed away.
"We get food, but how can we resume our lives?" he asked. "We have no bricks or roofing material, nothing. No money. What can we do?"
Most victims said they nearly starved during the first three days after the cyclone, but a massive international relief effort has brought at least survival rations to the most remote areas.
Near Chunua Para, people wait hours in the steaming heat for two pounds of rice per person, every four days, from the government and voluntary agencies. Not everyone gets his share.
"I got only a half-kilo (1 pound) for each of my four kids, the first time in six days," said a man who called himself only Kalamia.
People are worse off on the outlying islands, reached only by boat when the seas are not too rough, or by the U.S. Joint Task Force helicopters, most of which left on Wednesday.
The relief operation helped a resilient population avert a greater tragedy. Foreign and Bangladeshi aid workers crisscross the region, delivering medical assistance, clothes and seed for farmers whose fields are not contaminated by salt.
U.S. officials say they cannot even calculate the cost to all donors, but they put it above $$70 million, not counting the tens of millions of dollars to pay for the Joint Task Force's Operation Sea Angel.
Most of the recovery has been because stricken families went to work immediately to rebuild their lives. If most lost everything, their belongings were meager to begin with.
As soon as the waters receded, local businessmen moved in, some offering charity and others selling goods to anyone who emerged with dry banknotes.
Bangladesh's ubiquitous pedicabs rushed in to provide at least minimum transport, their bicycle wheels cutting deep tracks in the wet mud.
Relief included some payment for work on fixing roads and public services. Legislators and the government gave small cash grants to some.
For many survivors, the night of the storm will not fade away anytime soon.
"When I leave this place, I can forget," said Noor, pressing the filthy red cloth to his nostrils as he poked a stick into his fetid pond. "But when I return to my home, I cannot forget."
Like many coastal dwellers, Noor paid no heed to the top-level alert cyclone warning. He had heard them before, and little had happened. When water rose to his waist in his home, he knew he had made a mistake.
Floodwaters floated him to the ceiling, he ripped open the thatch and escaped. Grasping his 18-month-old daughter, Noor clung all night to a tree. Early the next day, he counted up who was left and went into mourning.
A month later, he speaks of that night with irony. "Look, my only possession to survive," he said, with a laugh, displaying a cheap Swiss-made wristwatch that kept ticking after a licking few watches ever receive.
But Noor's humor is on the surface. Asked how long it will take for life to return to normal, a grave look crossed his face.
"It will take 20 years for this to pass," he said.

 

End of Document
