

Nagorno-Karabakh is the Focus of the Azerbaijan-Armenian Feud
The Associated Press
September 24, 1991, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 421 words
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Here is a look at Nagorno-Karabakh, which is at the heart of a bitter feud between Soviet Azerbaijan and Armenia. The two republics today declared a cease-fire and limited self-government in the enclave, which was established as an autonomous region within Azerbaijan in 1923.
-POPULATION: Three-quarters of its 190,000 residents are Christian Armenians, the rest mostly Muslim Azeris. Enclave depends on mostly Muslim Azerbaijan for republic-run services like law enforcement and economic control.
-HISTORY: Conflict between Christian Armenia and Muslim Azerbaijan dates centuries, but flared in 1988 when Armenians in Nagorno-Karabakh expressed desire to unite with Armenia, a republic on Azerbaijan's southern border.
-VIOLENCE: On Feb. 28, 1988, 26 Armenians and six Azerbaijanis died in ethnic clash in the Azerbaijani city of Sumgait. Since then, more than 800 people have died in ethnic violence in the two republics.
Tens of thousands of ethnic Armenians have fled Nagorno-Karabakh and other cities throughout Azerbaijan, while others flocked to the disputed territory to try to preserve their majority.
-POLITICS: In January 1989, the parliament of Nagorno-Karabakh suspended and the autonomous region put directly under the control of the central government in Moscow. Soviet soldiers and Interior Ministry forces deployed to enforce direct rule.
The power of Nagorno-Karabakh's locally elected councils curtailed in effort to settle the conflict, and Kremlin authorities later returned administrative control to Azerbaijan. Armenia and Nagorno-Karabakh demand the councils be restored.
Soviet forces unable to contain the fighting and reportedly confine themselves to maintaining order at border posts.
But when fighting spread in May to Azerbaijani border towns populated mostly by Armenians, Armenians claim Soviet troops took part in fighting on the side of Azerbaijanis. Soviets forces deny taking sides.
A state of emergency later declared in the border areas.
But on Sept. 2, nearly two weeks after the hard-line Kremlin coup collapsed in Moscow, the administrative government of Nagorno-Karabakh declared itself a full-fledged Soviet republic independent from Azerbaijan.
Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin launched a peace mission to the area Sept. 21 and announced Sunday the three sides - Armenia, Azerbaijan and Nagorno-Karabakh - had agreed in preliminary talks to start negotiations.
The announcement itself was a breakthrough by signaling Azerbaijan's acceptance of Nagorno-Karabakh as a separate party to the talks.

 

End of Document
