

Nakhichevan - the Newest War Front in the Former Soviet Union
The Associated Press
May 23, 1992, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 644 words
Byline: By DEBORAH SEWARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ARMASH, Armenia
Body




Under cover of an aging armored personnel carrier, an old ambulance retrieves a fighter wounded in the hills overlooking the territory of Nakhichevan, the new front in a bloody war between Azerbaijani and Armenians.
"This is the southern front," said Martin Antonian, commander of a newly formed Armenian self-defense unit, as he inspected Araik Khanikian's bleeding hand on Friday.
Until now, the Armenia-Azerbaijan struggle was confined to Nagorno-Karabakh, a predominantly ethnic Armenian region inside Azerbaijan but now completely under Christian Armenian control. Four years of fighting have left 1,500 dead.
The conflict spread this week to Nakhichevan, an Azerbaijani enclave in southern Armenia bordering Iran and Turkey. At least 16 lives were lost in the fighting this week.
Now Armenia fears Turkey will intervene. Heavily Muslim Turkey and Azerbaijan share a religion, language and a deep animosity toward Armenia.
An Iranian delegation was in Nakhichevan to assess the conflict, Iran's official IRNA news agency reported today. A U.N. observer force was also expected today to investigate claims of aggression by both countries.
IRNA said Azerbaijan and Armenia have requested Iranian observers along the border between Armenia and Nakhichevan. Iran - along with Russia and others - has tried to broker peace talks, but all attempts have failed.
A spokesman for Armenia's national security service said the Armenian village of Erash was shelled early today by gunners in Nakhichevan.
The town of Askeran, near the Nagorno-Karabakh capital Stepanakert, was shelled overnight by artillery and rocket launchers, the Nagorno-Karabakh news agency KAN said.
Armenian self-defense forces, composed mainly of volunteers from nearby villages, hold a string of dugout bunkers along the barren hills that form Armenia's border with Nakhichevan.
The bunkers are in sight of a string of Azerbaijani military posts on the opposite hill. The two sides fire at each other constantly, sending puffs of smoke into the clear blue sky. Spent shells litter the bunkers' dirt floors.
Antonian said he joined up after two Azerbaijani rockets landed in his yard in Armash, breaking the windows of his house and ruining his property.
"Before this I was a simple worker. Now I'm defending my homeland," Antonian said.
His men are under the command of Col. Mikhail Arutunyan, an Armenian defense official sent to Armash to coordinate defense of the area, about three miles from the border with Nakhichevan.
The fighting has raged around the edge of Nakhichevan, an autonomous region of 300,000 people, mainly Azerbaijanis, that has a 90-mile border with Iran and a 7-mile frontier with Turkey.
Most Armenians living near the border have been evacuated. Their vineyards stretch for miles, untended.
A few red and blue shacks, a crackly radio and a few old telephones comprise Arutunyan's headquarters. But he has good detailed maps of the territory, left over from the former Soviet army.
Armenians say Azerbaijan started the fighting to open a second front and draw Turkey into the war. Azerbaijan says Armenia attacked Nakhichevan in an attempted land grab.
Parked near Arutunyan's post are four old armored personnel carriers, a couple of jeeps and two ambulances. Those constitute his military vehicles. Automatic rifles and hand-held grenade launchers are his weapons.
Volunteer nurse Sveta Oganzhenian was busy nearby. She said she did not fear helping in the war zone - "When things are tense, we have to be here to stand by our people."
Troops in the hills also are moved by patriotism.
"Nakhichevan is our land. Just as we took back Nagorno-Karabakh, we will take back this land, too," said Arak Arutunyan, a young fighter.
He said Azerbaijan forced his grandparents from Nakhichevan and that he would fight until they can go home.
"There will peace when we have our land back, and only then."

 

End of Document
