

Networks Look Ahead to the Waging of the Peace
The Associated Press
March 1, 1991, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 491 words
Byline: By SCOTT WILLIAMS, AP Television Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The waging of the peace won't require as many people in the Middle East as were needed to cover the war with Iraq, television news managers say. It's time to bring some of them home.
"We've got a lot of tired people out there right now," David Miller, NBC's director of foreign news, said Thursday.
Miller said all five of his combat pool staffers would be back in Saudi Arabia today. "Then they're going to go home," he said. "They deserve it. But I'm going to be sending in new people."
Staffs will be cut elsewhere in the Persian Gulf region, as well, he said. NBC has fewer than 100 people there.
"We will downsize in Saudi Arabia, for example, but we're going to be there," Miller said.
CBS, ABC and CNN also plan to bring employees home.
"We're looking to reduce our presence in that part of the world - but selectively," said Lane Vernardos, CBS' director and executive producer of special events, and executive producer of "America Tonight."
"We don't need nearly so many people in Saudi Arabia," he said. "They were there because that's where the troops were. The story is now in Kuwait and Iraq."
That's where the next pool satellite feeds will originate, he predicted.
"Unilateral" satellite coverage by individual networks will end "as soon as the anchor people have left the area and things are slightly calmer," Venardos said. "We can't all afford to sustain unilateral capacity."
Miller said he did not expect deep cutbacks in the next few days.
"We have a number of leased (satellite) transponders. If you cancel, you may save money, but you pay heavy penalties. And, if you give back transponder space, it can be very tough to get it back again," he said.
ABC expects to move people, but will wait for events to develop over the weekend before making final plans, said Bob Murphy, ABC's vice president for news coverage.
"I would expect that there'd be a fairly rapid rebasing of the people assigned to various pools, and that the size of our news coverage contingent will be reduced significantly over the next week to 10 days," he said.
"Beyond that I really can't predict. This is a very tentative and tricky period," Murphy said.
For CNN, Thursday was a blue-letter day. CNN changed from its gold-lettered "War in the Gulf" logo outlined in metallic red, to a similarly typefaced "Toward Peace in the Gulf" in cool, metallic blue.
The war will remain CNN's focus for the immediate future, said Ed Turner, CNN's executive vice president for newsgathering.
"As a spot news story, it still has quite a bit of play left in it, from where is Saddam to what kind of deal will be struck by the generals in the field, and the long-term and more complex issues from politics to the economy," he said.
CNN's staff of about 150 in the region will likely drop to about 100 people over the next two weeks, Turner said.
"The long-term committment is not going to go away. We will keep a much stronger presence in the Gulf for months - and years to come," he said.

 

End of Document
