

Newest Gadget in the Israeli Arsenal: the Cell Phone
 The Associated Press
August 29, 1995, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 454 words
Byline: By HILARY APPELMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




A wedding singer stops in mid-tune to answer his cellular phone, while the guests dance on unperturbed. An undertaker borrows a mourner's cell phone to call - from graveside - for a forgotten piece of equipment to lower the coffin.
Cell phones are suddenly ringing everywhere in Israel, spurred by some of the lowest calling prices in the world.
Even distant military outposts are no longer so remote: One Israeli soldier called a Palestinian vendor to order fresh fish for his platoon, and troops in southern Lebanon ordered pizza delivered to the border.
But when soldiers started getting private calls during military exercises and on patrol, the army intervened, ruling that cell phones can't be used on duty.
Soldiers can still call home at other times, as long as they don't give out military secrets, such as where they're calling from.
"It's a hectic country; we are always in a hurry," explains Varda Shilo, perhaps Israel's only expert in the field of etiquette. "Everyone thinks he must know everything here and now."
A year ago there were 100,000 cell phones in Israel. Today there are almost 300,000 - about one for every 16 of Israel's 5 million people. Communications experts expect that share to rise to one in 10 in the next few years - on par with the United States.
Though fewer Israelis have cellular phones than Americans, they spend much more time on their phones - eight times as much, says Moshe Pearl of Israel's communication ministry.
"Everybody wants to be the commander with a handset in his hand," says Ron Mandelbaum, a spokesman for Israel's Bezek telephone company.
"You see many people with a gun on the left and a cell phone on the right."
In Israel, unlike the United States, cell-phone users pay only for calls they make, not those they receive. Outgoing calls can cost less than 3 cents a minute, the price offered last year by upstart Cellcom when it entered the market dominated for 12 years by Pelephone, a joint venture of Bezek and Motorola.
Most attribute the popularity of the phones to a general fixation with high-tech gadgets in Israel, where the percentage of people with videocassette recorders, color televisions and cable is among the highest in the world.
As their popularity widens, the army isn't alone in seeing a need to limit the use of "Pelephones" as they are known here.
Police, leery of the effect of the hand-held phones on Israelis' already notorious driving, started enforcing a regulation that drivers keep both hands on the steering wheel.
And to keep Israel's parliament from restricting the use of the phones, telephone company Bezek sent out 2 million brochures offering cell phone dos and don'ts. A few suggestions: Turn ringers off in the theater, or during funerals.
 Load-Date: August 29, 1995

 

End of Document
