

Newspaper Ads Portray the Humor, and Disruptions, of the Gulf War
The Associated Press
January 31, 1991, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 603 words
Byline: By MARCUS ELIASON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TEL AVIV, Israel
Body




The Avazim Restaurant is advertising itself as "Open without a break, in all situations, before and after bombardments, from 11 a.m. to 4 a.m."
The Avazim, one of the few eateries in Tel Aviv staying open through the blitz, also touts its tasty Iraqi-style pita bread as "the answer to the Scud." An ad for a magicians' kit offers "magic against missiles!" And the national lottery promises that a $$250,000 prize "will come without warning!"
The ads are among many in Israeli newspapers that reflect the suddenly changed reality of life under the threat of Iraqi missiles.
Peppered with puns and exclamation marks, they range from the humorous to the bombastic to the congratulatory, with special praise for Tel Avivians who have chosen to stay in their city despite five bombardments since Jan. 18.
This is the first war Israel has experienced in which the home front is the battlefield and the army is being upstaged. So now is the time for all good admen to come to the aid of turning the mundane into the heroic.
The Hapoalim bank, representing "the business sector in the front line," offers a debt deferment scheme to companies, "because when put to the test, we work better."
"Be strong and brave, Israel, and do not be discouraged," say ads placed by the Tel Aviv bus company.
"We Are All Patriots!" declares Discount Bank, playing on the U.S.-supplied Patriot missiles deployed to protect Israel's cities against the Scuds.
Shabtai Taiber, a factory engineer, has been placing ads saying, "Germany Is No Different," as a protest against the German technology that has helped Saddam Hussein's missile and chemical warfare potential.
A son of Holocaust victims, Taiber, 45, says he is trying to make amends to himself for believing that post-World War II Germany has changed.
"They put me to sleep," he says of the friends and business contacts he has made in Germany. "They created an impression that things have changed in Germany. They want things to have changed. But they have remained the same nation."
Taiber is spending his own money on newspaper ads and a public billboard in Tel Aviv. "I could no longer keep the pain inside me," he says.
But an ad placed by the Israeli staff at the Goethe-Institut, the German cultural center in Tel Aviv, thanks its German director, Jurgen Keil, "for staying with us in the country, for his great personal efforts and his concern for his employees and their families."
A similar ad, by the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra, thanks conductor Zubin Mehta "for coming to Israel to be with us in our time of trial." It also apologizes to music lovers for being unable to perform its concerts as scheduled. Civil defense authorities are discouraging large gatherings.
Also postponed, "due to the situation" are: a seminar on U.S.-Israeli scientific cooperation, a symposium on drunken driving, a meeting of breeders of German shepherd dogs.
Health authorities advertise classes for over-65s in how to breathe more easily through gas masks. Bar Ilan University tells examinees to bring a gas mask, transistor radio and soft drink, and leave the campus immediately after the exam.
"Tel Aviv - the city that never stops, in peace or war!" proclaims a notice from the municipality appealing for volunteers to help comfort families made homeless by Scuds.
And then there's: "The Israeli government must expose the real face of those standing behind the world peace organizations, who are silent in the face of Saddam's atrocities against the Kurds and Iranians and his threats to destroy half the state of Israel, but cry out against Israel's war for survival."
That one's from a clothing store.
 Graphic



 
LaserPhotos TLV1,2,3

 

End of Document
