

No Cure In Sight Test your reading comprehension by reading the story below and answering the questions that follow.
The Associated Press
August 19, 1994, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 870 words
Dateline: YOKOHAMA, Japan
Body




The War on AIDS: No Cure, No Treatment, No Vaccine
 The gist of 3,500 reports from the war on AIDS is simple enough: There is no cure for AIDS, no effective treatment, no vaccine.
Nor will there be anytime soon.
"Anyone with HIV won't find much solace at this meeting," said Dr. Mervyn Silverman, president of the American Foundation for AIDS Research.
The tone of the 10th International Conference on AIDS was restrained from the start. Organizers warned the 12,000 participants not to expect anything big. They were right.
After four days of nonstop discussion, the goal of controlling HIV, the AIDS virus, seems as distant as ever.
Breakthroughs are rare in the months between international meetings, too. The only one that surfaced since last year's big meeting in Berlin was the discovery that AIDS-infected women can avoid passing the virus to their babies during birth if they take the drug AZT.
Even this is a limited victory. Because the medicine is so expensive, it will not help those living in poor countries, where the disease is most common. And it may be worthless to even those who can afford it if AZT- resistant strains of the virus grow dominant.
If any theme emerged from the conference, it was the need to go back to basics. Rather than a scatter-shot scramble for new drugs, many scientists seemed to agree that they need new ideas. And they will get them by exploring the innermost workings of the virus and the body's complex and ultimately futile response to it.
Dr. William E. Paul, the new head of the U.S. Office of AIDS Research, said this will be the focus of the federal government's annual $ 1.3 billion AIDS budget.
While almost everyone who catches HIV eventually gets sick and dies, about 5 percent are still perfectly healthy 12 years to 15 years after their infection. Researchers believe that if they figure out how these people's immune systems tame HIV, maybe they could turn it into a treatment for those less fortunate.
Other researchers said their decade of basic research into HIV's origins, structure and life cycle is about to result in human experiments in gene therapy, the most exotic AIDS treatment yet. The idea is to insert HIV-killing genes into people's blood cells so they will be able to protect themselves from the virus.
No one knows whether this will produce a practical AIDS therapy. Time and again, the virus has proven to be more clever than the scientists. Its principal tactic is to evolve mutant genes that make it impervious to new drugs.
During treatment, HIV quickly becomes resistant to AZT and all the other drugs developed so far. No clearly effective new ones were introduced at the meeting. Doctors still hope that mixing the drugs together will improve their potency.
For now, many believe that keeping people from catching AIDS, largely through condom use, is the only practical way to control the epidemic, which continues to spread with alarming speed.
The World Health Organization, which chronicles the spread of AIDS around the world, says about 17 million people have been infected with HIV - three million in the last year alone. Africa is hardest hit, but the virus is starting to spread in Asia, the world's most populous continent.
 
 ---
NO CURE IN SIGHT
 
 Use information from the story to answer the questions below.
 
 1. Where was the 10th International Conference on AIDS held?
2. What is HIV?
3. The participants at the conference on AIDS decided that there is "the need to go back to basics." What do the scientists plan to do next?
4. Why do researchers want to study the immune systems of perfectly healthy people who carry HIV?
5. How might AIDS-infected women prevent the spread of infection to their babies?
6. What is one of the main reasons that the drug AZT doesn't help people in poor countries, where AIDS is most common?
7. Has a cure for AIDS or an effective treatment for the disease been found?
8. What do many people believe is the only practical way to get AIDS under control?
9. What is the agency that tracks the spread of AIDS around the globe?
10. Which continent has the greatest percentage of HIV-infected people?
 
Answer key:
1. The 10th International Conference on AIDS was held in Japan.
2. HIV is the virus that causes AIDS.
3. Going "back to basics" means that the scientists will try to find out more about the virus and why it is so hard to treat.
4. Researchers want to study the immune system of healthy people who carry HIV because they want to learn how their immune systems control the virus.
5. AIDS-infected women can avoid passing the virus to their babies during birth if they take the drug AZT.
6. AZT is so expensive that people in poor countries can't afford it.
7. The cure for AIDS has not been found. Effective treatment for AIDS has not been found either.
8. Keeping people from catching AIDS, especially by using condoms, is believed by many to be the only practical way to control the epidemic.
9. The World Health Organization is the agency that keeps track of AIDS around the world.
10. The greatest percentage of people infected by the AIDS virus is found in Africa.
 
 ---
PART TWO
Continue the Research
Look in the newspaper this week to find articles about AIDS. Read the articles to discover more about the deadly disease.
 Load-Date: August 19, 1994

 

End of Document
