

Now It's The GOP Trying To Use The Draft Issue
The Associated Press
August 22, 1992, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 831 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: HOUSTON
Body




In an ironic switch on the controversy that dogged Dan Quayle four years ago, President Bush's campaign strategists are trying to make an issue of Bill Clinton's Vietnam era draft record.
It's going to take adroit handling to take advantage now of a topic that nagged their own vice presidential nominee last time. But the Bush people think they can use it to boost the Republican ticket among men middle aged and up, particularly the middle-class and blue-collar voters they're trying to reclaim. To that generation, military service equalled patriotism, a legacy of World War II.
Clinton and Quayle both avoided the Vietnam draft, the vice president by enlisting in the Indiana National Guard, the Democratic presidential nominee through a student and ROTC deferment and, later, the luck of a high draft lottery draw.
But Quayle says "there's a big difference" because he chose to serve by joining the National Guard, and Clinton chose not to serve at all. Clinton says he relinquished a deferment and voluntarily put his name into the draft pool in 1969, but drew a high number and was not called.
The draft question became one of Clinton's campaign headaches back in New Hampshire; he dealt with it in detail then, and when it comes up now, he says he did nothing wrong.
"All I've been asked about by the press is a woman I didn't sleep with and a draft I didn't dodge," he lamented of those so-called character issues during the New Hampshire presidential primary campaign.
Now the Bush campaign is out to revive the second of those topics, the draft, in the fall campaign.
So Clinton's draft record was cited in speech after speech at the Republican National Convention, often by indirection.
Marilyn Quayle, for example, said that in the generation she and Clinton share, a time of social turbulence, "Not everyone demonstrated, dropped out, took drugs, joined in the sexual revolution or dodged the draft." She said the people who heard her speak Wednesday night could draw any inference they liked.
So could the people who heard Secretary of Labor Lynn Martin nominate Bush for a second term. "Inside George Bush is the heart of an 18-year-old fighter pilot who risked his life for his country, who did not run from his responsibilities then and does not now," she said. "You can't be one kind of man and another kind of president."
There was no such subtlety from conservative Patrick Buchanan. "When Bill Clinton's turn came in Vietnam, he sat up in a dormitory in Oxford, England, and figured out how to dodge the draft," said Buchanan.
"… We'll be talking about the values of George Bush vs. those of Bill Clinton, talking about a man who quit school to go fight for his country and one who went to school to avoid fighting for it," said Sen. Alan Simpson of Wyoming. Bush flew combat missions in the Pacific in World War II, the youngest pilot in the Navy.
"Twenty-seven million of us proud American veterans won't forget," Simpson said.
Simpson's convention synopsis of Clinton and the draft:
"We'll be talking about an absolutely ambitious young man who at the age of 23 wrote a letter about his draft status and said he did it to - and please hear these four words - 'maintain my political viability."'
That letter, indeed the whole question of Clinton, Quayle and the draft dates from 1969.
That's when Clinton wrote to an ROTC supervisor at the University of Arkansas to thank him for "saving me from the draft," and to tell of his feelings against the Vietnam War. He said in the letter that he admired friends who had defied the draft but didn't want to do it himself because it would damage his career and "political viability."
During the New Hampshire campaign, he had said he dropped his deferment because high school friends were being killed in Vietnam and "I just didn't feel right" about avoiding the draft.
Sen. Al Gore Jr., Clinton's vice presidential running mate, enlisted in the Army, also in 1969, and spent nearly five months in Vietnam as an army historian in 1971.
"I think a lot of Americans, in fact most Americans, are really tired of seeing the Vietnam War used to divide our country," Gore said last month, defending Clinton after his military record had been questioned at a televised campaign town meeting in Kentucky.
Questions like that were a problem for Quayle almost from the day he was chosen for the Bush ticket. He enlisted in the Indiana National Guard in 1969 after his college deferment ended. There were suggestions, which he denied, that family influence helped him get the Guard slot that kept him out of the draft. He said his unit could have been activated any time during the six years he served.
In Houston, Quayle said there's no comparison between Clinton's record and his. "I wore the uniform for six years," he said in an NBC-TV interview. 'I chose to serve my country. Bill Clinton chose not to."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE: Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has covered national political conventions since 1964.

 

End of Document
