

Oct. 28 May Be The End of The World, But Police Are Ready if Not
The Associated Press
October 27, 1992, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 287 words
Dateline: SEOUL, South Korea
Body




Police have been put on alert across South Korea to try to prevent any suicides or other extreme actions by thousands of people who believe Wednesday is doomsday.
Police said they would patrol 90 chapels of the Christian church Mission for the Coming Days, which predicts the world will end Oct. 28.
Officials worry some believers may despair if the prediction - and their anticipated ascent to heaven - fails to come true. Many church followers already have sold property or quit jobs, said police, who were placed on alert Monday.
The church's founder, Lee Jan-rim, has warned followers to restrain themselves in case Wednesday is not the end.
Lee, 46, is in jail on charges of defrauding followers of up to $ 4 million.
The church claims 10,000 members nationwide.
Church members believe God will lift them to heaven in a phenomenon called "rapture." They say that will happen amid seven years of war, flood and famine that will annihilate the earth and set the stage for the second coming of Jesus Christ.
"We regard suicide as a sin, so there will be no such actions even though the rapture does not come to pass," said a church spokeswoman on condition of anonymity.
Police said there are other sects that also believe the world's end is imminent. They estimate the number of doomsday believers in South Korea at 20,000. Four have killed themselves so far this year.
The newspaper Hankyoreh Shinmun said Lee recently wrote followers a letter from jail saying: "Nothing is wrong with our objective to meet Jesus Christ. What is important is to wait quietly if the rapture does not come."
Prosecutors said Lee had $ 380,000 worth of bonds that mature as late as next May. They said that proved he did not expect the world to end.

 

End of Document
