

Oklahoma Bombing, Bosnia Top Stories of the Year
 The Associated Press
December 25, 1995, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1176 words
Byline: By LARRY McSHANE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




It was all O.J. all the time when 1995 began, but two stories surpassed the Simpson saga over the next 12 months: The arrival of homegrown terrorism in Oklahoma City, and the dispatch of 20,000 U.S. soldiers to blood-stained Bosnia.
The April 19 bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City was overwhelmingly cited as the top story of the year in the 59th annual Associated Press vote of newspaper and broadcast executives.
A solid second was the ongoing mess in the former Yugoslavia, where 60,000 NATO troops - one-third of them Americans - began arriving in December to replace ineffective United Nations peacekeeping forces. Years of war sparked by ethnic conflict in Bosnia have left at least 200,000 dead and 2 million homeless; a peace treaty offered shaky hope.
Last year, the Simpson case was the story of the year. In 1995, the Simpson acquittal was No. 3 on the list, finishing well ahead of the next two choices: the assassination of Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and the enormous earthquake that rocked Kobe, Japan.
The second half of the top 10, in descending order: Newt Gingrich, President Clinton and their fight for control of the government; a nerve gas attack in the Tokyo subway system; the rescue of Air Force Capt. Scott O'Grady from Bosnia; the murderous heat wave that killed more than 700 people in Chicago; and the jury decision to spare Susan Smith from execution.
A short synopsis of the top 10:
1. OKLAHOMA BLAST. When it happened at the World Trade Center, the terrorists came from the Middle East. But when a powerful bomb detonated outside the federal building on April 19, authorities said, the search for the terrorists ended within U.S. borders.
Accused were two U.S. Army buddies, Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols, who face trial in 1996. The carnage was shocking: 169 dead, more than 500 injured. The images were unforgettable: a firefighter carrying the bloody body of a baby girl. A woman rescued from the building's wreckage - only after doctors amputated her right leg.
2. THE FORMER YUGOSLAVIA. It was another year of ethnic violence and unrest in Yugoslavia, the continuation of a mind-numbing cycle of civil war that started near the turn of the decade. But at the end of 1995, the confrontation halfway around the world became personal for Americans: U.S. troops were sent to the Balkans.
The NATO mission - Operation Joint Endeavor - is the largest Western military operation in Europe since World War II. But many questioned Clinton's decision to step in where the United Nations had failed.
3. O.J. WALKS. It was 10 a.m. Pacific time, Oct. 3, when the nation stood still and stared at its televisions. Minutes later, a Los Angeles jury cleared O.J. Simpson of murdering his ex-wife and a waiter from a nearby restaurant. Many whites were shocked; many blacks applauded.
Months after his acquittal, public opinion remained divided - mostly along racial lines - on whether the former football hero slashed the throats of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald Goldman.
The story just won't go away. Simpson is reportedly planning an infomercial declaring his innocence, and the Brown and Goldman families are pressing on with a civil suit against the Juice.
4. RABIN ASSASSINATION. On Nov. 5, Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin delivered a message of conciliation to the crowd in Tel Aviv: "People really want peace." Rabin, a Nobel Peace Prize winner for his efforts in the Middle East, then left the pro-peace rally and walked to his car.
Yigal Amir was waiting.
The 25-year-old Amir, taking advantage of lax security, fatally shot Rabin from point-blank range, authorities said. The alleged killer had ties to Israeli extremist fringe groups, and no remorse for the slaying.
"I'm satisfied," he said, when told of Rabin's death.
5. KOBE EARTHQUAKE. They lined the streets outside Kobe - people limping, wrapped in bandages, carrying what was left of their possessions. They were fleeing the worst earthquake in Japan since 1923, a disaster that turned a sleek, modern city of 1.4 million into a post-apocalyptic nightmare.
The 7.2-magnitude earthquake on Jan. 17 killed more than 6,000 people, injured more than 26,000, demolished more than 94,000 buildings and homes. Random fires raged. Electricity, gas and water lines were knocked out. Food was at a premium. Nearly a year later, they're still trying to put Kobe back together again.
6. CONTRACT WITH AMERICA. In this pre-election year, with the arrival of Newt Gingrich as Speaker of the House, the battle lines were drawn early. Who knew they would end up leaving 260,000 federal employees temporarily out of work?
With Republicans in control of both houses of Congress for the first time in 40 years, they took on President Clinton on every front. Gingrich & Co. waged war with the White House and their Democratic counterparts in Congress over everything and anything. The end result: a partial government shutdown while haggling continued over the federal budget.
7. JAPANESE SUBWAY GASSED. Japan had its own problems with local terrorists. Aum Shinri Kyo, a Japanese cult, was accused of spreading deadly nerve gas through the Tokyo subway system on March 20. A dozen people were killed; more than 5,500 others were left gasping for air.
Authorities arrested cult leader Shoko Asahara, charging the cult planted the gas as part of its plan to prepare for a coming world war.
8. AMERICAN HERO. In an era short on heroes and role models, Air Force Capt. Scott O'Grady proved to be both - and a best-selling author, too.
O'Grady's F-16 was shot down over Bosnia on June 2, and he narrowly escaped Serb forces after fleeing his crippled plane. For the next six days, he survived on insects and grass, washed down with rainwater. Finally, the Marines swooped in and brought O'Grady home. His book on the ordeal, "Return With Honor," sold more than 200,000 copies.
His all-American image was solidified in a conversation with President Clinton. "The United States is the greatest country in the world," he said. "God bless America."
9. KILLER HEAT. For scores of elderly Chicagoans this summer, their homes became their coffins. A mid-July heat wave, with temperatures topping out at 106 degrees, caused more than 700 deaths - a higher death toll than in the Great Chicago Fire of 1871.
Most of the victims were elderly people who lived alone. The sad story was even sadder for some - 41 bodies were never claimed by relatives, and Chicago officials buried them in simple plywood caskets in a single mass grave.
10. SUSAN SMITH SPARED. The first decision was simple: Susan Smith had, by her own admission, strapped her two little boys in their car seats and rolled them down a boat ramp to their deaths in a South Carolina lake. A jury convicted her of murder on July 22.
The second decision was more vexing: Should she receive the death penalty? A poll indicated most Americans agreed that the murders of 3-year-old Michael and 14-month-old Alex were enough to cost their mother her life. But the jury disagreed; Susan Smith instead received life in prison.
 Load-Date: December 25, 1995

 

End of Document
