

On The Beaches, In the Streets, Allies Hunt Iraqi Mines
The Associated Press
April 4, 1991, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 628 words
Byline: By DAVID CRARY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KUWAIT CITY
Body




Three French Foreign Legionaires inched across a public beach on their hands and knees, gingerly scraping sand aside with little shovels, keenly aware that one awkward move could be their last.
They are part of a multinational task force faced with one of the most daunting clean-up jobs in military history - ridding Kuwait of the vast array of land mines and munitions left behind by Iraqi troops.
"It's a gigantic operation," said Maj. Gen. Robert Frix, deputy commander of the U.S. Army Central Command. "Every day, we blow up 5,000 to 8,000 pounds of ordnance."
During their occupation, the Iraqis riddled Kuwait with hundreds of thousands of mines. Almost daily there are reports of civilians, often children, being killed or injured in explosions.
U.S., French, British, Canadian and Saudi military units are involved in the cleanup, each with different sectors and assignments.
The Saudis, according to officers from other allied nations, have suffered more than a dozen casualities, including several deaths, because of inadequate training and supervision.
"It's a question of training and discipline and respect for the ordnance you're dealing with," said U.S. Army Maj. Chuck Maggio.
The French have taken on one of the most taxing assignments, clearing away mines, barbed wire and fortified trenches from Kuwait City's 18-mile seafront, including 12 miles of beaches. A small section of beach reopened to the public for swimming last week after the French announced it was cleared and safe.
Lt. Col. Guy Danigo, deputy commander of the Foreign Legion's 6th regiment, described the work as "exhausting and nerve-wracking," but said his 300-man cleanup crew has cleared more than 10,000 Italian-made mines without a single injury.
A key to keeping casualties low is a system whereby one legionaire supervises three others as they slowly sift the sands for mines. Danigo said the superviser makes sure the diggers don't work too hastily and rotates them every 20 minutes so their concentration doesn't fade.
"The method we're using allows us to say with 99 percent certainty that there are no more mines in a sector," Danigo said. "You can never give complete assurances. … In 20 years, you could still find one."
The Iraqis provided no plans showing where the mines are buried. But even if they had, the clean-up teams would be rash to move much faster, Danigo said.
Frix said the Americans also have assigned about 300 soldiers to clearing mines. Their top priority has been to remove arms and weapons from areas easily accessible to the public, such as homes, warehouses and Iraqi fortifications.
Maggio, of Portland, Ore., said the Iraqis left munitions in schools, hospitals and at the royal family's palaces. He said the U.S. crew has removed explosive devices made in many countries, including the United States, Jordan, the Soviet Union and Yemen.
Authorities are trying to teach the Kuwaiti public how to deal with the dangers.
Civilians are instructed to paint red circles around any explosives they find, so military sappers can locate and remove them. Posters showing different types of mines and bombs are displayed throughout the city, and the International Hotel, which overlooks the beach, has a large sign warning guests to stay off uncleared beaches.
The mine-clearing operation is expected to take at least a year, and even then many mines are likely to remain buried in the desert. Frix said the long-term work may be performed by units under contract to Kuwait.
Maggio said in some cases specialists can easily see that an area is mined, such as when large expanses of open desert appear between rolls of barbed wire in what was once Iraq's defensive lines.
But, he added: "In other cases, we're never going to know about (a mine) until someone steps on it."

 

End of Document
