

On the North Side of the Korean DMZ, History Changes In A Few Steps
The Associated Press
May 12, 1995, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 558 words
Byline: By JOHN LEICESTER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PANMUNJOM, North Korea
Body




Eyeball to eyeball, the North Korean and the American glared at each other through a window. One apparently powered by enmity, the other by chewing gum, the two officers clenched jaws almost in unison.
For foreign reporters, viewing the Demilitarized Zone from the North Korean side is like stepping through the looking glass.
The West's version of history is upended. Americans become aggressors, and the South Koreans their puppets. Here, North Korea is the threatened side. A few paces away, across the dividing line, is the threat.
The DMZ, which winds through rough, mountainous terrain, sprang up when the 1950-53 Korean War ended without a peace treaty. Today, the 155-mile-long, 2.5-mile-wide border is the world's most heavily fortified.
A road sign beside an electrified fence on the North Korean side says "Seoul, 70 kilometers," 43 miles. But the South Korean capital might as well be a million miles away.
Travel across the DMZ is forbidden, except for the occasional VIP. The only contact point between North and South is the eerie border village of Panmunjom, where green-uniformed North Korean soldiers trade baleful stares with South Korean and U.S. troops in camouflage fatigues.
For both Koreas, a visit to Panmunjom is an essential stop on the tourist itinerary. More than 100,000 come annually from the South Korean side. The number from the North is smaller, but figures are not available.
North Korean soldiers at a roadblock check papers and make drivers cover license plates with cardboard to deny the South any scrap of military intelligence.
"The situation is very acute here," said a stern North Korean officer who briefed visitors.
Visitors to the South Korean side sign waivers absolving authorities from any responsibility for "injury or death as a direct result of enemy action." On the Northern side, there are no such formalities.
The North Korean commander at Panmunjom, a high-cheekboned officer who would only give his name as Chon, greeted visitors with a bone-crushing handshake and briskly led them into one of seven huts which straddle the dividing line.
Over the line, a South Korean soldier watched through binoculars, just as the North Koreans do when visitors come to the south side.
In the hut, microphone cables mark the border, and visitors can briefly stand in South Korea. The hut is used for meetings of the armistice commission which oversees the uneasy truce.
North Korean guides claim the armistice is practically useless these days because American troops violate its terms so frequently. U.S. officials say North Korea is trying to dismantle the armistice to force direct talks with Washington, thereby snubbing South Korea.
Tensions have risen recently because of the dispute over the North's nuclear program, which despite North Korean denials, is suspected of producing weapons.
Suddenly, a gum-chomping American officer in peaked cap and sunglasses peered into the hut through a window on the South Korean side. Too proud to look away, Chon glared back, his jaw tightened, until the American dipped out of the view of a visitor's camera lens.
How did Chon feel? His answer, rendered by a translator, was swift and sounded well-rehearsed:
"The feeling is as soon as possible he wants to reunite our country and achieve national reunification."
The tour took minutes, but the tension made it seem much longer.
 Load-Date: May 12, 1995

 

End of Document
