

Operation Provide Comfort - The U.S. Effort To Aid The Kurds
The Associated Press
April 16, 1991, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 573 words
Byline: By JOHN DANISZEWSKI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: INCIRLIK AIR BASE, Turkey
Body




The roar of a C-130 transport plane just back from the mountains reminds U.S. troops of the urgency of their task - assembling hundreds more 1,000-pound bundles of food and supplies for Kurdish refugees.
"We're helping them. That's what makes us feel good," said Chief Warrant Officer Timothy Skinner of Seattle as the cargo was loaded on planes Tuesday at this sprawling air base.
Operation Provide Comfort, ordered April 5 by President Bush, began as an emergency aid program and is evolving into a program that can supply hundreds of thousands of people until relief organizations take over, said U.S. Air Force spokesman Lt. Col. Philip Crowley.
"Our first objective is to stabilize the patient," he said. "Then we will provide the help to allow the patient to survive and eventually get better."
The "patient" is an estimated 500,000 Kurdish refugees who left Iraq after a failed uprising and are now dying of hunger, exposure and dysentery along the Iraqi-Turkish border.
Food, water and supplies are arriving steadily at Incirlik, the main U.S.-Turkish base on the Mediterranean coast that is home to the allied relief operation.
Materiel also is being unloaded at the nearby port of Iskenderum, where the USS San Diego has anchored to contribute its helicopters and personnel to the effort.
At Incirlik, U.S. and British quartermaster troops not yet rested from Gulf War duty began working in shifts around the clock April 7 putting together relief parcels. Some 8,000 American troops are at the base.
In two cavernous hangars, they sort supplies, building relief bundles on wooden pallets that are rolled to the flight deck and loaded onto olive green C-130 transports.
Guided to their targets by A-10 "Warthog" reconnaissance planes, the C-130s use parachutes to drop the supplies to refugees. In the first nine days of the operation, the planes flew 145 missions, delivering more than 1,000 tons of supplies, military officials said.
Lt. Col. William J. Curtis Jr., in charge of the 5th Quartermaster Detachment, said U.S. troops are packing about 400 bundles a day weighing between 700 and 2,200 pounds each.
Besides water and field rations, the bundles contain blankets and plastic sheeting that can be used for tents. The refugees use the parachute rigging to tie up bundles and the pallets for firewood, he said.
The drops, conducted from an altitude of as low as 1,000 feet, were intended as a stopgap measure to get a lot of supplies to the area quickly. Officials say the role of C-130s will recede as supply and helicopter bases are set up at Silopi and Diyarbakir - installations much closer to the refugees.
"You can't sustain this kind of operation through airlift," said Crowley.
Trucks eventually will ferry most food and supplies to forward bases.
Turkish trucks already are leaving Incirlik every few minutes loaded with bottled water, ready-to-eat meals and other supplies. The goods are being taken to forward depots, where Chinook helicopters and the Navy's C-53 "Super Stallions" can take on the cargo.
Helicopters will be able to deliver the goods more accurately and safely than the C-130s, said Staff Sgt. Doyle Tillman. He accompanied one of the first Super Stallion runs Saturday that dropped German baby formula, Italian tents and Soviet-made overcoats from just above ground level to an isolated pocket of 150 refugees.
"Amid the frenzy to get all they could, a few refugees took a second to wave gratefully," he said.

 

End of Document
