

Out of the Closet, Into the Street: Japan's First Gay Parade
The Associated Press
August 28, 1994, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 351 words
Byline: AP Photo TOK101, By CHISAKI WATANABE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TOKYO
Body




Coming out of the closet and into the street, gays and lesbians on Sunday staged the first-ever gay parade in Japan.
Some passersby were surprised as the procession chanted and danced its way from Shinjuku to Shibuya, two commercial areas packed with young couples and families. Others waved and took pictures.
The three-mile route took nearly three hours in scorching 91-degree heat.
While the turnout of more than 1,000 participants was far smaller than similar parades in San Francisco and New York, organizers were pleased since they had originally received only 300 applications.
Teishiro Minami, chairman of the parade commitee and publisher of gay literature, said he has wanted to organize a parade for 20 years but had to wait until the time was right.
"Up until now, it was hard to come out and say you're gay," he said. "But changes in our society have made it easier to be open about it."
Mainstream Japanese magazines have started carrying articles on gays, and sponsors for the parade included companies such as Tower Records.
"This is a landmark day for us," says a 28-year-old lesbian painter who gave her name only as Mizuko. "We were able to prove that we're alive and that we exist in this society."
Yet despite increased awareness of gay issues, organizers said in a statement that homosexuals are still excluded from many aspects of Japanese society. Apart from a handful of transsexual entertainers, most Japanese homosexuals hide their sexual preferences.
Some parade-goers were dressed in drag. One lesbian couple wore matching wedding dresses, while others carried banners reading "Mother, Your Son Is Gay" and "Stop Homophobia."
There were no reports of protests or harassment.
A 29-year-old transsexual marcher who identified himself only as Kim said he was surprised when he heard about the parade.
"My reaction was, 'What on earth is happening in Japan?"' he said. But Kim said he hopes it will encourage more gays to come out into the open.
Spectator Junko Fujita, 26, said she had no objection to gays in general, "but it would be a shock to me if it is with my own brothers and sisters."
 Load-Date: August 28, 1994

 

End of Document
