

Pentagon Says the Past Day Was Busiest of the Air War
The Associated Press
January 25, 1991, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 934 words
Byline: By WILLIAM M. WELCH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The White House said today that Iraq is dumping millions of barrels of oil into the Persian Gulf from Kuwait in an apparent effort to frustrate any future U.S. landing efforts. President Bush pledged "every effort" by allied forces to halt the spill.
Bush told reporters that the Iraqi oil spill is akin to Saddam Hussein's use of Scud missiles and displaying of allied prisoners of war - without value to the Iraqi military effort. Pentagon officials said that despite the huige magnitude of the spill, it held no peril for any possible amphibious assault on Iraqi positions in Kuwait.
Lt. Gen. Thomas Kelly also said the past 24 hours had seen good weather in the skies above Iraq and Kuwait and allowed for the busiest day of the air campaign against Iraq, with 2,707 sorties.
Pentagon spokesman Pete Williams said the oil dumping "is clearly an act of environmental terrorism." He said it may be more than a dozen times bigger than the 1989 Alaska oil spill.
"It's kind of sick," Bush said. "… It looks desperate. It looks last gasp. It does not measure up to any military purpose."
On another sensitive subject, Bush refused to rule out that Saddam might remain in power after the war. Asked directly, he said, "our objectives remain the same.' Bush has outlined allied war aims as the liberation of Kuwait and the restoration of the Kuwaiti government.
"We're not in the business of targetting Saddam Hussein," he said. Yet he reiterated, "No one will weep when he's gone."
In Riyadh, Maj. Gen. Robert B. Johnston said U.S. forces are not targeting Saddam personally. But one Pentagon official said, "We go after command and control targets and if he happens to be there, great."
The Pentagon official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said it would be "too inefficient and iffy" to expend a lot of energy going after Saddam. But he said that if the Iraqi president fulfills his duties by going to command posts to oversee operations "then he is vulnerable."
The officials were commenting on a Washington Post report that bad weather thwarted an attack on a site where Saddam was believed to be.
Bush said the cost of the the war is still being computed, and an accounting would be given to Congress. He said he was "very pleased with the cooperation and participation of foreign countries" in financing Operation Desert Storm.
Kuwaiti's exiled government gave $$13.5 billion earlier in the day as part of its 1991 payment. Japan announced on Thursday a $$9 billion contribution.
Cost estimates for the war range upwards of $$600 million a day.
Bush said he planned to go about his business undeterred by the war. "Life goes on...I am not going to be held a captive in the White House by Saddam Hussein … I am not going to screech my life to a halt."
Presidential spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said the oil was being dumped into the gulf from oil tank farms. "It looks to be continuous," he said. "Clearly, it's in the millions of barrels."
Fitzwater also announced that the United States had begun shipping more Patriot anti-missile missiles to Israel to help protect against Iraqi Scud missile attacks. He would not disclose the size of the new shipment, but said the missiles began arriving in Israel on Thursday night.
Bush said he continues to have "enormous confidence in the Patriots." He said he did not have enough information to comment on whether debris from exploding Patriots may have been responsible for damage in the latest attack on Tel Aviv.
Meanwhile, Bush told Arab-Americans that the coalition fighting Iraq was "holding together with great strength and great conviction."
The 1989 Alaska oil spill from the tanker Exxon Valdez poured 11 million gallons - or about 260,000 barrels - into Prince William Sound. Fitzwater said the dumping of oil into the Persian Gulf would far surpass this.
"The presumption is to inhibit naval activity," Fitzwater said. "It could have some impact in that area. We don't know how much."
"The impact will be mostly environmental. That's our big fear at the moment. The military can plan around it. Unquestionably it will have an environmental impact."
He said that the Defense and Energy departments were closely monitoring the oil dumping and "examining contingencies for dealing with it" and were in close consultations with other countries in the gulf area.
He said it was not clear whether the huge oil dump could threaten Saudi drinking water supplies by damaging water desalination plants on the gulf, but he said that was possible.
Secretary of State James A. Baker III accepted the Kuwaiti contribution at a meeting with Sheik Saud Nasir al-Sabah, the Kuwaiti ambassador.
The Kuwaiti official, whose oil-rich regime was one of the richest in the world, called the $$13.5 billion "small and insignificant." Last year, Kuwaiti officials provided $$5 billion to the effort to free their country. In all, gulf nations including Saudi Arabia gave a total of $$12 billion.
The war is costing the United States a minimum of $$600 million a day.
As he posed for pictures with the sheik, Baker was asked about Iraqi threats of terrorism. "We don't think it's rhetoric. We have solid evidence of efforts to accomplish terrorist acts," Baker said.
Bush, meeting with a group of Arab-American leaders, denounced discrimination against Arab-Americans as a result of the conflict. "There is no room for discrimination against anybody in the United States of America," he said.
Bush met earlier with members of the Republican National Committee, where he gave a detailed description of his "internal debate" on the decision to go to war, according to people who attended the meeting.

 

End of Document
