

Perry Views Golan Heights From The Air, Protesters On The Ground
The Associated Press
January 9, 1995, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 493 words
Byline: By GWEN ACKERMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




U.S. Defense Secretary William Perry viewed the disputed Golan Heights from the air today while Jewish settlers on the ground protested Israel's withdrawal from the plateau captured from Syria.
When Perry's helicopter landed in northern Israel, police restrained about 30 Jewish residents of the Golan who gathered under a large red-and-blue balloon bearing the slogan "No moving from the Golan."
They also demonstrated against any agreement that would place U.S. troops on the Golan Heights between Israeli and Syrian forces. One banner declared "No American troops on the Golan."
According to a pool report, Perry could not hear the protesters because of the wind.
Perry was briefed on Israeli troop deployments facing Lebanon and Syria by Israel's northern commander, Maj. Gen. Amiram Levin, as they sat at a table overlooking the hilltops of Syria, Lebanon and Israel.
Levin showed him maps and a chart detailing 388 attacks that took place last year in northern Israel and in the Israeli-controlled strip of southern Lebanon.
The U.S. defense secretary did not fly directly over the Golan Heights, which Israel captured in the 1967 war and later annexed. The United States does not recognize Israel's claim and maintains the final borders should be set in negotiations.
Perry said Sunday that he was not in Israel to discuss the possibility of stationing American troops on the Golan Heights.
"We have willingness to discuss that, but it's premature at this time," he said. "We do not yet have a peace plan, and in particular we don't have a plan for how peacekeeping forces might be deployed there."
The issue of U.S. peacekeeping troops did not come up in talks between Perry and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, according to Oded Ben-Ami, spokesman for Rabin.
Syria demands that Israel return all of the Golan Heights in exchange for peace. Israel has said it is willing to pull back but has never defined the extent of the withdrawal, saying that depended on the nature of the peace Syria was offering.
In other developments, an Israeli newspaper said nuclear policy and Iran were the focus of the first round of talks on Sunday.
The daily Yedioth Ahronoth reported today that Perry told Israeli leaders Iran could achieve nuclear capability at any time.
Perry told reporters Sunday that the United States was "very much concerned about the potential that Iran might become a nuclear power."
"We do not consider that an acceptable development," he said.
Israel is concerned that Iran could acquire nuclear weapons within five years and believes it could rebuild its nuclear program.
Rabin said today that extremist Islamic terrorism posed the greatest threat to Israel.
"The major threat in the short term and medium and long term is the extreme, ugly wave of extreme Islamic interpretation which I call, and I repeat again, 'Khomeinism' without Khomeini," Rabin said.
He was referring to Iran's revolutionary patriarch, the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, who died in 1989.
 Load-Date: January 9, 1995

 

End of Document
