

Polls Predict The Winner: The Right, Left And Center
The Associated Press
June 20, 1992, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 474 words
Byline: By IAN M. ROSE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




After dozens of opinion surveys among voters, no one knows what brand of government will emerge from Israel's volatile politics.
That's because the polls vary widely, even forecasting opposite results in Tuesday's election for the 120 seats in Parliament.
On Friday, one poll showed Yitzhak Shamir's Likud party would win enough seats to form a coalition government with right-wing and religious parties. Another showed Likud and its allies on the right tied with Labor and its potential partners on the left.
But two other polls showed Labor and leftist and Arab parties could block a Likud government, opening the way for Labor to woo the swing-vote religious parties to its side.
Since neither Likud nor Labor has ever won an outright majority, Israel has always been governed by coalitions. So pollsters must look at how many Parliament seats the major parties will win plus how their potential political bedfellows will do.
"The political significance of one or two seats can make all the difference," said Avraham Diskin, chairman of the Political Science Department at the Hebrew University in Jerusalem.
The close vote is part of the problem, but Israeli polling methods also are wide open to inaccuracies.
Some surveys are financed by the political parties, coloring the questioning. Polls that make headlines often turn out to be telephone surveys of a mere 500 voters, meaning a margin of error of 4 percent - enough to swing the result either way.
But the pollsters say other factors make their job a nightmare.
"Election polling in Israel is complicated because of the many parties and the need to translate percentages into mandates" for parliament seats, said Dori Shadmon, who heads the polling firm of Teleseker.
Twenty-five parties are vying for Parliament seats, and figuring which party gets a seat is complicated by a law that nullifies ballots cast for a party if it does not get 1.5 percent of the vote.
Many polling firms also omit up to a third of the electorate from their surveys - including Israeli Arabs, ultra-Orthodox Jews, settlers and soldiers on duty. Instead, they make educated guesses about their voting behavior.
Naturally, different projections arise.
Israeli Arabs, about 11 percent of eligible voters, are usually left out of surveys because their politics are considered too complicated to gauge with telephone polls, said Elihu Katz of the Israeli Institute of Applied Social Research.
Other pollsters point out many Arabs do not have phones. They have similar problems reaching new immigrants and soldiers at remote posts. Settlers are omitted because it is assumed they will vote for the far right.
Another problem: many voters still undecided about which of the numerous parties to back. "The more options you have, the longer you take to decide," said Rutie Tzin, a staffer for the Dahaf agency, an Israeli pollster.

 

End of Document
