

Preparing for Battle on the Shifting Sands of the Arabian Desert
The Associated Press
January 23, 1991, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 587 words
Byline: By MORT ROSENBLUM, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: IN NORTHERN SAUDI ARABIA
Body




In the dawn chill, when the breeze is rich in scents and too gentle to carry sand, the desert can be thrilling, even beautiful. But it is a hell of a place to fight a war.
The broad swath of no man's land separating Desert Storm forces from their Iraqi foes defies all cliches about the Arabian desert. It is sandy, but rocky. There are dunes, but also marshes.
Now, with sporadic rains, there are lakes and rivulets and sinkholes called "sabkhas" that can swallow a tank.
Mostly, the northern desert is a desolate, featureless moonscape that only a Bedouin could love. Soon, it is likely to be a killing field.
Since mid-August, the Saudi desert has been dotted with new, shifting hummocks: tents of leafy plastic camouflage netting, with heavy gun barrels poking out ominously toward the north.
Makeshift shelters cover hundreds of thousands of troops under a half-dozen flags. Some live in tents. Others spread bedrolls on cots or directly on the ground, with the scorpions and snakes.
Troops have studied their surroundings for the purpose now at hand. Most are eager for combat, not for the love of battle but because they are convinced that only by storming Kuwait will they escape the desert.
No one underestimates what lies ahead.
Iraqi forces are dug in, with reinforced bunkers, tank traps and earthern berms, barriers of compacted earth. Much of Kuwait is marshland, with treacherous soft spots and impassable terrain.
Even short of the border, the desert is formidable. Sharp rocks and nasty ruts jolt vehicles beyond their endurance. Army drivers go through tires five times faster than normal.
Difficult access, along with operational reasons, has kept forward troops at the posts. Their only visitors are the camel herders who sell fresh milk, known generically as "Bedouin Bob."
Every shift in the weather takes its toll. In summer, the heat turned metal surfaces to waffle irons, sapping strength from the hardiest. Now, when night winds blow, the desert is glacial.
For days on end, driving rains streamed through the porous netting of the camouflage material, soaking troops to the skin.
"I took the mail to one unit and some old boy came out, looked like he'd fallen in a mud puddle," said Dana Patterson, an Army engineer. "He'd only been out on guard duty."
Hot or cold, there is always the sand. Desert-trained troops have seen nothing like it, sand as fine as foot powder that works into the deepest crevices of their bodies and their gear.
Tank crews sometimes stop twice a day to spend hours dismantling gun mechanisms for a thorough cleaning. Manuals call for light oil on metal surfaces, but that only manufactures sandpaper.
Of all the combatants poised for Desert Storm, the tank crews are most aware of the terrain. Especially for those in the smaller M-60 tanks, it will mean the difference between success and failure.
Israeli strategists with long experience note that the desert favors and hinders both sides alike. In most tank combat, terrain allows for ambush and surprise. Here, the edge goes to the longer guns.
"We'll have to outmaneuver them and not let them get the drop on us," said Capt. Rob Philon, a U.S. Marine tank officer, whose shorter-range M-60s must face laser-equipped Soviet-made T-72s.
The M-60 has a lower profile, allowing it to hide in swallow depressions.
If the northern desert is Iraq's back yard, ground forces commanders say, it is nothing like the eastern Iraq battlefields where Saddam Hussein's troops fought Iran.
"Don't forget," Philon said, "the ground is new to them, too."

 

End of Document
