

President Jiang the Life of the Mid-Air Party
The Associated Press
December 1, 1993, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 348 words
Dateline: BEIJING
Body




Jiang Zemin is already rich in titles. He is China's president, the Communist Party chief and head of the military.
Now, judging from the nationally televised news Wednesday night, he may be crowned with another: the people's party animal.
Jiang and his entourage sang and cracked jokes at a party aboard the plane flying them back to China after a two-week tour that included a summit with President Clinton in Seattle and visits to Cuba, Brazil and Portugal.
The unusual footage, and a front-page report of the party in the nation's leading newspaper, the People's Daily, were clearly designed to show a human face to the Communist rulers of China, particularly Jiang.
Jiang, 67, has used the trip to bolster his image at home, where despite his impressive titles he has yet to establish himself as a credible heir to his political patron, senior leader Deng Xiaoping.
China's official media prominently reported all of Jiang's activities abroad, providing particularly glowing accounts of his visit to the United States, where he made no concessions to demands for improved trade and human rights policies.
No wonder that aboard China's version of Air Force One, no one appeared to be having as good a time as Jiang.
Dressed casually - no tie and his collar unbuttoned - and speaking through the airplane's loudspeaker system, the president giggled as he asked Foreign Minister Qian Qichen to join him in a folk song from northwestern China.
After Qian begged off, Jiang plunged right into the opening strains of "Rose," his voice resounding through the cabin.
A rather stiff-looking Qian was up next. "I'll tell a joke," he began. "Once there was an official who went to a village to make a speech ..."
Before the Chinese masses could hear for themselves whether their foreign minister had a sense of humor, a television announcer drowned out the rest of the joke, assuring viewers that Qian had "brought rounds of laughter from the cabin."
Finally, a group of blue-uniformed stewardesses led the officials in a sing-along, with Jiang animatedly waving his hands in the air as he lustily joined in.
 Load-Date: December 1, 1993

 

End of Document
