

President, First Lady Call the Hogs in the Rose Garden
The Associated Press
June 15, 1994, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 351 words
Byline: By RON FOURNIER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Marine Band played Arkansas' fight song, Razorback red swathed the Rose Garden and the president of the United States pumped his fist, yelling, "Woo Pig Sooie!" If it wasn't Hog Heaven, it was the closest thing on earth.
"You made your president happy," Bill Clinton told the University of Arkansas basketball team, the 1994 NCAA champions.
The president, who hails from Arkansas and attended several games this season, presented official commendations to the team and Coach Nolan Richardson, crediting them with "hard, clean, aggressive basketball."
Smiling broadly, Clinton roamed among the crowd of 400 Arkansans crammed into a steamy, hot tent behind the White House, hugging some and kissing others. This wasn't just business; this was fun.
"We miss you, and this is a nice extra for me," Clinton told the crowd - mostly politicians, bureaucrats and lobbyists from Arkansas. Many now work for him in Washington.
He chided Sens. Dale Bumpers and David Pryor of Arkansas for missing the ceremony to vote in Congress. "I told them their priorities might be a little out of order," Clinton joked.
Mrs. Clinton, who helped play host to Japan's royal couple in the Rose Garden this week, gushed, "I think it is fair to say that there have been many important events that have occurred in the Rose Garden, but none more important than what is occurring right now."
Richardson presented Clinton with a red-and-white Arkansas jersey with "Clinton" and "No. 1" printed on it.
Scotty Thurman, whose three-point shot sealed the championship, told Clinton, "Hopefully we'll be all coming back here next year to do this again."
The president said basketball resembles another sport he likes - politics. "It's more and more physical all the time. You get behind and then you get ahead. You never know whether you're going to win until the end of the game. And people are questioning your judgment calls all the way through," he said with a laugh.
The event ended with three rounds of Arkansas' traditional hog call, "Woo Pig Sooie!" The president and the first lady joined in, although they chatted to each other between calls.
 Load-Date: June 15, 1994

 

End of Document
