

Re-enter the Dragon: Hollywood Tackles the Legend of Bruce Lee
The Associated Press
June 25, 1992, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 511 words
Byline: By DAVID W. CHEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAI KUNG, Hong Kong
Body




Inside a shack filled with ceiling fans and hungry mosquitoes, a short martial arts expert squares off against a muscleman with tree trunk-sized biceps and freeway-wide shoulders.
It's no contest.
In a flash, the smaller man jumps, kicks the hulk's midsection and screeches like an animal.
Bruce Lee is back.
"Dragon: A Life of Bruce Lee" is Hollywood's attempt to document the rise and fall of the kung fu figure who died of mysterious causes in 1973 at age 32.
Based on a book by Lee's widow, Seattle native Linda Emery, the movie has an unknown lead, a producer who's the daughter of movie mogul Dino de Laurentiis and a $ 14 million budget.
Since May 12, the cameras have been rolling in offbeat locations like this remote village named Sai Kung, near the Chinese border, and the Peter Po cha-cha school in the working-class Tai Kok Tsui district.
Production wraps up in northern California in July, and the film is scheduled for release by Universal Studios next summer, the 20th anniversary of Lee's death.
Lee, famed for his kung fu hit "Enter the Dragon," is worshipped on the set. Crew members wear T-shirts which read "Bruce Lee - We miss you!" and muse about what Lee would have said or done about their project.
"He was the James Dean of Hong Kong because he never got old and he was at his peak," said director Rob Cohen, who produced "The Witches of Eastwick."
The son of a Chinese opera star, Lee was born in San Francisco in 1940, grew up in Hong Kong and dropped out of the University of Washington (where he met his wife) to pursue acting.
Lee landed bit roles in several television series but ran "smack-dab into the vicious racism of America and Hollywood" before returning to Hong Kong, Cohen said.
Lee then starred in four movies which showcased his rippling stomach muscles and martial arts skills.
Following the release of his most successful movie, "Enter the Dragon," Lee died of a brain edema, or swelling of the brain, July 20, 1973, in the home of a Hong Kong actress.
The coroner described it as "death by misadventure," but rumors circulated that drugs or other factors caused his death.
Since then, Hong Kong's action-thirsty film industry has cranked out rip-off films like "Goodbye Bruce Lee - His Last Game of Death," and "Exit the Dragon, Enter the Tiger" starring people called "Bruce Le" and "Bruce Li."
As for the Hollywood version, Cohen said: "We are telling the life of a martial artist (and not making) a martial arts movie."
Lee is played by newcomer Jason Scott Lee (no relation), a 25-year-old Chinese-American who's appeared in "Born in East L.A." and "Back to the Future Part II." Lee has prepared for the role by taking a crash course in martial arts.
Producer Raffaella de Laurentiis thinks the film will do well, especially in Asia, because "everyone has wanted to make this movie for a long time."
But not everything has been smooth.
When de Laurentiis was scouting locations in November, she picked a temple near Sai Kung for a scene set in 1949. But when she returned in April, she discovered that a skyscraper had sprouted up behind it.

 

End of Document
