

REVIEW: The Race Is on for the Chungking Covenant
The Associated Press
April 29, 1994, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 337 words
Byline: By PHIL THOMAS
Body



For AP Special Features
Jack Higgins usually begins his thrillers with a couple of preliminaries before staging the main event, and "On Dangerous Ground" (Putnam, $ 22.95) is no exception.
Sean Dillon, the terrorist-turned-good-guy who has starred in several previous Higgins novels, is called upon by British intelligence to thwart the planned assassination of the American president during a visit to Britain. Dillon does so but is badly cut up by one of the would-be killers who wields a mean switchblade. While recovering, Dillon happens to wander into a London restaurant just in time to thwart a shakedown of the owner by local hoodlums.
Exciting stuff, but the best is yet to come. During World War II, the British agree to provide communist leader Mao Tse-tung with all the war materials his armies need to fight the armies of his rival, Chiang Kai-shek. In return, Mao agrees that if he comes to power he will extend by 100 years Britain's lease on Hong Kong, which expires July 1, 1997. The agreement is known as the Chungking Covenant.
There were four copies of the covenant, but only one still exists and no one knows where it is. Until 1993, when an old man's deathbed confession puts the missing paper inside a Bible that belonged to the lord of a Scottish castle.
Both British intelligence and the Mafia learn about the existing copy at about the same time, and the race is on. The British want to get the covenant and destroy it. They want to get out of Hong Kong and have no desire to stay on for another 100 years. The Mafia wants the covenant because it has billions of dollars invested in Hong Kong and would rather have the British in charge of the colony than the Chinese.
Charles Ferguson, head of the prime minister's personal action unit, is told to find the desired paper and destroy it. Ferguson enlists Dillon. The Mafia sends in its heavies. Each side knows what the other is up to and as they circle warily about each other, Higgins entertains the reader with another supercharged action adventure.
 Load-Date: April 29, 1994

 

End of Document
