

School Days Test your reading comprehension by reading the story below and answering the questions that follow.
The Associated Press
December 5, 1994, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 620 words
Dateline: TOKYO
Body



Few Of Japan's Kids Happy to Get More Saturdays Off
 A bit more leeway in Japan's notoriously strict school system would seem to be a blessing, but few are cheering the plan to give children more days off.
Teachers, students, and parents are objecting to a plan to cancel classes two Saturdays per month. Students now are off one Saturday per month.
"It's hard enough to digest the current curriculum in a six-day week - a five-day week is ridiculous," Mitsuo Arai, headmaster of a Tokyo high school.
Japanese children attend school about 240 days a year, compared with an average 180 in the United States.
The Education Ministry decided to reduce the number of days, but not the hours kids have to spend in class. The time lost on Saturdays will have to be made up, possibly cutting into time for activities, sports and free time.
Several mothers interviewed on television shows voiced concerns about the extra burden of watching the kids.
"If the children are in school, I have more freedom in organizing my schedule and doing errands. But if they're off, I have to spend all the time taking care of them," one mother said.
An Education Ministry survey in March showed 47 percent of parents were opposed to the change, mostly because "the kids would only play more."
But that's the whole point, says the Education Ministry. In recent years the Education Ministry has tried to respond to accusations that Japan's schools produce regimented thinkers, but not the creative individualists a modern Japan needs.
Even some children interviewed were not especially happy with the new 5-day week. Some said they would merely spend the extra time sleeping.
One elementary school student in a schoolyard said he would rather go to school on Saturdays.
"School is fun," he said.
 
 Use information from the story to answer the following questions:
 
 1. How is the Japanese government planning to change the public school schedule?
2. In Japan, about how many days per week do children go to school?
3. Compared with American students, about how many more days a year do Japanese children attend school?
4. Who decides the number of days in the Japanese school year?
5. Why is Mitsuo Arai opposed to shortening the school week?
6. According to the article, what is one thing that will not change if the plan goes into effect?
7. Do you think that Japanese students spend more time studying than American students? Explain your answer.
8. Name some ways that children in Japan might have to make up for lost time on Saturdays.
9. Why are so many Japanese parents unhappy about the plan to cancel Saturday classes?
10. Why do you think that some children might want to spend their free time sleeping?
 
Answer Key: (wording may vary)
1. The Japanese government is planning to change the school schedule by giving children days off.
2. Children go to school about 6 days a week.
3. Japanese children attend school about 60 more days a year than American children.
4. The Education Ministry decides the length of the school year.
5. Mitsuo Arai is opposed to a shorter week because he feels that the students will not have enough time to learn all the material he must teach.
6. If the plan goes into effect, the number of hours the children have to spend in class will not change.
7. Answer will vary.
8. To make up for lost time, the children might have to spend less time on sports, activities, or free time.
9. Answer will vary.
10. Answer will vary.
 

 
 PART TWO
 
 GOING PLACES
Pretend that you and a friend have decided to spend the weekend together. Plan your activities by turning to the entertainment section of your local paper. How about going to a football game, the movies, a museum, or a restaurant? List the things you plan to do and show the time for each event.
 Load-Date: December 5, 1994

 

End of Document
