

Serbs Show the Know-How to Play the Game
The Associated Press
February 10, 1994, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 596 words
Byline: By DONALD M. ROTHBERG, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Bosnian Serbs are demonstrating mastery of the cat and mouse diplomacy of the post Cold War era in which small, unpleasant powers thumb their noses at the mighty guardians of world order.
It can be a dangerous game. Ask Manuel Noriega and Saddam Hussein.
But as practiced by the Serbs and the North Koreans, it is a tactic that consistently frustrates the powerful by exploiting their reluctance to use their military strength.
Success requires a talent for assessing how far the major powers can be pushed and what they consider their vital national interests.
North Korea made a historic misjudgment in the Cold War when it assumed the United States did not consider South Korea a vital interest. The result was the Korean War.
More recently, North Korean leader Kim Il Sung has played cat and mouse diplomacy far more skillfully, alternately threatening and yielding in response to international pressure to allow inspections of the North Korean nuclear program.
The international threat is economic sanctions through the United Nations. But in the same way the Serbs have parried military threats, the North Koreans have fended off the economic club by seeming to yield to pressure. Maybe. Then not quite, or not at all.
Noriega failed to understand how strongly the United States felt about Panama and drug trafficking. He practically invited intervention, and to his amazement, President Bush accepted.
Saddam thought the United States didn't care how Iraq and Kuwait settled their territorial dispute. But when he occupied Kuwait he discovered he was wrong.
One lesson of these examples is that crossing firmly established international borders is far more likely to draw a response. Outsiders are far more hesitant to become involved in internal conflicts.
It's been obvious to the Serbs for at least two years that the United States and its European and Canadian partners in NATO wanted no part of the vicious civil war in the former Yugoslavia.
NATO had not yet voted Wednesday on a U.S.-French proposal to get tough on the Serbs, when a cease-fire plan hit the table.
Gen. Sir Michael Rose, the U.N. commander in Bosnia, announced that the Serbs had agreed to withdraw their artillery from around Sarajevo and accept U.N. monitoring.
Rose called the step a "very small start on a very large problem."
President Clinton was more upbeat, citing it as evidence that "every time NATO shows a little resolve we get results."
Another way of describing the sequence is that every time NATO shows resolve the Serbs back off far enough to avoid a military strike, but without really changing their objective of asserting their dominance over most of Bosnia.
Under the U.S.-French plan tentatively agreed on by NATO ministers meeting in Brussels, Belgium, Serbs will be given 10 days to remove more than 500 heavy guns that for nearly two years have been pounding Sarajevo.
Theoretically, if they failed to meet that deadline, NATO would carry out the strikes.
NATO threatened air strikes in August if the shelling didn't cease. Secretary of State Warren Christopher visited a NATO air base in Italy and chatted with pilots who were standing by their planes.
"The military operation is ready," he said.
The planes began flying missions over Sarajevo. But they never fired a shot or dropped their bombs. After all, the Serbs had backed off. The threat had worked.
But by early September, the shelling had resumed and Clinton was warning anew that NATO air strikes remained a threat. But only a threat.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Donald M. Rothberg covers national security affairs for The Associated Press.
 Load-Date: February 10, 1994

 

End of Document
