

Showing The Public He's The Foreign Policy Man
The Associated Press
August 9, 1992, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 711 words
Byline: By TOM RAUM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KENNEBUNKPORT, Maine
Body




President Bush, in staging a high-profile strategy session on the crisis in Bosnia and in meeting Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin at his vacation home, is trying to telegraph a message to Americans that he remains engaged in foreign policy.
And while the president and his top aides deny political motivations, they carefully are nurturing the image of a president busy in what is still widely regarded as his strong suit.
The president, after holding his third news conference in three days on ethnic warfare in the former Yugoslavs republics, was turning his attention to Israel. His meeting here at his oceanside home on Monday and Tuesday with Rabin is designed to improve strained relations between the two nations - and could help Bush win support among Jewish voters.
High on the agenda is Israel's long-languishing request for $ 10 billion in U.S. loan guarantees to help provide housing and job training to Jewish immigrants from the Soviet Union.
The guarantees had been snarled in a dispute between the Bush administration and the government of former Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir over construction of settlements in occupied territories.
However, Rabin's pledge to curb settlement building opened the way for approval of the U.S. aid - which now could be politically beneficial to Bush and the new Israeli leader.
An administration official, briefing reporters here late Sunday afternoon on the upcoming Bush-Rabin session, said "there are no obvious obstacles" to going ahead with the loan guarantees. "But there are some important issues for them to engage directly" and "sensitive issues on both sides," the officials said.
White House chief of staff Samuel Skinner, meanwhile, conceded the visit could have domestic political overtones. "Anytime you can be a world leader and show up as a world leader can't hurt you," he said.
Bush's stump-speech question - whom do you trust when the phone rings at the White House in the middle of the night? - has become a theme that the White House and the Bush campaign continually try to reinforce.
With the beginning of the Republican convention just eight days away, Bush awoke on a rainy Sunday to more bad political news: a Boston Globe poll suggesting Clinton had a broad-based lead over Bush.
The poll of 600 likely voters across the country suggested Clinton would beat Bush by 24 points - 56 to 32 percent - if the election were held now. The poll, conducted Monday to Wednesday, has a margin of error of 4 percentage points.
The poll also showed that one in five registered Republicans would like to see him step down. His overall job-approval rating was 31 percent.
There may have been some solace for the GOP ticket. The poll also showed that the president's wife continues to be the most popular public figure in America, with favorable approval ratings of 75 percent.
Bush was asked by a reporter Sunday after church services if he was humbled by the fact that his wife is twice as popular as he is. "Yes," Bush said, then adding: "I'm delighted with it."
The trip to St. Ann's Episcopal Church was one of Bush's few outings on a summer "vacation" that was shrunk from two weeks to four days, days dominated by attention to world events rather than recreation.
There were no images this time of Bush pounding through the ocean waves in his 28-foot powerboat or clowning on the golf course. The boat stayed at the dock unused, the golf course went unvisited, and the only pictures of Bush seen by Americans showed him in a coat and tie.
When Bush held his Saturday news conference on the situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina after meeting with his top national security advisers, he told reporters he hoped they would relay to Americans that he was hard at work rather than relaxing.
After months of not taking an active role in the crisis, the administration's new tougher stance - announced by Bush on Thursday during a campaign stop in Colorado - came only after Democratic rival Bill Clinton said he would support use of force in what used to be Yugoslavia.
But Bush bristled at the suggestion that his action was motivated by Clinton's comments.
And as to holding repeated foreign-policy news conferences when there's nothing new to announce, Bush said he was just trying to give Americans frequent updates.

 

End of Document
