

SPEAKING VOLUMES: The Dog Days of August Wag Some Star-Studded Tales
The Associated Press
August 7, 1992, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 2402 words
Byline: By RON BERTHEL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Three internationally admired entertainers are each giving the performance of their lives, so to speak, as the stars of new biographies.
These books, which relate the life stories of Sean Connery and the late Marlene Dietrich and Yves Montand, are among the many new titles booked into booksellers for August premieres.
Donald Spoto follows up last year's best-selling book on Sir Laurence Olivier with a biography of another legendary performer: "Blue Angel: The Life of Marlene Dietrich" (Doubleday) traces the life of the glamorous German-born film star and cabaret performer who died in May at age 90.
Film star Sean Connery won an Oscar for his role in "The Untouchables," but moviegoers worldwide know him best for his portrayal of James Bond. "Sean Connery: From 007 to Hollywood Icon" (Donald I. Fine) is author Andrew Yule's chronicle of Connery's rise from a childhood spent among the poverty-stricken tenements of Edinburgh to become one of filmdom's most popular and respected actors.
An Italian by birth, Ivo Levi became Yves Montand and won over audiences in the music halls of Paris and as a star in French and Hollywood films. In "You See, I Haven't Forgotten" (Knopf), Montand, who died in 1991, alternates his memoirs with biographical narrative by Herve Hamon and Patrick Rotman.
In their own way, many authors are stars, too. This month, the curtain goes up on the latest performances in paper and ink by such literary luminaries as Elmore Leonard, Andrew M. Greeley, Susan Sontag and Jan Morris.
With 30 novels behind him, has Elmore Leonard become punchy? Well, at least the title of his newest novel has: "Rum Punch" (Delacorte) is set in South Florida, where the heat is on bad guy Ordell Robbie when the flight attendant who helps in his illegal arms racket is arrested.
Andrew M. Greeley fans who have been waiting for him to write a new novel have had their prayers answered. The Catholic priest and best-selling author offers "Wages of Sin" (Putnam), the story of a man who seems to have everything but who can't find happiness until he learns the truth about a tragic event from his past.
"The Volcano Lover: A Romance" (Farrar, Straus & Giroux) is the third novel from essayist and filmmaker Susan Sontag. Set in 18th-century Naples, in the shadow of Mount Vesuvius, it tells the story of the widowed British ambassador to the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies and of the beautiful and intelligent young woman who comes into his life.
Books by Jan Morris have taken readers to far-off places such as Beijing, Hong Kong, Venice and Wales. The latest destination is "Sydney" (Random House), the former British penal colony down under that became a vibrant, sprawling city.
 
 More New Fiction
New for romance fans is "Dragonfly in Amber" (Delacorte), the second volume in Diana Gabaldon's trilogy, in which physician Claire Randall returns to the Scottish highlands and to the distant past; and "Wildest Dreams" (Fawcett Columbine), Jennifer Blake's historical novel of a woman who follows clues in an ancestor's journal to trek across Europe searching for the secret formula for the world's most sought-after perfume.
War is on the horizon in a pair of new novels: "Marking Time" (Pocket) by Elizabeth Jane Howard picks up where "The Light Years" left off, with the story of the Cazalet family and England on the brink of World War II; and "Imperial Kelly" (Crown) by Peter Bowen is another comic adventure for "Yellowstone" Kelly, who leaves the Western frontier to help his country in the Spanish-American War.
A white woman accidentally casts a spell that turns her most bigoted racial stereotypes into reality in "Negrophobia" (Citadel), Darius James' satire on racism; and a young Japanese-American woman tries to find her way in a world rife with disease and crime in Cynthia Kadohata's "In the Heart of the Valley of Love" (Viking), set in Los Angeles 60 years in the future.
In "The Van" (Viking), Roddy Doyle's third novel to feature the Rabbitte family, Jimmy Sr. and best friend Bimbo, both newly unemployed, become business partners peddling fish and chips throughout North Dublin from their beat-up old van.
Joseph F. Girzone's fourth novel to feature Joshua, the humble Christlike carpenter, is "Joshua in the Holy Land" (Macmillan). This latest adventure finds Joshua returning home to a violent Middle East and trying to show his followers the way to peace, in this world and the next.
In "Where Is Joe Merchant?" (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich), the first novel by singer Jimmy Buffett, rock star Joe Merchant is popping up everywhere - which is pretty strange since he committed suicide five years ago. On the other hand, disappearing without a trace are a professor and all copies of his novel in the campus caper titled "Book" (Random House) by Robert Grudin.
For readers who like more than one plot per book, there are "Plan B for the Middle Class" (Norton), short stories by Ron Carlson; "The New Treasury of Great Racing Stories" (Norton), edited by Dick Francis and John Welcome; and "Open Doors" (Knopf), four novellas in one compact volume by the late Italian writer Leonardo Sciascia.
 
 For Armchair Crime-Solvers
A host of new mystery and detective novels take readers on crime-solving expeditions throughout the United States, from Boston to Los Angeles - with a side trip to Canada.
"Eyewitness to Murder" (Donald I. Fine) by Sophie Belfort is the third novel to feature historian Molly Rafferty and her Boston detective fiance, Nick Hannibal. When one of her former teachers is murdered, Molly puts her wedding gown back into the closet and travels to Europe in search of clues.
Another Boston sleuth, John Cuddy, takes on his seventh case as he investigates a seemingly routine insurance claim involving a beautiful Amerasian model that turns out to be anything but routine in "Shallow Graves" (Pocket) by Jeremiah Healy.
Meanwhile, Los Angeles Police Detective Peter Decker and his wife, Rina, are tackling their fifth mystery in "False Prophet" by Faye Kellerman. The couple are called onto a case involving the attack of a Hollywood superstar's daughter, whose story seems more theatrical than factual. And when a Mexican-American feminist finds a child's body on a Los Angeles street, she goes looking for the murderer in "Eulogy for a Brown Angel" (Arte Publico) by Lucha Corpi.
In the nation's capital, Fiona FitzGerald, Washington socialite crime-solver and senator's daughter, is on case No. 5, the murder of a newspaper gossip columnist, in "The Witch of Watergate" (Donald I. Fine) by Warren Adler.
There's something missing in a trio of new mysteries: As New Orleans black detective Lew Griffin searches for a missing person, he comes to realize that his life is lost, too, in "The Long-Legged Fly" (Carroll & Graf) by James Sallis; missing jewels, along with a kidnapping, prompt the head-scratching in "The Double Minded Men" (Scribner's), the third Martha's Vineyard puzzler by Philip R. Craig; and Jessica James' mom shows up with her new husband and he promptly disappears, setting the stage for "Eagles Die Too" (Doubleday-Perfect Crime), Meg O'Brien's fourth mystery to feature the Rochester, N.Y., investigative reporter.
"Flashback" (Scribner's) by Ted Wood is the eighth adventure for Reid Bennet and Sam, the one-man, one-German shepherd police force in Murphy's Harbour, Canada. Hopes for a peaceful summer are shattered by a gang of teen-age thugs and the surfacing of a corpse.
Surfacing, too, is a new sleuth named Finley, the hearing-impaired heroine of "Crossed Wires" (Carroll & Graf) by John E. Simpson. Finley has many friends - as well as a murderer - among the correspondents in her computer's electronic bulletin board.
And there are two mysteries wrapped up in "The Small Bang" (Random House) by Jack Fenno: One is in the plot, which concerns the disappearance of a British physicist skiing in the Alps, and the other is the true identity of its author, whom the publisher says is "a well-known literary figure" writing under a pseudonym.
 
 Thriller-Dillers
Is a solution in the cards for forensic sleuth Dr. Kay Scarpetta? In Patricia D. Cornwell's "All That Remains" (Scribner's), a jack of hearts is the puzzling clue in the deaths of four young couples found murdered in the dense woods of Virginia.
A 200-foot fall put a woman into a coma 20 years ago, but when she comes out of it, the boyfriend who was convicted of attempting to muder her escapes from jail - but is it to reunite with her or to finish the job? That's one of the dilemmas in Fran Dorf's "Flight" (Dutton).
Some "homestyle" terror awaits in Evelyn Anthony's "The Doll's House" (HarperCollins), named for a luxury hotel in the English countryside that just might be headquarters for an international terrorist ring; in Barbara Michaels' "Vanish With the Rose" (Simon & Schuster), which finds its heroine in an 18th-century mansion looking to uncover some secrets from the past; and in Anne D. LeClaire's "Grace Point" (Viking), where a mother and daughter searching the attic for Halloween costumes come across some pretty authentic ones - four perfectly preserved human skeletons.
The thrills in "Corsican Honor" (Dutton) by William Heffernan come courtesy of the Mafia and international terrorists; and things heat up in Phoenix when a couple of con men and a mob don meet on a collision course, as told in "Flamingos" (Doubleday-Perfect Crime) by Marc Savage.
Other new thrillers are fueled by various dilemmas: a young adopted woman searching for her biological parents finds a murder mystery in "Blood Kin" (Morrow) by Marjorie Dorner; a bicentennial pageant in a small New England town brings with it some strange and dangerous goings-on in "So Shall You Reap" (Doubleday-Perfect Crime) by Marilyn Wallace;
A dedicated young woman doctor charged with malpractice and manslaughter must prove her innocence in "Doctor on Trial" (Morrow) by Henry Denker; a highly respected historical writer with a twisted interest in children is the featured player in "A Fatal Attachment" (Scribner's) by Robert Barnard; an international crime network and the murder of a presidential appointee are the concerns in "Black Dragon" (Morrow) by Christopher Hyde;
There's a revolution in Peru that puts some Americans in danger in "Fire Storm" (Orion) by Marc Iverson; and a former student radical who can no longer remain underground is the focus of "Revolution No. 9" (Mysterious Press) by Peter Abrahams.
Authors of first thrillers include Michael Dimercurio, whose "Voyage of the Devilfish" (Donald I. Fine) takes place in U.S. and Soviet nuclear submarines in the Arctic Circle; Anne Farell, whose "Deadly Deception" (Simon & Schuster) concerns a young woman whose life is threatened soon after she inherits her father's empire;
John Abbott, author of "Scimitar" (Crown), about a man hired by a vengeful head of state to assassinate a world leader (whom readers will easily recognize); and Craig Smith, author of "Ladystinger" (Crown), the story of a female scam artist who learns that changing partners can be a dangerous move.
 
 The Newest Nonfiction
In 1988, Neil Sheehan won a Pulitzer Prize and a National Book Award for "A Bright Shining Lie," his view of America's tragic involvement in the Vietnam War. In "After the War Was Over" (Random House), Sheehan describes his return to Vietnam and his visit to wartime capitals Saigon and Hanoi 15 years after the war's end.
"A Ship to Remember" (Morrow) by Michael Blow offers a history and a mystery - the history of the Spanish-American War and the mystery of the sinking of the battleship Maine, which precipitated America's entry into the war.
Other "watery" titles include "The Great Deep" (Random House), James Hamilton-Paterson's exploration of "The Sea and Its Thresholds"; "The Flood From Heaven" (Morrow) by Eberhard Zangger, a geoarchaeologist with a new theory about the lost continent of Atlantis; and "Venice" (Thames and Hudson), featuring the city of canals in 90 color photos by Dorothy Bohm.
In "Murder Machine" (Dutton), New York Daily News reporters Gene Mustain and Jerry Capeci examine the Gambino family and the world of organized crime in New York. Half a world away, an inside look at Soviet political life is revealed in "The System" (Times Books) by Georgi Arbatov, a Kremlin official since the 1960s and the Soviet expert on America.
Three new books celebrate life in the United States: "The American Homeplace" (Crown) by Donald McCaig, who combines his experiences and the observations of his rural Virginia neighbors to tell the story of rural America; "The Uncertainty of Everyday Life 1915-1945" (HarperCollins), Harvey Green's chronicle of life in America between the world wars and the fifth volume in the "Everyday Life in America" series; and "Big Muddy" (Dutton) by B.C. Hall and C.T. Wood, a cultural portrait of the Mississippi River fashioned from the authors' trek along Route 61, the old river road that runs from Minnesota to Louisiana.
If you've ever wondered what would happen if a female ex-Marine tried to teach English to a class of unmotivated and unmanageable high school students, you can find the answer in LouAnne Johnson's "My Posse Don't Do Homework" (St. Martin's).
 
 Who's New in Biographies
If nothing else, Princess Diana, Al Capone and Sen. Robert Kerrey have one thing in common - each is among the subjects of new biographies due out in August.
St. Martin's Press has a pair of offerings for Royal Family watchers: "Crown Princess" (St. Martin's) by Josephine Fairley is a biography of Diana; and the life of Di's mum-in law is told in "The Queen: A Revealing Look at the Private Life of Queen Elizabeth II" by Douglas Keay.
"Beyond Center Court: My Story" (Morrow) is by pro tennis champ Tracy Austin, with Christine Brennan; rackets of another sort are found in "Mr. Capone" (Morrow), Robert J. Schoenberg's chronicle of the life of one of America's most notorious men; and speaking of notorious men, there was Hitler, whose foreign minister, Joachim von Ribbentrop, is profiled in "Hitler's Diplomat" (Ticknor & Fields) by John Weitz, the menswear designer.
Waltzing and flying through life are "Waltzing Matilda" (St. Martin's) by Ivy Harper, the life of Nebraska Sen. Robert Kerrey, a former 1992 Democratic presidential hopeful; and "Flying Through Hollywood by the Seat of My Pants" (Birch Lane) by Sam Arkoff, the filmmaker who gave us "I Was a Teenage Werewolf" and those 1960s beach movies.

 

End of Document
