

Stamps In The News: Honoring 150 Years of the U.S. Naval Academy
 The Associated Press
October 27, 1995, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 486 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH, For AP Special Features
Body




The U.S. Naval Academy celebrates its 150th anniversary with the issuance by the U.S. Postal Service of a colorful new 32-cent stamp heralding the rich traditions of the Academy at Annapolis and its emphasis on seamanship, teamwork and character.
The new stamp features a 44-foot racing sloop against a background of the Academy at Annapolis, Md. There are 20 such sloops at the Academy - 16 for training and four for racing. One of these "44s" won the Annapolis-Newport race in 1992.
Atop the stamp is "United States Naval Academy." At the bottom is "150th Anniversary 1845-1995."
This is the second such stamp honoring the Naval Academy. A 5-center was issued May 26, 1937. It depicted two midshipmen next to the official seal of the Academy.
First day of issue postmarks may be obtained by purchasing the stamp at your local post office, affixing the stamp to your envelopes, addressing the envelopes and placing them in a larger envelope. Send to: Customer Affixed Stamps, U.S. Naval Academy, Postmaster, Annapolis, Md. 21401-9991. The deadline for ordering is Nov. 9.
---
Tanzania and World War II
Tanzania, a former British protectorate in East Africa, has released a sheetlet of eight different stamps commemorating the end of World War II. The new stamps depict the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, the North African campaign, the Battle of the Atlantic, the war fought in the Soviet Union, the D-Day invasion of Normandy, the Holocaust as symbolized by the barbed wire of the Nazi concentration camps, the war in the Pacific, and the dropping of the atomic bomb on Hiroshima.
A souvenir sheet also was issued with this set. It features the 1940 aerial "Battle of Britain." In the nonstamp portion of the sheetlet, depicted are the raising of the flag by American Marines on Iwo Jima and the atomic bomb attack on Hiroshima.
These stamps are available at your local post office.
---
Turtles of the Maldives
The turtle has received philatelic recognition by the Maldives in the Indian Ocean. A set of 12 and a souvenir sheet hail the "Turtles of the World."
One species, the hawksbill turtle, is shown on four 10 rufiyas stamps. Eight other species are of 3 rufiyas denominations identified by their common English names - the spur-thighed tortoise, the aladabra turtle, the loggerhead turtle, the olive tidley, the leatherback turtle, the green turtle, the Atlantic ridley and another view of the hawksbill. A second portrayal of the green turtle appears on the souvenir sheet.
The stamp set is the latest Maldives philatelic tribute to the World Wildlife Fund. Each of the stamps also bears the logo of the WWF - a panda.
There are between 200 and 250 different species of turtles, most of which live in warm and temperate regions of the world. Scientists say the turtles were among the earliest reptiles going back to the Triassic Age - before the arrival of dinosaurs.
The turtle stamps are available at your local dealer.
 Load-Date: October 27, 1995

 

End of Document
