

Stamps In The News: The 50th Anniversary Of UNICEF Is Commemorated
 The Associated Press
December 29, 1995, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 502 words
Byline: By SYD KRONISH
Body




In 1946 the United Nations Children's Emergency Fund was established to help war-shattered countries mend the lives of their young people. Fifty years later UNICEF still helps and protects children in more than 140 countries of Asia, Africa, Latin America, the Middle East and Eastern Europe.
To commemorate the 50th anniversary of UNICEF, the island of Jersey in the English Channel will issue a set of six stamps featuring some of the children and areas of the world which have benefitted from the Jersey Overseas Aid Committee. The stamps are scheduled to be released in February.
The 19 pence shows children and a map of Sudan, Somalia, Kenya, Angola, Malawi and Madagascar. The 23 pence has a worldwide view of children in need. The 30 p depicts a map and children of former Yugoslavia and Albania. The 35 p portrays children of St. Kitts and Nevis and Bolivia. The 41 p pictures youngsters of Afghanistan, Nepal, Bangladesh, Vietnam, Sri Lanka and the Maldives. The 60 pence features children in the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu.
To obtain these stamps and official first day covers, write to the Jersey Post Office, P.O. Box 304, St. Helier, Jersey, JE1-1AB, or contact your local dealer.
---
Smithsonian Institution Honored
On the schedule of the U.S. Postal Service for 1996 is a stamp honoring the 150th anniversary of the Smithsonian Institution. The Smithsonian in Washington, D.C., was started by an act of Congress on Oct. 10, 1846, and signed by President James K. Polk. The new stamp will feature a stylized treatment of the first Smithsonian Institution building. Also known as "The Castle," the building was designed by James Renwick and constructed between 1847 and 1855. Today, the Smithsonian is an education and research complex with 16 museums and galleries, as well as a national zoo.
---
Orchids Favored By Gibraltar
Five new stamps have been released by Gibraltar displaying its orchids in their beautiful colors.
The Bee Orchid has colors varying from very pale to strong pink and is seen on the 22 pence. The Brown Bee Orchid, says Gibraltar, is the least colorful and among the rarest of the local orchids. It is shown on the 23 pence. The 24 pence depicts the Pyramidal Orchid which is the tallest of all local orchids and also is considered very rare. The 25 pence has the Mirror Orchid, also rare, with its bright blue patch. The 26 pence illustrates the Sawfly Orchid, the largest and most colorful of all Gibraltar orchids but perhaps the rarest of all.
The stamps are available at your local dealer.
---
Passenger Trains Featured
St. Vincent and the Grenadines in the East Caribbean have released a set of six $ 1.50 stamps featuring "Great Passenger Trains of the World."
Pictured on the stamps are: the German Federal Railway E14-03, the French Train A Grand Vitesse, the British Railways Class 87 Electric Train, the Chinese "Beijing" Locomotive Railways, the American AMTRAK Turbo-Train, and the Swedish State Railways Class RC4 Electric Train.
These stamps are available at your local dealer.
 Load-Date: December 29, 1995

 

End of Document
