

Star Trek Exhibits Span the Century - the 23d and 24th, That Is
The Associated Press
July 16, 1993, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 710 words
Byline: By ALEC D.B. McCabe, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Bat-eared, bug-eyed and extended-eared aliens from more than 25 years of Star Trek explorations have beamed into Manhattan for the summer, bringing enough memorabilia to fill the starship Enterprise.
Props and costumes from the original 1960s series are on view at the Hayden Planetarium, while uniforms, props and new! improved! aliens are ensconced at the Museum of Television and Radio, which is showcasing an exhibit through Oct. 3 based on the 6-year-old syndicated series, "Star Trek: The Next Generation."
Both exhibits have the cooperation of Paramount Communications, which produced both "Star Trek" and its successor, as well as an even newer series that began in January called "Star Trek: Deep Space Nine" and six feature films.
The Hayden Planetarium Star Trek retrospective, which runs through next March, comes to New York from the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C.
Visitors lined up a half-hour early on opening day recently to catch a glimpse of Mr. Spock's rubber ear tips and period-piece costumes - complete with miniskirts - that seem more neo-Nehru than outer space.
That's not to mention a model of a Tribble, the limbless, purring furball that once turned the U.S.S. Enterprise into an intergalactic petting zoo. Fans of the series also get the chance to sit in a replica of the chair that served as headquarters for Capt. James T. Kirk in the original series, and can hitch a ride on the Starship Antares in a film in the planetarium's Sky Theater.
Celeste Cartagena, 22, confessed one motive for attending the exhibition: "I like Captain Kirk."
"Captain Picard is pretty sexy, too," she added, referring to Capt. Jean-Luc Picard, Enterprise commander in "Next Generation."
Besides costumes and a comprehensive display of props from the series, the Hayden exhibit also lays on a healthy dose of context for the show, which premiered on NBC in 1966 - suggesting that Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry was not exactly oblivious to the war in Vietnam, the civil rights struggle or the emerging drug culture.
The plot for an episode titled "This Side of Paradise," for example, has the Enterprise crew discovering a world whose inhabitants have fallen under the spell of plant spores that "make people friendly and loving, but leave them without ambition or creativity."
The exhibit at the Museum of Television and Radio, meanwhile, is essentially a homage to the costume, makeup and production designers who often create new creatures - and sometimes entirely new species - within two weeks, sometimes acting under such vague guidance as, "We need some bad aliens," according to a museum spokesman.
An entire gallery on the main floor is devoted to 14 mannequins professionally made up and clothed by "Next Generation" staffers in Los Angeles, plus uniforms worn on the show by, among others, Whoopi Goldberg, who plays a character named Guinan.
The results are eerily realistic: a Cardassian, lizardlike ridges running down to his shoulders, stares coldly into the room, while a cunning Ferengi flashes its beady eyes.
The exhibit also includes the heads of various alien beings, including three incarnations of an Allasamorph, a creature that hides its ferocious true self beneath a veneer of human form.
Among the props on display are a handheld phaser, which bears more than a passing resemblance to a miniature Dustbuster, and a headband-shaped electronic visor that enables LeVar Burton's character, the blind Lt. Cmdr. Geordi La Forge, to "see."
Downstairs, in the museum's main theater, visitors can catch highlights from six seasons of episodes from the "Next Generation" series, which has become one of television's highest-rated hour-long syndicated drama. The episodes are also available for viewing in the museum's video library.
The series premiere episode, "Encounter at Farpoint," takes a little time out for self-promotion.
"I was just wondering if most of our missions will be like this," says the Enterprise's second-in-command, Cmdr. William Riker, moments after the Enterprise crew has rescued, in the brink of time, two alien life forms that resemble enormous neon jellyfish.
"Oh no," replies Capt. Picard. "I'm sure most of them will be much more interesting."
Ingenious species, these humans.

 

End of Document
