

Sunday's Developments in the Soviet Union on the Baltics
The Associated Press
January 13, 1991, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 440 words
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




A look at Sunday's developments in the Soviet Union on the military crackdown in the Baltics:
---
LITHUANIA - The Soviet army imposed a 10 p.m.-6 a.m. curfew and named a military commandant for Lithuania after Soviet soldiers assaulted broadcast facilities in Vilnius. A high-level delegation from the Kremlin met with President Vytautas Landsbergis of Lithuania, who compared the military assault to the 1968 Soviet-led invasion of Czechoslovakia. A pro-Moscow group called the National Salvation Committee sought to present itself as the legitimate government. The Lithuanian legislature met all day in a heavily fortified parliament building surrounded by thousands of independence supporters who sought to protect it from Soviet troops. Lithuanian officials said 13 people were killed and 140 wounded in the pre-dawn attack on the broadcast facilities. The Soviet interior minister said the toll was 10 dead and 130 wounded.
---
LATVIA - Hundreds of thousands of people massed on the banks of the Daugava River in Riga to support Latvian independence, the independent Baltfax news agency reported. A Latvian legislative spokesman said lawmakers passed resolutions urging Soviet soldiers "to stop shooting their brothers in Lithuania" and asking Lithuanians to unite in their struggle "against reviving Stalinism and red fascism."
---
ESTONIA - Russian Federation Boris N. Yeltsin flew to Tallinn, Estonia's capital, to sign an economic cooperation agreement with the Baltic republic. He told Defense Minister Dmitri Yazov earlier Sunday that the Russian Federation opposes the use of force in Lithuania, Baltfax reported. The Estonian legislature, meeting in an extraordinary session, condemned the crackdown as "a superpower's aggression against a small, defenseless country." Entertainment programs on radio and TV were canceled out of respect for the dead in Vilnius.
---
KREMLIN REACTION - Soviet Interior Minister Boris Pugo, in an interview on Soviet television, accused Lithuanian demonstrators of opening fire on Soviet tanks and troops. Lithuanian parliamentary spokeswoman Rita Dapkus labeled Pugo's account as "ludicrous" and part of "a Soviet propaganda campaign that competes with the Stalinist period."
---
PROTESTS - In Moscow, Leningrad and the Georgian capital of Tbilisi, thousands of people marched in solidarity with the Lithuanian people and to protest the Soviet military crackdown. At the Moscow demonstration, hundreds of lawmakers led the protesters, who chanted "Hands off Lithuania!" Placards denounced President Bush for aiding "the bloody regime" in the Kremlin and compared Gorbachev to Iraqi President Saddam Hussein.

 

End of Document
