

Tales of the Philippines Go Beyond the News Reports
The Associated Press
December 13, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 459 words
Body




GINSENG AND OTHER TALES FROM MANILA.  By Marianne Villanueva. Calyx. 100 Pages. $ 16.95 Hardcover, $ 8.95 Paperback.
 
 For readers curious about the Philippines beyond the occasional news reports of natural or man-made upheavals, "Ginseng and Other Tales From Manila" is an introduction to a culture influenced by both East and West.
Its stories could describe any Third World country where poverty, violence, corruption and political repression are staples of life: A peasant woman, concerned mostly with her moonshine liquor and abandoned by almost all of her children, disappears after one of her sons kills a local military goon; a poor, good-looking man becomes a movie star, living a fast life until he tangles with a powerful man's violent and gun-happy son; and a writer is hired by a dictator to fabricate a heroic biography for him.
However, these stories also reveal the Filipino's rich mixed heritage - part indigenous, part Chinese, part Spanish and, more recently, part Hollywood-American. They ring true of the lives of Filipinos-Filipinas from different ethnic and economic backgrounds and of varying lifestyles.
From the prosperous merchants of Chinese descent to the genteel mestizos and mestizas of Spanish colonial times and to the peasants of time immemorial, the cultural melange that makes up this country of 7,000 islands is captured by Villanueva in her stories. She takes the reader from a poor, nondescript hamlet of several nipa (palm-thatched) huts to the glitter and gaudiness of modern-day Manila, and to the remembered gentility of the Philippines past.
In the title story, a man of Spanish descent (mestizo) and education is bewitched by the exoticism of a Chinese shop and the owner's daughter. The store and its bamboo scrolls, myriad fragrances, the daughter with a magical touch for the abacus, and the ginseng tea the man buys all serve to seal his fate.
The language is comprehensible, and ethnic terms are wisely used so that the reader can clearly picture a story's setting. However, there are also images and metaphors that transcend culture.
In "The Memorial," there is the moment when the political graffiti artist is found and killed by the authorities for his subversive art. His death is not explicitly described but is instead a metaphor, resembling something the artist himself might have drawn on a wall, which illustrates the pain and fear that one inevitably, unequivocally feels for his loss and the violence committed.
Most of these characters are in hard, desperate and often futile situations, the fate of most Filipinos. Their stories are rendered attractive, not through preaching or moralizing, but through clear, restrained and yet lyrical language and imagery.
 
 By Johanna M. Kiamzon
 
 AP Special Features

 

End of Document
