

Text of the Islamic Jihad Statement Given to Perez de Cuellar
The Associated Press
August 12, 1991, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1087 words
Dateline: GENEVA
Body




Here is the text of the Islamic Jihad statement that former hostage John McCarthy delivered to U.N. Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar. It was translated from the Arabic by the United Nations.
 
 In the name of God, the merciful, the compassionate. 'This is a message for mankind, that they may thereby be warned, that they may know that there is but one God, and that men of understanding may ponder it' (Holy Koran).
Mr. de Cuellar, Secretary-General of the United Nations.
We wish you every success.
You are well aware of the great importance of your role and position as secretary-general of the United Nations in the eyes of the people of the world, particularly the oppressed and downtrodden peoples who, even while we are on the verge of the 21st century, are still groaning and suffering under the yoke of tyrants, butchers and plunderers throughout the world.
You are also aware of the beneficial effect of your backing and support for the movement of the oppressed and persecuted peoples in the Islamic world, Africa and South America who are endeavoring to achieve independence, freedom and self-determination. Accordingly, your role must always be to support the struggle and jihad (holy war) of those people against the imperious and the usurpers. This is what those peoples have expected and still expect of you in order to prevent the United Nations and its secretariat from being transformed into a perjured witness through and in the name of which the most odious crimes and international conspiracies which are being hatched within its halls could be committed under spurious slogans calling for the maintenance of the security of the international community and world peace and emphasizing the need to combat terrorism, etc.
Mr. de Cuellar,
The role that the United Nations has played in our contemporary history, and primarily the approach that it has adopted towards the causes of the oppressed peoples of the world, particularly the cause of the Muslim people of Palestine, the usurpation of their land from which they have been evicted, the attempts of the Zionist enemy to exterminate them, the question of the occupied territories in Jordan, Syria and Lebanon and, subsequently, the Gulf crisis, gives us an extremely unfavorable impression of the situation of the United Nations, which has become a plaything in the hands of the superpowers, particularly America, the Great Satan, since your organization has become merely a cover to protect the interests of world imperialism and suppress the movement of the oppressed peoples yearning for the achievement of the independence. The established right of veto, which is still being exercised by the domineering superpowers, constitute a stigma of shame in the history of the United Nations, since this right of veto is worse than the law of the jungle and was introduceed in order to make sport of the destinies of the oppressed peoples of the world, as pointed out by our Great Departed Imam Khomeini (may he rest in peace). Where can we find justice, democratic principles, freedom, equality and human rights in resolutions that are dictated by the interests and ambitions of the superpowers and protected by the iniquitous right of veto?
Why has the United Nations been given an effective and important role to play in solving the crisis that arose in the gulf while it has been prevented from playing any role in helping to find a just solution to the question of the Muslim people in Palestine in spite of the fact that more than 50 years have passed since the Israeli enemy usurped the land of Palestine?
Why were the United Nations resolutions implemented immediately after their adoption during the Gulf crisis while none of the resolutions adopted in regard to the just Palestinian cause have yet been put into effect decades after their adoption?
What has the United Nations done to protect the human rights of Muslim and other oppressed peoples and to prevent the barbaric massacres that are being committed against them throughout the world?
Whenever an American, a Westerner or an Israeli is involved in a simple incident, there is an international hue and cry, all the United Nations organizations spring into action and governments throughout the world rise up in his defense under the slogan of the protection of human rights, in contrast to their attitude towards the massacres at Sabra and Shatila in which 5,000 defenseless Muslims were killed; the abductions of 3,000 Muslims in the eastern sector of Beirut, as well as four Iranian diplomats whose whereabouts are still unknown; the shooting down of a civil aircraft over the gulf, which led to the death of its 300 passengers; the barbaric massacres that were committed in the holy city of Makkah and the other equally odious massacres that have been committed against our people engaged in the intefadeh (uprising) in occupied Palestine, not to mention the savage massacres that are being committed against our people in Jabal Amil (south Lebanon), within sight and hearing of the international emergency forces, and the many other massacres that are being committed in Iraq, Afghanistan and Kashmir. This implies that the conventions that have been adopted to protect human rights have been formulated in such a way as to protect the nationals of the superpowers which, in their customary statements, attach no value to persons who do not hold their citizenship.
Where is the right to self-determination in the case of the Islamic and oppressed peoples in Palestine, Kashmir and Afghanistan? Do the United Nations conventions not make provision for the right of peoples to self-determination without tutelage or external colonialist interference and do they not regard the struggle for self-determination by various means, including force, as a legitimate and justifiable act that is in no way related to terrorism?
When oppressed peoples and societies demand freedom, independence, justice, a decent life and deliverance from those who wreak havoc with their countries, their resources, their beliefs and the future of the their children, can they be regarded as terrorist peoples and societies?
Where is the support that the United Nations should have shown for the peoples' movement throughout the world in resisting colonialist interference in the internal affairs of weak countries, as illustrated by America's actions in Nicaragua, Panama and Ethiopia, and in other countries as illustrated by the blatant daily actions of the Israeli enemy in the occupied territories and Lebanon?

 

End of Document
