

The Gulf In The Postwar Era: Visions From Different Nations
The Associated Press
March 7, 1991, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1049 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




With guns silent in the Persian Gulf, world leaders are facing the question of how to shape a lasting peace and foster political stability in the Middle East.
In the following reports, Associated Press correspondents describe views emerging in government circles in Britain, France, Germany, Japan, Saudi Arabia and Egypt:
---
LONDON - Nations of the Middle East will have to agree on a stable post-war order but must create and police the arrangement themselves, says Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd.
"You and I could go into a corner and write a perfectly rational plan for this settlement," Hurd said in a recent radio interview. "The difficulty is getting there … . We British can't impose anything, … nor the Europeans, nor the Americans."
He also told reporters in London that the British can't take a leading role, although "the United States is going to be crucial. Europe can be helpful."
Britain's colonial history is dotted with bruising attempts to impose its will on the Middle East.
Hurd stressed on a recent visit to the area that Britain hopes a postwar strategy for peace will develop from the Arab nations in the coalition against Iraq, particularly Egypt, Syria and Saudi Arabia.
Britain also supports an international peace conference on the Arab-Israeli conflict, though not immediately.
---
BONN, Germany - Germany has advocated a Marshall Plan for the Middle East after the war and suggests the European Community could serve as a model for the region.
Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher has also said the postwar order must be crafted by countries in the region with the assistance of the Western allies and the Soviet Union.
Without the Soviets, Genscher says, stability in the region cannot be guaranteed.
"Remember that the Marshall Plan wasn't only economic aid for a destroyed Europe, it was also an impulse for European unity," Genscher said in a recent interview.
The Marshall Plan funneled billions of dollars into Europe to rebuild the region after World War II, spurring economic growth and business confidence. Accompanying the plan were embryonic efforts at European unity.
Genscher has suggested that Persian Gulf countries establish an aid fund, similar to arrangements made under under the EC, in which richer countries underwrite the development of poorer neighbors.
In talks last week in Washington, Genscher said any Middle East solution "presupposes recognition of Israel's right to exist" and "the right to self-determination of the Palestinian people."
---
PARIS - France is again promoting an international conference on the Middle East but with a more narrow focus than previously suggested. France now suggests that only members of the U.N. Security Council participate.
In a speech last weekend, President Francois Mitterrand said such a conference should secure borders for Israel but also codify that Palestinians have a right to an identity and country.
France also favors replacing allied forces in the region with an Arab peacekeeping force.
Mitterrand faced some criticism after suggesting to the U.N. General Assembly last fall that an international conference on the Middle East be convened. Some felt he was placating Iraqi aggression.
As for Iraq, the government has hinted that Saddam Hussein should be toppled.
"One can only hope for the Iraqi people that the consequences of (Saddam's) grave errors will lead to … finding democratic expression," Defense Minister Pierre Joxe said recently.
---
TOKYO - Japan will keep the same low political profile in the postwar Middle East that it held during the Persian Gulf crisis, but may boost its role as an aid donor in the region.
The nation took a backseat to the allied coalition during the war and the preceding political crisis, providing no troops but promising $$13 billion in aid.
During the initial days of peace, Japanese officials have said they hope a postwar security structure will fall largely to Persian Gulf states, although they expect a larger U.S. presence in the region.
They will probably boost aid to poorer countries in the region, such as Egypt, Jordan, Turkey and Syria.
The Japanese are resisting a U.S. proposal to set up a reconstruction bank, believing instead in bilateral aid programs or institutions such as the World Bank.
In addition, Japan wants to campaign for Israel's compliance with U.N. resolutions on the Palestinians.
"We intend to strengthen our political dialogue with Israel, on one hand, and on the other … we are going to redouble our efforts for a direct aid scheme for the Palestinians," said a Foreign Ministry official, speaking on condition of anonymity.
---
DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia - Saudi Arabia favors a permanent Arab security force in the Persian Gulf, as agreed Wednesday by the Gulf Cooperation Council.
The kingdom is the council's largest and most dominant member. Other members are Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, Oman, Qatar and Bahrain.
Under the agreement, Syria and Egypt would provide the core of a permanent regional security force for weaker oil states. The council also stressed support for Iraq's territorial integrity, new Arab cooperation and the elimination of all weapons of mass destruction from the Middle East.
King Fahd wants non-Arab troops to leave the region, though Kuwaiti leaders have reportedly expressed interest in the continued presence of U.S. and British forces on their territory.
---
CAIRO, Egypt - With the defeat of its rival Iraq, moderate Egypt can expect a greatly enhanced role in the region.
Egypt believes a pan-Arab force should provide regional security, with support from U.S. military aid and other Western countries. Egypt would provide significant military muscle.
"Arab security will only be Arab," President Hosni Mubarak said in weekend speech. In return for military contributions, non-gulf powers Egypt and Syria hope to get substantial economic aid from their oil-rich partners.
Mubarak has hinted that the Iraqis would do well to rid themselves of Saddam. Three editors of leading Egyptian government publications did more than hint: they wrote that Saddam must go.
Egypt also expects to reap economic benefits from post-war reconstruction in Kuwait. Officials say Kuwait's government has promised a share in the rebuilding process to Egyptian companies.
Also, thousands of expatriate workers will return to Kuwait.

 

End of Document
