

The President and the Soldier: Eye-to-Eye at a Cold War Frontier
The Associated Press
July 11, 1993, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 401 words
Byline: By KELLY SMITH TUNNEY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BRIDGE OF NO RETURN, Korea
Body




President Clinton walked to the doorstep of the world's most reclusive nation Sunday and eyed the shadowy silhouette of an enemy soldier through drizzling rain.
"I looked at him and he looked at me," said Clinton. "And I wanted to wave, 'Come on over."'
The dramatic moment between a president and a soldier dramatized nearly five decades of agony and division, and a war that claimed 4 million lives, including 54,000 American soldiers.
Not since 1968 has anyone crossed the Bridge of No Return, where Clinton stood in the rain. The wood and concrete structure spans a brook amid weeds and wildlife in the desolate no-man's-land of the Demilitarized Zone.
It has come to symbolize this last theater of the Cold War, the bitter 1945 division between Communist North Korea and pro-West South Korea, and the three-year civil war that ended in 1953.
Clinton on Sunday became the first U.S. president to visit the bridge, the route home for thousands of prisoners from the civil war.
"Some day this will all be one country again," said Clinton, who appeared deeply moved. "I hope one day they'll be able to come in peace."
Five million Americans fought on the side of South Korea, along with 15 other nations under the banner of the United Nations Command, in the Korean War. More than 8,000 U.S. soldiers are unaccounted for.
Millions of Koreans on either side of the border remain separated from families, not knowing if loved ones are dead or alive. Four decades after the war's end, the border remains tightly sealed and there is no communication or travel between the two sides.
It is only at the Bridge of No Return, and the village of Panmunjom, that selected civilian visitors can eyeball the other side.
On Sunday, as Clinton walked the bridge in an olive drab jacket and an army baseball cap, two U.S. soldiers in combat gear stood guard watching a North Korean guardpost about 50 yards away. Others patrolled nearby.
The dramatic tone of the visit was heightened by thunder, lightning and patches of heavy rains. The president read the rusty sign near the end of the bridge that reads "Military Demarcation Line' and shook his head.
He told U.S. troops later: "When I stood on the Bridge of No Return and looked with my binoculars over at those young Korean soldiers, I thought to myself I wish they were free to walk across that bridge and be with us in peace and freedom. And someday, because of you, they will."

 

End of Document
