

The TV War We Saw, The War We Didn't See
The Associated Press
February 24, 1991, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 452 words
Byline: By SCOTT WILLIAMS, AP Television Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




We saw some of the ground war on TV. It was in our living rooms before we understood what we were seeing. It was instant war. Heat and serve. It had commercials.
This was the war we saw:
A white pennant fluttered in surrender on a ridge above a wasted, landscape;
A limping Iraqi whose left trouser leg is stained red with his blood;
A pair of dirty hands smoothes the white pamphlet of surrender;
A U.S. battleship, the USS Missouri, lights up the night with a salvo from its 16-inch guns;
A young Marine, wounded, lying in a U.S. Navy field hospital near Jubail, Saudi Arabia, talks to reporters;
A couple of anchors, Dan Rather and Tom Brokaw, dressed as if on an outdoorsy weekend, reporting from the blue-domed pool deck of the International Hotel in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia;
A burning oil wellhead flareup, and the black pall of oil smoke hovering over the Kuwaiti borderlands;
A retired general draws electronic chalk lines on the Persian Gulf map;
A subdued Saddam Hussein, in black beret and V-neck olive fatigue sweater, poses at the conference table with his revolutionary council; he's the only one wearing headgear;
A still photograph of the president and Mrs. Bush seated in St. John's Episcopal Church across Lafayette Square from the White House;
A monarch, Queen Elizabeth II, speaks to the British people;
A Saudi mechanized column, unopposed, penetrating "the berm," a plowed-up ridge of sand that marks Iraq's defensive perimeter around occupied Kuwait;
A column of Iraqi prisoners of war, halfway to the horizon, walks single-file past an allied armor column. There are hundreds of them. They sit and it looks like a line of dominoes falling; in the foreground a U.S. soldier at his "humvee" surveys them through binoculars;
A mechanized column of British soldiers flash the V-sign;
A Scud missile, intercepted above Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, explodes into a deadly white flower of shrapnel above the city;
A group of older men plays dominoes in Baghdad;
An Egyptian artillery battery's crewmen, nervous, excited, fire a salvo from their gun;
A shirtless Iraqi soldier kneels in the sand under the assault rifle of a watchful Saudi;
A tank silhouette rolling across the TV screen in the CNN "War in the Gulf" computer-graphics sequence of floating, golden letters outlined in metallic pink; another tank following.
We did not see the face of battle, or the fog of war, or even the opposition of a resolute foe;
We saw instant war, fed to us through the filter of military censorship, bounced up to "the bird" then out onto our television screens without the benefit of reflection, by a medium hungry for pictures.
Television showed us no tank battles, no skirmishes or firefights, no dead men.
It was the war we didn't see.

 

End of Document
