

The Terry Anderson Story: Part III; 'I'm a Syrian Colonel. You're Free.'
The Associated Press
September 11, 1993, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 2099 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




This is the third and final installment of the serialization of excerpts from "Den of Lions," Terry Anderson's account of his ordeal as a hostage in Lebanon.
In these sections, Anderson describes the misery of captivity, reports on his first contact with kidnapped mediator Terry Waite, and recounts his final day of captivity.
"Frank," "Tom" "John" and "Brian" are hostages Frank Reed, Thomas Sutherland, John McCarthy and Brian Keenan. "Robert" and "Nick" are Robert Fisk and Nick Tatro, fellow journalists who were based in Beirut. "Sulome" is Anderson's daughter. "Picco" is U.N. mediator Giandomenico Picco.
---
From "Den of Lions: Memoirs of Seven Years," by Terry Anderson. Copyright 1993 by TMS Corporation. Published by Crown Publishers, Inc.
---
This place is metaphorically, as well as literally, a hole. It's dirty and full of mosquitoes. The light, a bare bulb hanging from the ceiling, is never turned off. The guards are suspicious and unfriendly - one is "the Ghost," whom we've already had so much trouble with. He likes to sneak up to the opening of our cell above us and spy. Frank's cot is lying almost under the opening, and it's hard for him not to look at it under his blindfold, when he lies down. Whenever the Ghost appears, he accuses Frank of trying to see him. It's making Frank even more paranoid than he is. I offered to change places with him, but the guards wouldn't go along, for no apparent reason.
Once again, the depression is enormously deep. Only our physical misery distracts us from our black, endless thoughts. It's now March in southern Lebanon, and growing too hot for the heavy blankets we've been given, especially with three people's body heat raising the temperature even more. So it's a dilemma, either being stifled while hiding from the mosquitoes or being cooler and bitten in a thousand places.
It's so quiet most of the time, and the mosquitoes are so numerous, that just their combined whine keeps me from sleeping.
The chains are a very heavy emotional and psychological burden, as well as a physical one. Just to feel them even when I'm not moving drags me near to despair. And now they're very tight. The guards had been leaving them loosely around our wrists until the Ghost spied me managing to pull mine (with considerable effort and some pain) off my wrist. From then on, they were fastened tightly enough to sometimes cut off the circulation. Not that we could go anywhere even if we could get them off, with the metal grille and wooden door between us and the guards, and the guards between us and the outside, and a Shiite village surrounding us.
I've been feeding a tiny mouse that appears in the dead of night occasionally. I call her Mehitabel. She will sit for a while under Frank's bed, absolutely still, before dashing at an incredible speed to the foot of mine, then almost teleporting herself to the ledge beside the cot and finally close enough to snatch the little piece of bread I place next to my head on the pillow, usually while I'm dozing. When the hamsters sealed up the cracks in the wall with more concrete blocks and cement, she disappeared. Tom and Frank tried to convince me she was sealed up in the wall, but I refuse to believe it. She must have gotten away. …
I wake abruptly sometimes from the light dozing that passes for sleep these days, sweating and frightened. The dream is often the same: I'm free, and wandering through Beirut, or at the office, talking to Robert or Nick or some other friend, but I know I have to return to this prison. "I don't want to go back," I cry. "Well, just don't go back," is the bland reply. But they don't understand. There is some terrible compulsion, some obligation or promise I just can't ignore, and I have to. I just have to. "I don't want to wake with a chain on my leg again." And then I wake up, and at the first movement, I can feel the chain pulling at my ankle, and my heart plummets inside me.
I dream of Madeleine, too, and can feel her so clearly, the curve of her hip, the way she fits to me, the smell of her hair. It's so clear, so real, and I wake up to a terrible emptiness in my arms. I still can't think of her for more than a few moments at a time with the pain welling up, threatening to engulf me.
I can often feel the panic sneaking up, the weight of the months and years that have gone by while we lie on these mattresses, the incredible waste. I push it away, and busy my mind with mental games, or frantic efforts at conversation. Tom keeps careful track of the time - "This is my 500th, 600th, 700th day. It's 23 days till my birthday, till Christmas, till Easter." I ask him, snarl at him - "Don't tell me, Tom. I don't want to know." I can't stand to think about all those weeks, months, piling one on top of the other.
I pray. "God, give me strength, courage. Above all, calm acceptance. I'm grateful for my life, for all the things I've had. Even those so-short months with Madeleine were a gift. I've done so much, traveled so much. If I die tomorrow, OK, my life has been full. But this purgatory, endless, gray. Don't ask more of me than I can give. But I have to. If this is Your will, I have to."
Sometimes the acceptance comes, and I know I can just go on. Then the black misery comes again, and I try to push it away. Even when it does break through the deliberate busy-ness of my mind, and overwhelms me, I know by now that it will pass, retreat. It's hard to be so completely miserable all the time. But it never disappears completely. It's always there, in the background of my mind, waiting.
---
September 5, 1990. My 2,000th day.
I've established contact with Terry Waite. He is next door, as John and Brian thought. I began by tapping on the wall and, when he tapped back, painstakingly tapped out the series 1-2-3-4 … to 26. Then, using numbers for the alphabet (1 a, 2 b, and so on), I tapped out our names. It took a while, but he caught on. I spent all one night tapping out a summary of all the news: Brian's release; Frank's release; the comments and promises of Iran, Syria, and others on hostages over the past year. Then the world news: the Berlin Wall's falling, communism's demise in eastern Europe, free elections in the Soviet Union, work toward a multiracial government in South Africa. All the incredible things that have happened since he was taken nearly three years ago. He thought I was crazy.
He's been in isolation all that time, without even a scrap of news. I knew he was brave, risking his life for us. But he must also be an incredibly tough man. Sounds sane and rational. When I apologized for dragging him into this with the letters we sent so long ago, there was no bitterness in his gracious reply.
It takes an agonizingly long time to exchange any message, what with stops and starts, misspellings and miscountings. My knuckles are already scraped raw from the concrete wall. But he obviously needs this contact so badly, I can't stop. I have had to tell him not to knock so loudly, and not to do it when the apartment is very quiet, late at night. The sound carries through the walls, and God only knows what they'll do if they catch us.
---
Baalbek, Lebanon. December 4, 1991.
The 2,454th day, and the last. The two new subchiefs came in this morning to say that I would be going home tonight. They talked with me awhile about various things. Strangely, they seemed mostly concerned with justifying themselves, and the last seven years. They said that their group now realized that this had all been a mistake, and they had gotten little out of it. They knew that the release last year of their brothers in Kuwait, the main goal they'd had in the beginning and for all those years, had nothing to do with the hostages they had held so long. "This tactic (kidnapping) is not useful. We will not do it again," one of them said. "We are not giving up. But we will use other means."
He did not explain what that meant, and I was not interested enough to pursue the subject.
"Trust Me" Ali was also there, and tried to start an argument about the same old subjects - the evil of the West, and how the Arabs, especially the Lebanese Shiites, had been oppressed. After a couple of minutes, I told him, "Ali, we've had this argument before. It doesn't settle anything."
One of the two subchiefs rebuked him in Arabic, and he went off to sit at the other side of the room. Then they asked me if I would make one last videotape, telling the world what they thought of the whole matter. I agreed, provided that I was allowed to say directly that this was their statement, which I was only reading and did not agree with. They had no objection. A man came in with a small video camera, and they gave me several pages, translated into English but in the usual florid Arab style. I read the statement, then added at the end, bluntly, that it was my captors' statement, not mine. But, I said, I thought it was important to hear what they had to say.
They gave me a new shirt, a pair of trousers, and some shoes, then left. I've been sitting here most of the day playing solitaire by candlelight - the electricity is out again - and listening to the radio. It's very strange - all the news reports say I've been turned over to the Syrians already, and am on my way to Damascus. They say there's a delay because of snow in the mountains between Beirut and Damascus. Of course, I'm in the Bekaa, and there's no snow.
It's been interesting, listening to the news analyses, and the recaps of the past seven years. The newscasts are full of praise for me - I don't know for what, except perhaps for surviving. It's like listening to your own obituary.
My mind is so full, spinning so fast, with so many things. Maddy - she's in Damascus, according to the radio, with Sulome. How is she feeling? What will we say to each other, after so much pain? What will I do? It is so good, with her last radio message, knowing she is waiting, and we can start again. What has it been like for her? How could she wait so long? I know the depth of my love. Hers must be so much greater, her strength so incredible.
I know the drill at Damascus. I've seen it so many times, as hostage after hostage has been released. The first ceremony at the Syrian Foreign Ministry. Thank everybody - the Syrians, the Israelis, the U.S. government, even the Iranians - ironic that, but necessary, I suppose.
I have less constraint than the others - I'm the last, except for the two Germans. I'd like to say something about the Lebanese held in Khiam prison by the Israelis, without trial, without a chance to defend themselves. But I'm not sure I should - Picco is working on that problem, and I would certainly not want to screw up any deal that my release is part of.
What do I say about my kidnappers? I have no love for them. The small kindnesses of a few guards over the years, the mostly decent treatment of the past few months, mean nothing compared to nearly seven years chained to a wall. But I don't hate them. I could, easily, but I cannot let myself. My life will begin again in a few hours. What am I going to make of it? Can I keep the faith and the determination of this time? Will I be able to keep from slipping back to the self-indulgence, the arrogance that I know I was full of then?
I am 44 years old. I don't feel it. I still felt young when I was taken seven years ago. I feel young today. But I'm not.
All my thoughts are fleeting, drifting in and out of my mind. I can't concentrate on anything, except the cards. Game after game of solitaire, interrupted for moments as I tune one radio or the other to another newscast. Lunch comes, then dinner. Mahmoud asks me, as he brings the food: "Are you happy?"
"I'll be happy when I'm free, Mahmoud."
It's dark outside now. They always prefer to wait for darkness to fall before making any move. The door opens. Several guards come in. I'm already dressed - I put on my new clothes two hours ago. Mahmoud says, as he has so many times, "Stand up."
No tape this time. Just the blindfold. The new subchiefs are there. One of them hands me a small bouquet. Half a dozen carnations. "Give this to your wife, and tell her we're sorry."
Someone takes my arm, guides me through the door, outside, and into a car. Another Mercedes, just like the one they forced me into so long ago. "Trust Me" Ali is in the backseat with me. He's ranting about Bush's ingratitude, his failure to mention the Khiam prisoners in his first statement about my release. I'm impatient. Shut up, man. I don't need any more of this shit.
The car stops. I'm pulled out. Someone puts his hand on my shoulder. "I'm a Syrian colonel. You're free."
 Load-Date: September 11, 1993

 

End of Document
