

The Streets of Rafah: Army on the Prowl, 'Shebab' in Hiding
The Associated Press
June 8, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 773 words
Byline: By SAID GHAZALI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RAFAH, Occupied Gaza Strip
Body




Outlawed Palestinian flags once fluttered from rooftops and electricity poles in trouble-prone Rafah and graffiti covered the walls of its shabby concrete houses.
The flags have vanished, along with the masked activists who roamed the town at night with submachine guns and pistols. The Israeli army painted over the graffiti, and no fresh slogans have been scrawled.
In Rafah and elsewhere in the occupied territories, the revolt against Israel has become routine, creating a sense of boredom and frustration. The economic deterioration and rising unemployment that followed the Persian Gulf War contribute to the feeling of hopelessness among Palestinians.
The united street force that confronted the Israelis early in the 42-month-old "intefadah," or uprising, has splintered. Now, there are sporadic outbursts of bloody feuding and a sharp rise in vigilante killings of Arabs accused of collaborating with Israeli authorities.
The rare quiet in Rafah, at the Gaza Strip's southern tip, comes from a new army policy of almost daily raids to arrest the "shebab" - the young toughs who kept the Palestinian uprising boiling on the streets.
"Just two weeks ago, the youths challenged the army, and when the army came, they disappeared," said Ghazi Gharib, a teacher at a United Nations-run school. As he spoke, 12 army jeeps passed, headed toward the town's Tel-Sultan refugee camp.
Ahmad Shikaki, a Rafah doctor, explained the army's new tactic.
"The soldiers go through the tiny streets of the camp to provoke stone-throwers to act, and then they can chase them to their homes," he said.
The troops used to dodge confrontations by staying clear of trouble spots. Now, the army's more aggressive tactics seem to have put it in control and the young toughs in hiding.
None of this means the Palestinian uprising is over for the 90,000 people of this sandy town and its three refugee camps.
School boys still unleash stones at army jeeps and manage to flee into buildings and alleys.
And soldiers still try to surprise the Palestinians. Activists say 250 people have been arrested in the past month. On one recent day, seven boys were arrested in raids on three schools.
More military checkpoints also are set up on main roads, and residents say plainclothes security men seize cars with Gaza license plates to get into trouble spots unnoticed and make arrests.
Some raids are conducted with such accuracy that Palestinians suspect informers have been given electronic devices to alert soldiers. Army officials deny such suggestions.
Nearly 400 alleged collaborators have been killed in the West Bank and Gaza, more than 70 of them this year, including 11 in Rafah. Israeli soldiers and civilians have killed about 830 Palestinians during the uprising. Sixty-six Israelis also have been slain.
The excitement of mass demonstrations early in the uprising is gone. Stonings and knifings have become the main weapons against the occupation that began with the capture of the West Bank and Gaza in the Six-Day War of 1967.
The political arena appears equally stultified. Palestinians feel the international sympathy they gained from their uprising has ebbed, and they accuse Israel of raising the same arguments that have blocked progress toward peace talks for years.
The Israelis blame the deadlock on the Arab states, saying their refusal to negotiate with Israel face to face means they have not yet reconciled themselves to Israel's existence.
The Palestinians want an independent nation negotiated by the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Israel opposes giving up occupied land and rejects talks with the PLO because of its terrorist activities. It is offering limited self-rule to the 1.7 million Palestinians in the occupied territories.
The Palestinians feel that the "window of opportunity" opened by the Secretary of State James A. Baker III in his four Middle East peace shuttles has been shut.
Fayez Abu Rahmeh, a Palestinian lawyer from Gaza mentioned as a possible negotiator with Israel, says any hint at moderation by Israelis or Palestinians runs into a stone wall from their own people.
"An Arab politician faces accusations of making compromises; an Israel politician faces similar charges," he said.
Abu Rahmeh said the uprising would end if only Palestinians could see a political settlement developing. But many people in Gaza say stopping the revolt would put them back where they were before the last three years of sacrifice.
Compromises are desperately needed on both sides, Abu Rahmeh said.
"In war, we demand everything, they demand everything. There are winners and losers. In peace, we are all winners. Peace needs great efforts," he said.

 

End of Document
