

The World's Eyes Are on the Clock - Saturday: High Noon
The Associated Press
February 22, 1991, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 435 words
Byline: By HARRY F. ROSENTHAL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




In trenches on the desert, men and women are looking at the clock. In capitals around the world, in homes where loved ones wait, in Riyadh and Baghdad, in the shelters of Iraq, eyes are on the clock. Saturday: High noon.
By then, according to President Bush's ultimatum, Saddam Hussein must "do what he must do - begin his immediate and unconditional withdrawal from Kuwait."
High Noon in Washington; 8 p.m. in Baghdad and Kuwait.
There was little indication from Iraq whether the deadline would be obeyed. But there was no ambiguity on the American side.
"I haven't heard as clear a deadline since Gary Cooper in 'High Noon,"' said Sen. John Breaux of Louisiana.
In the movie, Cooper's lawman gunned down a gang of bad guys after sweating out their arrival on the noon train. This time it is Saddam who has the deadline, from the president of the United States.
In the movie it was going to be "my life or his'n. … Look at that big hand move along - nearin' high noon."
Now, it's Marlin Fitzwater saying: "It's all up to Saddam Hussein. The ball is in his court. The question is, what is his answer?"
So the world waited for High Noon.
There already was a jittery readiness on the front lines.
"It's like perching on the rim of hell and waiting for orders to jump in," said a Marine lance corporal.
After hearing the president's ultimatum on a television set in an airplane hangar in Saudi Arabia, Army Lt. Col. David Smith of Dearborn, Mich., said "The president is doing the right thing. We should fish or cut bait."
They were ready, too, at command headquarters.
"U.S. forces are fully prepared for execution of any action or any order given by the president of the United States," said Brig. Gen. Richard Neal at the daily briefing in Riyadh.
What happens now?
Unless Bush is bluffing, Saddam must either begin his large-scale withdrawal from Kuwait or face what has been promised as the most violent land battle in history. He has 48 hours to get his troops out of Kuwait City, seven days to pull them out of the country, two days to release all prisoners. A few hours to get started.
Saddam Hussein had said the day before that Iraq would fight on because the only other course was one of "humiliation and darkness, after which there will be no bright sign in the sky or brilliant light on earth."
But the American troops said Friday, if Saddam doesn't get out of Kuwait, the bright sign in the sky and brilliant light on earth might be the burst of American bombs at the start of a full-blown ground war.
"I'm hoping he doesn't (get out)," said Army specialist Mary Lipsett of Polk, La., "so we can do our job and go home."

 

End of Document
