

The Technology of Dissent: Antiwar TV in the Satellite Age
The Associated Press
January 29, 1991, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 704 words
Byline: By SCOTT WILLIAMS, AP Television Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The satellites and information technology so vital to the TV networks' coverage of war with Iraq have become just as indispensable in mobilizing the voices and images of U.S. dissent.
"Fifty years ago, print was the medium of protest," said Marty Lucas, producer of the Gulf Crisis TV Project. "Nowadays you really need to have a TV camera to participate in the debate."
As the Jan. 15 deadline approached for Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait, the project broadcast two hours of programs for peace - town meetings, speeches, panel talks, protest songs and demonstrations against U.S. intervention.
So far, the Gulf Crisis TV Project has aired on 26 Public Broadcasting Service stations and more than 300 cable television stations. "I would be very surprised if less than 1 million people had seen it," Lucas said.
That's a conservative guess. PBS affiliates that aired the show included New York City, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Washington, Seattle, San Diego, Denver, Phoenix, Evansville, Ind., Lubbock, Texas, and Charleston, Ill.
The four shows, compiled from a network of cable access and independent producers around the country, were barely publicized. It wasn't "splendid television" but it was more than street theater.
There were reports on oil, arms, politics, and grass-roots organizing, with commentaries from distinguished U.S. activists, including disabled veteran Ron Kovic, former U.S. Attorney General Ramsey Clark, Daniel Ellsberg and others.
Perhaps more impressive is that the two-hour block was "presented" - transmitted on the PBS' internal system - by Philadelphia public TV station WYBE and accepted for review by more than 60 PBS affiliates.
The project - its logo is a TV showing the universal "NO" circle and diagonal slash superimposed on an army tank - began in August after Iraq invaded Kuwait and President Bush sent U.S. troops to Saudi Arabia.
It is a venture of Paper Tiger Television, a New York City production group, and the Deep Dish TV Satellite Network, which has distributed programs to community access stations and cable systems since 1986.
"The critical link is that Deep Dish has been cultivating this network for five years," Lucas said. "We worked closely with 100 stations and got 125 tapes from independent producers around the country. "Most were cable access programs, some were from peace groups, some were music videos from sophisticated L.A. production companies. It varied."
TV technology had made it possible for local, public access producers, using Hi-8 and Super VHS video cameras to create virtually broadcast-quality pictures and sound - at about a tenth of the cost of conventional TV.
The 125 raw tapes represented 80 to 90 hours of video - about two weeks of viewing. The project team logged the tapes and began editing.
When the four programs were ready, the project started mailing and phoning producers to "pull down" the shows from the satellite, and it encouraged local producers to tie project's shows into "wraparounds" with their shows.
"What surprised us is when we were able to hook up with WYBE," Lucas said.
WYBE, UHF channel 35, is Philadelphia's "second" public TV station. It went on the air last June with a full-time staff of eight and a budget of less than $$1 million. The project was its first time as a PBS "presenter."
"We're committed here at the station to making sure that voices that usually go unheard or rarely heard get to speak clearly," said Aaron Ezekiel, WYBE's general manager. "Now that the technologies are becoming affordable, it's very important to make sure the widest possible range of voices is heard."
The Gulf Crisis TV Project does not end here, the producers said.
Foreign sales - including Britain's Channel 4, a British Broadcasting Corp. subsidiary, and Australia's SBS network - and negotiations with broadcasters in Sweden, Germany and Japan have given it renewed life.
The project has begun working on six to eight more shows to air weekly on public television and community access channels.
"I think television can be a real tool for empowerment," said Cathy Scott, a project coordinator. "Not only a tool for people to get access to information, but a tool for people who are organizing to see affirmative images of their movement."

 

End of Document
