

The War is Over, But the Song - Disturbingly - Remains the Same
The Associated Press
August 14, 1995, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 321 words
Byline: By RAYMOND CHOW, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HONG KONG
Body




A Japanese-owned chain of karaoke bars has been playing its own version of World War II.
Customers at BMB karaoke bars can sing along to wartime songs including "Flower of Patriotism" and "Holding the Remains of my Comrade," while video screens flash images of artillery, warplanes and soldiers brandishing their weapons.
"Come back to me after you win the war courageously. … Listen to the sound of trumpet. … Follow the Japanese flag," read the Japanese-language lyrics at the bottom of the screen.
Angered by the selections, a 28-year-old Japanese resident of Hong Kong led half a dozen protesters in demonstrations at the bars in question last week.
"The songs wash out the guilt about killing," said Mary Odachi. "They only praise the Japanese army, lauding them for fighting for their country and invading other Asian countries. …
"But in fact, 50 years ago in Hong Kong, Japanese soldiers cut off people's heads, raped women … These are never mentioned."
The protests produced angry newspaper articles and a prompt promise by the karaoke operators to withdraw the songs.
"It is hard to imagine anything in worse taste," the South China Morning Post commented. "If German beer halls began echoing to Nazi tunes glorifying the holocaust, there would be an international outcry."
The two main Japanese karaoke chains, BMB and Big Echo, said the songs arrived pre-packaged from their head offices in Japan. BMB managing director Yoshiko Takano said she had never seen people singing the songs, "not even the Japanese customers."
But Ms. Odachi, who has lived in Hong Kong for six years, said she saw and heard the clips while working as a hostess in a karaoke bar.
She blamed the Japanese government, saying it had failed to educate the postwar generations properly.
"The young generation has no interest in the truth about the war. They feel it has nothing to do with them, that they were not the ones who killed the victims," she said.
 Load-Date: August 14, 1995

 

End of Document
