

The High Cost of Covering the President
The Associated Press
November 19, 1991, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 861 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER CONNELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




"Have plane, will travel," George Bush said the first time he stepped aboard the new jumbo jet Air Force One.
But these days, fewer and fewer reporters and camera crews are traveling with the footloose president.
A pool of a dozen media representatives always flies in the back cabin of Air Force One, but most of the White House press corps are staying home when Bush hits the road.
The White House staff, which flies for free, outnumbered the eight paying customers on the Pan Am Boeing 727 jet chartered to take the media to the recent dedication of the Reagan library in California. The media, including the Air Force One pool, wound up paying $ 4,503 a seat.
The White House travel office scrapped plans for a press charter on Bush's trip to New York earlier this month because so few reporters had signed up it would have cost almost $ 2,000 apiece.
The per capita charter costs began escalating last spring when the television networks began pooling tape and sharply curtailing the number of crews, correspondents and producers they send on the road.
"The networks are only sending one or two people where they used to send seven or eight," said White House press secretary Marlin Fitzwater.
Newspapers and radio networks that once covered the president wherever he went also have bailed out of the charter.
Some reporters fly commercial when they can, paring their expenses but driving up the costs for those left on the chartered plane. But a charter becomes a necessity when Bush stops in several cities in a single day. No one can keep up with him on commercial airlines.
Hard times in the news industry has made more editors and bureau chiefs decide they can live without full-time, out-of-town staff coverage of the president.
Editors already have access to transcripts of Bush's public remarks, and they can watch many events live on CNN.
ABC estimates it cost $ 170,000 last year for each person the network had traveling in Bush's entourage. That included hotel and meal bills, said George Watson, ABC's Washington bureau chief.
The White House billed reporters $ 10,115 for Bush's trip to Paris, London, Greece and Turkey last summer, including the costs of phones, filing centers and ground transportation. The tab came to $ 3,389 for a recent three-day Bush Western swing that started in the Grand Canyon.
"This is the ubiquitous Mr. Bush. He goes everywhere. He's a very costly fellow to cover," said Timothy Russert, NBC's Washington bureau chief.
Fitzwater, who relies on the press charter to transport his staff, stenographers, computers and duplicating machinery to set up filing centers wherever Bush goes, urged reporters recently to do "some serious soul-searching … as to your commitment to coverage of the White House and the president."
But in an interview, he sounded reconciled to drastic changes in future coverage of the presidency.
"I think there will come a time when print journalists and broadcasters will cover presidential events electronically without having to have corespondents on the scene in many cases," he said.
Some news executives and correspondents agree that not all of Bush's trips are worth covering.
"There's an awful lot of motion sometimes without much happening. ..." said Al Hunt, the Wall Street Journal's Washington bureau chief. "I think the president by and large tends to be overcovered."
Kenneth Walsh, White House correspondent for U.S. News & World Report, agreed.
"There's not much news value in many of his trips," he said. "You're stuck on the plane for hours or you're stuck in the filing center, and you don't have access to the senior staff."
But Carl Leubsdorf, Washington bureau chief for the Dallas Morning News, said that "often the news on the trip is not the news on the schedule."
"When he went to the Grand Canyon, the news turned out to be some tough statements on Iraq, and we were sorry not to have been there," said Leubsdorf, whose paper makes most Bush trips.
"The cost of man-to-man protective coverage of the president has just become exorbitant," said Gaylord Shaw, the Washington bureau chief for Newsday.
"It's economics, made worse by the fact that he travels so much," said Karen Hosler, White House correspondent for The Sun in Baltimore. "Fewer and fewer newspapers are saying we need to be with him all the time."
Jonathan P. Wolman, bureau chief of The Associated Press in Washington, said the AP will continue to travel with the president.
"AP needs to cover the president wherever he goes, whatever he does," Wolman said. "But the cost has shot through the roof, and we're anxious to find a less expensive way."
Watson, the ABC bureau chief, suggested smaller planes that would be less expensive, while New York Times bureau chief Howell Raines said the White House has an obligation to maintain charters.
"We will be there for all trips - as long as the price is within the realm of reason," Raines said.
Karen de Young, assistant managing editor of The Washington Post, said her paper would "cover the president, no matter where he goes."
But, she said, the Post will "look at every trip and weigh" whether it needs to send someone on the press plane or rely on its already far-flung correspondents.
 Graphic



 
With LaserPhoto

 

End of Document
