

The 'Snakeheads' Are the Masterminds
The Associated Press
June 21, 1993, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 502 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The Chinese call them "snakeheads" - the shadowy masterminds who oversee the twisting, illicit routes that tens of thousands of Chinese follow each year to the United States.
These are four people law enforcers have identified as leading immigrant smugglers:
-"Big Sister Ping" (aka Cheng Chui Ping) may have earned $ 30 million smuggling immigrants, according to Senate investigators. Her supposed guarantee: If you die en route, I compensate your family; if you're caught and sent back, you go to the top of the list for the next passage. As a result, she's become a Chinatown folk heroine.
Police say Ping, a 44-year-old Fujian province native who sneaked into the country about a decade ago, is now a resident alien. She has a Chinatown souvenir shop and recently purchased a building for $ 3 million.
Despite her reputation, Sister Ping has been arrested just once - four years ago in Canada, for paying an undercover policeman to smuggle aliens into the United States. She was carrying $ 50,000 and an address book with names of hotels around the world. "It was like a smuggler's safe-house handbook," said an officer. She was sentenced to six months in prison.
-"Ah Kay" (who has used at least a dozen aliases) reputedly heads a faction of the Fuk Ching street gang, the first one to move heavily into alien smuggling. Authorities suspect Kay of masterminding the voyage of the Golden Venture, the freighter carrying almost 300 immigrants that ran aground off Queens this month. He reportedly won the ship in a card game.
Kay, 28, came to the United States from Fujian in 1980. Deported in 1988, he was caught trying to sneak back in the following year via Mexico, but was released because he had forged identification. Later in the year he was arrested in Queens and charged with illegal entry to the United States. He was released pending the resolution of deportation proceedings. He applied for political asylum in 1991, but disappeared earlier this year.
The Fuk Ching gang has been racked by internal warfare: last month two of Kay's brothers were killed in a spectacular shootout at a safe house in New Jersey, apparently in retaliation for the murder in January of two men in Chinatown.
-"Fuchou Paul" (aka Wong Kin-fei) is the reputed founder of the Green Dragons, a gang in the borough of Queens. He is wanted on federal murder and extortion charges, and is thought to have fled to Fujian two years ago. Wong, 37, is suspected by police of having changed specialties - from smuggling heroin to smuggling immigrants.
-Lin Tao Bao, who caters to the affluent would-be immigrant, is a Taiwan native who has lived in Boliva for 20 years. According to Asia Inc. magazine, passengers are dispatched by Lin's wife in Fujian, met at the La Paz airport, taken to a safe house and given Bolivian residence papers.
Over the next several months Lin's clients relax and see the sights while their photos are substituted on stolen passports. Then they travel by land to Peru or Brazil for a flight to the United States.

 

End of Document
