

The Contenders for the 2000 Olympics
The Associated Press
September 19, 1993, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 1399 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




The cities vying for the 2000 Olympics:
 
 BEIJING
THE CITY: China's capital, population 11 million.
FINANCING: Projected revenues, $ 1.14 billion; projected expenditures, $ 1.02 billion; projected surplus, $ 120 million. Expenses include $ 400 million in capital construction and $ 620 million in operations. Main sources of funding include $ 500 million from TV rights, $ 330 million in sponsorships, $ 74 million in Olympic coin sales. The Ministry of Finance and Beijing Municipal Finance Bureau have pledged to pay in advance any expenses of the organizing committee. There are concerns that citizens may be pressured to make contributions, as happened when Beijing hosted 1990 Asian Games.
FACILITIES: Seventeen events will be held in existing facilities, all of which will require repair, renovation or expansion. Seven stadiums and gymnasiums will be built, including a 100,000-seat Olympic Stadium for the opening and closing ceremonies; a swimming complex, a gymnasium and a tennis complex; an aquatic sports center; an equestrian park; and a velodrome.
EXPERIENCE AND INFRASTRUCTURE: Beijing hosted 1990 Asian Games. Much of city's infrastructure is old or inadequate. Among planned or ongoing modernization projects are a new highway linking the airport to downtown, subway extensions, a new train station, a natural gas pipeline to ease pollution from coal burning, and an upgraded telecommunications system.
STRENGTHS: China is a major sports power and the world's most populous nation with nearly 1.2 billion people. According to the IOC, it has an "enormous potential" in marketing. All venues are close to Olympic village, except yachting. The government is solidly behind bid.
WEAKNESSES: China's human rights record is widely criticized, telecommunications systems are inadequate, roads can barely handle the huge increase in traffic in reent years, and the air is heavily polluted.
 

 
 SYDNEY
THE CITY: Australia's biggest city, population 3.7 million.
FINANCING: Total cost of staging the Games projected at $ 975 million. Biggest revenue earner would be TV rights, estimated at $ 488 million. Projected surplus is $ 4 million. Separate budget of $ 201 million for construction under way, to be completed whether or not Sydney gets the Games.
FACILITIES: Construction of a track and field and swimming center at Homebush Bay, west of city, will be completed in 1994. About 70 percent of venues are in place. Still to be built are 80,000-seat main stadium, athletes' village, velodrome and 16,000-seat gymnastics arena.
EXPERIENCE AND INFRASTRUCTURE: Melbourne hosted the 1956 Olympic Games and Brisbane the Commonwealth Games in 1982. Sydney hosted the world amateur boxing championships in 1991 and was main center for 1993 World Youth Soccer Championships. It annually hosts international tennis, rugby and cricket events.
STRENGTHS: All competitors would live in one village. Australia is politically stable with strong links to IOC. All venues within 65 miles of the village. Superior technical plan. Most visually appealing of the bidding cities. Has support of government and environmental groups. Has budgeted $ 24.5 million to pay for athletes and officials to get to Australia.
WEAKNESSES: Distance and perceived isolation. Time difference between Australia and major TV markets. Heavy traffic.
 

 
 MANCHESTER
THE CITY: Cradle of the Industrial Revolution, population 2.6 million.
FINANCING: Projected expenditure is $ 1.36 billion, revenues $ 1.45 billion and surplus $ 92 million. Sale of TV rights projected as biggest source of revenue, $ 600 million. Government has guaranteed financing through mixture of private and public funding.
FACILITIES: Nearly 70 percent of facilities needed for the Games already exist or are being built. New cycling center and gymnastics arena already under construction. Land being cleared for new 80,000-seat Olympic Stadium. Fifteen venues located in city center, 10 in walking distance of Olympic village.
EXPERIENCE AND INFRASTRUCTURE: London hosted Olympics in 1908 and 1948, while Britain annually stages Wimbledon and British Open. Manchester hosts major soccer and cricket competition at Old Trafford stadiums. City has major international airport, with new terminal and rail link. New metro link connecting city center with most venues to be completed by 2000. Games would be used for regeneration of city's run-down districts.
STRENGTHS: This is Manchester's second bid, and officials know the system and IOC members. Bid chairman Bob Scott, a former theater impressario, is dynamic and articulate. Bid has full backing of government, with Prime Minister John Major heading delegation in Monte Carlo. Compact venues, with 21 of 25 sites located within Olympic ring. Excellent technology and telecommunications.
WEAKNESSES: Image problem. Can't match the glamour of Sydney or the political pull of Beijing.
 

 
 BERLIN
THE CITY: Germany's capital, population 3.5 million.
FINANCING: Projected revenues, $ 2.1 billion; projected expenditures, $ 2 billion; projected surplus, $ 117 million. Expenses consist mainly of capital construction projects. Those directly linked to the Games amount to $ 1.1 billion, including construction of Olympic village, renovation and building of several facilities and expansion of the subway. Major sources of revenue are TV rights, calculated at $ 572 million; international sponsors, $ 112 million; national sponsors $ 343 million; sale of memorial coins, $ 864 million; ticket sales, $ 83 million.
FACILITIES: The Olympic Stadium, built for the 1936 Olympics, has a capacity of 72,600 fans, but needs renovation. It is planned for opening and closing ceremonies, soccer and track and field. A basketball arena for 15,000 fans is planned. Five venues are ready, six need renovation, eight are under construction, three are still in planning stages. Most venues will be within six-mile radius of the Brandenburg Gate.
EXPERIENCE AND INFRASTRUCTURE: The city hosted the 1936 Games, but staged few major sports events after World War II because of its special status until German unification. Germany, however, has wide experience in hosting major events, such as the 1972 Munich Olympics and the 1974 soccer World Cup. Germans are known for their organizational skill, and the country has good communications.
STRENGTHS: In Europe's biggest economic power, no shortage of sponsors should be expected. Germany has very good infrastructure and communications, and plenty of experience in organizing major events. The country has a strong sporting tradition and enthusiastic fans.
WEAKNESSES: Berlin has a vigorous anti-Olympic movement. The country's image has been tarnished by rigthist violence against foreigners, which raises embarrassing parallels to the 1936 Games overshadowed by the Nazis. Berlin has an unpredictable climate. The government's support for the Games has been perceived as lukewarm, and the bid was plagued by scandals.
 

 
 ISTANBUL
THE CITY: Capital of the Roman, Byzantine and Ottoman empires, population 8 million.
FINANCING: Projected revenue $ 1.2 billion; Expenditures $ 1.02 billion; Surplus $ 206.9 million. Capital construction costs are put at $ 427.6 million. Revenue from TV rights is estimated at $ 480 million.
FACILITIES: Existing facilities include the Olympic marina, a volleyball arena, canoeing and rowing venues. Facilities to be built or under construction include the Olympic village, Olympic park, Olympic center, equestrian, tennis complex and others. The IOC said only one existing venue meets Olympic standards, but plans for other venues appear very good. Fifteen of the venues would be within 10 minutes of the Olympic village.
EXPERIENCE AND INFRASTRUCTURE: Major events hosted or to be hosted in Turkey and Istanbul include Europe Under-21 soccer championship, European wrestling championships and European boxing championship. Infrastructure is being streamlined and modernized, including new buses and streetcars, construction of subway system, and plans for building a third bridge over the Bosporus Strait.
STRENGTHS: The "Olympic Law" adopted by the Turkish Parliament, which gives the organizing committee the authority to undertake all projects necessary to stage the Games and provides guaranteed revenues and financial security. Quality and quantity of accommodation.
WEAKNESSES: Little organizational experience, worries about security and terrorism, pollution, traffic.
 Load-Date: September 19, 1993

 

End of Document
