

The Best Hotels in the Country - And No Plaza
The Associated Press
April 19, 1995, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 379 words
Byline: By LARRY McSHANE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Barely a week after Donald Trump peddled the Plaza Hotel for $ 325 million, the Zagat Survey had bad news for its new owners: The Fifth Avenue landmark didn't crack the nation's top 100 hotels - or the city's top 10.
The Plaza, in fact, failed to register among the local 10 best for rooms, dining, service or public facilities. In the last survey, two years ago, it had ranked fourth for public facilities and 10th for best dining.
"Interestingly, the Plaza didn't rate," said Tim Zagat, one-half of the husband and wife team behind the guide, although it did receive a grade of "very good to excellent."
The newest Zagat Survey on U.S. Hotels, Resorts and Spas was released Wednesday. The survey is done every two years.
In the last guide, the Plaza failed to break the nation's top 50 hotels. In this edition, the list was expanded to 100 hotels - and the Plaza still didn't make the cut.
Trump, who bought the hotel in 1989, said he was not surprised by the ratings.
"We're in the midst of a major restoration program, doing hotel rooms, public rooms, and other facilities," Trump said through spokeswoman Norma Foederer. "Next year, we hope to be No. 1."
Last Tuesday, a Saudi prince and a Singapore-based hotel company announced they had purchased the Plaza.
Thirteen New York City hotels are among the top 100, although none made Zagat's Fab Five: The Mansion on Turtle Creek (Dallas), the Bel-Air (Los Angeles), the Halekulani (Honolulu), Windsor Court (New Orleans) and the Ritz-Carlton Buckhead (Atlanta).
The Mansion in Dallas received 28 of a possible 30 points for combining "European elegance with old-fashioned Texas hospitality and … top honors in dining, location and style."
The price: $ 213 a night.
Other tidbits from the guide: Avis must keep trying harder - Hertz is the No. 1 car rental company. Honolulu is the best resort destination. And the Ritz-Carlton, with seven hotels in the top 20, is the best hotel chain.
Nearly 12,000 people participated in Zagat's fourth hotel survey, including more than 750 people from the travel industry. The participants spent an average of 35 nights a year in hotels; the average hotel rating is based on more than 100 visits.
The overall rating is a combination of ratings for rooms, service, dining, public facilities and cost.
 Load-Date: April 19, 1995

 

End of Document
