

The Stew Still Bubbles in Potsdam; Dividing Europe, and the A-Bomb, Too
The Associated Press
July 18, 1995, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 577 words
Byline: By LARRY THORSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: POTSDAM, Germany
Body




A new destiny awaits a decaying villa where word of the first atom bomb test explosion reached President Harry Truman and where the world's statesmen, the victors in World War II, sealed the division of Europe.
"Truman was sitting at his desk in this room, and he looked up, and Stalin was here in this doorway," Robert S. Mackay says, relishing the lakeside villa's past.
Soviet dictator Josef Stalin came on short notice to get acquainted and stayed for a simple lunch of liver and bacon on July 17, 1945, in what Truman called the "Little White House," his home for two weeks during the Potsdam Conference held in a nearby palace.
Nazi Germany surrendered 10 weeks before the conference began. The Big Three - Truman, Stalin and British Prime Minister Winston Churchill - met to decide such questions as how to punish and rehabilitate Germany and how to finish the war against Japan.
Churchill lost an election during the conference, and Clement Attlee signed for Britain at the end.
Some historians have declared the Potsdam Conference as the start of the Cold War, solidifying the division of Europe that had been decided six months earlier at the Yalta Conference on the Soviet Union's Crimean Peninsula.
Hiroshima became an A-bomb target while the conference was under way, and the nuclear arms race probably began forming in the minds of Soviet leaders while they were here.
Mackay and a group of Americans would like to build a museum to German-American relations in what is now called the Truman House. Former East German Communists would prefer to feature Hiroshima as the building's historic legacy.
Mackay, an American businessman who has lived in Berlin since 1963, and his group plan a fund-raising campaign to buy the four-story mansion, which the group now rents. The heirs of the pre-war owners recovered title to the villa, which had been nationalized by the East German government, and put it on the market for $ 10 million.
Mackay's interest was piqued because so many Japanese visited the mansion, leading some people to think a Japanese buyer might turn it into a memorial for atomic bomb victims in Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
Indeed, word went out to Japan looking for a buyer to fund such an anti-nuclear-war memorial, said Hans-Peter Richter, of a group called the German-Japanese Peace Forum that was founded in West Berlin in 1987.
"We didn't find anyone, and I don't have much hope," Richter said.
The connection to Hiroshima is strong, he said. Truman was in the mansion on July 16 when he learned that the first atom bomb test explosion had occurred.
"Our aim is certainly not to discredit President Truman," said Hans-Juergen Scharfenberg, head of the former Communists in the Potsdam city council. "But we want to make it clear that the city of Potsdam has an important relation to the dropping of the atomic bomb on Hiroshima."
Mackay said his group was not averse to talking about the bomb but wanted the context of the decision to be made clear, "that there might have been good reasons for dropping the bomb, and it might in the end have saved many Asian lives as well as U.S. soldiers."
His group wants to have the little square in front of the house renamed Truman Platz. Now it is part of Karl Marx Strasse.
"Truman is a massive figure today. He drew the line, stood up for West Berlin, started the policy of bringing Germany back into the ranks of civilized nations," Mackay said, bemoaning the lack of streets named after Truman in Germany.
 Load-Date: July 18, 1995

 

End of Document
