

The Iraqis Are Back … On The Air
The Associated Press
July 11, 1991, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 499 words
Byline: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KUWAIT CITY
Body




Every afternoon, the Iraqi invaders come back to Kuwait.
Turn on your radio, and the threats boom out in the harsh accents of an Iraqi officer: "Anyone found walking on the streets after the 5:00 p.m. curfew will be shot."
But this time, it's mostly a laughing matter.
A popular serial on Radio Kuwait gives dramatized snippets of the Iraqi invasion - especially incidents that portray Iraqi soldiers as witless.
Writer Mubarak Hashash guarantees that all dialogues are based on real incidents, although when pressed admits taking poetic license to show Kuwaitis a little braver and Iraqis a little dumber.
"It helps people lift the weight off their chests, helps them relax," he says.
There was the time the guards at a checkpoint ordered a man out of his vehicle. He stepped out of the Japanese car and its voice computer started intoning: "You left your key in the car."
The Iraqis drew their Kalashnikovs and yelled, "All right come out with your hands up!"
The title of the program "Makrush Tah Bikrush" is a proverb that tries to capture the rapacious spirit of the invasion. It has no exact English equivalent but comes across as "A banquet drives a beggar mad."
"They were like soldiers that had come from another century," said Hashash. "They knew nothing about modern life, modern technology. It seemed like a comedy to us."
The daily 15-minute shows, recorded by four or five actors, grew out of a desire to make documentaries. But they became so popular that 90 stories set to end this month has grown to 120. The best will be adapted for television.
Listeners call in all the time and stop the writer on the street with new incidents to build programs around.
There's the one about the Iraqi soldier buying extra large black garbage bags because he thought they were throwaway versions of the abaya, the head-to-toe garments women cover themselves with to follow Islamic dress codes.
One group of Iraqis thought bottles of hand cream were yogurt.
Most Kuwaitis find the show wildly funny, but some think it's too soon after the invasion to mock such a traumatic experience.
"It gets the anger out to laugh at the enemy, to show him as a stupid person," said psychologist Dr. Fawzia Dora'i.
"But they were not that stupid, otherwise how could they have done that to us?," he says. "The programs aren't doing anything to help rebuild the country."
Government censors laid down a few rules for the program, telling Hashash he could not make fun of other Arab nationalities and that insults like "you donkey", which can make blood boil, should not be used too freely.
Hashash is actually married to an Iraqi women from a family that has lived in Kuwait for decades.
His program has spawned more than a few discussions with his in-laws.
His wife's brothers tell him not to be too hard on the Iraqis, but he tells them, "You had your fun during the occupation, now it's our turn."
But he says it's his wife that usually gets the last word: "She tells me, 'The Iraqi secret police will kill you if they find you."'

 

End of Document
