

The New Elite: Nothing Like the Old One
The Associated Press
November 20, 1993, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 732 words
Byline: By JILL LAWRENCE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SEATTLE
Body




The power club that held its charter meeting at a rustic cedar lodge Saturday is as new to the world as its members are to each other.
It was a strikingly diverse group that lined up along the rail of a ferry boat, casual in jackets, scarves and sweaters, bound for a Puget Sound retreat and, perhaps, more neighborly relations.
"I hope we will all exchange telephone numbers and fax machine numbers," Philippines President Fidel Ramos said before the first-ever summit of Asian and Pacific leaders.
They range from the super-rich Sultan of tiny Brunei to the communist president of enormous China. Some reflect the enthusiasms and informality of the New World, others the reserve and tradition of Asia.
And yet, politicians are politicians the world over.
Chinese President Jiang Zemin's visit to a typical American family's home resembled nothing so much as one of President Clinton's studiedly informal campaign stops last year. He drank tea, toured the house and got into a detailed conversation about how much it cost, and gave out gifts to the children.
Clinton, however, didn't get the warm and cuddly treatment in his meeting with Jiang. The Chinese president gave no ground on human rights or other issues of concern to the United States - in fact he read Clinton a statement and barely engaged in conversation.
But that was only a momentary damper on the spirits of the hyperkinetic U.S. president. Large, restless and sociable, showing up all over town with speeches and small talk, Clinton seemed to personify America and all of its contrasts with Asia.
Body language spoke volumes. After his meeting with Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, Clinton shifted repeatedly in a chair that seemed too small for him. Hosokawa, meanwhile, sat quietly for the cameras with his hands clasped in his lap.
Within weeks of Clinton's inauguration last year, his Cabinet members bundled up and boarded buses for a retreat at Camp David in the Maryland mountains. The idea was to get to know each other and feel more like a team.
It worked for them - why not for heads of state? And so this weekend's invitations went out. "It's like all other human relationships," Clinton said Saturday after the unprecedented Blake Island talkfest. "The more we're together, the more natural it is."
Clinton, invigorated by House passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement, was not the only leader who came here riding an enormous victory.
Hosokawa was celebrating approval of a major political reform bill by one chamber of the Japanese legislature. And Thai Prime Minister Chuan Leekpai survived a no-confidence vote last week in his House of Representatives.
Chuan's reward was a coveted private meeting with Clinton, one of only four at the conference. "I admire very much the work that he's done in bringing democracy and human rights back to Thailand," Clinton said.
Hosokawa's reward was pressure to open Japan's rice market now that his political reforms are launched. Not so fast, he said, clamping a lid on expectations in classic political fashion. The reform package has another chamber to pass "and one has to be very careful in not getting this rice issue in the way," he said.
Ramos, the Philippine leader coping with the aftermath of the Marcos era, is getting his one-on-one with Clinton on Monday in Washington. Along with interviews here, he dispensed copies of his serious-minded book: "A Call To Duty: Citizenship and Civic Responsibility in a Third World Democracy," published by the mysterious "Friends of Steady Eddie," a takeoff on Ramos' nickname.
He spent much of the conference chewing a cigar. "I don't smoke it," Ramos said. "Smoking is bad for you. In an emergency, I eat it for lunch."
The newest leader at the meeting was a veteran 30-year politician, Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien. He came buoyed by his party's landslide victory last month but under protectionist pressure from his hurting constituents.
There was no contest for the richest person here - Brunei's Sultan Sir Hassanal Bolkiah, whose reported $ 37 billion worth is about six times his country's annual gross domestic product. Living conditions there are excellent - if you don't mind bans on movies, dancing and liquor.
The most rebellious leader was Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad, who boycotted Saturday's session. "I have no regrets," he said from home. "I am quite happy here, as you can see."
 Load-Date: November 20, 1993

 

End of Document
