

The Simple Apple: At the Heart of U.S.-Japanese Trade Relations
The Associated Press
July 17, 1993, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 697 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Consider the apple, the congressman said, an everyday snack in America, a costly delicacy in Japan. Forbidden trade fruit, it is an apt symbol of the challenge facing U.S. negotiators trying to get more American exports into Japanese markets.
Rep. Sam Gibbons pointed that out at a hearing the other day, asking the U.S. trade representative whether he'd ever eaten a Japanese apple.
Mickey Kantor, just back from the economic summit in Tokyo, said he had. "They were nice enough to have a basket of fruit in my room, which I think must have cost a fortune," Kantor said.
"Their apple isn't an agricultural product, it's an art form . .. it's a meal," said Gibbons, a Florida Democrat. Each apple is coddled and guarded while it grows, often gift wrapped after it is harvested.
It also is the subject of a 22-year trade dispute. Despite an agreement to open the market in 1971, Japan imports no U.S. apples, citing concern about agricultural diseases, insects and worms.
Obviously, apples are a small bite of the nearly $ 50 billion U.S. trade deficit with Japan. But the case illustrates the differences negotiators must resolve.
Even the new Tokyo agreement that set the framework for a year of trade talks is read differently in the two capitals.
Kantor said this is different from prior agreements that didn't deliver reductions in the trade imbalance. "No. 1, it's results oriented," he told the House panel, and that means specific measurements of progress toward more balanced trade.
But the Japanese rejected numerical trade targets, balked at a commitment to cut their $ 50 billion U.S. trade surplus in half over the next three years, agreeing to "sets of objective criteria," but leaving the definition for later.
"We've got some hard bargaining to go," Kantor said. "These are only the rules of the game."
The agreement was reached with a lame duck Japanese government that may lose its parliamentary majority in national elections on Sunday. The Clinton administration says that won't be a problem because the permanent bureaucracy really runs things anyhow.
There's already a side argument. In a letter on Tuesday, the Japanese threatened to withdraw from the planned talks if the United States should take punitive trade actions under its law against unfair trade practices.
President Clinton is making trade a priority in his economic game plan, saying freer, fairer terms for imports and exports will mean jobs for the United States and its trading partners. The preliminary arrangement with Japan, and another, including western Europe, that will help in the push for a worldwide trade agreement this year, were two of his trophies at the economic summit.
But they are only opening moves. "There is a tendency to come home and want to overstate what you have achieved," Kantor acknowledged. "This is going to be tough sledding."
The administration also is trying to complete a process the Republicans began, and extend the North American Free Trade Agreement to Mexico, despite labor and liberal misgivings. That will go to Congress in the fall.
Economically, progress toward a worldwide trade agreement probably would rank as the most important legacy of the Tokyo summit. Politically, a deal that really does reduce the $ 50 billion Japanese trade surplus with the United States would be the biggest plus for Clinton.
It is the most visible symbol of the trade problem. GATT and NAFTA are only initials. Japanese cars and TV sets are everyday reminders of that trade imbalance.
"This problem has, as all of you know, fueled resentment in our country," the president told a Tokyo university audience. "… It is clear that our markets are more open to your products and your investments than yours are to ours."
Kantor put it bluntly, telling the House committee that U.S. exports are effectively locked out of Japanese markets for the goods that account for about 65 percent of the trade imbalance, electronics, automobiles and parts, and computers.
He said that has to change.
"We're not trying to bash anyone," he added.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.

 

End of Document
