

The Nigerian Connection: Heroin Moves to U.S. Via Courier Condoms
The Associated Press
November 28, 1992, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1478 words
Byline: By GEORGE GEDDA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




He was Nigerian, 35 years old, and he flew from Lagos to New York a few weeks ago, his stomach stuffed with 125 condoms laced with balls of heroin. One condom burst about the time he arrived. Within a few hours, he was dead of a heroin overdose.
In drug war parlance, the man was known as a "swallower," part of an army of couriers that Nigerian drug lords have been using with increasing success to penetrate the lucrative American heroin market. It is a trade which the Nigerians have come to dominate.
The unfortunate Nigerian swallower apparently was done in by an 11-hour delay in the arrival time at Kennedy Airport. During the long wait, stomach acids ate away at the condoms and produced a deadly leakage of heroin.
"These people are walking time bombs," says Tom Mattina, a New York-based Customs Service official. "All you need is a leak."
Despite the risks, there does not appear to be a shortage of Nigerians and other West Africans willing to become swallowers. A few days' work can net them what it would take years to earn at a legitimate job back home. Depending on the circumstances, the pay usually ranges from $ 2,000 to $ 15,000; per capita income in Nigeria is about $ 250 a year.
Not all who apply are accepted. The drug lords have instituted a swallower selection process whereby if a candidate gags when fed an oversized grape, he is rejected. Those who are approved are fed a thick green okra soup before takeoff to facilitate the descent of the condoms into the stomach. Laxatives are provided to help the swallowers evacuate the condoms after arrival. Those who find condom swallowing distasteful can use alternate means, such as taping the drug to their bodies or sewing it into their clothes.
Despite stepped up law enforcement efforts at airports, officials believe that only about 5 per cent of Nigerian-sponsored smugglers are caught.
Tom O'Grady, who monitors the heroin problem at the Drug Enforcement Administration, says heroin trafficking via Nigeria was a manageable problem not long ago - only 27 arrests of West Africans with seizures totaling 7.2 kilos in 1983. By 1991, there were 802 arrests and 820 kilos seized.
As the odyssey of the ill-fated Nigerian swallower demonstrates, the Lagos-based drug barons shun efforts to smuggle heroin in large quantities, relying instead on individual couriers who carry small amounts. These couriers are a key link in a smuggling process that begins in Southeast Asia, where the heroin is derived from the bountiful supplies of opium poppy.
For the drug kingpins, the profits are huge. A unit of heroin, about 700 grams, costs about $ 6,000 in Bangkok and yields about $ 120,000 to the Nigerian kingpins. The street value of the 700 grams runs into the millions.
O'Grady says use of couriers is a virtually foolproof way to make big money. The profit margin is such that the traffickers are ahead of the game even if nine of 10 couriers are arrested. And an arrested courier, he adds, is of little use to law enforcement authorities because he does not know the true identities of the people he works for.
The couriers have been as young as 14 and as old as 75. A decade ago, the traffickers used Nigerians and other West Africans, for the most part, to deliver heroin. But when U.S. Customs agents began keying on West Africans, the traffickers responded by diversifying. They now utilize couriers of virtually every race, creed and nationality, and the ports of entry have been diversified as well. And the Nigerians nowadays find themselves in increasing competition with traffickers of other nationalities, such as emigres from the former Soviet Union who use Poland as a transit point.
"These traffickers are very, very wily, very, very smart. As we adjust, they introduce countermeasures," says O'Grady.
Still, the twice-weekly Nigeria Airways flights to JFK from Lagos - the only direct air service between the two countries - are the arrivals most heavily monitored by federal agents.
An average of 220 passengers are aboard each flight; officials believe 30 to 40 are heroin couriers. In October alone, 167 pounds of heroin were seized at JFK. Of that, they estimate 75 percent was brought in aboard flights originating in Lagos.
Nigerian nationals, officials say, accounted for over 40 percent of U.S. Customs seizures in the United States in 1990, more than any other country.
Melvyn Levitsky, head of the State Department's narcotics office, blames corruption among Nigeria's law enforcement officials. The Nigerians, meanwhile, insist that the root cause is the demand for heroin in the United States.
The Lagos government also claims that many Nigerians are strip searched on arrival at Kennedy. A Nigerian government document calls the searches "inhuman, embarrassing, disgusting and disgraceful."
Fulani Kwajafa, head of the Nigerian anti-drug agency, appealed to American reporters recently to send a message to U.S. officials who "see every Nigerian as a drug carrier. The contrary is the case. Search those who deserve to be searched - not just any Nigerian." His comments were quoted in the Christian Science Monitor.
Mattina, of the U.S. Customs Service, says less than 1 per cent of Nigerians arriving at Kennedy are strip searched because "pat downs" are a more effective way of determining whether a passenger is carrying narcotics. If a passenger is suspected of being a swallower, he says, an X-ray may be used.
Despite stepped up enforcement measures, there seems little doubt that the heroin war is being lost. With prices down and purity levels up, experts are warning that the heroin habit could ensnare a new generation of Americans.
"Cocaine use will drop like a stone; heroin use will come up," says Mark Kleiman, who conducted a study of heroin use for the Federal Office a National Drug Control Policy. "I'm taking all bets on having more heavy heroin users than cocaine addicts by the turn of the century."
Kleiman, an assistant professor at Harvard University's Kennedy School of government, says a recent boom in Southeast Asian opium production has pushed down the cost of heroin from about $ 2 per pure milligram in 1987 to about 90 cents last year.
Heroin also is becoming a more attractive addiction because users no longer need to rely on hypodermic needles. New blends can be snorted, like cocaine, or smoked, like crack.
Nigeria is by far Africa's most populous country and is a major source of oil for the United States. But as heroin has come to dominate the bilateral agenda, there has been a corresponding souring in U.S.-Nigerian relations. U.S. charges that the Nigerians are not taking the problem seriously have been met by angry rebuttals from Lagos that it is indeed giving the issue top priority.
U.S. officials were angered earlier this year when Nigerian magistrates refused to extradite two sets of brothers wanted in Maryland on drug trafficking charges. With the help of Nigerians arrested here who were linked to the drug lords in Lagos, U.S. investigators compiled a "foot-high" stack of documents implicating the four but the Nigerian magistrates said the suspects, if extradited, would not receive a fair trial in the United States.
But Nigerian President Ibraham Babangida overruled the magistrates and ordered all four extradited. As of mid-November, only one of the four had been arrested and extradited. The others were still at large.
Before Babangida's intercession, a State Department report said the Nigerian government "has as yet not shown the political will necessary to attack major drug trafficking organizations in Nigeria nor to devote adequate resources to the task."
The report says Nigeria is "increasingly identified worldwide as the source of a seemingly endless stream of heroin couriers. Nigerians operate sophisticated drug trafficking and money laundering rings spanning five countries."
"We see room for light years of improvement," O'Grady says, assessing the attitude of the Nigerian government. Among countries with which the United States is seeking cooperation in drug enforcement, O'Grady ranks Nigeria last.
The National Drug Law Enforcement Agency of Nigeria, created almost three years ago, expressed surprise after being informed of O'Grady's statements.
"On land, sea and air, we have remained unwavering in our total commitment to putting an end to the drug problem afflicting our nation," the agency said, suggesting that O'Grady was not fully informed about the extent of Nigerian cooperation.
O'Grady says, "You have arrests which occur in Nigeria but you don't have any convictions. You don't have any major traffickers going to jail."
The NDLEA says 205 suspects have been convicted on drug-related charges since the agency was founded in 1990. It adds that 391 others are on trial or awaiting trial. U.S. officials are hopeful cooperation improves once an expected change of government takes place in Lagos next year.

 

End of Document
