

The Newest Statesman On The Block Is As Busy as The Big Guys
 The Associated Press
October 24, 1995, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 575 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




When you're the newest, smallest fry in the geopolitical sea, you quickly learn to swim with the big fish.
So there was Kuniwo Nakamura this week, rubbing elbows with King Hussein of Jordan, talking environment with "Hillary," trading favors with Japan, and rehearsing for his five minutes at the U.N. rostrum, his chance to tell the world - the WORLD - what course to set for the 21st century.
If only the folks back home in Palau could see their president at the U.N. 50th anniversary celebration.
That's P-A-L-A-U. Rhymes with "Wow!" And that says it all for the beautiful sprinkling of far Pacific islands that this smiling, 52-year-old economist presides over. Not only is Palau the newest U.N. member, gaining independence just last December after a half-century as a U.S. trusteeship; it's also the smallest, with just 16,000 people.
And Nakamura can't wait to get back.
"Get me out of here!" he said Tuesday. "I don't know how New Yorkers can survive. Give me the slow pace, relaxed, more humane."
Actually, his New York digs looked pretty humane - a plush $ 500-a-night Grand Hyatt suite under Secret Service guard 32 stories above 42nd Street.
"It's extravagant for us," he conceded. "But they recommended it for security reasons. All I need is a place to sleep. I don't even need a bed."
Inhumane or not, Nakamura took advantage of his hectic four days in New York to run with the barracudas, the whales, and even some fellow small fish.
He and the presidents of Micronesia and the Marshall Islands held their own summit to compare notes and coordinate strategy on the American aid programs all three inherited as former U.S. Pacific island territories.
On his own, the hustling Nakamura engineered some diplomatic horse-trading with another benefactor, the government of Japan, exchanging his desirable Sunday speaking spot for Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama's original Tuesday slot. Japan now owes him.
But the high points of this short, solid, bespectacled man's turn in the global spotlight were the less serious encounters with the high and the mighty.
"I shook hands with Yeltsin, and Arafat, and Rabin," he reported. And at a group photo session for all 180-odd world leaders, he made small talk with his right-hand neighbor, King Hussein, and came away impressed with the Jordanian monarch's knowledge of Pacific geography.
"Even Mrs. Clinton knows about Palau," said Nakamura, who got to pose with Bill and Hillary for a memento shot at a black-tie reception in New York's Public Library, a gargantuan building that's as big as downtown Koror, Palau's tiny capital.
"She knew that Palau had a very clean environment, and diving spots, and so on," he said.
The busy islander topped off his social whirl Monday evening with the glittering U.N. anniversary concert of the New York Philharmonic, reached by flashing, wailing motorcade across town.
All the while, the soft-spoken, University of Hawaii-educated president was polishing and rehearsing his five-minute U.N. speech, an appeal on behalf of the Pacific environment and against nuclear testing that ends with an analogy likening the United Nations to his ancestors' ocean-crossing boats.
"We must all learn to sail together," he wrote, "if our voyage is to be successful."
Then, at 11:45 a.m. Tuesday, the moment arrived. As the neophyte statesman waited in the wings, his cue resounded through the General Assembly hall:
"His Excellency, Mr. Kuniwo Nakamura, president of the Republic of Palau!"
 Load-Date: October 24, 1995

 

End of Document
