

The Route to Western Georgia Leads to the Ousted President
The Associated Press
January 11, 1992, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 664 words
Byline: AP Photo NY5, By SERGEI SHARGORODSKY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAMTREDIA, Georgia
Body




The fighters who ousted Georgian President Zviad Gamsakhurdia may control the capital. But Gamsakhurdia is still the favorite in western Georgia, and his supporters are not giving up.
"The (new) military council is promising stabilization. But there will be no stabilization until the legal president returns," said 27-year-old Manana Ahvlediani, who rallied with 2,000 others in Kutaisi on Friday.
Kutaisi sits on the edge of a plain in the heart of western Georgia, where Gamsakhurdia was born. The region has become a stronghold of opposition to the fighters who took over the capital, Tbilisi, last week and drove Gamsakhurdia into refuge in neighboring Armenia.
As the 190-mile highway that leads from Tbilisi to Kutaisi and Samtredia rolls through mountain passes and over green plains, anti-Gamsakhurdia forces disappear and the heavily armed defenders of the president take over.
The military council earlier this week appointed its own envoys to replace Gamsakhurdia's hand-picked administrative chiefs in cities throughout the republic of 5.4 million.
Vladimir Toliashvili, the newly appointed envoy in Gori, 44 miles west of Tbilisi, said the town of 70,000 had been mostly calm since the fighting in the capital largely ended this week.
The pro-Gamsakhurdia administrative chief left "without any problems," he said, and even his underlings who stayed were cooperating with the new authorities.
"We have announced a curfew and everything is quiet," said Toliashvili, a schoolteacher who was born in Gori.
West of Gori a roadblock has been set up by the National Democratic Party, which supports the military council.
The situation is different 155 miles away in Kutaisi, an ancient city with about 250,000 residents.
A pro-Gamsakhurdia rally of 300 people swelled Friday afternoon to about 2,000, and Malhaz Dvalishvili, the military council's envoy in Kutaisi, seemed to feel far less secure than Toliashvili.
"They actively want to destabilize the situation. They are calling for civil disobedience and a general strike," Dvalishvili said of the pro-Gamsakhurdia protesters.
Dvalishvili, a Kutaisi native, was sitting in the heavily guarded city hall surrounded by fighters holding Kalashnikov assault rifles. He said he was greeted by an angry crowd when he arrived on Tuesday.
His guards fired into the air from city hall balconies to disperse the group. Protesters returned Wednesday and beat two opposition supporters, Dvalishvili said.
Then on Thursday and Friday, "there were demonstrations across the whole city." People carried portraits of Gamsakhurdia and chanted his name.
Dvalishvili claimed their numbers would dwindle when more information reaches the city through the news media, which resumed operation on Thursday.
Even so, he said, "there might be a confrontation of a civil war type. I hope it will not happen after they realize that the opposition clearly has more force."
Two armored personnel carriers in the hands of the military council guard the road leaving Kutaisi. But just two miles farther west, pro-Gamsakhurdia forces were erecting concrete barriers for their own roadblock.
Samtredia is Gamsakhurdia territory. The city of 67,000 is a major railroad junction for the entire Caucasus region and sits more than 185 miles west of Tbilisi.
An estimated 5,000 people from around western Georgia gathered in the city on Friday for a demonstration in support of the toppled president. A Soviet tank was parked in front of city hall surrounded by armed supporters of Gamsakhurdia.
"The council is a military junta that took power by force!" declared a speaker at the rally.
The envoy appointed by Tbilisi leaders to administer Samtredia arrived on Tuesday but was prevented from taking over, said Nodar Nadiradze, deputy editor of local newspaper, Samtredia News.
Nadiradze estimated that 90 percent of town residents support Gamsakhurdia. He said there had been persistent but unconfirmed reports of his supporters organizing military units in the nearby town of Zugdidi.

 

End of Document
