

The 'Incredible Shrinking Gov.' vs. the 'Out-of-Touch' Diplomat
 The Associated Press
October 9, 1995, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 409 words
Byline: By MARCUS ELIASON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HONG KONG
Body




Hong Kong's countdown to Chinese rule was marred Monday by another verbal skirmish between its governor and the British diplomat who helped negotiate the colony's return to Chinese sovereignty.
Sir Percy Cradock dubbed Chris Patten "the incredible shrinking governor" whose battle with China for democracy in Hong Kong had condemned him to the sidelines.
"Pretty tired old stuff," retorted Patten's spokesman, Kerry McGlynn, calling Cradock "a retired official completely out of touch with modern Hong Kong thinking."
The barbed exchange highlights the sharpening of political debate as China's 1997 takeover draws nearer and the lead characters vie to imprint their viewpoints on Hong Kong minds.
The sense of drama has been heightened by the Sept. 17 legislative election - Hong Kong's last under British rule - and last week's Chinese-British agreement on a package of measures to streamline the transfer of sovereignty.
The election, which handed critics of Beijing a sweeping victory, took place in the shadow of the mainland government's renewed threat to disband the legislature. The subsequent London agreement is being attacked for failing to tackle China's threat to the legislature.
Hong Kong people have grown familiar with periodic clashes between Patten, the populist politician, and Cradock, the China scholar and Foreign Office diplomat.
Cradock believes his negotiations with China more than a decade ago got the best deal possible for securing Hong Kong's democratic freedoms. Patten believes not enough was achieved, and, since arriving in 1992, he has implemented reforms to broaden democracy.
Cradock's latest salvo came Monday in an interview from London with Hong Kong radio.
Patten, he said, had inflicted "a good deal of damage" because it was his reforms of the electoral system that provoked China's pledge to dismantle Hong Kong's elected institutions.
The result would be "less democracy, less rule of law" for Hong Kong after 1997, he said.
Noting that Patten was absent from the talks in London that produced last week's deal, Cradock suggested the governor had written himself out of the script because "he's made himself so obnoxious to the Chinese."
"You have now the spectacle of the incredible shrinking governor," he said.
Patten denied he was sidelined, and Foreign Secretary Malcolm Rifkind backed him up, writing in Hong Kong's Sunday Morning Post that he worked closely with Patten on the contents of last week's deal with China.
 Load-Date: October 9, 1995

 

End of Document
