

The S&L Mess: Showing the Federal Government at Its Worst
The Associated Press
March 16, 1991, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 767 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




For an encore, the Congress that helped to produce the savings and loan mess has been performing a political shuffle before voting, grudgingly, to accept a bailout bill that couldn't be dodged.
It took longer than the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait to get the second, $$30 billion installment ready for final action by the House and Senate. That's because, as one House Democrat said, it is the least popular of programs, and, as another observed, nobody wanted to leave fingerprints on it.
Delay has been chronic, and costly, ever since the savings and loan mess began. While precise numbers are subject to political dispute, the earlier the government acts to shut down a failing savings and loan, the sooner the losses are stopped and the less it costs to pay off federally insured depositors.
The House finally approved the latest measure Wednesday night, by an 11-vote margin, after Democratic leaders negotiated terms with the administration. More Democrats voted no than yes.
"It is the easiest thing politically to say 'damn the S&L scandal,' " said Rep. Henry B. Gonzalez, D-Texas, chairman of the House Banking Committee, who had to compromise on some of the terms he wanted.
But having said that, there was no alternative to putting up the money. "… One way or another, it has to be done," said Speaker Thomas S. Foley.
It was, by a narrow margin that underscored the point made by Rep. Charles E. Schumer, D-N.Y., who voted for the measure as distasteful but essential.
"You can say, 'No, I will vote no, and hope my colleagues will pass it,"' Schumer had said. "That is a time-honored method of voting, but let me tell you, on this legislation, if it is not you, there are not going to be many of your colleagues to pass it."
The whole exercise is one that shows the federal government at its worst - political, parochial, bureaucratic, slow to react, quick to blame somebody else.
Republican administrations and Democratic Congresses both had a hand in creating the mess. The ironically named thrift industry got congressional clearance to go into ever riskier ventures - with increased federal insurance - while the Reagan administration eased supervision in line with its philosophy of deregulation.
Early efforts to start dealing with the problem stalled in Congress, in part because of pressure from savings and loan interests, which didn't want the government moving in on them. A 1986 proposal to replenish the S&L insurance fund with money raised from the industry itself was delayed for a year and a half, reduced and restricted before anything passed. All the while, bailout costs were multiplying.
The savings and loan mess gave the Senate its Keating Five case, and, in the House, figured in the downfall and 1989 resignation of Speaker Jim Wright.
It is not only divisive politically, it is stirring regional disputes, with northeastern and midwestern House members pushing a measure that would force Texas and other Sun Belt states with high S&L failure rates to pay a bigger share of the cost through special deposit insurance premiums.
The administration, which originally sought an open-ended appropriation that Congress would not grant, said nearly 10 months ago that the additional $$30 billion would be needed. The Senate finally approved the funds on March 7, after six days of debate, with one Republican suggesting that senators hold their noses and get done with it.
In the House, four versions of the bill were rejected on Tuesday. Democrats had demanded that the funds be tied to tighter supervision of the Resolution Trust Corp., the agency set up in 1989 to deal with S&L shutdowns and asset sales. Gonzalez also wanted requirements that minority enterprises get a bigger share of the bailout business, and special terms for lower-income families to buy housing units the RTC acquires from failed S&Ls.
The only one that got majority Democratic support would have required that bailout costs be counted against the deficit ceilings set in the 1990 budget deal. That would have forced the administration to propose tax increases or politically untenable domestic spending cuts, pinning S&L blame on the Republican White House.
Th low-income provision was part of the compromise that finally passed on Wednesday.
The administration already has forecast a need for $$50 billion more in the year beginning next Oct. 1. So the whole issue will be back for a reprise, and it probably will be played from the same political script.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 25 years.

 

End of Document
