

The Speeches Are Familiar, But Not the Setting
The Associated Press
October 31, 1991, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 579 words
Byline: By MARCUS ELIASON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MADRID, Spain
Body




The speeches were filled with familiar ingredients: history, religion, recriminations.
The difference was that Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel and Jordanian Foreign Minister Kamel Abu Jaber were speaking to each other in the same room.
The two men, brought together at the Madrid peace conference by Secretary of State James A. Baker III, delivered the same simple bottom line: Let's make peace.
But they were poles apart on how to do it.
"Land for peace," said Abu-Jaber.
"The issue is not territory but our existence," said Shamir.
The second day of the conference opened with the same stiff formality as the first, the Arab and Israeli delegations keeping to their opposing sides of the table and not exchanging greetings or handshakes.
Baker, who is chairing the session with Soviet Foreign Minister Boris Pankin, tried to set a relaxed tone by remarking that the parties had waited more than 40 years to negotiate and their Spanish hosts had managed to set up the conference in just 12 days.
It was the day's only light moment. The speeches that followed were solemn and emotional.
Shamir spoke first. Short, bushy-browed and wearing a blue-gray suit, the 76-year-old Israeli stood at the podium in the ornate royal palace hall and delivered his address in thickly accented English.
The nub of his speech was his invitation to the Arabs to come to Israel to start the actual negotiations. Abu Jaber did not react, but the question of venue is already a major sticking point.
Abu Jaber, a white-haired, 59-year-old political scientist, wore a charcoal suit and also spoke English. Both men spoke for about 30 minutes, each foregoing 15 minutes of their allotted time.
Shamir did not applaud after Abu Jaber's speech, although a few members of his delegation sitting behind him did clap their hands. None of the Arabs applauded Shamir.
Shamir recounted the Jews' centuries-old longing to return to their homeland in Palestine.
"Jews have been persecuted throughout the ages in almost every continent," he said. "Some countries barely tolerated us. Others oppressed, tortured, slaughtered and exiled us."
Abu Jaber made the Israeli delegates sit up sharply when he blamed the Nazis for the Arabs' troubles with Israel. It was Nazi anti-Semitism that "unleashed the passions of injured Zionism for which the Palestinians and Jordan have paid the price," he said.
Abu Jaber quoted Albert Einstein. Shamir quoted Mark Twain. The Jordanian quoted the Koran. The Israeli quoted the Bible.
Shamir portrayed the conflict as arising entirely from the Arab refusal to accept Israel in any form. Abu Jaber acknowledged that "most Arabs, out of a sense of outrage and feelings of injustice and betrayal, have refused since 1947 to contemplate accommodation."
He also spoke of a need "to rectify the mistakes of the past." But he decried "Israel's self-righteous attitude to live by its own rules alone."
The delegates listened solemnly to the speeches. Palestinian leader Haidar Abdul-Shafi leaned his head on his hand and took notes. Shamir leaned on folded arms, or back in his high-backed chair to gaze at Abu Jaber.
When he spoke, Shamir gripped his text firmly, but raised his finger once in the direction of the Palestinians when he reminded them that they had spurned past offers to negotiate autonomy for themselves.
"You could have been at this table long ago," he said.
Abu Jaber told a reporter he made eye contact with Shamir several times. Asked why they did not shake hands, he shrugged.

 

End of Document
