

The Friendship Force: Healing the Wounds of War
The Associated Press
November 20, 1993, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 779 words
Byline: By GEORGE ESPER, By AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: HANOI, Vietnam
Body




Myrl Allinder never prayed to God to save his life nor to kill the enemy when he was flying missions over Vietnam more than 20 years ago. "I was praying for peace," he said.
Jill Hubbs was only 10 when her father was shot down over North Vietnam more than 25 years ago. "I'm here because my dad is still missing from the Vietnam War," she said.
Myrl Allinder and Jill Hubbs journeyed half way around the world to Vietnam with The Friendship Force, seeking to mend the wounds of war.
They are among 14 Florida and Georgia residents who arrived in Hanoi Saturday with The Friendship Force. The Atlanta-based organization promotes friendship among nations through exchanges of citizens.
This is its first delegation to Vietnam. During their weeklong stay, the Americans will tour Hanoi and the countryside and sponsor a Thanksgiving Day celebration Thursday for their Vietnamese hosts. The Friendship Force said a similar Vietnamese delegation would visit the United States next year.
"I examined my heart every day in flying," recalled Allinder, who served two tours in Vietnam as a Marine Corps pilot during the 1960s. "I prayed for my wingman. I prayed for North Vietnam every day that I was here."
Allinder retired from the Marine Corps in 1987 after 29 years of service. Now 58, he lives in Clearwater, Fla.
He had not given any thought to returning to Vietnam until recently. His 32-year-old daughter, Julie Allinder, a reporter for WGST Newsradio in Atlanta, called him to tell him that she was thinking about going to Vietnam with The Friendship Force. She wanted to know if he had any ideas about interviews.
"Boy, my heart just jumped," he said. During the week the group is here, Allinder is hoping to visit his old bases in Da Nang and Chu Lai in central Vietnam.
"I'd just like to see if there's any remnants or anything left," he said.
Allinder helped rescue 300 Montagnard orphans ranging in age from 2 to 16 from the mountains near the Laotian border in 1969. Their parents had been killed in the war. But he doesn't really expect to find any of them.
He also helped build an orphanage and a school in Tam Ky in the same region.
"I don't have some of the real grievous wounds that many of our veterans do," he said. "I'm really coming to serve. I admire the Vietnamese spirit. And I'd like to do something to help the children.
"I work with teenagers in the summer. I'd like to talk to the Vietnamese government about letting me bring over a team of about 30 teenagers and build them an orphanage or a school or see if there is some project we could do next summer or the summer of 1995."
Jill Hubbs is now 36 and is an elementary school teacher in Jacksonville, Fla. She has a daughter, Sarah, who is 10, the same age she was when her father, Navy Cmdr. Donald Hubbs, was shot down over North Vietnam on March 17, 1968.
"I'm here to see if I can find out anything, any shred of truth," she said.
She is planning to meet with both American and Vietnamese specialists on those missing in action. By pure luck, on the Air Vietnam flight from Bangkok, she met Lt. Col. John C. Cray, the officer in charge of the U.S. MIA office in Hanoi.
"I just feel it's important that people of the two different countries have some kind of reconciliation, not only for the veterans but also for the Vietnamese people," she said. "When you come and do things in the name of friendship, I feel like I might be able to get some answers."
She said both her father and the Vietnamese who fought the Americans were doing what their governments asked.
"The war's over," she said. "I understand there's so many people that have bitterness and there's so much pain. There's so many feelings that were torn apart because of the war, Vietnamese and American families. I feel we need to get past that and get on with everything."
The Americans were scheduled to stay with host Vietnamese families but when they arrived they were told they would stay at mini-hotels that were family owned.
Hoang Cong Thuy, of the Vietnam-USA Society, said they could not stay with regular Vietnamese because their homes are small, their families are large and they lack toilet and other facilities.
"So we need the families who are well-to-do and who are better off and in a position to run mini-hotels," said Thuy. "This is the first time we try this. If it is a success, then next year there is another one."
Mary Thibaudeau, the group leader from Roswell, Ga., said that despite being put into mini-hotels, "the fact that we're here and we've made our first step is a great beginning. We would love to be staying in individual homes but everyone is happy to be here. I think a lot can be accomplished just by our presence here."
 Load-Date: November 20, 1993

 

End of Document
