

The Graying of the PLO Rejectionists: Sidelined and Seething
The Associated Press
March 16, 1994, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 704 words
Byline: By G.G. LaBELLE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DAMASCUS, Syria
Body




Onetime allies of Yasser Arafat are watching the PLO leader's latest balancing act and hoping for one final, fatal tumble.
Palestinian rejectionist leaders Dr. George Habash, Nayef Hawatmeh and Ahmed Jibril rail at Arafat's signing of the PLO-Israel accord that they see as an end - not a beginning - to the dream of a Palestinian state.
The three operate from a string of rundown offices in Damascus, armed with fax machines and protected by guards toting Kalashnikov assault rifles.
They express horror at the Feb. 25 massacre of 30 Palestinians by a Jewish settler in the West Bank, although the violence it spawned is to their advantage. They denounce peace talks as part of an American plot.
But the no-longer-young revolutionaries - Jibril is 57, Hawatmeh 58 and Habash 67 - seem destined to watch from the sidelines and seethe.
In the 1970s, they were on center stage when their guerrilla attacks on Israel and airplane hijackings gave Palestinians the label of "terrorists." They still talk of armed struggle, but their words have a hollow ring, and are eclipsed by the violent deeds of new Islamic fundamentalist movements.
Jibril's Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command is not very popular. Hawatmeh's Democratic Front is not much of a front. It split when a chief aide went over to Arafat's side.
Only Habash's Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine retains a substantial following.
Habash says he expects Arafat to move ahead toward peace.
"There is no other choice for Arafat personally," Habash said, explaining that Arafat would further undermine himself politically if he reversed course.
If the Palestine Liberation Organization and Israel finally implement their Sept. 13 accord, most Israeli soldiers will withdraw from the Gaza Strip and West Bank town of Jericho. Many people think that will renew the pact's popularity, now at a low point because of the delay in putting it into effect.
But the rejectionists refuse to believe in that outcome. Jibril predicts that anything less than a total Israeli withdrawal will turn the stone-throwing Palestinian uprising into a full-fledged war.
"We won't need our children to throw stones. We will have armed struggle," he says.
He expects guns to be available, too, since weapons will be given to the Palestinian police force to be formed under the peace accord.
"Either we would borrow them … or we would take them by force," Jibril says.
His prescription for battling the peace accord has as much to do with fighting Arafat as Israel. He calls the PLO leader "a cop" for the Jewish state and expects clashes with Arafat loyalists.
Habash, a courtly man educated as a physician, is upset at the idea of battles among Palestinians but says his men would fight if attacked.
His plan for opposing the peace accord has "three, four or five points," Habash says, launching into a long explanation of the need for Palestinian and Arab unity.
But then he talks of Arafat's "betrayal," and, in truth, little unity exists even on the rejectionist side. Jibril, Hawatmeh and Habash have split and regrouped over the years.
Now the three - all leftists who seek a secular Palestinian state - have allied with the fundamentalist Hamas movement that demands an Islamic Palestine.
Habash, a Christian, sits in an office where a carpet woven with Lenin's face hangs opposite a model of Jerusalem's Dome of the Rock mosque, Islam's third holiest site. He admits the only unifying force behind the Hamas-leftist alliance is enmity of the peace accord. Some reports say the two elements already are arguing.
Habash's hope for Arab unity fares little better. Even President Hafez Assad of Syria, once the rejectionists' best ally, is negotiating with the Israelis. Diplomats in Damascus say Assad is restricting the activities of the three opposition Palestinians.
Habash and Jibril are white-haired now, and Hawatmeh is graying. Habash's right hand is crippled from a stroke in 1979. Age has given Jibril a grandfatherly look even as the former Syrian army officer rails against American imperialist plots.
Like Arafat, all three men are 1948 refugees whose life in Palestine disappeared with the founding of Israel. Unlike Arafat, they are not thinking of going home soon.
 Load-Date: March 16, 1994

 

End of Document
