

The Vietnam Conundrum: How To Win the Peace
The Associated Press
January 2, 1994, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 693 words
Byline: By ROBERT DVORCHAK, AP National Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Perhaps it's an appropriate legacy for a war that sundered America's soul: Even among those with the strongest emotional stake in Vietnam, there seem to be as many opinions about lifting the U.S. trade embargo as there are about the war and the way it was fought.
For many veterans and their families, the stumbling block has a number - 2,248 - those fathers, brothers, sons and friends still unaccounted for 20 years after the last U.S. troops departed Vietnam.
But for others, like combat veteran James O'Brien, the embargo that prevents U.S. businesses from trading with Vietnam is the impediment to closing the book once and for all.
"Vietnam is a place, not a war. The war is over. Life does go on," said O'Brien, a Boston lawyer who still carries an AK-47 slug next to his spine from his days as a lieutenant with the Army's 173rd Airborne Brigade.
O'Brien, 47, has returned to Vietnam three times since 1991 for the humanitarian mission of opening medical centers to treat burns. He represents Holt International Children's Services, which works with displaced and orphaned children.
"If we continue to fight an economic war, we're going to be outflanked again. We will have lost the Vietnam War a second time," O'Brien said. "You don't get anything out of somebody by isolating them."
But many who fought in Vietnam believe in keeping out U.S. business, not to perpetuate the hostility but to get the fullest possible accounting of the missing.
"We would oppose lifting the trade embargo until we can resolve to our satisfaction the fate of our loved ones," said Larry Rivers, a Marine platoon leader who serves as national commander of the Veterans of Foreign Wars.
"Our attitude is not to punish Vietnam, but to get answers," Rivers said. "If history teaches us anything, the wounds of war finally heal. Normalization is going to come. The way to make it happen sooner is to finally have a real accounting of those left behind."
The 3.1 million-member American Legion also wants to pressure Vietnam by withholding U.S. dollars.
"The economic embargo is the only leverage the U.S. government has left to force Vietnam into providing the fullest possible accounting," said Bruce Thiesen, a Vietnam-era vet and the Legion's national commander.
And Michael Milne, executive director of the Veterans of the Vietnam War, agrees that the embargo keeps alive the issue of missing Americans.
"If relations are normalized, it's going to get buried," Milne said. "If big business gets in there, talks will simply fade away."
Except for humanitarian aid to orphans and limbless soldiers from the former South Vietnam, trade with Vietnam has been banned since April 30, 1975 - the day the U.S. Embassy closed during the North's conquest.
But in September, President Clinton eased the embargo by allowing American companies to carry out projects in Vietnam that are paid for by international groups like the World Bank. Clinton said lifting the trade ban entirely, however, hinges on Vietnam's accounting of missing Americans.
Elizabeth Stewart, the daughter of an Air Force colonel who was shot down and unaccounted for, favors normalizing relations to gain access to war records.
"The answers will only come when the book is closed and put on the shelf and we move into the post-embargo period," said Stewart, 39, a lawyer from Washington, D.C., who heads the POW Publicity Fund. "I support lifting the embargo as a means of finding answers on the missing."
But the National League of Families, which represents 3,900 families hoping to get to the truth about their loved ones, favors easing the sanctions only if Vietnam does its part.
"I've seen Vietnam promise ad nauseum to grant full and open cooperation, and then not grant it," said Ann Mills Griffiths, the group's executive director and the sister of a flier missing since 1966.
"Why would anyone think that if we did things in advance that they would do what they promised to do over and over and over?" she said.
"There's no animosity here. It's a matter of wanting answers. I just wish they'd hurry up. You can live with tragedy and death. But it's the uncertainty of not knowing that has driven this issue for so long."
 Load-Date: January 2, 1994

 

End of Document
