

Those Who Paid the Price
The Associated Press
March 8, 1991, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 3080 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: ALEXANDER CITY, Ala.
Body




Thomas Randall Jarrell's mother worked on the Support Our Soldiers rally March 2 at an Army National Guard armory. Two days later, her son died in a weapons accident in the Persian Gulf.
Jarrell, 20, is survived by his 17-year-old wife, Misty.
A 1990 graduate of Benjamin Russell High School, he had been in the guard for three years.
"He was more proud of being in the guard and being in that uniform than anything else," said a neighbor, Steve Walden. "He was just a boy. He had his whole life ahead of him."
Jarrell's mother, Tera Rice of Alexander City, has been active in the 214th Support Group. Leaders of that group said members are now doing what they can to help the family.
Walden said Army officials reported that Jarrell was accidentally shot by another soldier.
---
 
 James N. 'Trey' Wilbourn III, 28
HUNTSVILLE, Ala. (AP) - As public affairs officer for his unit with the Cherry Point Harriers, Marine Capt. James N. "Trey" Wilbourn filed reports of bomber pilots' flights in the Persian Gulf.
When his jet went down in a February bombing mission, no one immediately told of his fate. But on March 4, his family was told that his body and the wreckage of his AV-8B Harrier jet had been found near the Saudi-Kuwait border.
"He wanted to go over there and do this. Now that he's gone, there is not bitterness at all," said Wilbourn's sister, Sabrina.
Wilbourn, 28, dreamed of becoming a pilot.
He earned a bachelor's degree in aviation management from Auburn University in 1984 and his wings from the Marines in 1987. His squadron, known as the Tigers, was among the first American forces sent to Saudi Arabia.
On the first day of the war, Wilbourn and three other Tiger pilots attacked Iraqi rocket launchers and artillery positions. He reported seeing large, secondary explosions and did not feel the apprehension he expected.
A month later, he was shot down.
"You're not supposed to die at age 28," said his high school Spanish teacher, Kathy McGuffy. "But at least he died doing exactly what he wanted to do - not many people can say that. He died a hero."
---
 
 CALIFORNIA:
 
 Adrian L. Stokes, 20
 
 Eds: Goodno is cq.
RIVERSIDE, Calif. (AP) - Sgt. Adrian L. Stokes, an Army armored cavalry scout who died under enemy fire, loved to sing and travel, and joined the military to finance a college education.
Stokes, 20, was killed Feb. 26 when his armored personnel carrier was hit. He drove the vehicle with the 3rd Armored Division, which thrust into southern Iraq as part of a flanking maneuver.
His mission "placed him in harm's way," said Capt. Barbara Goodno of the Army public affairs office. Scouts "serve as the forward eyes and ears of the commander."
"He joined the military because he loved to travel and he wanted to get a college education," said his mother, Jacqueline Stokes.
"He didn't want to be there because of the fighting," she said, "but he said while he was there he would do the best he could."
Born in Baton Rouge, La., Stokes moved to Riverside in 1976 with his mother, father, Arthur, and two sisters and brother. He was graduated in 1988 from Ramona High School, where he was active in football, track and the choir.
"He was the type of child that would just sing all the time," Mrs. Stokes said. "We used to call him the bathroom singer."
Stokes enlisted in August 1989 and had been based in Germany.
---
 
 FLORIDA:
 
 Raymond E. Hatcher, 32
BRANDON, Fla. (AP) - Staff Sgt. Raymond "Randy" E. Hatcher loved to fish and was planning a fishing trip with his stepfather when he got home from the Persian Gulf.
Hatcher, 32, who was stationed at Fort Benning, Ga., was killed March 2 in Iraq when a trash fire accidentally ignited ammunition, officials said.
"It just sort of seems unfair, since it was all over with," said his mother, Carole Jones. She spoke from Hatcher's Fort Benning home, where she was helping his wife, Florita, and 2 -year-old son, Randy Jr., move back to Florida.
"But I think he opened up a lot of hearts while he was over there, because he was writing to four schoolchildren. … That made him feel real good to be able to do that," Mrs. Jones said.
She said her son, who was an infantryman, had been in the Army for 11 years.
"He believed in what he was doing," she said. "I guess what he was looking forward to most, he and my husband are fishermen, and he was looking forward to coming back and they were going to take a fishing trip together."
---
 
 Dodge Randell Powell, 28
HOLLYWOOD, Fla. (AP) - Army Staff Sgt. Dodge Randell Powell planned to retire to Germany, the country where he met his wife and which he came to love during his military service.
Now, Powell, 28, is being buried there. The combat engineer in the 82nd Engineer Battalion was killed Feb. 27 in the Persian Gulf War.
Nancy Eberhardt remembered her brother's sense of humor, love of music and diminutive size - he was 5-feet-2. He loved music and fishing.
"Most of the time I ended up protecting him," she said. "He was my little big brother."
He attended McArthur High School in Hollywood, then joined the Army.
He married his wife, Hedvig, of Bamberg, Germany, in November. They had only 12 days together before he was shipped to Saudi Arabia.
---
 
 GUAM:
 
 Roy T. Damian Jr., 21
AGANA, Guam (AP) - Army Spc. Roy T. Damian Jr. planned to make his career with the Army, his father said.
Damian, 21, of Toto, was killed March 2 when he stepped out of a vehicle and onto a land mine, military officials said.
Damian had last visited Guam in June, his father, Roy, said.
Damian also is survived by his mother Teresita; two brothers, Shawn and Joshua; and a sister, Marcia, Guam's entrant in the 1990 Miss Universe pageant.
Navy Airman Brent A. McCreight was remembered as an outdoorsman who was voted wittiest in his high school class.
His basketball team at Eminence High School posted the school's best record in recent history, 21-5, the year he was graduated, 1986. Billy Berry, a friend, said he and McCreight also went hunting, fishing, camping and golfing.
McCreight joined the Navy a few months after graduation.
"He was pretty excited about it and pretty proud," Berry said.
Single and the youngest of three children, McCreight had been expecting to be discharged from the Navy in February, said a sister, Melisa Hawkins.
He died just before Christmas when a ferry capsized as it returned 102 sailors to the USS Saratoga from shore leave in Israel.
McCreight also is survived by his parents, Danny and Delores McCreight of Eminence.
---
 
 MICHIGAN:
 
 Steven Mark Hansen, 29
LUDINGTON, Mich. (AP) - Army Staff Sgt. Steven Mark Hansen loved to hunt deer and to ski.
Hansen, 29, died March 1 in the Persian Gulf. His parents said they were told few details.
Hansen was graduated from Ludington High School, where his mother, Carole Schierholt, and his stepfather are teachers.
The next year he joined the Army. He was a combat engineer with C Company, 19th Engineer Battalion, part of Fort Knox's 194th Armored Brigade.
He was an outdoorsman who loved snowmobiling, cross-country skiing and hunting. "We went cross-country skiing together," his stepfather, Donald Schierholt, said. "He spent a lot of time with his father hunting deer."
Survivors include Hansen's wife, Sheryl, daughter, Stephanie, and son, Kyle, who live at Fort Knox.
---
 
 MINNESOTA:
 
 Daniel Joel, 23
DELAVAN, Minn. (AP) - Cpl. Daniel Joel, 23, was shy, but he excelled as a wrestler at Delavan High School, his mother said.
"Wrestling was his sport. That's what my two sons did - they kind of 'wrassled' around," Edna Joel said.
Joel, a Marine reservist, died March 4 in Saudi Arabia when the truck he was driving went out of control in loose sand, Marine officials said.
After being graduated from high school in 1985, Joel joined the Marines to learn to drive and repair trucks. He had been with the Marine Corps Reserve unit at Fort Snelling in the Twin Cities.
He went to the Persian Gulf with few qualms, his mother said. "He wanted to do his part," she said. "He was proud to be a Marine."
Joel won awards with other unit members for their ability to haul ammunition and build ammunition storage sites, Mrs. Joel said.
Joel last spoke with his family March 1, and said he'd be home around the first of May.
Joel leaves a wife, Gina, and two children.
---
 
 Scott A. Rush, 19
BLAINE, Minn. (AP) - At 19, Pfc. Scott A. Rush contemplated death in the desert in a letter dated three weeks before he was killed in an accident in Saudi Arabia.
He was one of two soldiers killed Jan. 19 when their bunker collapsed. A specialist in dismantling explosives, he served with Bravo Company, 317th Engineer Battalion, 7th Engineer Brigade, VII Corps.
"It is a weird feeling, looking around at friends and just people I know, wondering who is going to die, hoping it is not you, then again hoping it is you rather than a good friend," Rush wrote in a Dec. 31 letter to a friend.
"You have people that are glad to be here, saying we're going to get ribbons and combat patches. You just want to hit them. I just want to make it back," he added.
A 1989 graduate of Spring Lake Park High School, Rush was determined to join the military to get an education, said a friend, Mark Meisenholder.
"He was a real high-energy kid," said the principal, Glenn Martin. "He was very hard-working at the things he cared about, especially a trades and industries program at the school."
Rush had moved to Minnesota from Colorado, where he was born.
---
 
 NEW YORK:
 
 Kerry Hein, 28
SOUND BEACH, N.Y. (AP) - Kerry Hein's care package of instant soup, tortilla chips and caramels was ready for shipment to the Persian Gulf when his parents learned he had died in a helicopter crash in Saudi Arabia.
His parents covered the yellow ribbon on the door of their Long Island home with a large black bow, and mourned the young man who had dreamed of becoming a pilot since he was 10.
Hein wanted to become a commercial pilot, and joined the Army to get flying experience.
Hein was an avid basketball and lacrosse player. He also liked to laugh, and had a particular weakness for Monty Python.
He graduated from Rocky Point High School in 1981, and waited on tables to work his way through Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University in Florida. After graduation in 1985 he got married and joined the Army. He got his wings at Fort Rucker, Ala.
Hein arrived in Saudi Arabia on Christmas Eve as part of the Army's 507th Medical Company. His parents last heard from him Feb. 21.
His wife, Laura, who is expecting their second child in April, was with their daughter at Fort Hood, Texas.
The morning after the cease-fire, Hein's mother, Patricia, says she began to relax. "I went to work," she recalled. "I thought I'd come back at lunch and send the care package to Kerry." But before she could, the Heins were visited by a sergeant with sad news.
Although the Army said Hein had not died in battle, it was unclear why he crashed, and whether he did so before or after the cease-fire.
---
 
 NORTH CAROLINA:
 
 Kenneth Jerome Jackson, 22
CONCORD, N.C. (AP) - Pfc. Kenneth Jerome Jackson died in Saudi Arabia, and two of his relatives couldn't come to the funeral back in Concord, at the National Guard Armory.
His aunt, Joanne Carr, said her daughter and brother were still in Saudi Arabia.
Jackson, 22, was a member of the North Carolina National Guard's 1454th Transportation Company.
Jackson and Spc. Bobby L. McKnight, 52, of Dallas, N.C., died Feb. 17 when Jackson lost control of the tractor-trailer he was driving. McKnight was a passenger.
A 1987 graduate of Northwest Cabarrus High School in Concord, Jackson played football for two years. Relatives said he also played basketball.
Among his survivors are his parents and his 22-month-old daughter, Cherie Jackson.
Marine Cpl. Victor T. Lake Jr., 22, was an athlete who loved children and "always had a smile on his face," his uncle said.
On Feb. 28, his parents were notified he had been killed in Kuwait City the day before when a faulty grenade exploded.
Lake was graduated in 1987 from East Bank High School in East Bank, W.Va. He lettered in football and track. That September he joined the Marines.
He left for Saudi Arabia the day after Christmas.
Lake's uncle, Larry Jackson, said Lake spent his life helping other people. He had sponsored a child through Children's International; his parents are going to continue that.
"He always had a smile on his face, a gleam in his eye," said the Rev. Broken Oliver of the Open Door Baptist Church in Morehead City. "He had such an innocence about him. When you saw him, the impression it gave you right off was just wholesome, clean inside and out. He was very attentive with his eyes when he spoke with anybody. He was good-looking, manly. He was always very interested in children.
"I've never seen anybody's life as organized, as ordered and directed as his," Oliver said.
---
 
 OHIO:
 
 Jonathan Kamm, 25
MASON, Ohio (AP) - Army Staff Sgt. Jonathan Kamm, 25, was killed during the final hours of combat in the Persian Gulf War when his Blackhawk helicopter was shot down.
Kamm, a 1983 graduate of Mason High School, was a seven-year Army veteran.
He is survived by his wife, Donna, and an adopted son, Jeremy, 10.
Ellen Lambing, founder of Operation Orange Ribbon, a support group for soldiers' families, said Kamm's family had celebrated the end of combat, thinking that Kamm soon would be home.
"They were so happy when the cease-fire was declared, so happy that he'd be coming home," she said.
---
 
 TENNESSEE:
 
 Roger E. Valentine, 19
MEMPHIS, Tenn. (AP) - Roger E. Valentine worked part-time throughout high school and hoped to get a start on college by joining the Army.
Assigned to an artillery unit, the 19-year-old private died in the desert March 2, after the cease-fire.
"We were so happy and excited that the war was over and he was coming home," said his sister, Teresa Williford.
Valentine grew up in Texas and moved to Memphis to complete his last year of high school while living with his sister and her husband.
"He was a really good person, and I'm not just saying that now because of what happened," Ms. Williford said. "He always worked very hard."
Valentine spent most of his high school years at Gregore-Portland High in Portland, Texas, where his parents, Thomas and Nancy Valentine, live.
Valentine was married a month before he left for the Persian Gulf, and his wife, Becky, still lives in the Corpus Christi area, Ms. Williford said.
Valentine was graduated in June 1989 from Sheffield High School in Memphis.
Ms. Williford said the family has received conflicting stories of the exact circumstances of Valentine's death.
---
 
 TEXAS:
 
 Arthur O. Garza, 20
KINGSVILLE, Texas (AP) - Lance Cpl. Arthur Garza's ambition growing up in this south Texas ranching community was to join the Marines, his mother said.
Garza, 20, was killed in an amphibious vehicle accident Jan. 26 off the coast of Al Garaah, Saudi Arabia.
Mary Helen Garza had to sign her son's enlistment papers because he was only 17 when he joined, in 1987.
"It was his ambition to join the Marines and become a hero," she said.
Garza grew up in Kingsville but lived the two years before enlistment in Houston with his father, Oscar Garza, and graduated from Jersey Village High School.
He married Jennifer Curtis, who is from San Diego, near Camp Pendleton, where Garza was posted with the 1st Marine Division. The couple had a daughter last summer.
---
 
 VIRGINIA:
 
 Donald Morgan, 30
FORD, Va. (AP) - Staff Sgt. Donald Morgan, a 12-year Army veteran, died in an accident the day after a cease-fire was declared in the Persian Gulf War.
Morgan, 30, died Feb. 28 when a pallet fell on him and crushed him, said his sister, Bertha R. Morgan of Dinwiddie.
"It might not be so hard to take if he'd been killed on the battlefield, but the war was over," she said.
Before going to Saudi Arabia in December, he had been stationed in Germany as part of the 586th Maintenance Company. Operation Desert Storm was his first combat assignment, Ms. Morgan said.
---
 
 Jonathan Matthew Williams, 23
PORTSMOUTH, Va. (AP) - The night before he left for war, Jonathan Matthew Williams told his sisters he had a feeling he wasn't coming back.
"He said, 'Don't say it to mama,"' said Charlotte Carter, one of the 23-year-old Army corporal's sisters.
Williams died Feb. 25, six days after arriving in Saudi Arabia, killed in a Scud missile attack on a barracks near Dhahran.
Williams, a Franklin native, joined the Army in 1986 after being graduated from high school. After three years of active duty he went on inactive reserve and was called back about six weeks ago.
Williams had been studying business administration at Tidewater Community College while working for a computer supply company.
"He stuck out," said Pat Iannatti, human resources manager at Kasei Memory Products. "For a young person, he was polished."
"There were tears shed here today," she said. "It was the last thing we would have thought. It doesn't seem right."
---
 
 WEST VIRGINIA:
 
 Mark E. Hutchison, 27
ELKINS, W.Va. (AP) - Mark Hutchison, a petty officer second class and boiler technician, was near the end of his military service when he died in a boiler room accident aboard an amphibious assault ship in the Persian Gulf.
Hutchison, 27, was one of 10 sailors killed Oct. 30 when a pipe on the USS Iwo Jima ruptured.
Hutson graduated from Elkins High School in 1981 and spent eight years in the Navy, assigned to the base in Norfolk, Va.
"My family and his family were real good friends," said Nancy Pierce Lambert, a special education teacher at Elkins High. "He was really a good kid. He was very outgoing. He was mischievous, but not devious. He was a good-looking boy, a handsome kid."
His wife, Rhonda, and two teen-age children, Billy and Angela, live in Norfolk. His parents and three siblings live in Wilmington, N.C.
---
 
 WISCONSIN:
 
 Lance Monsen, 35
MILWAUKEE (AP) - Marine Sgt. Lance Monsen, an 18-year veteran soldier whose parents also served in the military, died Jan. 10 of an apparent heart attack after training in Saudi Arabia.
Monsen, 35, the son of Wayne and Betty Monsen of Milwaukee, attended military schools as a child.
His father was an Air Force master sergeant. His mother was a Navy welder. He joined the Marines at 17 and intended to retire in 1992 after 20 years of service, his mother said.
"He was such a good boy. Six-foot-four. Never sick. This was quite a shock for us," Mrs. Monsen said. "He was really a good person, certainly a wonderful family man."
Monsen was stationed at Camp Lejeune and lived in Jacksonville, N.C., with his wife, Martha, and sons, Jonathan, 10, and Nicholas, 8.

 

End of Document
