

Town's Dilemma: Keep the Chickens or Kick Them Out of the Coop?
 The Associated Press
August 31, 1995, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 359 words
Byline: By ELLIOTT MINOR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: FITZGERALD, Ga.
Body




Exotic chickens that have roamed freely for decades are ruffling feathers in a town known for tolerance and diversity.
Bird lovers say the fowl make the town unique and should be protected. Opponents consider them an annoyance and want them run out of town.
The battle over who rules the roost is pitting neighbor against neighbor in this south Georgia town of 8,600 people, which was founded 99 years ago by Union and Confederate veterans of the Civil War.
"I'm not chicken crazy," said Jan Gelders, who regularly feeds the birds cracked corn. "There is something bigger here. There is something more important. There's the principle - protecting something so it just doesn't disappear like other things."
Hundreds of the chickens - descendants of Burmese jungle fowl brought to Georgia in a failed wildlife experiment - have roamed the west side since the 1960s.
At night, the birds roost in trees and screech loudly if they are disturbed. They crow at dawn, and during the day they wander through yards, scratching flower beds and vegetable gardens in search of bugs.
Sometimes cars have to stop to let a family of chickens cross the street.
"Those chickens are beautiful and I love wildlife, but chickens don't belong inside the city limits," said Foster Goolsby, whose well-groomed yard is dotted with flower beds. "These chickens are convinced my place is theirs and that is not the case."
But David Malcolm, a retiree who enjoys watching the birds, said moving them to a rural area would amount to a death sentence because it leaves them vulnerable to coyotes, foxes and other predators. That's why state game officials discontinued efforts to introduce them into the wild.
The knee-high roosters have colors ranging from red-orange to black. The slightly smaller hens are usually brown. The chicks are brown or black.
When Fitzgerald's weekly newspaper, The Herald-Leader, surveyed readers last week, 208 wanted to keep the birds and 68 wanted to get rid of them.
Residents are trying to resolve their bird differences politely.
"I think it's a situation that is serious to some people and it's a laughingstock to others," said city administrator Alvie Dorminy.
 Load-Date: August 31, 1995

 

End of Document
