

UN Anniversary Notebook: Where'd He Go? The Boor at the Ball
 The Associated Press
October 25, 1995, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 749 words
Byline: By CHARLES J. HANLEY, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Dale Carnegie, Emily Post, Miss Manners, front and center! Uncle Sam needs you.
Winning friends, influencing people and doing the correct thing seemed to be slipping priorities this week during the U.N. 50th anniversary celebration "hosted" by the United States.
 
 ---
The kings, presidents and prime ministers had partaken of their fig tarts, gulped down their coffee, and were filtering out of the U.N. luncheon to be picked up by their limousines.
Jordan's King Hussein, South Korea's President Kim Young Sam and others waited in a lobby area. Five minutes, 10 minutes, 15 minutes passed. At some point, it was explained that their motorcades were blocked because President Clinton had not yet left the building and, the American security officers insisted, his must have the right-of-way.
Twenty minutes passed, and finally Kim - a man with no small terrorism concerns himself - gathered up his entourage and stalked off on foot, walking four blocks to 42nd Street, to be picked up by his detained driver.
Kim had no public comment. Dale Carnegie might have.
 
 ---
And Emily Post might have quibbled with the special definition of "host" this week - "last to the party, first to leave."
Much was made of the U.S. role over 50 years as "host" to the United Nations. But at Sunday's opening session, the presidential limo of the "host country" was the last of the 180 or so U.N. member-states to deliver its occupant to the U.N. front door.
From there, Clinton went to the General Assembly rostrum to deliver, as "host country," the first member's speech in the special session. And then the host left, with his secretary of state and U.N. ambassador in tow. Two low-ranking U.S. diplomats were left behind to listen to Boris Yeltsin, King Hussein, Japan's Tomiichi Murayama and others.
U.N. organizers were understanding of Clinton's need to be elsewhere, but were surprised that Ambassador Madeleine Albright, at least, did not stay behind.
It recalled the "age of hauteur" under President Reagan's U.N. ambassador, Jeane Kirkpatrick, who routinely bolted from the Security Council chamber after saying her piece, apparently uninterested in others' thoughts.
 
 ---
Dear Miss Manners: What is it about New York?
"New Yorkers are proud of the United Nations," New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani proclaimed during his "host city" dinner for the visiting dignitaries.
Well, proud of some of the united nations.
The New York mayor "disinvited" a handful of U.N. members from the dinner, including Cuba's Fidel Castro, and one prominent official U.N. "observer," Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat.
But when the mayor then tried to turn Monday night's New York Philharmonic U.N. anniversary concert into a joint city-U.N. event, while still keeping his "enemies list," the U.N. leadership finally revolted. They sent back their share of the tickets and said the organization would not co-sponsor such a discriminatory event.
The snubbed Arafat, who can match any New Yorker in raw sidewalk style, turned up anyway, and sat through two movements of Beethoven's 9th Symphony before being shown the door by Giuliani's chief of staff.
An embarrassed Clinton administration tried to offer Giuliani a lesson in etiquette - Arafat "should be given the respect the Palestinian people deserve," said State Department spokesman Nicholas Burns.
 
 ---
This is not to say that only "foreigners" enjoyed this kind of treatment at the hands of the hosts.
When President Clinton decided - on the spur of the moment - to dine at a popular West Side restaurant, police trucks quickly towed away a couple of nearby blocks' worth of legally parked automobiles.
They had owners, of course, who eventually showed up, to be told their vehicles were over there, back here or, in some cases, nowhere to be found.
Was there a clairvoyant malefactor afoot, anticipating impromptu presidential movements and converting innocently parked cars to his devices? Neither the police nor the Secret Service explained. They never do.
 
 ---
This is also not to say the Americans were alone in committing faux pas this protocol-heavy week.
There was, for example, the man who interpreted Jiang Zemin's remarks when the Chinese president was welcomed by the U.N. secretary-general, the secretary-general whose redundant name has, for some reason, become a butt of late-night comedians' jokes.
On this occasion, the hapless, nervous interpreter addressed the dour-looking statesman as "Boutros Boutros Boutros-Ghali."
Boutros-times-three, a nominal record. Your bid, Leno.
 Load-Date: October 25, 1995

 

End of Document
