

Waiting for the End of the World: Doomsday Movement Alarms Korean Officials
The Associated Press
October 6, 1992, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 666 words
Byline: By KELLY SMITH TUNNEY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SEOUL, South Korea
Body




Kwon Tae-young, seated cross-legged on the white linoleum floor, gestured excitedly as he explained: at midnight on Oct. 28, trumpets will blare and white-robed angels will carry him, his wife and three sons to heaven.
The only earthly remains of the Kwon family, he said, will be the clothes they were wearing, their dental fillings and their ID tags from the Mission for the Coming Days church.
Kwon said he's never been happier.
The firm faith of Kwon - and about 20,000 other church followers - has South Korean officials worried. They wonder how believers will react if doomsday doesn't arrive on schedule.
Some experts are even raising fears of mass suicides if the date passes uneventfully.
Church members believe the faithful worldwide will be lifted into heaven in a phenomenon called the Rapture. The church says the event will trigger seven years of war, flood and famine that will annihilate the earth and set the stage for the second coming of Christ. One group says the Rapture could occur as early as Oct. 10.
Hundreds or possibly thousands of Koreans who believe the beginning of the end of the world is at hand reportedly have sold property, abandoned their families, quit schools and jobs, deserted military posts, and even had abortions. At least three have already committed suicide.
In an effort to counter the doomsday movement, some parents have committed children to psychiatric hospitals. Counselors are swamped. Traditional churches have issued appeals, and plainclothes police have been assigned to monitor church activity.
"It's a potential social disaster," says cult expert Tahk Myeong-whan, director of the International Religions Research Insitute.
Critics say the doomsday predictions are a scheme to take advantage of the young, the troubled and the insecure.
Lee Seung-eun, who heads a victims association, claims her college-age son was kidnapped by church members. Her hand shook as she held a list of 21 church "martyrs" expected to die - including her son.
"What can we do?" she said, wringing her hands.
South Korean officials were initially reluctant to interfere with the doomsday movement for fear of infringing on the freedom of religion.
But as its popularity swelled, police in September arrested farmer-turned-preacher Lee Jan-rim, a leader of the movement and a translator of a doomsday book by American evangelist Percy Collett that was a bestseller here.
Lee was charged with swindling followers of up to $ 4 million. Prosecutors also said he had $ 380,000 worth of bonds with maturities as late as next May, indicating he did not believe his own preachings that the world was ending.
Police have also detained believers preaching on street corners for minor traffic violations. They arrested a fish merchant who said he speaks to God through a piano, charging him with illegally distributing videos.
Some church members have gone underground, decrying what they say is persecution by the government and the media.
As the day approaches, the faithful spend up to 24 hours a day at one of the movement's 250 churches, praying to be among those taken to heaven.
They meet in basements, office buildings, remote mountain camps, and abandoned warehouses - many of which are rented only until Oct. 28.
In southern Pusan, one church required believers to prove their faith by kissing snails, eating live eels and fish and disrobing for the congregation, news reports said.
"We're not crazy," said Kwon, who is a director of his church. "We're not psychos. We pray."
Presbyterian pastor Rev. Kim Su-yong, a counselor, says the movement's success reflects despair among Koreans over rapid social changes, an uncertain economy, worries over rapprochement with North Korea and the inability of traditional churches to address those concerns.
"These people are brainwashed," said Kim.
Kwon discounts the predictions of suicides if doomsday doesn't come.
"Committing suicide is like going to hell and nobody in this church is foolish," he said. "Besides, we know the date is definite."

 

End of Document
