

WALTER MEARS: Reform Is in the Eye of the Reformer
The Associated Press
December 15, 1992, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 783 words
Byline: By WALTER R. MEARS, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Reform is a risky political business, except for the people who get to decide what it is. That's why politicians would rather give reform than get it.
The hassle over House rules changes is a case in point.
Congressional Democrats call it reform for the sake of efficiency and fairness, while outnumbered Republicans complain they're being bullied by revisions that will bring down the gavel on overtime talk - and also enable five Democratic delegates to vote on legislation.
The new year is going to be a big year for reform, as defined by Democrats in Congress and at the White House. So it's also going to be a bumper year for Republican protests.
They've already begun over the rules that will be adopted for the House after the new Congress convenes on Jan. 5. House Democrats have approved the revised rules, so final adoption will be a formality, after another round of GOP complaints about being stifled, gagged and mugged by the majority.
Activists, and especially activist conservative Republicans, are angry at restrictions on what had become their regular forum: end-of-the-day speeches called special orders, in which any member could reserve time to talk at will, and often at length. The chamber was empty, but the television cameras were on.
It was largely, although not exclusively a Republican province. During the campaign, for example, Rep. Robert K. Dornan, R-Calif., used special orders for denunciations of Bill Clinton, questioning his patriotism and making an issue of his visit to Moscow as a graduate student.
Still, special orders can cut in both political directions. When Rep. Henry B. Gonzalez, D-Texas, couldn't get answers or action on his questions about U.S. aid to Iraq, he made his point and raised the issue in a series of speeches to the empty chamber.
House members always had the right to arrange special order speeches after the day's business was done. But talking in an empty chamber took on another dimension when the House permitted television coverage of its sessions, beginning in 1979.
Conservative Republicans saw an opening and grabbed it for a nightly series of speeches assailing Democrats in general and, often, House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. in particular. O'Neill retaliated in 1984 by changing the TV rules; the C-SPAN cameras that had been required to focus only on whoever was speaking began periodically panning the House floor - showing when nobody was there to listen. That enraged the Republican orators, but it's still the procedure.
The new rule doesn't eliminate the overtime speeches, but it will limit them to no more than three hours, split evenly between the parties, with a 9 p.m. curfew.
Most nights, that probably won't make a lot of difference. But Republicans see it as another narrowing of their already sparse minority powers. It would, for example, preclude the infrequent all-night speeches the GOP has staged, on abortion last year and on flag-burning the year before.
The new rules also limit the one-minute speeches members get to deliver at the start of each day's session; in the new Congress each party will be held to 10. Those also have been tailored to television; they're perfect for sound bites on the issue of the day, since any member can orate on any subject.
Rep. Robert H. Michel, the minority leader, often conciliatory in the past, called the speechmaking limits an outrageous attempt to stifle Republicans, and threatened to retaliate with disruptive parliamentary tactics.
The change on voting by delegates to Congress is more substantive, and Republicans were said to be weighing a court challenge on that front. Prompted in part by pressures to make the District of Columbia a state, the Democrats decided to grant limited floor votes to the congressional delegates from the capital, Puerto Rico, American Samoa, Guam and the Virgin Islands. All five are Democrats, effectively widening the majority margin.
Republicans gained 10 House seats in the November elections for a total of 176 in the new Congress. Democrats have 258, and there is one independent.
The delegates already can introduce bills and amendments, and vote on legislation in committee. Under the new rule, they will be able to vote when the House is acting as a committee of the whole, which is the parliamentary status in which most of its significant business is done. Bills are debated, amended and shaped for final passage with the House acting as a committee because parliamentary strictures would otherwise slow the whole process. The delegates won't vote on final passage.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Walter R. Mears, vice president and columnist for The Associated Press, has reported on Washington and national politics for more than 30 years.

 

End of Document
