

WASHINGTON TODAY: Quiet at the Eye of the Storm
The Associated Press
June 22, 1994, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 742 words
Byline: By TOM RAUM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Sometimes you get the feeling that Tony Lake would rather be on his 140-acre farm in Massachusetts tending to his cattle and writing books, instead of minding world crises.
The reserved New Englander did not seek the spotlight and is not comfortable with it, but neither can he completely avoid it as President Clinton's national security adviser.
Lake, 55, is the quiet eye of the storm that swirls around Clinton's foreign policy-making - a process that has drawn considerable criticism lately in debates over Bosnia, Haiti and Korea.
Last week, Lake was mobbed by reporters demanding to know about former President Jimmy Carter's statements in North Korea. What if Carter was right about new concessions from the communist regime?
"My mother told me never to answer questions that begin with 'if,"' was Lake's droll response.
Carter's freelance diplomacy in the Koreas, although praised by the White House, was just one more headache for an administration desperate to overcome the impression of a rudderless foreign policy.
You don't see Lake much on television. His name is not nearly as well known as some other men who have held the job. He is not an academic celebrity like his predecessors Henry Kissinger or Zbigniew Brzezinski, nor a military career officer like Gen. Colin Powell or John Poindexter. He is not a pal-as-adviser, as was Brent Scowcroft to George Bush.
He seldom appears on TV talk shows. At public ceremonies, he often stands far from Clinton, deep in the shadows. He maintains the lowest profile of any senior White House official.
For the most part, Clinton and Lake are bedeviled by foreign-policy dilemmas left over from the Bush years: Somalia, the nuclear-inspections dispute with North Korea, bloodshed and chaos in Bosnia, the military uprising in Haiti.
Ironically, when Clinton hired him, Lake was planning to write a book about how presidential candidates often make damaging statements on foreign policy in the pursuit of political victory that they later come to regret.
After blasting Bush for failing to act decisively in Bosnia, Clinton found himself unable to do much better. He denounced Bush's policy of returning Haitian boat people without affording them a hearing, but later initially adopted the same policy himself.
He criticized Bush for being too cozy with totalitarian regimes like China, then turned around and renewed trade benefits for Beijing despite its continuing human-rights abuses.
The author of five books on foreign policy, Lake served in the State Department in both the Nixon and Carter administrations. When Clinton tapped him for the NSC job, he had been teaching international relations at Mount Holyoke College in South Hadley, Mass., and raising 28 head of cattle on his farm.
He joked at the time that he took the White House job "because the price of beef is down." Clinton's description of Lake: "He's one really smart dude."
When 18 U.S. servicemen were killed in an abortive raid in Mogadishu in Somalia last fall, Lake was the sole member of Clinton's national security team to offer to resign. "That was not a big deal. It's what you do," he said then.
Rumors have flown for months that Clinton was on the verge of restructuring his foreign-policy team, replacing either Lake or Secretary of State Warren Christopher or both.
But White House insiders say that, at least for the time being, Clinton appears to have decided to keep the team in place.
If Lake is perturbed by talk of a foreign policy in disarray, you wouldn't know it from his demeanor.
He is exceedingly courteous. Once he halted a background briefing for reporters in the White House to give one reporter time to change a tape. Another time, on the recent D-Day trip to Europe, Lake rushed back to the podium after a briefing in Rome to amend and clarify some of his remarks.
But his self-effacing, in-the-background style vanishes when it comes to baseball.
He is an avid Boston Red Sox fan and a fanatic at rotisserie baseball - where hobbyists craft imaginary ball teams and lineups, swap players and pore over box scores every day to compute team standings.
He has started several fantasy leagues and has been recognized by Baseball Weekly for his bravado and as the inventor of "rotisserie lite," a version of the game adapted for busy professionals.
"I consider myself the highest-ranking rotisserie baseball player in the country," he once boasted.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Tom Raum covers the White House for The Associated Press.
 Load-Date: June 22, 1994

 

End of Document
