

WASH: to clear garble SUB 18th graf, which 7th graf 1st Add a0627: Q: Mr. President, Israel … the process?
The Associated Press
September 12, 1991, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 2548 words
Body




Q: Mr. President, Israel yesterday released 51 Arab prisoners, and the Shiite Moslem kidnappers say that they support a comprehensive settlement of the hostage ordeal. What's your reading of this situation? And is there anything that the United States can do to facilitate the process?
 
 A: Not directly, 19th graf, which 8th graf 1st Add
Bush: Helen?
Q: Mr. President, what do you say to people who believe that if there is aid money available, that it best be spent on the millions of Americans who are without jobs and are disadvantaged?
A: Well, that is a question that the American people seem to be raising more and more about foreign aid. But my view is, we must do what we can to facilitate this peace process.
In the long run, that is not only in our national security interest but I think it would prove to be in the financial interests of the United States, as well. So, I don't think that these two need to be mutually exclusive.
Q: Well, do you think you are going to do more and more for the Americans who are without jobs now and who are really poverty stricken?
A: Well, I think we are beginning to see this economy move, and I think that, of course, is by far the best answer to jobs. Jobs created by the federal government don't last; jobs created by a reinvigorated private sector do, and that's why I would hope that our growth package that we have there can be moved on.
Q: Mr. President, Israel yesterday released 51 Arab prisoners, and the Shiite Moslem kidnappers say that they support a comprehensive settlement of the hostage ordeal. What's your reading of this situation? And is there anything that thetates can do to facilitate the process?
A: Not directly. I was very pleased, though, at the release of those prisoners. We have been in touch with the Secretary General, with Mr. Picco of his office, also, who is doing a very good job. And again, we're back where we were a month ago: "How optimistic is the President, how optimistic is the Congress about the release of these prisoners?" And once again I'm going to resist quantifying my optimism, but I think this recent development is bound to be viewed, properly, as very, very favorable.
Q: Do you believe that the release of a hostage is imminent?
A: I can't - I don't want to put terms on it. I mean, I know that there was a feeling a month ago - I remember it very well - that hostage release is imminent, and sure enough, thank heavens, a release did take place. But I just am going to resist, Terry, if you'll permit me not to go into how optimistic or moderately ?  he Senate committee that he has never expressed an opinion about Roe v. Wade, that he has no opinion …
on one of the most controversial legal issues in the country. First of all, do you find that credible and, secondly, do you find that something that commends him further to be a justice on the Supreme Court?
A: I think it's a question for the Senate to decide and I think he is handling himself very, very well. And if you look back to other people that have appeared before the court (sic), there seems to be some similarity in wanting to stay away from prejudging cases. So he has my full support. I think he's doing a beautiful job up there and I - again, I don't quantify everything - but I feel more confident than ever that he will be confirmed, and I think that's because the American people see that he should be.
Q: Are you surprised that he says he has absolutely no opinion on this subject?
A: No, I think he's handling himself very, very well.
Q: Mr. President?
Q: Back on the question of …
A: Yeah. Jim, I'll be right over. Go ahead, Susan - Ann.
Q: Back on the question of the Israeli loan guarantees, even many of your Republican supporters on the Hill say that Israel should have had this money a long time ago and they don't support the 120-delay that you're asking for. Is there any kind of compromise, is there any kind of middle ground? You sound very tough today on wanting to hold to that 120 days.
A: I just sound principled. I'm convinced that this debate would be counterproductive to peace and I owe it to the members of Congress to say it as forcefully as I can. I've worn out the telephone in there and one ear and I'm going to move over to the other ear and keep on it, because this is - peace is vital here and we've worked too hard to have that request of my mine denied. And I think the American people will support me. They know we support Israel. I've just detailed some of what we've done. So there should be no question about that. I am giving the Congress - and I did it with the leaders today, having an opportunity here, thank you, to do it here to give my best judgment. And I'm up against some powerful political forces, but I owe to the American people to tell them how strongly I feel about deferral.
Q: Are those powerful political forces ungrateful for what you've done so far in a peace process and why doesn't the peace argument sell with them? A: I think it will sell, but it's taking a little time. And we're up against very strong and effective, sometimes, groups that go up to the Hill. I heard today there were something like a thousand lobbyists on the Hill working the other side of the question. We've got one lonely little guy down here doing it.
So, however, I like this forum better, too.
Q: … grateful for what you're trying to do?
A: I don't know whether - I'm not talking about gratitude. I'm talking about world peace. And we've got to get it into a far broader perspective, and that's exactly what I'm talking about. And I think people will understand that.
Bush: Yeah, Jim?
Q: Mr. President, you said that a contentious debate now could actually keep some parties away from the peace table, yet the Israelis claim that those Arabs who have indicated a willingness to participate in the peace process have not made the settlement issue a precondition. They say that's your precondition. As one columnist said this week, it's your obsession. Is that fair?
A: Well, I would simply say that I read some charges coming out of a source in Israel that we'd made a deal with the Arabs that we would fight this. That's not true. That is factually incorrect, simply not true. No, it is my judgment, and Jim's, and everybody else's working this problem, and has been for months, that this is the approach we ought to take. Because we don't want a contentious debate on settlements or anything else over there at this juncture. We want to get these parties to the table.
And I don't think it's asking too much to have a 120-day delay. I think Congress should listen carefully to what I'm asking for, and I hope that they will go along with this.
Q: Mr. President, you talked about powerful political forces at work. It sounds like you're feeling the heat from the Israeli lobby. Do you think that there's unfair foreign intervention in the U.S. political process here?
A: No. I don't think - I think everybody ought to fight for what they believe in. That's exactly what I'm beginning to do right here. We've laid back down. We've been lying in the weeds, saying let's not get all this debate - these debate subjects going. The best thing for peace is to move - to move the process forward is to just have this deferral. But I'm going to fight for what I believe, and it may be popular politically but probably it's not. But that's not the question here, that's not the question, is whether it's good 1992 politics. What's important here is that we give this process a chance. And I don't care if I get one vote, I'm going to stand for what I believe here, and I believe the American people will be with me, if we put it on this question of principle. And nobody has better - been a better friend to Israel than the United States, and no one will continue to be a better friend than the United States.
But here, we are simply asking for a 120-day deferral and that's what motivates me, it isn't anything to do with lobbies or politics or anything else.
Yeah?
Q: Mr. President, just how much damage is being caused by this showdown?
A: I don't think there's any damage. Lawsie, we'll be debating something else tomorrow. But I think this one's very important, and that's why I want to be sure that our position is out there. I'm not only half in jest about what's happening up there on the Hill. Listen, there's a tremendous effort going on, and we have had a low profile on this. And I wake up now and see that we better get out message out, loud and clear.
Q: But does this strain itself threaten the peace process?
A: No, it has nothing to do with the peace process, in my view. I mean, if what would happen - the result was what would strain it, not the …
Q: Isn't there a loss of trust, there? I mean, do the Israelis trust you as much as they did?
A: Well, you'd have to ask the Israelis that. I can't tell you about that. All I'm doing is expressing the foreign policy of the United States of America. And we're going to say what we think is best; if they agree, fine. They've got to worry about their priorities. But I think many people there want to see this peace process go forward. The polling numbers in Israel are overwhelming in support of the peace process. And so, what I'm trying to say is listen, to the degree America's judgment and leadership matters, listen to what we say, how strongly we feel about this. And I think the people there will respond. I think the American people will respond.
Q: So have you made …
Q: Mr. President …
Fitzwater: Final question, please. .
Q: … to the Israelis and to the Congress that in the event the delay is acceded to, that you will support the loan guarantee unequivocally and with no further condition?
A: What was that?
Q: Have you made a commitment to the Israelis and to their supporters in the Congress that if they agree to the delay that they will - that you will then support the loan …
A: Absolutely not. That would undermine everything. I have proposed that the question be considered in 120 days without any objection on our part and that in principle the concept of absorption aid, a principle that we backed up by $ 400 million this year, will still be a valid principle. But to agree to something of that nature would be just the same, if I feel it is detrimental to the peace process as presented now, that kind of agreement would be equally detrimental to the peace process.
I really am going to have to run. Yeah, Charles, and then I am going to Philadelphia here in a minute and then I've got something else I've got to do before I go there.
Q: What?
A: Domestic agenda.
Q: Israel wants this peace conference as much as you do and yet it's Israel that submitted this request to you. Have they put you in a difficult position and does this say something about their less than genuine interest?
A: Well you can't judge by statements from one or another in the cabinet in Israel. You have got to look at the whole picture. And there have been some disquieting statements by one rather flamboyant minister that I am sorry I didn't get asked about because I have just been aching to answer the question. But we are not - I am not going to answer anymore - but I am just simply saying we are not judging it on a statement here or there. I take the Prime Minister at his word when he says that they feel it's in their interest to have a peace conference and it has not been an easy decision for him, but he has taken that decision and to his credit he reaffirmed their interest in the peace process just less than 48 hours ago.
So those are the statements that we ought to look at and in that one, why I was quite reassured. But again, Charles, we are the United States of America. We have got our policy. We should say clearly what our policy is and I want this peace process to happen.
I want the Israelis to do that which they wanted all along, have a chance to sit down one-on-one with historic adversaries and I want the Arabs to have a chance to get this question settled once and for all, and I really believe the whole world wants that, and it is my best judgment that an rancorous debate now is literally minuscule in importance compared to the objective of peace and that's - we ought to set it back 120 days only, who is going to get hurt? What possibly could work against - against that reasonable request from an administration that's brought this thing from square one right up to a peak that nobody really believed we could achieve; getting these countries together, and the work that's gone into it.
I just don't want to risk it by us taking some stand in the United States Congress against a request by the President in order to satisfy some other interest.
We've got to keep our sights on the broad picture of peace in the Middle East, and I would say that includes world peace. They're so closely interlocked when you look at the complex relationships in the Middle East and how they spill over into Europe and to Asia, into the Soviet Union still. So we're talking about a major chance now for one more tremendous step towards peace. We've seen the evolution of the Soviet Union, we've seen the defeat of aggression over there in Iraq, we've seen democracy on the move in our hemisphere. And here is a last place that really needs this peace process to go forward.
Q: Sir, just a quick follow-up was, if this goes through, which Arabs could you no longer count on?
A: I'm not going to define that at all. It's just our judgment that it would be very detrimental to the peace process. I can't help you with the individual country.
I - listen, I've got to go - honest. Shall we have one in the …
(Cross talk as several reporters attempt to address questions to the President.) A: You're not - too bad you're not in the back of the room. Here - right back there.
Q: Mr. President - Mr. President, next week you have another somewhat controversial nominee going to hearing - the Robert Gates CIA nomination. Do you - are you still confident that he will be confirmed? Is there any consideration being given to withdrawal?
A: Absolutely no consideration to withdrawal because there's no reason for withdrawal. I don't see - I'm not sure how controversial this nomination will be. When the facts are out there - and the committee are going to deal with it, in my view, in extraordinarily good faith. I've had an opportunity to talk to the Chairman, the Ranking Member, other members of Congress. And I think that a lot of these kind of feathery charges that are floating out there are nonsense. And I think the process will be fair enough that I wouldn't concede that this nomination is in any trouble at all.
And I believe Bob Gates is the best man to head the intelligence community. I have total confidence in his honor, his integrity, if you will, his word of honor. And I think he will be confirmed. So I have no - no question in my mind about this being the proper choice.
Q: You don't think the Clair George indictment hurts him?
A: I don't think so. I think people are fair. I mean, they … if Clair George came out and made some charge against Bob Gates that might have some influence, but I don't think that will happen. I have no reason to believe that at all.
A: Hey, listen, I'm not making an excuse, I really do have to get to the Cabinet …
Q: Just a follow-up on Jerusalem, sir?
A: Huh?
Q: Just a quickie on Jerusalem.
A: Thank you very much. .
 
 END

 

End of Document
