

Weapons of Terror: Bomb in the Baby Carriage, Nerve Gas in the Subway
The Associated Press
March 20, 1995, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 649 words
Byline: By RICK HAMPSON, Associated Press Writer
Body




Combined, they're the blessing and curse of our time: increasingly intricate public systems, like skyscrapers and jumbo jets, and increasingly sophisticated terrorist weapons, like the nerve gas used in the Tokyo subway.
The Tokyo catastrophe was caused by sarin, a product of Nazi Germany, so toxic that a good whiff or a drop on your skin can kill you in 10 minutes.
"I think there's been an informal bond between terrorists and their victims not to exceed certain constraints - chemical, radiological, nuclear and biological weapons," said Robert Kupperman, a terrorism expert. "Now the terrorists have begun to exceed this contract."
The Tokyo attack was unprecedented, but there appeared no reason why something like it could not happen again - on New York's subway, London's underground, or Paris' Metro. A mere firebomb carried onto the subway in New York in December burned 39 people and tied up the system for hours.
Next time, the weapon might as easily be plastic explosives or a hand-held rocket launcher; the target could be a power grid, computer network or art museum.
Civilization raises great edifices, as well as the discontents and the weapons to lay them low. Computer hackers can download bomb manuals via the Internet. A shaving cream can filled with a gray gel called Foam-X can blow out the wall of a 747. Some nuclear bombs weigh only a couple of hundred pounds.
The sarin that killed six and injured thousands in Tokyo can be made "by any competent organic chemist, especially one experienced with insecticides," Kupperman said. "Are we vulnerable? One hundred percent."
"Our social contract is such that the haters can do a great deal of damage," said Robert McCrie, a security expert at John Jay College of Criminal Justice in New York. "So far, they just haven't."
Not in the United States; the bomb that rocked the World Trade Center two years ago was fairly simple. But the one that destroyed Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988 was apparently made of Semtex, a powerful plastic explosive virtually undetectable by standard baggage-screeners.
Then there are vulnerable, high-tech targets. A year ago this month, two power line towers near Montreal were blasted by dynamite. Hydro Quebec discounted the possibility of terrorism, however, calling the incidents "simple acts of vandalism."
Indeed, some of the oldest fears about new weapons and new targets have not been realized.
Poison a city's water supply? Pulp fiction aside, only a vast amount would not be harmlessly diluted in all that water. And nuclear blackmail has proved a bigger problem for James Bond than his real life counterparts, given the difficulty of obtaining, building, delivering and detonating a bomb.
Meanwhile, the world has battened down. Witness the concrete barrier outside Belfast's Europa Hotel, the soldiers with M-1s in the corridors of the Manila Hotel, the shuttered general parking garage at the World Trade Center, the checkpoints around London's financial district.
Airlines and airports have scanners to detect firearms and most types of bombs. Researchers are working on machines to identify even small amounts of Semtex.
But no matter the system - skyscraper, power grid, airport - security managers are always playing catchup. As aviation safety expert Clinton V. Oster Jr. wrote three years ago: "Tightening security only in some regions creates incentives for terrorist activity in other locations."
When undercover investigators tested airport security after the World Trade Center blast two years ago, they were able to walk unchallenged past security guards and through emergency doors, setting off alarms that elicited no response.
"There's always going to be that one vulnerable point," McCrie said. "Security managers see the point, but sometimes they have to say, 'It's not practical or economical for us to back this point up.' And they have to hope nothing happens."
 Load-Date: March 20, 1995

 

End of Document
