

WEEK IN REVIEW: The Republicans Leveled the Playing Field
The Associated Press
August 22, 1992, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 681 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Presss Writer
Dateline: HOUSTON
Body




There was nothing subtle about the purpose of the relentless tongue-lashing administered on Bill Clinton and spouse in the Astrodome last week: to level the field on which the fall campaign will be played.
Hillary was pilloried and Clinton mocked by a Republican attack machine.
So determined was the attack on the Clintons and the GOP-dubbed "Prince Albert" Gore and on the Democratic Congress that the watching public might have wondered if the Republicans were for anything except keeping Clinton and the Democrats out of office.
President Bush gave an answer: He was for a big tax cut - its size unspecified - if Democrat-run Congress would pay for it by cutting spending.
That may not be a vision for America but it was the beginning of a tax-and-spend debate likely to last until November. The Clinton camp immediately called Bush's idea irresponsible.
Bush's proposal gave his campaign focus, and James A. Baker III will give it even more definition. On Sunday, he relinquishes diplomacy and takes charge in the White House and the campaign.
Both are familiar roles for Baker. They've been friends since the 1960s when Bush was a Houston oilman running for Congress and Baker a corporate lawyer recruited to run that first campaign.
Baker is an expert at using the levers of government to maximum permissible political purpose.
Focus was missing pre-Baker. Even the convention threatened to go off in any direction. It started amid wild rumors of an imminent American attack on Saddam Hussein's Iraq. In midweek, the rumors had switched to a wholesale housecleaning of Bush's economic team.
Neither materialized, and Bush dampened talk of a cabinet shakeup. Saddam, the unconquered ruler of conquered Iraq, still taunts him from afar, with troublemaking potential.
Bush has had trouble finding a second-term theme ever since Patrick Buchanan's rattling challenge in New Hampshire in February.
Sinking in the polls, troubled by the economy, without a message on the campaign trail, the president looked haggard. He has had to deny rumors of ill health. He denied them again in his convention speech, as did first lady Barbara Bush in hers.
The Republicans seem satisfied that the convention did what it had to do: slow down Clinton, and pull him from a 30-point lead in the polls.
Like Bush, Clinton had a shaky spring, but his convention was a triumph of moderates and moderation, and things turned his way. Ross Perot got out of the race and, saying the Democrats had "revitalized" themselves, seemed to tilt toward Clinton.
Clinton helped himself with his popular choice of a photogenic running mate and with the inspiration of teaming up with Al Gore on a bus tour through the countryside that made small-town voters giddy with excitement.
All that made a Republican turnaround here vital. The first polls, taken during the convention, encouraged the GOP. Clinton still led, but by a margin narrowed to near single digits.
"Chopping off more than 10 points would be a very successful convention, more than you could expect or hope for," said Michael Baselice a Republican pollster. "It appears we've done that."
But the way Clinton was brought down cost the Republicans. The party showed only its conservative face. There was no big tent under the big dome.
The Democrats also suppressed dissent at their convention and had a few laugh lines of their own. They squelched Pennsylvania Gov. Robert P. Casey, who opposes abortion, and they lost no opportunity to make mashed potatoes of Dan Quayle's spelling proclivities.
But nothing in New York matched the barrage aimed at Clinton. He was called a "skirtchaser" and a "draft dodger." Hillary Clinton was called a militant feminist.
Clinton was pictured as a radical who would coddle criminals, reduce defense to a pre-Pearl Harbor inadequacy, prostrate himself before "lobbyists, lawyers, labor bosses and big city machines" and impose $ 220 billion in higher taxes.
The polls to come - as people talk over what they saw - will tell whether it was overkill.
But for the moment, the playing field, if not leveled, seemed not quite so steep for Bush.

 

End of Document
