

What the Victors in the Persian Gulf War Want Now
The Associated Press
February 28, 1991, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 896 words
Byline: By RUTH SINAI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The countries that fought Iraq, along with some important ones that sat out the conflict, are jockeying for position on the crowded postwar playing field.
Their wish list reflects disparate interests, and the United States faces the difficult task of making sure that the glue that held the war together can also hold the peace.
What do these countries want?
-Saudi Arabia.
"They want to be left alone to enjoy their wealth and peace," says Michael Mandelbaum of the School of Advanced International Studies at Johns Hopkins University.
For the most part, Saudi Arabia wants to return to the status quo of pre-invasion days, although it might seek a more active role in regional politics now that Iraq has been removed as the predominant power.
The Saudis, who asked the United States to defend them against Iraq in August, want the allies to leave soon because of pressure from religious Moslems who view the foreign presence as defiling Islam's holiest sites.
"But they want a U.S. presence on the horizon," probably in Kuwait and aboard ship in the Persian Gulf, said Daniel Pipes of the Foreign Policy Research Institute.
The Saudis also want Iraq led by a government devoid of territorial ambitions, analysts say.
-Egypt.
Its aims are similar. Like the Saudis, Egypt wants the United States to press Israel into ceding occupied lands to the Arabs.
"They feel their Arab nationalist credentials were tarnished by their siding with the United States. Now they want to prove to their critics that the alliance can benefit the Palestinians," said Pipes.
Egypt risked domestic unrest to fight Iraq. Now it wants the Saudis to show gratitude by sharing their oil wealth. Egypt also wants to strengthen its role as a leader of the Arab world, possibly by sending forces to keep the peace between Iraq and Kuwait, analysts say.
-The Persian Gulf states.
The tiny, oil-rich countries of Oman, Qatar, Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates want a greater U.S. role in the region to protect them. Until now, these countries had secret military agreements with the United States. Analysts predict they'll be more open about cooperation.
-Syria.
President Hafez Assad nimbly leaped aboard the allied bandwagon to replace his crumbling alliance with the Soviet Union. Assad wants Saddam, his bitter rival, removed, along with improved ties with the West, which has shunned him as a sponsor of Palestinian terrorism, and financial aid from Saudi Arabia.
He has already benefited. The United States looked the other way last fall when Syria effectively took control of large chunks of Lebanon, said Mandelbaum.
-Turkey.
President Turgut Ozal wants to cash in on his support for the coalition, a move he undertook in defiance of top aides and public sentiment. He would like the European Economic Community to consider Turkey for membership and he wants increased financial aid from the United States.
Some analysts believe Ozal is eyeing northern Iraq, to which Turkey staked a claim in the 1920s, and would make a grab for that oil-rich region if Saddam were ousted and a power vacuum ensued.
-Britain, France, Italy and Germany.
"They want contracts to rebuild Kuwait, and a free flow of oil," said Mandelbaum.
-The United States.
In addition to what the Europeans want, the Bush administration wants a pro-Western, or at least a neutral, government in Baghdad, and a balance between the two regional powers - Iran and Iraq.
It also wants the Arabs to take a more active part in policing the region against bullies like Saddam, and the Israelis to grant the Palestinians self-determination. The United States is also seeking regional arms cuts and a system that would provide for sharing of Arab oil wealth with the poorer nations of the region.
-The Soviet Union.
Although not a fighting member of the coalition, Moscow has sided with the allies politically. "What they care about is being in the club, not outside," said John Steinbruner of the Brookings Institution.
Although consumed by internal problems, President Mikhail Gorbachev wants a say in the postwar gulf region to counter the predominant influence of the United States.
Some analysts believe Gorbachev, under pressure from conservatives and military hardliners, wants to save Saddam so the Kremlin can resume being his main arms supplier.
Outside the coalition are some real winners and losers.
-The Palestine Liberation Organization.
Having sided wholeheartedly with Saddam for his championship of their cause, the PLO lost the financial support of the gulf states and hard-won political backing from Washington.
-Iran.
Without lifting a finger, Iran saw its biggest rival greatly weakened. Its neutrality in the conflict also eased its international isolation, led to warmer ties with France and the Soviet Union, and even raised the possibility of a dialogue with the United States.
-Jordan.
King Hussein backed Saddam under pressure from his Palestinian majority and in defiance of his one-time ally, the United States. "He'll pretend it never happened and be welcomed back to the fold," said Pipes. Hussein wants to emerge as the champion of the Palestinians and will try to use that to extract badly needed aid from the West, analysts say.
-Israel.
Its biggest enemy, Iraq, has been destroyed militarily. But Israelis worry about the price they might have to pay: U.S. and allied pressure to give up lands for a Palestinian state and for peace with Syria.

 

End of Document
