

When the News Filters Out of the Hallowed Halls of Business
The Associated Press
June 21, 1991, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 818 words
Byline: By MARIANN CAPRINO, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




In business as in politics, secrets just don't keep.
In recent weeks, two of the nation's leading computer companies have been the target of leaks, prompting speculation about their motivation and the missions served by the release of sensitive corporate information.
The leaks at International Business Machines Corp. and Microsoft Corp. both appeared to spring from the middle ranks of the companies. But to label them the work of disgruntled staffers may oversimplify the case.
The sudden release of internal information can ease the frustration of the leaker, but it also can command attention in ways the mundane company newsletter cannot.
Some say IBM Chairman John Akers was a master strategist when he complained bitterly in private talks with managers that workers had become far too complacent. In an angry tirade, he said employees should be worrying about job security every time they lose a sale.
Brent Henderson, an IBM manager who attended one of the seminars, messaged his notes to a few colleagues via the company's computer system. "He thought he was doing the right thing," said IBM spokesman Steve Eames. "There was no intention to do anything bad … It just spread."
Electonic mail "is only one stage up from the public mail" system, said Martin Reid Stoller, a lecturer at Northwestern University's Kellogg School.
"Akers essentially created a worldwide Page One story by using the press to air his views," said Stoller, who maintains that a newspaper is a far more powerful forum than any company newsletter.
Government officials have a long history of anonymously passing on information. Leaking has proved to be a successful way of gauging public sentiment before committing to a course of action.
For example: A senior administration official says the government may suspend aid to Israel because the Israelis continue to build settlements in the West Bank. "He wants to see which direction the power brokers are going to tilt … then he can make a calculated judgment on whether to proceed," Stoller said.
He believes there's going to be an explosion of this type leaking at the corporate level now that firms have to contend with huge pension funds as shareholders as well as a broad spectrum of special interest groups.
"Corporations are beginning to need to match the constituency-building of public institutions," he said.
Most of the time, however, information is leaked by unhappy workers. Stephen Stumps, a professor of management at New York University's Stern School, maintains that this is the case about 70 percent of the time.
And as companies purge entire layers of middle managers, he said, there is even more potential for sensitive information to spill out, not necessarily to the press, but certainly to the competition.
"The movement of people across firms is such that laundry is aired. You can't lay people off and not expect them to walk into the next company and tell them everything bad they remember about you," Stumps said.
Most leakers remain anonymous. Take the case of Microsoft, the nation's largest computer software firm.
Chief Executive Bill Gates circulated a memo in which he lashed out at former ally IBM over a software package the two companies are developing. He also discussed government antitrust concerns about Microsoft and its legal dispute with Apple Computer Inc., among other juicy issues.
A spokeswoman for the Redmond, Wash.-based company said Microsoft would like to know who leaked the memo, though the company "is not trying to find out in an investigative sense … It's not like there's a leak patrol."
She conceded there was not "anything tremendously surprising" in the memo but added, "it's not good for high-level, strategic documents that are internal to be made public."
There are benefits to leaks. "They let the cat out of the bag and people can deal with the information," Stumps said, rather than be confused by mixed messages. "So if your job is on the line when you miss a sale but the corporate policy is one that you have a job for life, you don't trust anyone."
Still, leaks can be embarassing. In May, plans by Clorox Co.'s public relations firm to handle a hypothetical conflict with environmental groups were leaked to the public. The blueprint included counter-attacks to "worst-case" charges Clorox bleach's effects on the environment.
John Paluszek, president of the public affairs division of Ketchum Public Relations, said his firm doesn't know who leaked the plan. But he conceded that "values … are shifting a little. With more concern about the environment, there can come a conflict in values between the employer and what might be happening in the environment."
He said Ketchum is in the process of "finalizing security arrangements to see it isn't done again."
No matter, experts say. The bottom line is that it's just a matter of time before a thought committed to paper or computer screen finds its way into the public domain.

 

End of Document
