

Why The Smithsonian Gave Up Trying to Tell About Hiroshima
The Associated Press
February 20, 1995, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1325 words
Byline: By MIKE FEINSILBER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




War historian Paul Fussell was a 21-year-old infantry lieutenant in France in the summer of 1945. Wounded in the legs and the back, he still got orders to prepare for the forthcoming invasion of Japan, a battle too dreadful to contemplate.
And then came Hiroshima.
"We cried with relief and joy," he recalled years later. "We were going to live. We were going to grow up to adulthood after all."
Rarely does an entire people share a single emotion. But as it became clear that the A-bomb mean the war would soon be over, virtually every American greeted the atomic attack of Japan with joy, relief, thanksgiving.
Over the years, others developed more ambiguous feelings. The bomb introduced the nuclear age; the nuclear age became an era of fear. Questions were raised about the need for a democracy to have used this terrible weapon. Could there have been a demonstration bombing? Would Japan have surrendered anyway, without an invasion?
Last month, a museum exhibit about these issues fell victim to the emotions they still evoke. To the Smithsonian Institution, custodian of America's collective memory, Hiroshima became a story too hot to tell.
Bowing to pressure from Congress and veterans' groups, Smithsonian leaders junked the exhibition about the Enola Gay, the B-29 that bombed Hiroshima and launched the nuclear age. Only the fuselage of the plane is to be shown.
Smithsonian Secretary I. Michael Heyman said the exhibit had two irreconcilable goals - to honor the valor of the soldiers who fought the war and to reassess the Enola Gay's heritage.
Veterans and their families "were not looking for analysis" he said, "and frankly we did not give enough thought to the intense feelings such an analysis would evoke."
Heyman's conclusion was foreshadowed early on in a note from curator Tom Crouch to museum director Martin Harwit, a memo promptly leaked by internal critics. (The museum staff has declined to be interviewed about the controversy.)
"Do you want to do an exhibit intended to make veterans feel good," Crouch asked, "or do you want an exhibition that will lead our visitors to think about the consequences of our atomic bombing of Japan? Frankly I do not think we can do both."
Why not? If a high school history book can offer a non-controversial account of Hiroshima, why couldn't the Smithsonian?
-Museums have changed their view of their role in society. They are not satisfied just displaying stuff - arrow heads, moon rocks, airplanes. The Smithsonian bristles at being described as "the nation's attic." Now artifacts are "tools" used in interpreting history. "Analysis" - Heyman's word - is the name of the museum game.
-Of all museums, the National Air and Space Museum, which celebrates American ingenuity and spunk, holds a special place. It is the world's busiest; eight million visitors a year come to be awed by the Wright Brothers' 1903 Kitty Hawk Flyer, Charles Lindbergh's Spirit of St. Louis, Chuck Yeager's X-1 and the Apollo 11 crew's command module Columbia. In these halls of marvels, photographs of Hiroshima pedestrians turned into columns of ashes would seem incongruous.
-A generation gap exists in the museum and in society. Project manager Crouse was born in 1944, curator Michael Neufeld in 1951. Their generation associates the bomb not with the joy of release from the grip of war; instead the bomb is associated with the doctrine of "mutually assured destruction," the pleas by John F. Kennedy to build bomb shelters, the newsreels telling of Pacific Islanders and U.S. guinea pigs sickened by radiation in atomic tests.
-Distrust grew between the museum staff and its veteran-critics. Rather than relieve it, negotiations between them only heightened suspicions.
The American Legion first picked up rumors in 1993 that the exhibit was taking a decidedly skeptical view of Enola Gay's achievement.
A committee of World War II B-29 veterans collected nearly 10,000 signatures asking the Smithsonian to properly display the aircraft or turn it over to a museum that would.
The American Legion adopted a resolution objecting "to the use of the Enola Gay and the heroic men who flew her in an exhibit which questions the moral and political wisdom involved in the dropping of the atomic bomb."
Paul Tibbets, who piloted the Enola Gay and named it after his mother, called the exhibit plans "a package of insults."
Harwit undertook to repair the damage.
The 500-page exhibit script underwent five revisions. The result was to make outsiders part of the process but the veterans said they were asked for their opinions, then largely ignored. It only deepened suspicions.
Particularly galling to the veterans were a couple of sentences from the script and an emotionally charged artifact borrowed from the A-bomb museum at Hiroshima.
"For most Americans," read the offending excerpt, later abandoned, "it was a war of vengeance. For most Japanese, it was a war to defend their unique culture against Western imperialism."
The artifact: a schoolgirl's charred lunchbox with remains of peas and rice reduced to carbon.
The critics said such artifacts were selected to make visitors sympathetic to the victims of the bombings.
John Correll, editor-in-chief of the Air Force Association's magazine, noted that the plans called for: 49 photos of Japanese casualties, but three of American casualties; two references to Japan's search for a diplomatic solution and four "on U.S. avoidance of a diplomatic solution"; one "aggressive, anti-American statement by Japanese" and 11 "aggressive, anti-Japanese statements by Americans."
"It was handled badly from the beginning," says Stanley Goldberg, a historian of science who served on the advisory committee but resigned when he concluded the Smithsonian was allowing the veterans' groups to act as censors.
Edwin C. Bearss, a National Park Service historian who was wounded in the Pacific in World War II and spent 26 months recovering, was another panel member. In retrospect, he thinks Hiroshima may simply be too touchy.
"Maybe you have to wait 100 years," he said. "You're having people who came along in the 1950s and '60s putting a judgment on the '40s. It's a problem you run afoul of because wars are emotional and politicians are going to listen to veterans."
Perhaps the controversy was encapsulated in a memo last April from Neufeld to Harwit, discussing whether the decision to drop the bomb could be considered "debatable."
From the critics' viewpoint, only pacifists would debate the decision, Neufeld wrote. But from his viewpoint, "30 years of scholarly research … has shown that the decision is debatable on its political and military merits - a conclusion which goes to the heart of the exhibit concept. … This research has produced much new knowledge that must be communicated in some form to the public."
But the Air Force Association was expert at rallying public opinion and some members of Congress jumped on the issue.
The Smithsonian blundered one more time: Word leaked out that it had submitted the script to officials of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. A spokesman said the drafts were sent in soliciting artifacts, but the Japanese would be permitted to make factual corrections.
The last straw came when - after the American Legion had reluctantly signed off on the final draft of the script - Harwit notified the Legion that the Smithsonian was making one substantial change: lowering the exhibit's estimate of the number of Americans who would have perished in an invasion of Japan.
Harwit said the exhibit would accept an analysis by Stanford University historian Barton Bernstein that put the number at 63,000, far below others' estimates.
Legion officials said the estimate was lowered to belittle the need for the bomb and to make it seem it was used for "revenge."
The Legion called for canceling the exhibit and 81 members of Congress called for firing Harwit. Within a few days, Smithsonian chief Heyman pulled the plug on the Enola Gay. Its story will have to wait.
 Load-Date: February 20, 1995

 

End of Document
