

Women Hockey Players Finally Breaking the Ice in Midwest
The Associated Press
January 16, 1994, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 1140 words
Byline: By CATE TERWILLIGER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MINNEAPOLIS
Body




No. 22 is lost beneath a pile of her jubilant Harvard teammates, gloriously flattened inches from the cause of all this celebration: a black puck on the white ice within the net of Brown University's goal.
The Bears gather wordlessly at their bench, wearing brown and orange breezers, sweaty ponytails and the stony disbelief of the rarely defeated.
A long minute later, Stacy Kellogg emerges from the mound of women, pads, and blades to skate on weary legs to Harvard's bench. Kellogg's goal with three seconds remaining in the second overtime period has given the Crimson a championship title, a glittering trophy plate and gold medals.
Coach Margaret Degidio-Murphy and her Brown Bears will settle for silver this time - silver and a fluid fragment of a history they are helping create.
Harvard's razor-thin win in the first All-American Women's Intercollegiate Ice Hockey Tournament may ultimately mean less to the Crimson women, who have been playing varsity hockey for 15 years, than to supporters of women's hockey in Minnesota and other states where the sport is only now winning respect.
Women's ice hockey is well-established in the East, where 16 Division I teams compete at the college varsity level, and dozens of prep schools also field varsity teams. Today's best high school and college players are likely to form the core of the U.S. team when the sport makes its Olympic debut at the 1998 Winter Games in Nagano, Japan.
But in Minnesota, varsity play has been reserved for males - and the rare female good enough to share the ice with them.
"Women's hockey hasn't been pushed hard enough until now," says Gayle Obodzinski, a spokeswoman for the Minnesota Amateur Sports Commission. "The women up until this point have probably not been satisfied, but have been content, to play at the club level."
No longer.
Those who want equal opportunity for girls and women point out that varsity play offers far more experience for far less money. Club members shell out $ 300 to $ 500 for their own equipment, and typically pay about $ 500 each year in fees. High school players, on the other hand, buy their own skates and some pads; schools provide the other necessities for a $ 55 annual user fee.
The ice time that goes along with varsity practice and play is at least as important. Long-established boys' and men's teams historically have owned the ice; a recent survey showed that just 5 percent of the prime time available at Minnesota indoor ice arenas goes to all-female groups. Scant ice time for girls' and women's teams means they rarely get enough consistent practice to improve skills and develop camaraderie.
Those inequalities, teamed with a state statute and Title IX - the federal law that prohibits schools from sex-based discrimination - are breaking the ice on girls' varsity play. A dozen Minnesota high schools are starting girls' programs this year after gender-equity supporters campaigned to expand the number of sports available to girls, and a statewide survey showed that girls overwhelmingly favored the chance to play ice hockey over other sports.
Boosters hope Minnesota colleges follow suit and give the state's best skaters an option to stay home instead of going east to play at Division I schools.
"With the Olympics coming, we need the opportunity to have Minnesota people on those teams," says Lynn Olson, the girls' and women's section director on the board of USA Hockey, the national governing body for the sport.
"Going to the Olympics is always a dream," says Shelly Thaisen, 17, of Austin. Thaisen is a forward for the Minnesota Thoroughbreds club, the state's best high-school age girls' hockey team. The Thoroughbreds played well enough at the All-American to beat Yale 10-0, but lost 6-1 to Dartmouth in the third-place game.
Like many hockey-playing women, most of the Thoroughbreds started skating with older brothers while in grade school. By the time they hit 15 or 16, they had enough skill to silence the scoffers - and there are many.
"We've been in a couple guys' tournaments, and they think they're going to walk all over us," says Thoroughbred goalie Tara Joosten, 17, of Coon Rapids. "After the first five minutes, they find out we're there to play."
At the top of the stands in Mariucci Arena, Tom Witchger is watching daughter Libby's Brown University team fall behind in its championship game with Harvard. A proud father, he says other hockey dads clam up when he mentions that his daughter, who made the cut for her 1991-92 high school boys' varsity team, continues to play.
"I think the other fathers think it's their world," he says. "I think they think it's less of a macho sport if women can play it."
Under most definitions of "macho," it is. Women's ice hockey doesn't allow checking, and although the players themselves are split over the rule, fans say it makes for a purer game, a contest based less on brute strength than on finesse.
"The people who execute the best will win - not the people who survive," says Gwain Davis, program director for sports clubs at the University of Minnesota.
"I think it will remain non-checking because of what the men's program has shown us, the violence in the game," Olson says. "The violence shouldn't be there."
Although checking is forbidden, the women's game is plenty physical.
Early in the third period of the All-American championship game, with the Bears threatening to tie, players exchange punches after a pileup in front of the Harvard goal. Five women head to the penalty boxes for roughing.
Fighting is rare, Harvard co-captain Joey Alissi says later: "You don't want to give women's hockey a bad name."
Brown gets the tying goal five minutes later, and the game stretches into one overtime, then two. Coach Degidio-Murphy - Cornell's starting center for four years - switches her dog-tired lines with a piercing whistle. Brown forward Andrea Boudreau comes off at a sprint, hits the wall and topples into the box, where she lies face down on the rubbery floor for half a minute, sucking cold air into her overheated body.
After Kellogg's power-play goal wins it 3-2 for Harvard, the flush-faced players head for locker rooms to shower and pack their gear.
Brown captain Shannon Bryant lingers in the hallway, talking about what it means to play with women in college after playing with boys from the time she was 8 through high school.
"Emotionally, it's a huge difference," the senior forward says. "You get to dress with the team, and be with the team. It's a great experience to feel that team bonding."
She looks around the crowded corridor, at the beaming parents waiting for their daughters to emerge, at the teen-age players whose opportunities are already outdistancing hers.
"Women's hockey has jumped so much since I was in it," she says with a wistful grin. "Sometimes it makes me wish I was 10, so I could start all over again."
 Load-Date: January 16, 1994

 

End of Document
