

Women Face Different Work and Family Challenges Around the World
 The Associated Press
August 29, 1995, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1995 Associated Press   All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 2193 words
Byline: AP Business Extra, By The Associated Press
Body




In Atlanta, Gwendolyn Manto awakens at 5:30 to spend time with her three children before leaving for work as an executive at three department store chains. With relatives living nearby and enough money for an au pair, Manto is able to have a family and a successful career.
In many other countries, women are not as fortunate. While they comprise half the work force and half the educated public, they still struggle for any but the lowest-paying jobs. They still struggle against prejudice, for salaries comparable to working men and for adequate child care.
In early September, women from around the world will assemble in Beijing to compare their everyday realities at work and home, and discuss problems they confront in the areas of health, education and human rights.
The United Nations conference on women is to be held in the Chinese capital Sept. 4-15.
In advance of the conference, The Associated Press asked a random sampling of women about their lives in four nations: the United States, Russia, Mexico and South Africa.
The women were asked who does the housework and looks after the children in their families? Who makes the important family decisions? They were asked to compare their situations with those of other working women in their countries.
We also asked whether they felt they had choices about their families and jobs and about the image of the working woman in their nations.
---
 
 CHINA
In Beijing, Tang Kai, 41, a maid, is married with one 14-year-old child.
 
 HOUSEHOLD CHORES: We both do the housework. If (my husband) gets home from work early, he makes dinner. He also does the laundry and such, everything. If I get home early, I do it. There's no system of "you do this, I do that."
As for looking after the child, when she was little, she went to nursery school. Because of my work, I couldn't get home for lunch, so most of the time he was responsible for making lunch and looking after her.
FAMILY DECISIONS: Everything is discussed. If I'm right, then we do it my way. If he's right, then we do it his way. (If we each think we're right) then we try to find a reasonable solution.
I think that China has come a long way in this regard. In the past, in a feudal society, this would have been impossible. At that time, the man always made the decision. I think that today, (all men) are like (my husband).
WOMEN IN CHINA: I think everyone's situation is like mine. If a woman has family matters to attend to, her work unit will make allowances for her. The situation is improving all the time in China. For instance, when we have children we get maternity leave but we won't lose our jobs. We can have a half-year or a three-month maternity leave, with pay. Now, men can also get leave to look after their wives.
CHOICES: Everything is up to the individual. For instance, if you want to leave your parents and set up your own happy little family, you can get married. It's not like the family forces you and says that when a daughter grows up, she has to get married. Whether you have children after you get married, that's up to each person as well.
In China, our education teaches us that men and women are equal. If you're able to, then you should work. It's not that I feel pressured to work. At home, we share the housework, so I have the time to go and work.
IMAGE: The status of women in China, I think, is pretty high. So the image is a rather lofty one. Today, a lot of the leaders in the central government are women. And the same is true in business. There doesn't seem to be any difference between men and women.
 
 UNITED STATES
In Atlanta, Gwendolyn Manto, 40, a senior vice president at the department stores Rich's, Lazarus and Goldsmiths's, is married with three children.
 
 HOUSEHOLD CHORES: We share the responsibility and have a woman come in weekly to do the heavy cleaning. An au pair looks after the children. Still, although men participate more than they used to, women still have the ultimate responsibility for their children.
FAMILY DECISIONS: All major decisions are made jointly.
WOMEN IN THE UNITED STATES: I probably have a premium situation. I'm a top executive and have a high income, which affords me better child care, and a very supportive husband. Combined with that, my family lives here. That's something many people in the U.S. are missing, the extended family network to help them in the care of their children.
CHOICES: I have choices, but my situation is a little different. I was married for 10 years before I had children and my energy went toward my career. I had grown in my position from a sales girl earning $ 3.65 an hour and took a lot of pride in what I was able to accomplish. When I finally had children I didn't want to leave work. Still, they were new on the scene and I had to carve out time. I don't feel, however, like I made a conscious decision to cut back on work, but I changed how I worked. I became a strong time manager, a better delegator and I cut out lunches. That meant I could leave work in time to be with them. That involved bringing home work.
IMAGE: I think working women are viewed positively. It's become an integral part of how families operate and economically it's almost impossible to operate without both incomes. I personally think I am treated equally but women have to perform at work at a higher level than men in order to be successful.
 
 RUSSIA
In Moscow, Irina Yurna, 38, works in three blue-collar jobs to try to make ends meet. She and her husband have an 8-year-old daughter and live in an apartment in the Russian capital.
 
 HOUSEHOLD CHORES: When (my daughter) was little, of course I did it all. It's not seen as proper for men to do that. I started working when she was 2, and for a little while we put her in a kindergarten. Now I try to find baby sitters, but it's very hard. (The division of housework is) about 50-50, because I don't have time to do it all. But of course, (my husband) thinks he's doing more than that.
WOMEN IN RUSSIA: I'm atypical in that my husband actually makes an effort to help. It's not usually acceptable for a man to do any work around the house. Russian women in general support this idea too. I think it's compensation for our lack of power outside the house. We take revenge inside the home, by controlling everything there.
It's also unusual that we don't have a grandmother living with us to help with child care. That's the only way most of our women survive.
CHOICES: I feel I have choices in my life. I feel very lucky. But of course I don't have the choice not to work. That has never been a choice.
IMAGE: Under socialism, we were just other comrades, and we all had to work to create this socialist dream. We weren't distinguished as working women or working mothers. After perestroika, some tried to return to the old patriarchal model, with women staying in the home. But of course that's only in theory, because in reality most families simply can't afford to free themselves that way. I would say Russian women always have and always will work hard. I see those "nouveau riche" Russian women whose husbands won't let them work. They don't know what to do with themselves, and they get depressed.
In Tokyo, Mayumi Ito, 44, works for a major Japanese trading firm and is married with three children.
 
 HOUSEHOLD CHORES: My mother-in-law does the housework, while she and her husband, who live with us, take care of the children from Monday to Friday. I take over on weekends. When my husband, who works for a subway company, gets 1 days off every four working days, he does the housework and takes care of the kids.
I don't usually eat at home. On a typical weekday, my husband and I meet after work and have dinner or a drink on our way home. The first thing I do when I get home from work is to take a bath, and then spend couple of hours with my children before sending them to bed.
FAMILY DECISIONS: Usually my husband and I discuss things and make decisions together. Maybe my husband makes the decision 60 percent of the time.
WOMEN IN JAPAN: I think I'm very fortunate considering how difficult it could be to be a working mother in Japan. I have an understanding husband and great support from his parents. In Japan, the majority of people still think women should do all the housework even though they work, but my husband is different.
The biggest setback for working mothers in this country is a lack of child care facilities that can offer extensive services, including medical care. Every time our children get sick we have to rush home in the middle of our work. The situation not only makes us nervous, it's inconvenient for our colleagues and gives employers an excuse not to give us responsible tasks!
CHOICES: No. It's pretty unrealistic to change jobs at my age. It is impossible to find a company that is willing to hire a woman of my age. If a different job would give me to spend more with my family, I wouldn't want to do less responsible work than I am given now.
IMAGE: My typical image of the working woman is a cheerful, enthusiastic professional. But women are still seen as assistants for male colleagues. It is really unfair that our salary is substantially lower than our male counterparts just because we are women. I really want to make clear this one thing. We are working just as hard as the men, getting the same job done. Why should our salaries be lower?
 
 MEXICO
In Mexico City, Malu Santora, 35, works in public relations, is divorced with an 8-year-old daughter.
 
 HOUSEHOLD CHORES: We have a maid who comes in a few times (a week) to help with the housework and take care of my child when I can't or she is not in school.
FAMILY DECISIONS: Me, alone. When I was married we shared the decisions. Now I make them all.
WOMEN IN MEXICO: It's very difficult for all working women in this country now because of the economic crisis. The tuition for school has gone up, and I work on my own. My income varies from month to month. But I get by as I can. Sometimes I can't buy clothes or other things.
IMAGE: There is a lot of unemployment. And even if you have a career, for example, if you are an architect and a woman, (if you're out of work) you have to find a job in sales or whatever you can. We are definitely worse off than a year ago. Before, I could work a few days of the week, but now I end up working a lot more to make ends meet.
 
 SOUTH AFRICA
In Soweto, the black township outside Johannesburg, Angeline Leshope, 59 and the mother of four grown children, earns the equivalent of about $ 140 a month as a laundromat attendant. Such unskilled, low-paying service jobs are typical for South African black women - they clean houses, raise babies, wash dishes at restaurants, sell vegetables on the street corners.
 
 HOUSEHOLD CHORES: I do, no one else. You know, always the woman does more than the man. It's our culture, we're used to it. You've got to see to the children, have got to see they get clothes, that they have money for school.
FAMILY DECISIONS: My husband and I share decision-making.
WOMEN IN SOUTH AFRICA: When we moan, it's about the same things. Everyone complains about the men. And about money - money is the most important thing.
CHOICES: What choices? You couldn't live without working. You know, most of the people now, they haven't got money. People are so poor now, they've got no work, everybody is moaning about jobs.
IMAGE: Working women are respected. I get respect, anyway.
 
 GERMANY
In Neuruppin, Cornelia Giese, 33, has five children ages 3 to 15. She previously held jobs as janitor and grocery store clerk, but is now unemployed.
 
 HOUSEHOLD CHORES: She does nearly all the housework and child-rearing. Her husband works at a concrete-mixing center in Werder, more than an hour's drive. He's up at 4 a.m. and not home until 10:30 p.m. "I can't even wake him at 8 a.m. Saturdays and ask him to help. He needs to sleep."
"If he (asks to work fewer hours) there are lots of others waiting in line. Jobs are not easy to come by."
WOMEN IN GERMANY: Her life was easier before the Berlin Wall fell. Everything was provided automatically: child care, jobs, training. "We didn't have much of a choice of what we could buy in the stores, that was the downside. But we could drop off our kids (for day care) without any problem and pick them up when we were finished working. That is no longer possible."
As in most of former East Germany, after-school programs shut down in her town 40 miles northwest of Berlin for lack of funds.
"I have lots of depression because I don't have the contact with people any more. Back in the old days, everyone knew their place. Things were certain. Now it's precious money that everyone must be after."
"More and more women are being forced back into the kitchen and we don't want it."
CHOICES: Giese would like to get retraining and find a job as a florist. Her chances of getting a job that could co-exist with the demands of family are "almost nonexistent. A six- to seven-hour-a-day job, the only one I could manage, is extremely difficult to find."
IMAGE: To be a working mother in the east today is a constant battle of nerves. You must be psychologically fit and in top physical shape. From 6 a.m. until 8 p.m. you are going full tilt.
 Load-Date: August 29, 1995

 

End of Document
