

World Vision in Vietnam: Healing the Body, Bringing the War to a Closure
The Associated Press
January 30, 1994, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 746 words
Byline: By GEORGE ESPER, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: HANOI, Vietnam
Body




On Christmas Eve 1967, when the Vietnam War was raging, a 25-year-old Marine Corps pilot was making a bombing run against an underground fuel depot in the northern coastal city of Vinh.
But the computer that sends the bombs to their target failed that night in Capt. Robert Seiple's A-6 Intruder. So he had to release the bombs manually. They missed the intended target and hit a village instead.
Now, more than a quarter of a century later, that memory stirs uneasiness in Seiple, the 51-year-old president of World Vision, an international Christian relief and development agency based in Monrovia, Calif.
"They came off late, and it was a moonlight night," Seiple recalled in a recent interview. "And as we pulled off the target we could see them exploding in the village. Those kinds of memories bring discomfort."
World Vision is now working with prosthetics in Vinh, 170 miles south of Hanoi. "We're supporting the work there with folks who have lost limbs, so that perhaps gives me a little satisfaction," says Seiple.
His own connection and fascination with Vietnam and what he saw as the country's tremendous needs propelled Seiple to bring World Vision back in 1988, eight months after he was recruited from academia and appointed president of World Vision. The organization had pulled out of Vietnam in 1975 when U.S.-backed South Vietnam fell to the communist North.
"Being back over here is motivated by a desire to help people and to bring the war to a closure that's never happened," said Seiple. "This is a war that should have been over 20 years ago and we still have an embargo … "
Seiple has come full circle, from foe to friend, from pilot to peacemaker, imploring President Clinton to lift the 19-year U.S. trade embargo against Vietnam and "to take the moral ground of reconciliation."
"It's hard to make a case for an embargo that's worked," he said. "They normally impact the poorest people first. But it's a sign of weakness. It's a sign that a country continues to bear a grudge … It begins to erode the soul of a country."
Seiple, a native of Harmony, N.J., left Vietnam as a Marine in November 1968 after flying 300 missions. He left the service in October 1969 and worked as a sales representative for a building products company in Michigan for about a year.
Then he returned to his alma mater, Brown University in Providence, R.I., where he held a series of jobs including athletic director and vice president for development.
He left Brown in 1983 to become president of two schools outside of Philadelphia - Eastern College and Eastern Baptist Theological Seminary, eight miles apart. He held these positions for four years until he joined World Vision in July 1987.
Nine months later, in April 1988, when Vietnam was in ruin and scorned by the world, Seiple returned for the first time
"When I landed in Hanoi," he said, "I couldn't believe they had won. It just did not make any sense. The place was devastated. There was pocket famine in the North, malnutrition, polio. They had every mark of a country that had been devastated to the point of losing the war and yet they had been the victor."
He carried with him a letter from President Ronald Reagan which he thought would be a powerful springboard to bring World Vision back.
"It was like waving a red flag in front of a bull," he recalled. "We had a lot of angry discussions, lots of political posturings back and forth. At the end of the meeting, the Communist Party guy said, 'Does anybody else want to say anything?"'
Seiple's 12-year-old son, Jesse, who was traveling with him, raised his hand.
"My dad wants to help you," the boy said. "I think he can help you. You ought to let him help you."
The meeting was over. The Vietnamese all wanted to have their picture taken with Seiple's son.
World Vision began with a staff of one. Today the organization has a staff of 18 foreigners and 45 Vietnamese with a $ 5 million annual budget. It has about 30 projects across Vietnam including health care, prosthetics, agriculture and relief programs for natural disasters, such as typhoons.
"We were initially invited back to try to bring healing to the body," said Seiple. "This country has about 60,000 amputees and a couple million invalids. Polio is still yet to be eradicated in some of the cities and people are still stepping on land mines and blowing themselves up."
For himself, Seiple does not look at Vietnam as winners and losers.
"I look at Vietnam as a war that produced nothing but victims," he said.
 Load-Date: January 30, 1994

 

End of Document
