

A base in the Soviet war against Afghanistan, Uzbek city is again on the front line
September 26, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 680 words
Byline: By BURT HERMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TERMEZ, Uzbekistan
Body




Carried across the dusty landscape to the parched cotton fields where women stoop to pick Uzbekistan's "white gold," the wail of the muezzin's call to prayer can be heard from across the border in Afghanistan.
On the southern edge of Central Asia, Termez was a major forward base for the Soviet army's war in Afghanistan. Once totally off limits to foreigners, it is poised again to be on the front line as the United States apparently moves closer to retaliating for terrorist attacks Sept. 11.
As in Soviet times, Uzbekistan and all of the other recently independent Central Asian nations guard their borders from their neighbors, and checkpoints are a way of life. Reporters asking questions about a possible U.S. presence in the area also quickly attract the attention of police at the checkpoints leading into Termez.
Uzbekistan has offered to help Washington, and Russian President Vladimir Putin has said air bases in Central Asian nations could be used for the counterattacks. Repeated unconfirmed reports have said U.S. planes already have landed in Uzbekistan.
Just outside the city limits, the local mosque is being swept by a stick broom to prepare for a weekly festival at which families sip tea with a view of the Amu-Darya River and the Afghan plains just yards away.
At the lone bridge between Uzbekistan and Afghanistan, two soldiers stand guard on regular duty with rifles next to a dug-in armored personnel carrier. Built by the Soviets for their tanks to ride south to victory, the bridge instead became the symbol of their retreat.
Along other parts of the frontier, guard towers peer over the scraggly fence that marks the border, closed in the last few years since the Taliban gained power in parts of northern Afghanistan. The Uzbek authorities have put down violence by homegrown Islamic rebels and fear the influence of the Taliban.
Although only separated from Afghanistan by the trickle of the Amu-Darya - dry enough in some spots that it appears one could simply walk across - residents have almost no ties to their neighbors, who they view as coming from a nation of lawlessness and extremism. Even the word "Afghan" in the Uzbek language means "someone who has left."
The growing talk of war around the world has had little effect on locals here, who are accustomed to living in the heart of turbulent Central Asia, a part of the country that dips down between Tajikistan and Turkmenistan to touch Afghanistan.
"You can ask anyone on the street, no one's afraid," Mayor Abdurayim Choriyev said Tuesday. "It's all as usual here."
Still, workers appear to have stepped up their work on building planned border reinforcements. An area near the mosque that was wide open over the weekend with only fenceposts is already laced with barbed wire, and work is continuing on further rows of barriers and trenches. Border guards also have increased their vigilance.
Uzbek military facilities, which the country took over when the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, and housing dot the city of Termez, which was off limits to all except for residents with special permits during the Soviet era.
Many Uzbeks are hesitant to comment on the political situation here, where much of the Soviet-era institutions for controlling the population are still in place but with different names. Pictures and slogans of communist icon Vladimir Lenin have merely been replaced with those of President Islam Karimov, who has run this country since before its 1991 independence.
"They can do what they want over there (in Afghanistan), here everything is calm - honestly," said Radjap, the guide and custodian at the mosque and who uses only one name.
It's not that the city has been untouched by the more recent violence in Afghanistan. Several years ago, a couple of missiles landed here and destroyed a house and the border has also led to a drug smuggling problem.
But as preparing to celebrate 2,500 years as a city, the headlines in the newspaper still focus enthusiastically of the record harvest of cotton - which people here boast is the finest in the country because the area gets more sun.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos XEL101-102
 Load-Date: September 27, 2001

 

End of Document
