

A look at the issues on the table in Sharm el-Sheik
The Associated Press
February 8, 2005, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 331 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A look at the issues and what's at stake as Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon and Palestinian leader Mahmoud Abbas join the leaders of Egypt and Jordan for Tuesday's summit.
---
 
THE ISSUES
SECURITY: Both sides are expected to commit to a cease-fire, calling a formal end to four years of violence. Israel also wants Palestinian security forces to actively pursue militants. Palestinians want Israel to remove security checkpoints in the West Bank to permit freer movement.
PRISONERS: Israel holds about 8,000 Palestinian prisoners and a substantive release could strengthen Abbas' credibility among militants. Israel has said it will free 900 prisoners - Palestinians not involved in attacks on Israelis - and has agreed to a joint committee to review possible releases of those with "blood on their hands."
FUGITIVES: Palestinians seek a list of names of fugitives - about 350 people - who would be given conditional amnesty, provided they hand over their weapons and agree not to leave their hometowns.
DIPLOMATS: Israel wants Jordan and Egypt to return their ambassadors to Tel Aviv, and the two countries reportedly are nearing a decision to do so.
---
 
WHAT'S AT STAKE: Egypt and Jordan, who have signed peace agreements with Israel, are pushing for progress in talks in order to undermine extremists who use the conflict to recruit and mobilize militants in their countries. Sharon hopes to shore up domestic support after enduring a challenge from his own political party for pressing forward on a Gaza withdrawal plan. Abbas wants to show Palestinians - especially militants - that talks with Sharon can produce dividends that ease everyday life.
---
 
WHAT LIES AHEAD: Negotiations, if all goes well. The summit is geared toward creating an atmosphere in which talks can proceed. It does not address the tough issues that negotiators will have to sort out to allow creation of a Palestinian state, including future borders, the status of Jerusalem or what to do about Palestinian refugees.
 Load-Date: February 9, 2005

 

End of Document
