

A man stood in the torrent at the brink of the falls. What held him there? How long could he last?
The Associated Press
June 27, 2003, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1122 words
Body




EDITOR'S NOTE - On the day that American forces entered Iraq, an unimaginable act of courage and endurance was unfolding half a world away in Niagara Falls, N.Y. Amid the war news, the story was largely overlooked. We tell it now because acts of heroism should not go unrecognized.
 
By HELEN O'NEILL
AP Special Correspondent
NIAGARA FALLS, N.Y. (AP) - The call came in just after 5 p.m. as State Park Police were wrapping up a coffee-and-cake retirement party for a veteran on his last day.
"Man on the ice at Terrapin Point."
Sgt. Patrick Moriarty, head of the emergency rescue team, grabbed his jacket, yelled for the rescue truck, hopped in his cruiser and sped the short distance to the scene.
Terrapin Point - named for rock formations resembling turtles that once dotted the area - is a pretty ledge that juts out over the American side of the Horseshoe Falls, which curve 2,200 feet between the United States and Canada. In summer Terrapin Point is a favorite spot for tourists.
In winter, Terrapin Point is transformed into a treacherous embankment of ice and snow that blankets everything - the park, the railings, even the lampposts. The area is fenced off to tourists, but there are always a few daredevils who climb up for a better view.
Heading to the scene, Moriarty assumed he was about to rescue one of them.
Nothing prepared him for what he saw.
The man wasn't on the ice, but trapped in the rapids, swaying in an eddy about 250 feet from the shore. His hands were jammed into his pockets, his body in a crouched position as though trying to steady himself against the enormous weight of the water thundering past. The water wasn't deep: it only came up to his knees. But the current was savage, hungrily trying too drag him over. Every now and then he teetered, but he didn't fall.
He was two feet from the brink.
From the top of the embankment, Moriarty thought, "He'll be swept over any minute or just die of the cold."
And he wondered: What on earth was holding him there? How long could he last?
The water was 33 degrees. The river was an angry black mass, surging forward, carrying great chunks of ice that had broken from the scrub islands in the rapids upriver.
"Hang on," Moriarty bellowed, waving at the victim, who had wedged his feet into a rock crevice. "We're coming for you."
There was no way the man could hear him, but he turned and mouthed something.
"I'm so cold," he seemed to be saying. "Please help me."
Moriarty cringed. Conditions couldn't be any worse for a rescue. The embankment sloped steeply about 30 feet down to the falls. There was light snow on top, but the rest was sheer ice. If anyone slipped it would be like a toboggan ride straight into the falls.
For 15 years Moriarty, 46, has headed the emergency rescue team. He knows Niagara as well as anyone. He has plucked boaters from the rocks, pulled fishermen from the ice, carried injured hikers out of the gorge.
But usually the victims are farther upriver.
Moriarty had never pulled anyone from the brink. He'd never seen anyone this close to the edge.
Other police officers arrived, lugging equipment, rope lines, survival suits and a safety ring.
Moriarty started zipping up the thick orange neoprene suit that would protect him from the cold. Someone would have to be lowered into the water, and he had the most experience.
One police officer grabbed a bullhorn and bellowed to the man in the water.
"Hang on. We're coming to get you."
But his words were drowned out by roar of the falls.
Fire chief John Jacoby arrived, joining Moriarty at the top of the embankment.
"God must be holding that guy in place," Jacoby exclaimed.
"The only thing holding him in place is fear," Moriarty replied.
Dusk was falling, the temperature was dropping. It seemed impossible that the man could survive much longer.
Firefighter Gary Carella had suited up and was getting ready to be lowered into the water with Moriarty.
The biggest problem was where to anchor the ropes that would be attached to the men. The only possibility was a treetop poking through the snow about 250 feet upriver.
They had no idea how sturdy it was. Was it just a branch or was it strong enough to bear the weight of the 20 or so men who would hold the lines harnessed to the rescuers?
They had no choice. Covering the tree with a protective nylon webbing, they attached the ropes and the steel rappelling clasp that can halt an entire rope line in an instant.
Four rope lines were set up - a main line and a backup safety line for each man, each about 250 feet long.
About 20 men took positions on the ropes, spread evenly over the ice, some near the tree, others farther down the slope. The ropes were attached to harnesses worn by Carella and Moriarty.
Carella is 39, an 11-year veteran of the fire department, and in every way the opposite of Moriarty - small and wiry with huge brown eyes and an innocent face. But Carella is tougher than he looks. He has participated in almost as many rescues as Moriarty. He knows the falls as well as anyone.
Sliding down the embankment, the two rescuers hit the spongy, rocky floor of the river and immediately felt the pull. Weeds clawed at their feet. The current was trying to tear them from their lifelines. The spray bit into their faces.
The man was craning to see them, yelling through the mist.
"HELP. I can't hold on much longer."
Moriarty and Carella stumbled forward. They didn't have radios, so state park police Detective James Comfort, inching his way along the embankment above them, became their contact to the men on their rope-lines.
Most of the rescuers had grown up in the Niagara area, lived and worked there for years. They knew the history of the falls - the lure as well as the lore.
From the famous Blondin whose death-defying exploits on the tight wire in 1859 drew thousands of onlookers, to Annie Taylor, a Michigan schoolteacher who successfully went over in a 160-pound oak barrel in 1901, assuming - wrongly - that she would reap great riches from her daring, there have always been those who tested themselves against the falls. Few have survived.
Police and firefighters trade stories about what they have witnessed and who they have rescued. They remember dates and names. They even categorize them - leapers, stunters, suicides (those who leave notes).
Rescuers in these parts have seen so much and heard so much, they don't question the reasons people wind up in the water. They just focus on trying to pull them out.
But sometimes clues turn up. Creeping down the embankment, Comfort spotted it, a small dark bundle lying on the ice.
There was a brown wallet and a dark baseball cap pierced through with a pen.
Stuck to the pen was a note.
The handwriting was neat. The message short.
"Please tell my parents I'm sorry."
---
To be continued
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NYBUE465, NY466 of June 24

 

End of Document
