

Afghan minister urges world leaders to expand the international force in the country
April 25, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 444 words
Byline: By EDITH M. LEDERER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




The highest-ranking woman in Afghanistan's interim government urged world leaders Thursday to expand the international force now in Kabul, warning there can be no peace unless troops are deployed throughout the country.
"The gains that have been made in the last four months could be lost unless security is greatly improved," Sima Samar, the minister for women's affairs and vice-chairman of the interim administration, told the U.N. Security Council.
She addressed the two issues that have made the United States and other major troop contributors reluctant to expand the 4,500-strong security force now in the Afghan capital, Kabul: the cost and the risk to soldiers.
"Another cycle of war will cost an even greater expense to the world," she warned. "It will be costly, in terms of the loss of human lives. Another period of violence will also risk the money and support that has been invested already in support of the peace process."
As for the risk that soldiers might be kidnapped or killed, she said: "Yes, that risk may be there and we must respond to it by putting everything in place to give these soldiers the proper support so that they are not left vulnerable."
Samar also warned that without the expansion of international forces, peace, democracy, reconstruction and the full restoration of women's rights and human rights would not be possible.
Afghanistan's interim leader, Hamid Karzai, asked the U.N. Security Council in January to boost security in other parts of the country. In February, Afghanistan's Foreign Minister Abdullah backed a suggested force of about 20,000 troops in four or five cities, naming Herat, Mazar-e-Sharif, Jalalabad and Kandahar.
The United States commands the war effort in Afghanistan, including the British-led peacekeeping operation in Kabul which includes troops from 18 nations. After Karzai's request, the possibility of expanding the force was debated and rejected in favor of quickly training an indigenous Afghan army and police force, a process that has already begun.
But Samar said it was unrealistic to expect a government in place for just a few months to "respond to the level of challenges that we face after more than 20 years of destruction in a war culture."
Samar flew to New York on Thursday morning from Washington where she held talks with Secretary of State Colin Powell, National Security Adviser Condoleezza Rice, and a number of lawmakers.
Before addressing the council, the first Afghan woman minister to do so, Samar held talks with U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan. She said Annan and one of the 15 council members told her "they are trying" to expand the force, "but it takes weeks, and months."
 Load-Date: April 26, 2002

 

End of Document
