

After the grief, a teen follows his dead brother's path to the Army
The Associated Press
December 25, 2003, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1079 words
Byline: By DON BABWIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: FORRESTON, Ill.
Body




Nobody would have faulted Joe Tyrrell if he changed his mind about joining the Army now.
Not after standing over the hospital bed of the badly burned body of his brother, seeing only emptiness where his arms should have been, understanding then as few do the price some soldiers serving in Iraq have paid.
But after he buried Pvt. Scott Matthew Tyrrell, 19-year-old Joe, with the blessing of his family, enlisted in the Army.
In an interview at his mother's home in this tiny Illinois town, he recalled what he told his brother, who lay before him unconscious: "I told him that I had the responsibility of joining the military and I was going to do it for him.
"It was always something I wanted to do," Joe said, "but now I felt like I needed to do it."
It happens in towns and cities across the United States, a sibling follows a brother or sister into the military. In Illinois, for example, among the soldiers killed in the war and its aftermath were Army Spc. Brandon Rowe, Illinois National Guard 1st Sgt. Brian Slavenas, and Army Pvt. Matthew Bush - all of whom are survived by siblings who were either serving or had served in the armed forces.
Yet, as casualties in Iraq continue to mount and more questions are raised about the war, and as headlines are dominated by such dramas as the capture of Saddam Hussein, quiet stories like that of Scott and Joe Tyrrell sometimes get lost.
"What the Army did for Scott was wonderful," said their mother, Susan Tyrrell. "I am not angry at all. I am very proud of Scott and I am very proud of Joe."
Any understanding of how a mother just weeks past the death of a child could say that begins with the boy Scott was.
The way his mother tells it, Scott had a difficult childhood. Overweight, with a learning disability that made reading a struggle. "He was picked on all his life," she said.
In high school, he told his family he was going to become a soldier. "After he decided to enlist, we saw such a transformation in him," said his aunt, Mary Beth Mitchell of Elgin.
About a month after he graduated from high school, Scott was in boot camp. A few months later, that transformation was obvious. Gone were about 45 pounds.
"I didn't recognize him," said Joe.
Also gone was the teenager unsure of himself and what he wanted to do with his life.
"He was a different person," said his mother, a fourth grade teacher. "He did not live until he got into the Army."
His father agreed. "He matured and had a sense of responsibility that had been missing," said Arnold Tyrrell, a machinist who lives in a town nearby.
That memory of the solid, confident young man is what the Tyrrells held on to when they were told last month there had been a terrible accident.
On Nov. 14, Scott, a combat engineer, was operating an armored earth mover. His job was to help build a dirt berm in front of the entrance of a bunker loaded with collected enemy ammunition that the Army wanted to protect from looting, according to a report received by the Tyrrells.
For unknown reasons, the bunker exploded, and Scott's earth mover was engulfed in flames.
Less than two days later, the Army called his family and told them he had been taken to a hospital in Germany. "They said Scott was burned really bad and … (doctors) had to remove his arms," said Kelly Zitelman, his sister.
After Scott's condition stabilized, he was flown to Brooke Army Medical Center in San Antonio, where his family flew to be with him.
When they arrived, they didn't recognize him. His face was covered with white cream and his badly swollen body was wrapped in "white padding," his sister said. And his arms had been amputated above the elbows.
Family members said doctors told them there was a chance, maybe 50-50, that Scott would survive. But whether he would ever walk again or how well he would see was uncertain. They said they had to decide whether to take him off the ventilator and allow him to die or wait to see if he would regain enough strength while on the ventilator to survive on his own later.
Psychologists were brought in to talk to them, as were other burn victims. But while they said they all wanted to keep him on the ventilator, they soon came to realize that Scott would not have wanted to live the way the fire had left him. He had told his mother as much before he was injured, saying he'd rather die than be attached to a ventilator.
Joe said there would be no way to explain to his brother how they could have let that happen. Kelly, their sister, said that as much as she wanted Scott around, she kept thinking about her 5-year-old son, who adored his uncle. "Scott would never be able to hug Ethan again," she said.
Said Scott's mother: "I told the surgeon I didn't want to bury my son in 4 or 5 years when he figures out how to end his life."
Scott's surgeon, had been neutral. But when the family told her of their decision to remove the soldier from the ventilator, "She said, 'OK guys, let's go make him whole,"' his mother said.
Pvt. Tyrrell was taken off the ventilator the night of Nov. 19. He died the next evening. He was 21 years old.
Scott's family insists the soldier's death has not made them angry at the Army. His life was short, but it had meaning. The Army, they said, made him happy.
Now, weeks after his death, family members have no doubt they did the right thing.
"He'll never grow old; he'll always be a hero," said his mother.
Which leads them back to Joe.
"I think if it (the Army) does anything for Joe what it did for Scott it will be good," their sister said.
Arnold Tyrrell said it is already clear that his son benefits from a structured environment. After Joe dropped out of high school last year, he went into a rigorous program sponsored by the Illinois National Guard in which he was able to get his GED.
"He's been a little flighty here, had trouble doing his school work," he said. "I think the Army will give him a sense of belonging to something."
Susan Tyrrell said losing one son has not made her worry about the other's safety. She also knows the Army was careful to make sure Joe wasn't joining to avenge his brother's death.
One thing she did ask of her son is that he not become a demolitions specialist like his brother. So Joe, who reports for boot camp in April, will train to be a mechanic.
Joe, a gangly teenager who wears a black "Army of One" shirt and carries a black backpack with an Army logo, said he is ready to be a soldier - something he hopes to make his career.
"This is something I wanted to do since I was 12," he said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY391-393 of Dec. 22
 Load-Date: December 26, 2003

 

End of Document
