

AP News in Brief; U.S. is on the edge of available evidence, maybe over, in making the case for Iraq war
September 27, 2002, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1515 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




In making the case for war, the Bush administration has delivered a bill of particulars against Saddam Hussein that includes al-Qaida terrorist links yet to be demonstrated and weapons he may or may not have within reach.
Publicly, President Bush's officials are touting reports that al-Qaida operatives have found refuge in Baghdad and that Iraq once helped them develop chemical weapons. Privately, government intelligence sources are hedging on that subject, suggesting there might be less than meets the eye.
Did Iraq really kick out U.N. weapons inspectors in 1998, as Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld has said? No. "We made the decision to evacuate," says Charles Duelfer, who was deputy chairman of the U.N. inspection agency at the time.
Searchers say more than 760 believed dead in ferry sinking off West Africa, 88 bodies recovered
 
DAKAR, Senegal (AP) - An ocean ferry capsized in a fierce Atlantic storm off West Africa and plunged beneath the waves in minutes, trapping hundreds of screaming passengers. Rescuers said Friday that more than 760 people were believed killed.
Just 32 people aboard the ship were known to have survived the disaster late Thursday night, some by clinging to the sides of the overturned craft. Senegal Prime Minister Mame Madior Boye said nearby boats brought them to safety.
"It was horrible, because we were hearing people screaming from underneath," said hospitalized survivor Moussa Ndong, who escaped when the ferry capsized Thursday night.
The state-owned Joola ferry capsized off Gambia in the Atlantic Ocean about 11 p.m. en route to the Senegalese capital, Dakar, from the south of the country.
 
U.S. would give Saddam Hussein seven days to comply, open his palaces to inspection
 
UNDATED - (AP) The United States and Britain are proposing that the United Nations set a seven-day deadline for Iraqi President Saddam Hussein to agree to disarm and open his palaces for searches of hidden weapons, a Bush administration official and U.N. diplomats said Friday. President Bush backed the U.N. effort, saying, "I'm willing to give peace a chance."
The tough demands are coupled with a warning that "all necessary means" would be used against Iraq in the event of defiance, the officials told The Associated Press on condition of anonymity.
Describing the proposed U.N. resolution as tough and detailed, the U.S. official said Iraq would be accused of being in "material breach" of U.N. Security Council resolutions and told it must agree to "full, final and complete destruction" of its weapons of mass destruction. The resolution was being circulated to attract the support of France, Russia and China.
 
Finance leaders say world economy is bouncing back, despite crises
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - The finance ministers of the Western Hemisphere, seeking to project confidence in the face of a severe economic crisis in Latin America, pledged Friday to work harder to bolster growth and endorsed a new plan to choke off terrorist financing, a top priority of the United States.
U.S. Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill, the host for the meetings, read a statement after the discussions in which the group promised to complete negotiations for the world's largest free trade zone, linking all 34 democratic countries in the hemisphere by 2005 and also vowed not to turn away from free-market policies.
The Bush administration has been concerned that a deep economic crisis in Argentina and increasing market turmoil in Brazil and other Latin American countries might prompt the region to retreat from the U.S.-backed free-market style of economics.
 
U.S. says Chinese vessels harassed Navy oceanographic research ship in Yellow Sea
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Chinese coastal patrol planes buzzed an unarmed U.S. Navy ship several times and demanded that it cease "illegal operations" inside China's 200-mile economic exclusion zone, U.S. officials said Friday.
The incidents happened in the Yellow Sea over a period of weeks starting in early September. In an exchange of diplomatic notes with Beijing, the United States asserted its right to conduct what it calls oceanographic survey activity inside any nation's economic exclusion zone.
In Beijing on Thursday, Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Zhang Qiyue said, "We think it violates the international maritime law and we have made several representations to the U.S. side."
The U.S. ship involved, the USNS Bowditch, normally carries 28 civilian mariners and 27 oceanographers. It has since departed and is in port at Sasebo, Japan.
 
Americans flee homes that became fear-filled prisons in rebel-held Ivory Coast
 
YAMOUSSOUKRO, Ivory Coast (AP) - Bundled onto cargo planes or speeding through the lush Ivorian countryside, Americans on Friday abandoned a West African city that had become their home but was now held by a disciplined rebel force and facing government attack.
"We live here. All my children graduated from school here," said Tim Downs, a Kansas missionary, his voice breaking after rebellion and gunfire cut short his stay in Africa of 15 years. "My house looks like I just went out for bread, and I'll be back in 20 minutes."
Downs spoke Friday outside an overgrown compound at the end of a rutted red-earth road in Yamoussoukro. Capital of this former French colony, Yamoussoukro became staging post for evacuation by convoy and helicopter of Americans and other foreign nationals from the rebel-held city of Bouake, 40 miles farther north.
 
What's left of Isidore dumps rain on Midwest, speeds into Northeast
 
PIKEVILLE, Ky. (AP) - The remnants of Tropical Storm Isidore swept into the Northeast on Friday after leaving thousands of people without power in swamped communities across the South.
The storm left nearly 10 inches of rain in Ohio, Kentucky and Tennessee but largely spared the region's flood-prone mountains. By late afternoon, it was dumping rain on Pennsylvania, New York and parts of New England.
Isidore hit Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula as a hurricane last weekend, killing at least two people. It was blamed for at least two deaths in the United States, in Mississippi and Tennessee, and millions of dollars in damage.
President Bush on Friday afternoon declared disaster areas in 15 parishes in Louisiana, where Gov. Mike Foster estimated at least $18 million in damage. Florida Panhandle counties said Isidore and a tropical storm earlier this month caused at least $20 million in beach erosion damage.
 
Herpes drug shown to prevent transmission of the virus
 
SAN DIEGO (AP) - For the first time, a drug widely used to treat genital herpes has been shown to prevent its spread as well, offering a new way of curbing an infection already carried by one in five Americans.
A study released Friday found that a once-daily Valtrex pill cut in half the risk of passing on the infection when taken by people with herpes simplex virus type 2, the primary cause of genital herpes.
Until now, the only advice for avoiding herpes during sex has been to use condoms. While no one knows which is more effective, condoms are clearly not foolproof, since the virus spreads by contact with herpes sores, and condoms may not cover them all.
Dr. Lawrence Corey, the study's director, said the latest research suggests a new use for Valtrex in so-called discordant couples - those in which one partner is infected and one is not. The drug is already widely prescribed to prevent and treat herpes flare-ups.
 
Soul singer Barry White needs a kidney transplant, his record label says
 
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Deep-voiced soul singer Barry White needs a kidney transplant due to complications from years of chronic high blood pressure, his record label said.
White, 58, is undergoing dialysis treatment to stabilize his condition, Island Def Jam Music Group said in a statement Friday.
The singer's family refused to say whether he is hospitalized or is undergoing treatment at his Los Angeles home.
White is known for such romantic songs as "Can't Get Enough of Your Love, Babe" and "You're the First, the Last, My Everything."
He had been working on a new studio album, said Sheila Richman, spokeswoman for Island Def Jam.
White was hospitalized in August 1999 for a blood pressure problem, which forced him to cancel several live performances with the group Earth, Wind & Fire.
 
Americans don't need Tiger to keep it close
 
SUTTON COLDFIELD, England (AP) - Tiger Woods pressed his thumb to pursed lips as he surveyed the shot. It was the final match Friday at the Ryder Cup. A crucial point and valuable momentum were riding on the outcome.
This is Woods' stage. Only this time, he was a spectator.
The Americans didn't need the world's best player to stay in the game, relying instead on three Ryder Cup rookies and a gutsy shot by Phil Mickelson in the last match of a thrilling opening round at The Belfry.
Europe wound up with a 4 1/2-3 1/2 advantage, despite saddling Woods with two more losses to send his Ryder Cup record even more out of kilter with his other golfing feats.
The momentum belonged to the United States, thanks to Mickelson and David Toms rallying from 3-down with four holes to play to scratch out a valuable half-point.
 
 Load-Date: September 28, 2002

 

End of Document
