

AP News in Brief; Remembering the unforgettable, America and the world mark Sept. 11's anniversary
September 11, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1257 words
Body




America and the world remembered the unforgettable on Wednesday.
A cascade of memorial events around the globe marked a moment whose echoes still resound from New York to Afghanistan, and everywhere in between - a moment that even a year later left many transfixed by the horror, burdened by sadness, plagued by fears.
"A day of tears," said President Bush, "and a day of prayer, and a day of national resolve. It also needs to be a day in which we confirm the values which make us unique and great."
It was a day, too, of jitters and heightened security. Officials issued a "code orange" alert and warned that terrorists who struck last Sept. 11 might strike again.
Overseas, nine U.S. embassies were closed.
The message came attached to an announcement by Attorney General John Ashcroft that U.S. intelligence had uncovered the first specific threats against U.S. interests abroad and less credible information that terrorists might attack America again.
 
Pentagon says Taliban, not al-Qaida, suspected in Karzai assassination attempt
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Authorities in the United States and Afghanistan say the assassination attempt against Afghan President Hamid Karzai probably was engineered by the ousted Taliban regime, rather than al-Qaida terrorists.
"A lot of the violence - including, we may well find out, the assassination attempt on Karzai - are the product of remnants of the old regime that are still around, that are still trying to kill us and kill our allies and make way for terrorists," Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz said Tuesday in an interview with AP Radio and AP Television News.
Another senior defense official later said on condition of anonymity that intelligence gathered so far points to Taliban.
Another U.S. official, also speaking on condition of anonymity, said the Taliban's role in the attempt has not been definitively established. Another possibility includes the forces of the former prime minister, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, or old tribal enemies, officials have said.
 
Bush commemorates Sept. 11 as a day of tears, defiant national resolve
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - President Bush exhorted the nation to join him in a reverential but defiant remembrance of that bright September morning one year ago that shattered America's security and drew its people together.
"We have mourned the lost, honored the living and celebrated the character of our country," Bush said on the eve of this new Sept. 11, as he prepared for a pilgrimage that he hoped would both console and embolden.
He led the national observances from beneath an extraordinarily heavy lid of security as new intelligence warned of car bombings, suicide attacks and other anniversary-linked strikes.
Vice President Dick Cheney stayed out of sight to preserve the line of presidential succession.
Unlike the circling path that Air Force One took away from the attacks' epicenter a year ago, the president's purposeful journey on their anniversary was to touch each of the scars left by four hijacked airliners that struck in Washington, New York City and Pennsylvania.
 
Widespread election problems stall Florida primary results; Smith dumped in New Hampshire
 
Another Florida election. Another race too close to call. And, once again, problems at the polls that left voters angry and confused.
A new $32 million election system put in place after the 2000 Bush-Gore presidential debacle in Florida failed miserably in its debut Tuesday: Ballots jammed, machines malfunctioned and Gov. Jeb Bush - who will face the winner of the primary in November - ordered polls to stay open late.
Tuesday marked the busiest election day of the year.
Voters in 12 states determined fall lineups for six open governor's offices, three of the most competitive Senate seats and a few House seats that could influence control of Congress and the shape of the remainder of President Bush's administration.
In New Hampshire, U.S. Sen. Bob Smith was defeated by Rep. John Sununu in the GOP primary. In North Carolina, Elizabeth Dole coasted to victory Tuesday in the Republican Senate primary and Erskine Bowles won the Democratic nomination.
 
Police raid apartment house, kill and capture militants in three-hour gunbattle
 
KARACHI, Pakistan (AP) - Heavily armed police wearing body armor stormed a suspected al-Qaida hide-out Wednesday, killing two gunmen and capturing at least five others in a three-hour shooting battle, police said. One child was killed in the cross fire.
Five officers - three policemen and two intelligence agents - were wounded, two of them critically, police said. The federal Interior Ministry in Islamabad said all the gunmen were foreigners but did not say from what country. An intelligence officer, speaking on condition of anonymity, said one of the gunmen spoke Arabic.
A police official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the surviving gunmen could not speak Urdu, the Pakistani national language. He said police found a laptop and "literature" in the apartment and they suspected the gunmen were linked to al-Qaida.
 
Suspected Islamic militants kill state minister in Kashmir
 
SRINAGAR, India (AP) - Suspected Islamic militants gunned down a state minister and five of his supporters Wednesday as they campaigned for legislative elections in Indian-controlled Kashmir, police said.
Mushtaq Ahmad Lone, law minister for Jammu-Kashmir state, was killed in the village of Lalpora, nearly 70 miles north of Srinagar, a police officer said on condition of anonymity.
The suspected guerrillas detonated a land mine and opened fire as Lone arrived at the village, the officer said. The explosion blew up two vehicles, including the one in which Lone was traveling as he drove through his constituency, the spokesman said.
Lone belonged to the ruling, pro-India National Conference party. He died on the spot, police said. More than a dozen people were wounded in the attack.
Additional details were not immediately available.
The rebels have intensified attacks on politicians defying their call to boycott the elections to begin next Monday.
 
Security tightened and travel expected to be light on anniversary of attacks
 
Security workers at airports and train stations and along waterways were warned to be extra alert on the anniversary of the terrorist attacks, a day when fear and the weak economy were expected to keep travel light.
Newly hired federal security directors told passenger screeners, police and others to be vigilant, and the Bush administration raised the nationwide terror alert to its second-highest level.
"This is all being done out of an abundance of caution," said Transportation Department spokesman Leonardo Alcivar. "There's no specific threat within the United States."
The Coast Guard increased patrols and inspections and Amtrak, the national passenger railroad, said additional police officers were on patrol.
 
Sports world pays tribute to Sept. 11
 
The sports world honors the anniversary of Sept. 11 with moments of silence in baseball, observances at European soccer games and a candlelight vigil at U.S. Olympic headquarters.
All major league night games Wednesday will pause in silence at 9:11 p.m. local time. A videotape then will be shown in memory of those who died in the attacks. During afternoon games, the moment of silence and video were scheduled for the seventh-inning stretch.
During the day baseball games, a logo was to be displayed on the field, outfield walls, bases and lineup cards, incorporating the Stars and Stripes, the major league baseball logo, a red-white-and-blue ribbon and the phrase "We Shall Not Forget."
 
 Load-Date: September 12, 2002

 

End of Document
