

As the world changes, so must the maps
January 30, 2001, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 359 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




New parks are created, an old city changes its name, and the deepest sea surface sinks even farther. The Earth is a constantly changing place, and the maps that reflect it have to change, too.
The map policy committee of the National Geographic Society, maker of maps for millions of people, announced a series of changes Tuesday in its world maps.
For example, the surface level of the Dead Sea, the lowest point on the Earth's surface, has dropped even lower.
Due to what the Geographic calls a variety of factors, including shifts in rainfall and changes in irrigation practices, it now stands at 1,349 feet below sea level, down 9.8 feet in the 1990s.
"Before making a change, we consult with a myriad of sources, including national governments, the United Nations and the U.S. State Department. It's an in-depth process and when changes are decided upon, they are authoritative and recognized," said Juan Valdes, chairman of the map policy committee.
The changes are now included in the MapMachine, National Geographic's online atlas. Owners of the National Geographic's printed world atlas can download and print color patches of map changes to include in their atlas.
Besides the sinking sea, other changes announced were:
-Kolkata: Calcutta, India, reverted to its indigenous name of Kolkata on Dec. 23, 2000. Bombay, India, also is being switched to its original name, Mumbai, though that conversion is not complete on all maps yet.
-Sea of Japan (East Sea): South Koreans dispute the term Sea of Japan. Their preferred name, East Sea, is now added in parentheses.
-New Boundary Between Yemen and Saudi Arabia: In June 2000, the leaders of Yemen and Saudi Arabia signed a treaty defining their borders. The previous border was mostly undefined.
-Madidi National Park, Bolivia, and adjacent Bahuaja-Sonene National Park, Peru, were established.
-Newly designated or expanded U.S. National Monuments: Ironwood Forest National Monument, Ariz.; Vermilion Cliffs National Monument, Ariz.; Canyons of the Ancients National Monument, Colo.; and Craters of the Moon National Monument, Idaho.
On the Net: National Geographic Society: http://www.nationalgeographic.com 
 Load-Date: January 31, 2001

 

End of Document
