

Assassinated Hamas militant was the father of the Qassam rocket, had eluded Israeli forces for years
The Associated Press
October 21, 2004, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 339 words
Byline: By IBRAHIM BARZAK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GAZA CITY, Gaza Strip
Body




Adnan al-Ghoul, the Hamas military leader assassinated in an Israeli missile strike Thursday, had long eluded Israeli forces through a mixture of stealth and luck.
Al-Ghoul, 46, joined Hamas in 1988 when the group was in its infancy, and went on to help found its military wing. He became the organization's top bomb-maker after Israel assassinated Yehiya Ayash, known as "the engineer," in 1996.
Al-Ghoul also developed the homemade Qassam rocket as well as anti-tank and anti-aircraft weapons, according to Palestinian and Israeli military officials. Palestinian militants have fired dozens of Qassams into southern Israel in recent years, and Israel launched a broad offensive into Gaza late last month after a rocket attack killed two Israeli preschoolers.
Al-Ghoul was a resident of the Mughrkha area south of Gaza City but lived in hiding for years and never made public appearances or spoke to the media.
In September 2003, he was holed up in a Gaza apartment with Hamas founder Sheik Ahmed Yassin, senior official Ismail Hanieh, and military wing chief Mohammed Deif, when the Israeli air force dropped a 550-pound bomb on the building. All the men escaped unharmed, although Yassin was subsequently killed in an Israeli helicopter strike earlier this year.
Hamas is secretive about its organization, but the broad structural outlines are known.
General policy is set by the political bureau, headed by Khalid Mashaal in Damascus, Syria. Other members of the bureau include several Hamas leaders in the Arab world, as well as Hanieh and Mahmoud Zahar in Gaza.
The Hamas military wing, Izzedine al Qassam, plans and carries out attacks on Israelis. It is headed by Deif, who tops Israel's wanted list and has been operating from hiding for years.
Al-Ghoul's eldest son, Bilal, was killed in an Israeli air strike on 2001 while he was driving his father's car, and his second son, Mohammed, was killed the following year, together with a cousin, when Israeli troops searched the family home.
He is survived by a single son and a daughter.
 Load-Date: October 22, 2004

 

End of Document
