

Bell Ringer at Church of the Nativity shot and killed on the way to work
April 4, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 664 words
Byline: By IBRAHIM HAZBOUN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BETHLEHEM, West Bank
Body




The Palestinian bell ringer at the church built above the spot revered as Jesus' birthplace was shot and killed Thursday while walking to the basilica from his nearby home.
Samir Ibrahim Salman, a 45-year-old Palestinian Christian, was shot just a few steps from the Church of the Nativity during gunbattles between Palestinians holed up inside the church and Israeli troops outside, witnesses said.
Salman, who also cleaned the church and prayed there each day, was hit once in the chest, said Peter Koumry, director of the nearby Beit Jalla Hospital. The source of the fire that killed Salman was not known.
Armed Palestinians holed up inside the church said Thursday that Israeli troops blew open a back door leading into a small courtyard next to the church and fired inside, wounding three people. The Israeli military denied the claim.
Mazen Hassan, a Palestinian policeman in the church, said he and other armed men were close to the metal door when it was blown open and shots were fired, wounding the people. An Associated Press reporter speaking to Hassan by phone could hear the sound of heavy shooting in the background. Hassan said Palestinians were not returning fire.
However, Lt. Col. Olivier Rafowicz, an Israeli army spokesman, denied soldiers moved into the church compound. Other military officials said there was shooting in nearby Manger Square, and that troops were pursuing gunmen.
On Wednesday, Israeli Defense Minister Binyamin Ben-Eliezer said the shrine, one of Christianity's holiest, was off-limits to Israeli forces.
The Israeli military prevented reporters from reaching the church to assess the rival claims.
Rafowicz said Israel has been offering safe passage out of the church for anyone wishing it, and that Palestinian officials holed up inside "are preventing the people from leaving."
Before dawn Thursday, Israeli soldiers surrounding the church built over Jesus' traditional birth grotto had used loudspeakers to call on some 240 Palestinian police officers and militiamen hiding inside the massive stone walls to surrender.
No one answered the call.
The standoff began Tuesday, when the fighters, who had been engaged in heavy gunbattles with advancing Israeli troops for hours, dashed a few dangerous steps from the Palace Hotel to the Church of the Nativity.
An army video released Thursday showed the gunmen running a dozen at a time from the nearby hotel, their heavy footfalls splashing puddles in the cobblestone path under a slashing rain. "One at a time," shouted one of the men. Wearing military vests and boots and carrying rifles, they ran as another turned and provided cover, wildly firing an assault rifle.
Inside the dark, cold church nuns and priests, among about 60 members of the clergy there, have attended to 10 wounded gunmen and tried to come up with blankets. Two of the wounded need immediate medical care, said Father Ibrahim Faltas.
An Italian correspondent for RAI TV, Marc Innaro, was trapped inside the church before being evacuated with other foreigners in Bethlehem by a convoy of armored cars from the Italian Embassy Wednesday night. He said the gunmen appeared ready to hold out.
"They were very determined, not nervous, tired also, but not willing at all to surrender," Innaro told the AP. Footage taped by his crew showed gunmen milling about a statue of the Virgin Mary in a courtyard of the church. One of the men talked on a cellular phone amid the crackle of gunfire.
Elsewhere in Bethlehem, army footage showed about a dozen gunmen surrendering, coming out of a house one at a time and holding rifles over their heads as several members of the International Committee of the Red Cross watched. Soldiers looked down from their tanks and armored vehicles.
Other helmeted soldiers grabbed rifles from the men and lined them up on their knees with their hands on top of their heads.
Looking on, one of the international workers sought to calm the soldiers and the gunmen, saying slowly in a shaky voice, "We're OK. We're OK."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos
 Load-Date: April 5, 2002

 

End of Document
