

Big Deal in the BCS: How Miami and Nebraska reached the Rose Bowl
December 15, 2001, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 1020 words
Byline: By BEN WALKER, AP Sports Writer
Body




A poor pass in August, a blocked kick in October, an obscure game in December.
For Colorado, Oregon and Nebraska, their quests to reach the Rose Bowl came down to all the little things.
In the end, the Cornhuskers were picked to play top-ranked Miami in the Bowl Championship Series title game, based on a complicated formula mixing polls and computers. The choice was greeted with outrage by the teams left out.
"I liken the BCS to a bad disease, like cancer," Oregon coach Mike Bellotti said.
Colorado coach Gary Barnett demanded more "integrity" in the system. And USA Today, which compiles the coaches' poll with ESPN, ran a fans survey on the debate - at the top of page 1A above a story on the war in Afghanistan.
Hardly anyone seemed satisfied with the matchup. The howls for a new format - and possibly a playoff - were heard throughout sports.
"You probably would want it won on the field," Seattle Mariners manager Lou Piniella said. "But you would have to play into the late part of January. These are college kids who go to school to get an education as well as football."
The possibility of a split title looms, too. The coaches will automatically crown the Rose Bowl winner, while The Associated Press poll voters are free to pick their own champion.
"If you're asking me if the perception of chaos is good, I'm not buying into that," BCS chairman John Swofford said.
The BCS formula is equally weighted in four parts - the two polls, eight computer rankings, losses and strength of schedule. A bonus-point system was added this season to reward teams for wins over highly rated opponents.
A week-by-week look at how the contenders wound up where they did in the BCS shuffle:
 
Oct. 22
The first BCS rankings are released and defending national champion Oklahoma is No. 1. The Sooners will soon be tested - they next play at No. 2 Nebraska. UCLA, Miami and Virginia Tech follow in the ratings.
Oregon, coming off a fourth-quarter meltdown in which two blocked punts led to a 49-42 loss to Stanford, stands 13th.
Colorado is nowhere to be found following a 41-7 rout by Texas. Besides, the Buffaloes were upset by Fresno State 24-22 on Aug. 25 when a young quarterback threw a foolish interception near the end. Oct. 29
Nebraska beats Oklahoma and becomes No. 1 in the BCS standings. Oklahoma slips to second and Miami, despite being ranked No. 1 in both polls, is third. They're followed by Michigan, Texas and Stanford.
Oregon is hovering at No. 10. The Ducks are penalized in the BCS system because they only play the 36th-toughest schedule in America.
Colorado remains out of sight after a 22-19 win over Oklahoma State. As it turns out, had the Buffs won by 17 points instead of only three, they'd now be in the Rose Bowl.
"Squeakers hold you down," said David Rothman, who runs one of the eight computers the BCS factors into its formula. Never mind that he also ranks Division II Grand Valley State ahead of Michigan and Auburn. Nov. 5
Nebraska stays No. 1, and Miami trades places with Oklahoma.
Oregon moves into range at No. 6. The Ducks have caught the interest of Wes Colley's computer. A missile tracker for MIT's Lincoln Laboratory, he ranks them No. 3.
Colorado still is a no-show. Nov. 12
Nebraska (11-0) is solidly on top, having won every game by at least 10 points, and seems headed for Pasadena, Calif., possibly to play Miami. Fans are familiar with this scene - the Huskers and Hurricanes have met before for the national title.
Oklahoma and Oregon are next, while Florida is fifth and climbing. The high-scoring Gators are a perfect match for Jeff Sagarin's computer - it likes lopsided wins.
Colorado finally breaks into the BCS rankings at No. 14. Nov. 19
It's still Nebraska, Miami and Oklahoma. Florida beats up rival Florida State and moves ahead of Oregon for the fourth spot. Texas and Tennessee are in the mix, but will need help to go much further.
Colorado is idle and slips a slot to 15th. But the Buffaloes can cause big problems with an upset next weekend at home against Nebraska. Nov. 26
Surprise! Colorado routs Nebraska 62-36, Oklahoma State stops Oklahoma 16-13 and the whole BCS is shaken up.
Miami is ranked No. 1 by every poll and computer, and Florida is No. 2. The Sunshine State rivals met last season in the Sugar Bowl, and a rematch in the Rose would be fierce.
"As we all know, college football is not the most fair thing without a playoff system," Florida coach Steve Spurrier often says.
Texas, Nebraska, Oregon and Tennessee close in. Colorado shoots up to seventh, and is in position to keep zooming. Dec. 3
Miami escapes when a Virginia Tech receiver drops a late, 2-point conversion pass. The top-ranked 'Canes finish undefeated and are going to the Rose Bowl, no matter what.
Tennessee pulls an upset at Florida and takes over at No. 2. The Volunteers will go to Pasadena, too, if they beat LSU in the Southeastern Conference championship game.
Nebraska, Colorado - after beating Texas 39-37 in the Big 12 championship game - and Oregon follow. All three are done with their regular seasons, and it'll only get interesting if Tennessee loses. Dec. 9
The worst-case scenario for the BCS: Tennessee blows a lead and falls to LSU 31-20. Now it's a free-for-all to decide who goes to the Rose Bowl.
Nebraska is No. 4 in both polls, but all eight BCS computers rank the Huskers higher. Plus, they're helped by a quirk: Down in Hattiesburg, Miss., in a meeting of unranked teams, Texas Christian has beaten Southern Miss 14-12.
TCU's win suddenly gives Nebraska the 14th-toughest schedule, rather than the 18th. The Huskers, having beaten the Horned Frogs back in August, get a slight benefit - just enough to finish No. 2 in the BCS ratings and put them in Pasadena.
Nebraska (11-1), despite not even winning its division of the Big 12, gets a 7.23 rating in the BCS ratings. Colorado (10-2) is third at 7.28, despite jumping past the Huskers in the coaches' poll.
Oregon (10-1) finishes fourth in the BCS ratings. The Ducks rank second in both polls - yet for the second straight year, the AP's No. 2 is left out of the BCS championship game, the same thing having happened to Miami last season.
 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos; AP Graphic
 Load-Date: December 16, 2001

 

End of Document
