

BOOKS 5-7; The ABCs of the NSA
May 7, 2001, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Lifestyle
Length: 567 words
Byline: By DAVID SMYTH, For AP Weekly Features
Body




Quick, now - name America's biggest security and surveillance agency.
Did you say the CIA? The FBI?
Wrong!
It's the NSA. The National Security Agency. Otherwise known as "No Such Agency," or, to its employees, "Never Say Anything."
The NSA employs more people than the CIA and the FBI combined. It has 38,000 employees and would rank among the first 50 of U.S. industrial corporations. Its headquarters complex at Fort Meade, Md., consumes as much electricity as Annapolis, the state capital.
The NSA's job is to break foreign country's codes and intercept communications worldwide. It has also been known to spy on American citizens. This is a spooky giant in the shadows that could be vital to national survival. Or a deadly threat to the liberty of individual Americans. And nobody knows much about it.
An investigative journalist, James Bamford, took a first look at the NSA in his 1982 book "The Puzzle Palace." Now, in "Body of Secrets"@ (Doubleday, 721 pages, $29.95), he does a remarkable job of peeling away even more protective layers from this supersecret behemoth of the espionage business. 
Among other things: how the NSA alerted President Kennedy to the massive Soviet buildup in Cuba in the 1962 missile crisis; how it kept certain information out of the official Warren Report on Kennedy's assassination; how President Eisenhower micromanaged incredibly risky espionage overflights of Soviet territory; and how an NSA mistake led to the enormous expansion of the Vietnam War following the Gulf of Tonkin incident.
In the murky world of international espionage, the NSA has achieved brilliant coups and made major blunders, all out of public sight. Bamford appears to have done his homework with great thoroughness to bring them out of the shadows.
One example: Bamford reveals how the U.S. Navy ignored warnings from the NSA and sent the spy ship Pueblo to its humiliating capture by North Korean gunboats in 1968.
Another: A few months earlier, in the USS Liberty incident, the NSA had blundered badly. The Liberty, also an espionage vessel, was sent out practically unarmed, put in harm's way during the 1967 Arab-Israeli war, and then abandoned under fire. It was bombed, machine-gunned and torpedoed for several hours by Israeli warplanes and gunboats. Help from the U.S. Sixth Fleet nearby was withheld. Thirty-four U.S. sailors, Marines and NSA employees were killed and 171 wounded.
Israel has maintained the attack was accidental. But Bamford reveals that an NSA surveillance plane was overhead at the time. Aboard the plane was Marvin E. Nowicki, a Hebrew-speaking intercept specialist who told Bamford that he overheard Israeli pilots talking about attacking a ship flying the American flag - direct evidence that it was no accident. It was a deliberate attack, and the NSA knew it.
Bamford reports that the Liberty had inadvertently sailed within earshot of an operation so secret that Israel would do anything to prevent its disclosure, even if it had to sink an American ship and kill its crew.
Bamford concludes that it is time for a thorough investigation of Israeli responsibility for the attack. But the NSA has been sitting on Bamford's revelation for years. The surveillance plane's transcripts of intercepted Israeli communications have lain neglected in a desk drawer in NSA's G643 office, Bamford says, and the agency should be required to release them to the American public.
 Load-Date: May 8, 2001

 

End of Document
