

Dean is a little-known outsider in the presidential race, and he's making the most of it
The Associated Press
January 15, 2003, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 641 words
Byline: By WILL LESTER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Presidential candidate Howard Dean believes his fellow Democrats in Washington are afraid to take on President Bush.
For example, he said, the debate in Washington over whether to pass a $670 billion tax cut or a smaller version is missing the point.
"We are headed down a path in this country of borrow and spend, borrow and spend," Dean said. There should be no more talk about tax cuts until political leaders consider how to pay the country's bills, he said.
Dean said people in his party are "so afraid to talk about that because they see the president's popularity and think, 'Boy, people want tax cuts."'
The former governor of Vermont is near the bottom of the polls among 2004 Democratic presidential candidates. Dean says he sees himself as the outsider in the race, and he's making the most of that role.
The 54-year-old physician told a packed conference room at the National Press Club on Tuesday that he's willing to challenge President Bush on his policies ranging from Iraq to education to tax cuts.
Dean says he's an independent voice because he's free of any congressional entanglements and willing to take on the president. All others currently in the race are in Congress. The Rev. Al Sharpton of New York expects to join the campaign soon.
For the last year, Dean has been making his case in the states that will kick off the 2004 caucuses and primaries. He's been to Iowa more than a dozen times, New Hampshire two dozen and South Carolina a half dozen in the past year.
On Tuesday, Dean also criticized the president's education plan - the "no child left behind" act - by calling it the "no school board left standing" act.
"Everybody running for president - except for me - and the Republicans got together on this wonderful bipartisan bill that is the second largest unfunded mandate in the history of education," he said, referring to tougher accountability standards without the additional money to meet those standards.
Dean also made a pitch for his plan of providing universal health insurance through expanding Medicaid and said it could be paid for with half of the president's tax cut. And he criticized the administration's foreign policy, which he said has rejected international agreements and focused intently on Iraq without providing proof that country has weapons of mass destruction.
Associates of two Democrats who will be appearing with Dean at a political event in Iowa Saturday night rejected his description of them as timid in confronting Bush.
"It's the battles you fight that make you an outsider in the eyes of Democratic activists," said David Wade, a spokesman for Massachusetts Sen. John Kerry. "Kerry has a 30-year record holding the system accountable for the American people." Wade cited Kerry's activism after Vietnam, his work on the POW-MIA issue and efforts to reduce dependence on foreign oil.
Rep. Dick Gephardt's associates pointed to the Missouri lawmaker's recent comments in South Carolina when he told party activists his feelings on Bush: "He is a nice man … but he is uninformed, he is inexperienced and he has no curiosity. … He is not up to the job and needs to be replaced."
White House spokesman Scott McClellan said: "This is a time when Democrats are trying to outjockey one another. We'll leave it to the Democratic candidates to resolve their internal differences.
"The president is focused on running the country, not for office, and that's why his focus will continue to be on our big priorities, such as fighting terrorism, protecting the homeland and strengthening the economy."
Asked Tuesday how he feels about being at the bottom in a recent national poll of Democrats on their choice for a nominee, Dean laughed.
"A year out, who cares?" Dean said.
"What I care about is where I am in Iowa the night before the caucuses."
On the Net:
Howard Dean campaign: http://www.deanforamerica.com 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo WX104 of Jan. 14

 

End of Document
