

Defense chief not budging from opposition to expanding the size of the military
The Associated Press
January 13, 2004, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 564 words
Byline: By ROBERT BURNS, AP Military Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Taking on critics in Congress who say America needs a bigger Army, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said Tuesday the military is under strain but he is not yet convinced a permanent expansion is in the best interests of the Pentagon or taxpayers.
Anticipating a renewed call for enlarging the Army when Congress returns next week, Rumsfeld said the Pentagon was already using emergency powers to temporarily add 36,000 service members.
"That's a considerable increase," he said, for a military of 1.4 million active-duty members. "A permanent end-strength increase could prove to be the slowest and most expensive option for reducing stress on the force."
The nature of the authority under which the Pentagon has temporarily added 36,000 service members gives it the flexibility to drop as many of those as it wishes when the need goes away.
Although the global war on terrorism appears to have no end in sight, Rumsfeld argued that the extra demands placed upon U.S. soldiers since Sept. 11, 2001, are only temporary - a "spike period."
Rumsfeld said he found it understandable that some believe the Army needs a permanent increase in the number of soldiers, given its heavy commitments in Afghanistan, Iraq and elsewhere.
"The question really is not whether we can afford an increase in end strength," he said. "Of course we can. The United States is perfectly capable of paying for additional forces if we decide that that's desirable."
But at this point it does not appear to be an economical choice, he added.
"The costs are sizable over a lifetime of each added service member. And because of the time it takes to recruit, train and integrate new military personnel, the benefits really cannot be felt for some time."
He added that a permanent increase in the size of the Army would force the Pentagon to cut elsewhere in its budget, "crowding out funding for various types of transformational capabilities that can allow us to do more with the forces that we currently have."
Rumsfeld also argues that measuring U.S. military capability by numbers alone misses an important point. It takes a smaller number of forces - whether soldiers on the ground or planes dropping bombs - to accomplish a military mission today than it did even a decade ago. The reasons are many, including technological advances and improvements in joint service warfare.
Rumsfeld cited the combat successes in Afghanistan and the initial phase of the war in Iraq as examples.
In a related development, the Navy announced that the amphibious assault ship USS Bataan will set sail Jan. 19 from Norfolk, Va., en route to the Persian Gulf to deliver a portion of the 2nd Marine Expeditionary Force, which is part of a wholesale changeover of U.S. troops in Iraq.
The Marine units going from Camp Lejeune, N.C., include portions of the 2nd Marine Division, the 2nd Force Service Support Group and the 2nd Marine Aircraft Wing. They will operate as part of a larger group of Marines designated for Iraq duty from Camp Pendleton, Calif.
The Bataan returned to Norfolk June 25 after serving six months in the Gulf as part of the initial Iraq invasion force. It also spent seven months helping fight the Afghanistan war in 2001.
The Navy also announced that the aircraft carrier USS George Washington and its battle group will head for the Gulf region Jan. 20 from their homeport at Norfolk. The group has 7,600 sailors aboard.
 Load-Date: January 14, 2004

 

End of Document
