

Democrats take pokes at the right wing and at the funny bone
The Associated Press
September 29, 2003, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Lifestyle
Length: 597 words
Byline: By ANTONIO CASTANEDA, Associated Press Writer
Body




"Lies and the Lying Liars Who Tell Them: A Fair and Balanced Look at the Right." By Al Franken. Dutton. 379 Pages. $24.95.
---
"Lies and the Lying Liars Who Tell Them: A Fair and Balanced Look at the Right" rings with the moral clarity of an angel's trumpet. Or at least that's what a Hippies for Howard Dean rally or the left wing of the Democratic Party will certainly be preaching this political season.
Comedian Al Franken's diatribe against the Bush administration, Fox News Channel and other representatives of the right could be seen as another cheap political book with a not-so-veiled agenda. Although Franken is a self-proclaimed liberal, his work differs in that it presents well-substantiated arguments and damning examples of false accusations that conservatives have effectively used against Democrats.
Also, and perhaps more importantly for conservative readers, it does so in an incredibly amusing way.
Regarding Bill O'Reilly, the Fox News host whom he calls a "right-wing blowhard of the schoolyard bully variety," Franken exposes several embarrassing examples of personal embellishments and blatantly inaccurate statements that he's used on his program. And he includes twisted excerpts from O'Reilly's book about a "serial killer who will exact revenge on everyone who has sabotaged his rising TV career" that will make you think twice before entering O'Reilly's "No Spin Zone."
There's a compelling argument against Attorney General John Ashcroft's policy of arresting immigrants as "material witnesses" in terrorism investigations. But he can't resist also poking fun at Ashcroft, a devout Pentecostal, for anointing himself with Crisco before being inaugurated as U.S. senator.
Franken repeatedly uses sharp analysis and humor to drive his point home. Regarding accusations that Iraq was building aerial vehicles to attack the United States before the war, he says this was as "plausible as the Malawi space program, which consists of a bucket and one man's dreams."
Franken also pays a ridiculous visit to Bob Jones University, the ultraconservative school in South Carolina that Bush visited during his presidential campaign, and listens to a student explain why he believes in creationism. When the student argues that no mutation has been beneficial, Franken writes, "I looked at my thumb, but said nothing, as I used it to hold my fork and shove the worst lunch I've ever had in my mouth."
To emphasize his point, he adds that the unaccredited school has "the same degree-granting power as Schlotsky's Deli."
Franken does stoop to deliver a few attacks against Bush that are unsubstantiated. He blames Sen. John McCain's loss in the 2000 South Carolina Republican primary on the Bush campaign without providing ample evidence. But even when he's off-base in his arguments, his book is still hilarious for anyone fairly well-versed in current affairs.
Despite its many jokes, "Lies and the Lying Liars" is not devoid of a larger point about the current nature of American politics. Franken does not deny that the left wing has its share of hacks and attack dogs. But he persuasively makes the case that the right wing's spokespeople and officials in major media outlets often cross lines of honesty and decency far exceeding the politicking of the left.
Franken at one point glibly refers to himself as "a mere comedian with only a passing knowledge of current events." But the examples he cites throughout his book could - at the very least and for any reader - make you think twice before you believe the latest accusations spouting from right-wing radio or television.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY633
 Load-Date: September 30, 2003

 

End of Document
