

Excerpts of a letter to the al-Qaida leadership about the insurgency in Iraq
The Associated Press
February 12, 2004, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 523 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Excerpts from a letter, purportedly from anti-U.S. operative Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, to al-Qaida about the state of the insurgency in Iraq. The text of the letter was released by the U.S. military and translated from Arabic by The Associated Press:
On Iraqi Kurds: "They opened their land to the Jews and became their rear base and a Trojan horse for their plans. They (Jews) infiltrate through their land and take cover behind their banners, use them as bridges to cross into financial control and economic hegemony ..."
On Shiites: "Shiism is the overwhelming danger and real challenge."
"The American army began to retreat from some cities and its presence became scarce (in others). It's being replaced by the Iraqi army and this is the real problem we are facing. Fighting the Americans is easy because the enemy is obvious, its back is unprotected and it is ignorant of the terrain and the reality of the mujahedeen because of the weakness of their intelligence.
"We know for a fact that that these crusader forces will go tomorrow or the day after, but anyone aware of the reality will see how hurriedly the enemy is forming the police and army, which have begun to take over its duties. That enemy is made up of rejectionists (Shiites) and augmented by Sunni collaborators and is the real danger we face. They are our cousins and they know our ins and outs and they are more cunning than their crusader masters."
..."Regrettably, jihad here is planting mines and firing rockets and mortars from afar. The Iraqi brothers are still keen on safety … some groups perhaps brag among themselves that none of them had been killed or captured and we told them many times that safety and victory don't go together."
..."This country has no mountains in which we can take refuge or woods in which we can hide. Our backs are unprotected and our movements are exposed and eyes are everywhere and the enemy is in front of us and the sea behind us."
..."America did not come here so it can leave and it will not leave no matter how many wounds it sustains and how much blood it sheds. "
..."We, thanks be to God, were the key to all martyrdom operations, including those in the north, planning and preparing for them. We have completed, with the help of God, 25 of them. Some of them targeted the rejectionists (Shiites) and their symbols, some the Americans and their soldiers, police and coalition forces. Those to come will be more, God willing."
..."Our hope is for our work tempo to accelerate, to form brigades and battalions that have experience and perseverance, and to wait for zero hour when we begin to appear in public and control the land at night and, God willing, also during the day. This zero hour we hope to extend for about four months before the proposed government is formed. As you can see, we are in a race against time. If we can, as we hope, turn the tables against them and spoil their plans, that would be good. But if it goes the other way, God forbid, and the government controls the country, then there will be no choice but to pack our bags and move to another land where we can once again carry our banner, or become martyrs."
 Load-Date: February 13, 2004

 

End of Document
