

Former President Clinton sees 'great battle for the heart and soul of the new century'
October 2, 2001, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 270 words
Byline: By ERICA WERNER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




Former President Clinton said the fight against terrorism is "the great battle for the heart and soul of the new century, and we have got to win it."
During an appearance Monday at an online learning conference, Clinton also urged support for the Bush administration and assured the packed audience that America's defenses will improve.
Clinton suggested that prevailing over Osama bin Laden, who is suspected of masterminding the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, may not be easy.
"Mr. bin Laden, who I've studied a long time, he's got a specific agenda here. And if you look at him he's a very worthy opponent - a formidable person - as the president, Secretary Powell have said. He wants America out of Saudi Arabia, the country of his birth," Clinton said.
"We're in a crisis now and we need to stay together," Clinton said. "There are responsible people in power who are working hard to make good decisions and we should all support them regardless of party."
Clinton also said bin Laden would like to impose his "narrow and I think highly twisted view of truth" on the world and America must fight that.
"I think it would be a pretty dreary world of their view of the truth prevailed," he said in reference to bin Laden and the Taliban party that rules Afghanistan.
Clinton's appearance came the same day the U.S. Supreme Court suspended him from practicing law before the high court and gave him 40 days to say why he should not be permanently disbarred there. Clinton offered no comment on the court action, but one of his lawyers said earlier the ex-president will argue that disbarment before the high court is inappropriate.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos KSDX101-2; 105-6
 Load-Date: October 3, 2001

 

End of Document
