

From the bench to the front lines: War tests nation's citizen-soldiers
The Associated Press
September 22, 2004, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 715 words
Byline: By CHRISTINA ALMEIDA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LAS VEGAS
Body




The National Guard soldiers were upbeat and their sense of mission strong at their annual convention. But they were also painfully aware that their mission no longer involves being mere "weekend warriors."
The National Guard - long viewed as an emergency backup to the U.S. military - now looks more like another full-fledged branch of the armed forces, making up 40 percent of those fighting in Iraq. Nearly one of every five U.S. casualties in Iraq has been a National Guardsman or reservist. The turmoil has stretched the Guard thin as it carries out a dual mission of fighting a bloody insurgent war while also protecting airports and nuclear power plants from terrorists.
"This is not your father's National Guard," said Lt. Gen. H Steven Blum, who oversees the National Guard. "It's not an either or deal. We must do both."
The evolution of the Guard was reflected in the fact that both President Bush and John Kerry addressed the convention last week, aware that the troops' long deployments in far-off lands have had a profound toll on almost every community in the country.
There have been mounting complaints that Guardsmen have not been properly trained and equipped for the new responsibilities, and the discord was evident outside the convention hall. Members of the organization Military Families Speak Out said they had to buy walkie-talkies and global-positioning satellite devices for their loved ones overseas.
Bush "did not give them training and equipment. He has never given them a good reason why they are fighting and dying for him," said Karma Kumlin, whose husband is deployed with the Minnesota National Guard.
Blum acknowledged some initial problems but said that the situation has dramatically improved and that every soldier is as well-trained and -equipped as his active-duty counterparts.
"We are one army. They are all U.S. soldiers," Blum said. "This is the first time in the history of the United States that it's been that way."
While the citizen-soldiers of the National Guard and the Reserve have played a role in virtually every U.S. conflict, rarely have they sustained such casualties. Guard troops were primarily the bench players who occasionally were called up but more likely served a weekend a month in their home states.
That changed with the Sept. 11 attacks.
Tens of thousands of National Guard members were called to duty to Afghanistan and later to the front lines of Iraq to supplement a military that had been downsized in recent decades.
"The Guard is bearing more of a burden than most of its current members signed up for," said Loren Thompson of the Lexington Institute, a defense think tank in Alexandria, Va. "You can forget about the 'weekend warrior' concept. The Guard is beginning to look more and more like an annex rather than an emergency backup."
Such duties are causing soldiers to have second thoughts about joining the new Guard, which has a total of about 460,000 men and women.
While Air National Guard recruiting is up, indications are the Army National Guard will fall about 4,000 short of its authorized force of 350,000 soldiers, Blum said. Most of the 122,000 or so deployed Guardsmen are overseas; of the more than 1,000 casualties since the start of the war, nearly 200 of them have been Guardsmen or reservists.
Guard officials blame the shortfall on active duty soldiers - traditionally a consistent source for the National Guard ranks - who are not enlisting because of recent deployments.
"It defies common sense to believe that the kind of people who used to sign up for the Guard will continue signing up in equal numbers given how the job has changed," Thompson said.
Bush told the cheering convention that he is improving life for the nation's citizen-soldiers and has spent nearly $14 billion for construction, maintenance and support for Guard and Reserve facilities.
"I have made a pledge to those who wear the uniform that they will have the resources and the tools they need to do their jobs," the president said.
In his convention address two days later, Kerry accused Bush of mismanaging the National Guard and said he would expand the nation's active duty forces.
"The National Guard was intended to complement, not be a substitute for, active duty forces," Kerry said.
On the Net:
National Guard: http://www.ngb.army.mil 
 Graphic



 
AP Graphic IRAQ NATIONAL GUARD
 Load-Date: September 23, 2004

 

End of Document
