

How different groups feel about the price of gasoline and their other top priorities for the president, Congress
The Associated Press
September 2, 2005, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News; Washington Dateline
Length: 347 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Demographics and details from the AP-Ipsos poll on gas prices and other top priorities for President Bush and Congress. The results are taken from a poll of 1,000 adults conducted Aug. 29-31 by Ipsos, an international polling firm. The survey has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3 percentage points, larger for subgroups.
TOP PRIORITIES
Gas prices: Adults younger than 65, about one-fourth of that group, were more likely than seniors, 14 percent, to name gas prices as the top priority; men younger than 45, about one-third of that group, were more likely than older men, 19 percent, to name gas prices.
Iraq: Women, 33 percent, were more likely than men, 24 percent, to name Iraq as the top priority; people with a college degree, 33 percent, or some college, 30 percent, were more likely than those with a high school education or less, 21 percent; Democrats, 35 percent, were more likely than Republicans, 25 percent, to name Iraq.
Economy and jobs: Minorities, 21 percent, were more likely than whites, 12 percent, to name the economy and jobs as top priorities.
Terrorism: Men, 13 percent, were more likely than women, 6 percent, to name terrorism as the top priority; those over age 30, about one-eighth of that group, were more likely than young adults, 2 percent; those who make more than $50,000 a year, about 14 percent, were more likely than those who made less, about 7 percent, to name terrorism.
CONFIDENCE LEVELS
Iraq: Almost four in 10 said they were confident the president will be able to handle Iraq effectively, and 45 percent were confident in Congress to handle that issue.
Energy and gas prices: Just over one-third said they were confident the president will be able to handle energy and gas prices; almost half said they believe Congress can handle it.
Economy and jobs: Just over one-third said they have confidence the president can handle the economy; almost half said Congress should be able to handle it.
Terrorism: Nine in 10 said they have confidence in the president to handle terrorism; seven in 10 said they have confidence in Congress to handle it.
 Load-Date: September 3, 2005

 

End of Document
