

In Middle East, counting the cost of two years of battles is part of the fight
November 27, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1177 words
Byline: By JASON KEYSER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




A Palestinian blows himself up, killing Israeli soldiers, along with women and children. An Israeli missile kills a militant leader Israel holds responsible for the attack, along with women and children who happened to be nearby. And out come the scorecards in a grisly battle of numbers.
Beyond the tragedy of shattered lives, the death toll is itself part of the Israeli-Palestinian struggle, with each side contesting the other's version to portray itself to world public opinion as the greater victim.
The meaning behind the figures depends in part on one's view of who's a combatant and who's a bystander.
The Associated Press re-examined the death toll to better determine how many people have died in the more than two years of fighting that followed the collapse of U.S.-brokered peace talks, and to say with more certainty who the victims were.
After a re-count of all the fatalities since Sept. 29, 2000, and in some cases renewed investigation of their circumstances, AP found that 1,934 people have died on the Palestinian side and 678 on the Israeli side as of Monday.
The numbers are based on interviews with doctors, relatives and witnesses, visits to hospitals and morgues, and statements by both sides' security forces.
Government and unofficial agencies on both sides also keep count, and their totals vary somewhat, reflecting some disagreements over what kinds of deaths to include.
But more profound are the disagreements over which types of casualties constitute "combatants" and which are "innocent civilians."
Israel's Foreign Ministry maintains no more than 45 percent of the Palestinian casualties of the conflict were "noncombatants," people who were neither involved in hostilities against Israel nor members of Palestinian armed groups.
But the Palestine Monitor, a think tank that tracks the violence, says 85 percent were "civilians" - and appears to include in that category all who were not members of the Palestinian security forces, even if they belonged to various armed groups.
As for the Israeli casualties, there is little dispute that most were civilians although determining an exact number is difficult because the two sides disagree on who fits into that category.
A total of 309 Israeli dead, or about 45 percent, were killed in suicide bombings and dozens more were killed in shootings.
Jewish settlers, while only 3 percent of Israel's population, constitute almost a fifth of the casualties: 131 people.
In all, 71 Israelis and 265 Palestinians under age 18 have been victims of the violence. These figures don't include Palestinian teens who carried out suicide and shooting attacks.
A total of 191 Israeli soldiers have been killed, 38 in Palestinian attacks inside Israel while off-duty. Palestinians tend to count them as combatants anyway - a classification Israelis vigorously reject.
Yet Israelis also tend to see the other side's security services as combatants, especially since Israel has insisted the Palestinian Authority is involved in terror - in some cases directly and in others by its inaction. Palestinian officials say 258 police or other security personnel have been killed by Israeli fire.
To Palestinians, attacks on police and security buildings are Israeli aggression and more evidence that Israel is being disingenuous when it demands the Palestinian police crack down on militants.
For example, on Dec. 4, 2001, Israel responded to a series of suicide bombings by Islamic militants that killed 26 people by sending F-16 warplanes to drop bombs on a Palestinian security building in Gaza City.
The attack killed one undisputed noncombatant - 15-year-old Mohammed Abu Shokeh, who fled a nearby school with hundreds of other students - but what of security services member Mohammed Ahmed Siam, 25, who was also killed? He is not known to have had ties to militant groups or a history of attacking Israelis.
It can also be difficult to categorize those killed in what Israel has called "targeted attacks" on Palestinian terrorists - which Palestinian officials label assassinations.
Israeli forces have killed at least 82 Palestinian militants in such targeted attacks, strikes that have also killed 52 bystanders.
Even many Palestinians who oppose suicide bombings in Israel sometimes express some understanding of them, noting the Palestinians are under occupation and vastly outgunned by one of the world's most powerful militaries.
Consequently the Palestinian Authority's statements condemning suicide bombings are generally careful to declaim the killing of civilians on all sides - which is meant to underscore that Israel is no less guilty.
Palestinians say Israel too often takes action that clearly will carry a civilian toll.
The radically opposing viewpoints can dictate the reaction to the detailed breakdown of the death toll AP periodically publishes.
One point of contention, for example, has been AP's decision to include in its Palestinian death toll the 89 suicide bombers who killed themselves.
Critics have charged that since the death toll is widely perceived as a tallying of victims, these clear cases of attackers sacrificing their own lives should be left off.
However, it would be difficult to justify leaving the suicide bombers off while including the roughly 100 Palestinians killed while staging other types of attacks.
And the inclusion of undisputed Palestinian attackers can be seen as balanced by the inclusion in the Israeli death toll of soldiers who died in combat.
The Palestinian toll also includes at least 56 Palestinians who were killed by fellow Palestinians on suspicion of collaborating with Israeli authorities - further underscoring the count should not be viewed as a straightforward "victimization" of one side by the other.
Israeli and Palestinian human rights groups and research institutions have published similar counts to AP's, but there are some differences.
Palestinians tend to count about 70 people they say died of illnesses because they could not get medical treatment due to curfews and long waits at checkpoints. AP does not include such cases.
The review of AP's death toll found that past miscounts had inflated AP's Palestinian count by 88 and the Israeli count by seven - mostly during the tumultuous period last spring when Israel launched a major military offensive and conditions at Palestinian hospitals were chaotic.
Part of the death toll revision came from a renewed look at the Palestinian casualties in Nablus during 18 days of heavy fighting in April. The earlier count was based on Palestinian figures the AP has determined included 12 cases where people died of medical conditions or road accidents.
Other differences arise over whether to count foreign nationals, such as British U.N. official Iain Hook who was shot by Israeli troops on Friday in the West Bank town of Jenin, or Romanian guest workers killed by a Palestinian bombing in Israel near the Gaza Strip. The AP count includes these deaths.
---
On the Net:
Israel's International Policy Institute for Counterterrorism: http://www.ict.org.il 
Palestinian Medical Relief: http://www.upmrc.org 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos JRL103,NY195
 Load-Date: November 28, 2002

 

End of Document
