

In Rhode Island, GOP embraces the maverick incumbent instead of the loyal challenger
The Associated Press
November 15, 2005, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 503 words
Byline: By M.L. JOHNSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WARWICK, R.I.
Body




Liberal Republican Sen. Lincoln Chafee refused to support President Bush in the last election, opposed the GOP tax cuts and was the only Republican to vote against the use of military force in Iraq, a war he has likened to Vietnam.
So why, a year before the election, is the GOP embracing Chafee and spending close to $200,000 on television ads aimed at undercutting his conservative rival in the Republican primary, Cranston Mayor Stephen Laffey?
Like him or not, Republicans consider Chafee their best chance to win in heavily Democratic Rhode Island.
Brian Nick, spokesman for the National Republican Senatorial Committee, said it is "ridiculous" that Laffey is running against "the only Republican that can keep the seat in the Senate." The committee is financing the ads and urging Laffey to abandon the race.
In recent years, Laffey endeared himself to the GOP by challenging the state's unions and other public officials; Republicans once courted him for lieutenant governor. Now, he is ignoring their entreaties to step aside.
"This is the story of my life," said Laffey, a 43-year-old former investment banker. "People tell me I shouldn't do things, and I end up doing them. Seems like I do them for spite sometimes."
The son of a toolmaker, Laffey frequently boasts about attending Harvard Business School despite being told he would not get in straight out of college. He scoffs at the Republican argument about the Senate race.
"The national Republican Party has sort of lost its way," he said. "Think about it: The first $200,000 they're spending is against a fellow Republican."
Chafee - a first-term senator who inherited the seat upon the death of his father, John Chafee, and later won it outright in 2000 - is soft-spoken and painstakingly polite. Laffey is outgoing, outspoken and often confrontational.
Chafee is a reluctant campaigner. Laffey enlists his wife and five children to stand on street corners to reach people as they drive to work and says he would "rather campaign than do anything else."
Rhode Island has more than three times as many registered Democrats as Republicans, and the state overwhelmingly went for Democrat John Kerry in the last presidential election, 59 percent to 39 percent.
Republicans fear Laffey will mobilize enough conservatives to edge out Chafee in the GOP primary next September, and then lose to a Democrat in November, said Maureen Moakley, a political science professor at the University of Rhode Island.
On the big issues - the environment, the war in Iraq, abortion - Chafee looks a lot like a Democrat, Moakley said. (The senator even drives a Toyota Prius hybrid.)
As for his relationship with the Bush administration and Republican Party leaders, Chafee said: "We have a respectful distance, if you will, a mutual non-aggression pact."
The contenders on the Democratic side are former Rhode Island Attorney General Sheldon Whitehouse, Secretary of State Matt Brown and businessman Carl Sheeler.
On the Net:
Chafee: www.chafeeforsenate.com 
Laffey: www.electlaffey.com 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos
 Load-Date: November 16, 2005

 

End of Document
