

In the heart of Shiite Iraq, questions the U.S. presence
The Associated Press
May 15, 2003, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 616 words
Byline: By ALI AKBAR DAREINI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NAJAF, Iraq
Body




In his little souvenir shop near the shrine of Imam Ali, a revered figure whom Shiite Muslims consider the Prophet Muhammad's successor, Zahra Shokri pulls out a box of American-made Kent cigarettes and scribbles a message for President Bush on the back.
"Explain to us what you think is wrong with Islam, and why do you reject an Islamic government in Iraq?"
The note, handed to a journalist this week, refers to a statement by U.S. Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, who said that a government dominated by hard-line Muslim religious clerics "isn't going to happen" in Iraq.
"The only good thing the Americans did was to oust the notorious Saddam Hussein," Shokri said. "Now, they are overstaying in Iraq. Worse than that is they are opposing an Islamic government here."
As Washington faces the possibility that democratic elections might produce an Islamic-oriented government in Iraq, Shokri's comments appear to typify the growing resentment that many Shiites feel toward the United States and what they see as its effort to install a puppet government in Baghdad.
Iraq's Shiites have a long history of opposing foreign-installed rule. In the 1920s and 30s, they mounted a series of revolts against a British-imposed monarchy and were put down by the Royal Air Force.
The Shiites, who make up 60 percent of Iraq's population, were persecuted and oppressed under Saddam's Sunni Muslim-dominated regime. But many retain a deep mistrust of the United States, which they believe abandoned them in 1991 after encouraging them to mount an armed revolt against Saddam. Without U.S. help, thousands of Shiites were slain by Saddam's forces.
"We want the rule of Islam," Shokri said. "The Bush administration should respect the choice of the Iraqi people."
Shokri's definition of Islamic rule - apparently shared by the vast majority of citizens in this center of Shiite learning - coincides with what many religious leaders have been demanding in recent months: a democratic government within an Islamic framework.
The return last week of Ayatollah Mohammad Baqir al-Hakim - leader of the Iran-backed Supreme Council of the Islamic Revolution of Iraq - after 23 years of exile is widely expected to reinforce Shiite demands for a major role in Iraq's future government.
On his first day back, al-Hakim said he advocated a "modern Islamic system." Then, days later, his language was somewhat different - a possible attempt to both assuage the hard-liners among his supporters but also appear conciliatory to the United States, Iraq's new master.
"We want a democratic government but not a western-style democracy - a regulated democracy on the basis of Islam, a democracy that doesn't offer absolute freedom," al-Hakim said.
Shokri, who studied religion in Najaf, acknowledges that any one of those comments would have gotten someone jailed, tortured and even killed during Saddam's rule. But like other Shiites throughout Iraq, he doesn't feel particularly indebted to the United States for ousting Saddam.
"Saddam's dictatorship brought Iraq destruction and economic backwardness," he said. "Now we are free from despotism, but Americans should not prevent us from choosing an administration we like to run our own country."
He added: "Mr. Bush must elaborate on what he thinks is wrong with Islam before offering an alternative to an Islamic government."
Maeda Yazdinia, a customer in Shokri's shop, nodded in agreement.
"I wear the head-to-toe chador because Islam doesn't allow me to show my body to unrelated men. It brings me dignity," Yazdinia said. "A freedom that allows women to walk half-naked in the streets is a freedom that animals, such as a goat, enjoy - a freedom to show all their body parts."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos VNAJ101-106

 

End of Document
