

In the strikes on Afghanistan, the fuel planes are the first out and last to return
October 24, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 533 words
Byline: By CHRIS TOMLINSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ABOARD THE USS THEODORE ROOSEVELT
Body




Every night when the USS Theodore Roosevelt launches airstrikes on the Taliban, the first planes out and the last ones back are the fuel tankers. Without them, the attack jets couldn't make the long flight to Afghanistan.
The F-14A Tomcat fighters and the FA-18C attack jets that drop the bombs and launch the missiles fly up to 8 hours a night to reach the front lines between Afghanistan's ruling Taliban and the opposition forces of the northern alliance. The planes refuel in mid-air up to four times.
Their first pit stop is often over southern Pakistan taking fuel from an S-3B Viking, also launched from the Theodore Roosevelt. The refueling planes play a key role in allowing the U.S. Navy to strike anywhere in the world from their floating air bases.
Lt. Tom, whose call sign is "Ike," said his mission is like a complex game, constantly trying to conserve fuel as he flies to make sure he has plenty for the fighters. But he must also make sure he has enough fuel to get home himself.
"You are constantly listening to the radio (to see where we are needed) looking at the radar and looking at your gas," said Tom, of Pensacola, Fla.
Pilots flying from the Theodore Roosevelt can only be identified by their first names and call signs to protect their families from possible retribution. Commanding officers, though, can be fully identified if they choose.
The cockpit of the twin-engine Viking is like a Plexiglas bubble, since the plane was originally designed to hunt submarines and the pilots needed to be able to see the ocean. But with helicopters now doing that job, the Viking's missile racks are fitted with auxiliary fuel tanks, a 40-foot hose and rearview mirrors.
Despite the importance of their mission, S-3B pilots from the VS-32 "Maulers" squadron are teased for being "gas station attendants," or asked why they don't wear oil company logos on their uniforms.
The teasing ends when the Viking pilot and his flight officer are rolling out the refueling hose and using light signals to communicate with the other plane because they are under radio silence. The planes fly within 30-feet of each other at 250 mph during the refueling, normally without a word spoken between them.
Once over Afghanistan, U.S. Air Force tankers refuel the Navy jets at high altitude, giving them enough fuel to carry out the air strikes and then reach the Vikings for the last leg back to the carrier.
There, a Viking also circles the ship until every jet lands, in case one needs a last quarter tank after missing a landing attempt. Each Viking can carry 16,000 pounds of fuel.
Six or seven of the squadron's eight S-3Bs fly every night to refuel dozens of fighter planes. The extraordinary distance to northern Afghanistan means Viking pilots often fly two missions a night, each lasting 2 to 4 hours. Sometimes the Vikings refuel each other.
"It wears on you after a while," said Tom, who has flown two mission each of the last three nights.
Lt. Cmdr. Evan, the squadron's executive officer, said this has been his squadron's toughest assignment. He admitted that some of the pilots are frustrated at not playing a more active role, but they understand their mission is what makes the whole war possible.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos
 Load-Date: October 25, 2001

 

End of Document
