

Iraq says the United States has resorted to the logic of brute force in Afghanistan
November 14, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 322 words
Byline: By JONATHAN EWING, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




The Sept. 11 terror attacks in the United States have their roots in U.S. "arrogance, injustice and aggression," Iraq's foreign minister told the U.N. General Assembly on Wednesday.
But instead of addressing those problems, the United States resorted to the "logic of brute force," Naji Sabri said, referring to the U.S. attacks on Afghanistan for harboring Osama bin Laden.
"Attempts are escalating to impose certain cultures on the peoples … and to preach the clash of civilizations and the launching of new crusades," the Iraqi foreign minister said.
Many in the Arab world fear the military campaign in Afghanistan could spread to other Islamic countries, including Iraq, which Washington regards as a state sponsor of terrorism.
Iraq denies any ties to bin Laden, the prime suspect in the Sept. 11 attacks, and has urged a "united Arab stance" against the campaign.
"The world could be set on fire by a spark coming from the West, and it is in need of saving itself from falling into a bottomless abyss to which it is being pushed by policies that have their roots in conceitedness, arrogance, injustice and aggression," Sabri said.
Those policies, he added, have been accompanied by Western media campaigns intended to kindle feelings of rancor, hatred and chauvinism.
It was under these circumstances that the events of Sept. 11 took place, he said.
"While we have offered our sincere condolences to the American people and the families of the victims of these events," Sabri said, "Iraq has expressed its hope that the United States will deal with these events in a spirit of wisdom and responsibility by undertaking a comprehensive review of its policies."
He pointed to the U.N. sanctions imposed after Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990. The sanctions, chiefly designed to prevent Iraq from rebuilding weapons of mass-destruction, have been criticized as hurting Iraqi civilians while failing to shake Saddam Hussein's autocratic regime.
 Load-Date: November 15, 2001

 

End of Document
