

Israel stresses message to Israeli youth that Poland not the main culprit in the Holocaust
The Associated Press
May 4, 2005, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 769 words
Byline: By RAMIT PLUSHNICK-MASTI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Israel is telling high school students making pilgrimages to Nazi death camps in Poland that Germans - not Poles - were the main culprits in the Holocaust.
The new message, a response to complaints by the Polish government, comes on the eve of the largest-ever March of the Living at the Auschwitz camp, a memorial led this year by Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, 20 Holocaust survivors and their grandchildren.
Thursday's march from Auschwitz to Birkenau - which together make up the largest Nazi camp complex, where about 1.5 million Jews were killed during the World War II German occupation - will include 18,000 people, a number chosen to symbolize the Hebrew word for life, or "Chai."
The March of the Living began in 1988 as a biannual gathering to commemorate the infamous Nazi "death marches" in which thousands of camp inmates died while being forced to walk in the freezing Polish forests toward the end of the war. For the last decade, it has been held every year.
Thursday's two-mile march caps a year of events commemorating the 60th anniversary of the end of the war and coincides with the May 5, 1945, liberation of several Nazi camps and Germany's surrender three days later.
Poland has a long history of anti-Semitism and was home to 3.5 million Jews before the war, the largest population of Jews in Europe. Most were killed in the Holocaust; today about 20,000 Jews live in Poland.
Every year, thousands of Israeli high school students make pilgrimages to Auschwitz and other death camps to forge a personal link to the Nazi murder of 6 million Jews.
Israel's annual Holocaust Memorial Day began Wednesday evening with a ceremony at the Yad Vashem Holocaust memorial and museum in Jerusalem. A children's choir sang, and a poem written by a death camp survivor was recited.
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon said Israel has learned its lesson. "Jews will never again be without a home, without a safe refuge, without protection," he said. "We will never again be caught unprepared. Never again."
Also scheduled are a concerts, readings of victims' names and a two-minute nationwide siren Thursday morning during which traffic will stop.
Israel and Poland began working to change the Israeli youth missions after Polish President Aleksander Kwasniewski visited the Jewish state in March and urged Israel to focus on the history of Polish Jewry, officials said.
A pilot exchange program for Israeli and Polish high school students is awaiting final approval in Israel. The sides are planning more meetings between the youths during upcoming trips to Poland, said Noah Shalev, the Education Ministry official in charge of the program.
Shalev said Israeli and Polish officials want to ensure one message is clear - Germans carried out the Holocaust.
"German Nazis were the perpetrators, but a great deal of it occurred on Polish soil," Shalev said. "Some (Polish) people have a feeling they are being blamed and we are making an effort to change this."
Poland's Chief Rabbi Michael Schudrich said it's also important for Israeli youth to be exposed to the rebirth of Polish Jewry.
"In fact, they should be in contact not only with the tragic Jewish past or the prewar glory years of Jewish life, but also with the renaissance of Jewish life in today's Poland and to dialogue with local Polish non-Jews," Schudrich said.
He said Polish Jews need the contact with Israelis to strengthen their community.
Nimrod Barkan, a Foreign Ministry official involved in overhauling the youth missions, said he decided to make changes after his own daughters participated and told him their main interaction with Polish society was at an outdoor market.
Meeting Poles and studying the prewar Jewish community can give Israelis a truer picture of Poland's role in the Holocaust and Jewish history, he added.
"We all know the history of anti-Semitism in Poland. No one is going to deny or change that, but we want to create a more balanced image," Barkan said.
That anti-Semitism is indelibly etched in the memory of Yosef Broshi, 82, a survivor of Auschwitz traveling with Sharon to Poland.
"I didn't want to go back, not even to the town I was born," said Broshi, who grew up in a village that is now in Belarus. The number 98882 is tattooed on his arm from his year in Auschwitz.
On Thursday, Broshi is returning to Auschwitz for the first time since 1944, when the Germans moved him from the camp to a rifle factory. Accompanying him is his grandson, Nimrod, an 18-year-old private in the Israeli army.
"It's like showing the world that we live, and we survived and we have a story to tell and something to say," the grandfather said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos JRL124,130
 Load-Date: May 5, 2005

 

End of Document
