

Karzai's enemies appear to be reorganizing, raising the stakes in the battle for a stable Afghanistan
September 7, 2002, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 852 words
Byline: By KATHY GANNON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan
Body




After months of relative inaction, President Hamid Karzai's domestic enemies appear to be reorganizing, raising the stakes in the battle for a stable Afghanistan.
The twin attacks Thursday - an attempt on Karzai's life in Kandahar and a car bombing that killed 30 people in Kabul - appear to confirm persistent reports that fugitive Taliban, remnants of al-Qaida, disaffected Pashtuns and others are ready to move beyond rhetoric and challenge the U.S.-backed administration with violence.
"Once I would have given this government a 50 percent chance of succeeding. Now it is even less," a Western diplomat said, speaking on condition of anonymity. "The enemy seems to be more organized."
Karzai insists Thursday's attacks were not a sign the country is descending into chaos. He called the attacks isolated incidents which show that Afghanistan's enemies "are no longer capable of mobilizing as groups. So they act as individuals."
Yet signs seem to be emerging that some of those opposed to Karzai's government may have spent the last several months trying to organize. Rather than acts of desperation, Thursday's attacks may be seen as signs of their organizational success.
Whoever was responsible for the car bombing managed to rig and set off the device in broad daylight in the middle of a city patrolled not only by Afghan government security forces but also about 4,800 international peacekeepers.
Karzai's assailant, who opened fire on the grounds of the provincial governor's mansion, joined the Kandahar administration's security force only two weeks ago. He was approved to carry a weapon near major government figures even though he came from an area known as a Taliban stronghold.
Aside from those incidents, there have been reports from eastern Afghanistan of meetings between renegade commander Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, a former prime minister once bankrolled by the United States during the 1980s war against the Soviets, and former Taliban leaders, including some with close links to al-Qaida.
Other reports said Hekmatyar has held exploratory meetings with Afghan leaders like Abdul Rasool Sayyaf, a former deputy prime minister in the northern alliance who has been largely sidelined by Karzai's government.
Just three days before the car bomb blew apart a market in Kabul and a gunman narrowly missed Karzai in Kandahar, Hekmatyar had called for a jihad, or holy war, against foreign forces in Afghanistan and threatened the international peacekeeping force with attacks.
Hekmatyar directed his appeal to Afghanistan's ethnic Pashtuns, who dominate the east and the south of the country. That's where U.S. military operations are being conducted because American intelligence believes enemy al-Qaida and Taliban fugitives are hiding there.
Many Pashtuns feel left out of Karzai's government, although Karzai himself is a Pashtun. Many of them complain of discrimination and harassment because most of the Taliban were ethnic Pashtuns.
They also complain that Karzai is politically outmuscled by ethnic Tajiks from the former anti-Taliban northern alliance, including Defense Minister Mohammed Fahim.
Even prominent members of the international community have said that Afghanistan's defense minister may be sabotaging attempts to build a multiethnic national army, preferring to keep the military power in the hands of his Tajik soldiers.
The national army is seen by the United States as the key to stability in Afghanistan. However, the Americans are now considering dropping their opposition to sending in more international peacekeepers and expanding their mission because of the difficulties organizing the Afghan army.
A European diplomat, who spoke on condition he not be named, said the Afghan Defense Ministry has so far refused to hand over its weapons hidden away in the Panjshir Valley, where the northern alliance was headquartered during the six years of Taliban rule.
In a further sign of trouble, an Arabic-language pamphlet surfaced last week in eastern Afghanistan claiming responsibility for attacks on U.S. forces. The pamphlet announced the establishment of a new "Secret Army of Mujahedeen" to fight U.S. and other foreign forces.
It is difficult to tell how the call is resonating within Afghanistan, a country of impassable roads, few telephones, a primitive domestic media and no independent polling agencies.
On Friday, however, Afghan refugees in northwestern Pakistan spoke in favor of Hekmatyar's call for jihad. Those voicing support included followers of Sayyaf's Ittehad-e-Islami, one of the most conservative factions of the former northern alliance.
Islamic clerics at mosques in the pro-Sayyaf Jalozai Refugee Camp, about nine miles from Peshawar, demanded that both U.S. soldiers and international peacekeepers leave Afghanistan.
At the Katcha Garhi refugee camp in Peshawar, a half dozen Afghan Islamic clerics gathered Friday to show solidarity with Hekmatyar, shouting slogans condemning the United States and Karzai's government.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Kathy Gannon is bureau chief for Pakistan and Afghanistan and has reported on Afghan affairs for The Associated Press since 1988.
 Load-Date: September 8, 2002

 

End of Document
