

Kerry says the presidential election will decide the fate of Social Security
The Associated Press
October 19, 2004, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 343 words
Byline: By MARY DALRYMPLE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WILKES BARRE, Pa.
Body




Democratic presidential candidate John Kerry said Tuesday that President Bush's tax cuts and proposals for the future amount to an "all-out assault" on Social Security.
"On Nov. 2, Social Security is on the ballot," Kerry said. "A choice between one candidate who will save Social Security and another who will undermine it."
Kerry also fought back against the president's accusations that he stands for "protest and defeatism" in Iraq, telling supporters he will bring a fresh start and new credibility to the war effort.
"Have no doubt about it, we will hunt down, capture or kill the terrorists wherever they are in the world," Kerry said.
Those who receive retirement benefits from Social Security - more than 47 million Americans - will see a 2.7 percent increase in their monthly checks next year, or about $25, the federal government announced Tuesday. But much of the extra money will be eaten up by higher Medicare premiums.
"For 2 million seniors, their entire cost of living increase is going to be completely wiped out by the higher Medicare premiums," Kerry said. "That leaves less money for food, less money for medicine, less money for an occasional gift for a grandchild or to be able to go out and do something. That's wrong, folks."
The average retiree will see only a little over half of the increase because the government announced last month that monthly Medicare premiums for doctor visits are going up by $11.60 a month next year, a record in dollar terms.
Kerry has also criticized the president's proposal to let younger workers set aside a portion of their Social Security contributions in private investment accounts. Bush has not stated how Social Security will make up for contributions diverted to partial privatization.
The Bush-Cheney campaign said Kerry's attacks on Social Security are meant to scare voters.
"These false and baseless attacks are yet another example of John Kerry's willingness to say or do anything in order to get elected," campaign spokesman Steve Schmidt said.
On the Net:
Kerry campaign: http://www.johnkerry.com 
 Load-Date: October 20, 2004

 

End of Document
