

Key developments across the country in the terror attacks investigation
September 25, 2001, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1143 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A state-by-state look at developments in the past seven days in the terror attacks investigation in the United States:
 NEW YORK
 
Secret hearings have been held at Manhattan's federal courthouse for material witnesses held in connection with the attacks. A federal grand jury was convened north of the city in White Plains, N.Y. It may meet once or twice a week while investigators gather evidence.
 MICHIGAN
 
Three men were arrested in a raid on a Detroit home where investigators found false IDs and information on a U.S. military base and airports. Karim Koubriti, 23, Ahmed Hannan, 33, and Farouk Ali-Haimoud, 21, were charged with identity fraud; fraud and misuse of visas, passports and other documents; and conspiracy to commit those crimes. A lawyer for one of the men said their presence in the home with the suspect documents was a coincidence. The raid had sought Nabil Al-Marabh, whose name was on the mailbox. Al-Marabh, later arrested near Chicago, was wanted for questioning in the attacks.
ILLINOIS
 
Nabil Al-Marabh, arrested last week in a Chicago suburb by an FBI-led terrorism task force, was moved to New York in custody of immigration officials. His name was on the FBI list of people wanted for questioning in the attacks. Also, federal prosecutors charged Nageeb Abdul Jabar Mohamed Al-Hadi, a contract employee for a German airline, with passport fraud and were working to extradite him from Canada, where he was arrested the day of the attacks. Canadian authorities found him with three passports under three different names when his Chicago-bound jetliner out of Frankfurt diverted to Toronto.
 FLORIDA
 
A group of Middle Eastern men repeatedly asked a fertilizer company in Belle Glade, Fla. about crop-duster planes in the months leading up to the attacks, raising fears that terrorists also may have been planning a chemical or biological strike. One worker identified suspected hijacker Mohamed Atta as one of the men. FBI agents took computer documents from a South Florida library as they investigated whether suspected hijackers used library computers to communicate over the Internet. Anonymous tips led agents to the Gulf Coast community of Punta Gorda, where Atta may have spent time within the last year. Local business owners recognized Atta from newspaper photographs.
 MARYLAND
 
FBI agents interviewed residents and business owners in Laurel, where suspected terrorists from at least three of the four hijack teams apparently lived just before the attacks. One suspected hijacker, Hani Hanjour, tried to rent a small plane from a Bowie airport in early August. Laurel is also the home of Muslim cleric Moataz Al-Hallak, who voluntarily answered questions from a federal prosecutor last week. Al-Hallak's lawyer said the cleric knows nothing about the attacks.
 NEW JERSEY
 
Agents have visited flight schools, reached out to the Muslim community and probed funding sources for the attacks. The FBI has detained 20 people, including two Jersey City men, Ayub Ali Khan and Mohammed Azmath, found in Texas with box-cutting knives and cash. A Wayne, N.J., car rental agency said two suspected hijackers, Nawaq Alhamzi and Hani Hanjour, rented at least three cars between June and August.
 PENNSYLVANIA
 
The FBI completed its investigation at the site where United Flight 93 crashed in Somerset County, Pa., and said it does not believe an explosive was involved in the crash. Passengers had said in cell phone calls that one of the hijackers had what appeared to be a bomb strapped to him. FBI Director Robert Mueller said the FBI and National Transportation Safety Board were still transcribing and translating dialogue from Flight 93's cockpit voice recorder.
 OKLAHOMA
 
FBI agents visited a Norman, Okla., flight school seeking information on Zacarias Moussaoui, who was detained after seeking flight training in Minnesota. Moussaoui trained at Airman Flight School in Norman from Feb. 26 to May 29, but left before earning a license. Hussein Al-Attas, who knew Moussaoui in Norman, has also been detained. Friends of Al-Attas said he once shared a residence with Moussaoui and drove him to Minnesota.
 ARIZONA
 
A Phoenix-area flight school confirmed that a man with the same name as a suspected hijacker used an aircraft simulator in June. Hani Hanjour was a member of the Sawyer School of Aviation's simulator club, which allows unlimited use of the school's basic flight simulator for $200 a month. The school wouldn't say whether the Hanjour who used the simulator was the suspect.
 MISSOURI
 
A man who took flying lessons in Kansas City was detained near Dulles International Airport in suburban Washington on the day of the terrorist attacks. Khalid al-Draibi, 32, a cab driver, was held on an immigration charge. His attorney Drewry Hutcheson Jr. said al-Draibi lived most recently in Kansas City and took flight lessons using the name Khalid Suleiman. Hutcheson said al-Draibi knows nothing about the attacks, and authorities would not confirm if he was the same man who drove cabs in Tennessee and Alabama and took flight lessons in Alabama under similar names.
 NEVADA
 
Mohamed Atta, a suspected leader in the terrorist attacks, stayed in a Las Vegas motel twice in recent weeks, a motel owner said. FBI agents and Las Vegas police distributed to Las Vegas resorts, casinos and hotels a list of more than 20 names of suspected hijackers, hotel officials said.
 TEXAS
 
FBI agents arrested Ghassan Dahduli, a Palestinian who was a top local officer of the Islamic Association for Palestine, a Richardson, Texas, educational group that Israel has labeled a front for the militant Hamas movement. He was arrested on a bond revocation. In Houston, Atallah Fuad Khoury, who identified himself as a Palestinian, was arraigned on a charge of having a gun while being in the United States illegally. Federal agents arrested him last week after he allegedly told a rental car clerk he was two weeks away from getting a pilot's license and that she should watch the news. Khoury's brother, Nicola Khoury, said his brother had no connection to the attacks.
 CALIFORNIA
 
Two California men with possible ties to hijackers were detained and questioned. Omer Bakarshabat, 26, arrested in San Diego, may have spent time with Khalid Al-Midhar and Nawaq Alhamzi, both identified as hijackers by the FBI, when the two lived in San Diego last year. Tarek Mohamed Fayad, 33, was arrested in Colton. Investigators have not said which of the 19 hijackers identified by the FBI may have been connected to Fayad.
Also in San Diego, three college students have been detained as material witnesses in the Sept. 11 attacks, The San Diego Union-Tribune reported Tuesday. Attorney Randall B. Hamud, who is representing two of the students, said his clients were acquaintances of one of the suspected hijackers, but were unaware he was involved with the terrorist plan.
 Load-Date: September 26, 2001

 

End of Document
