

Key changes between the draft Iraqi constitution submitted last week and the one finished Sunday
The Associated Press
August 28, 2005, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 418 words
Body




EDITORS NOTE: Changes in the text are in parentheses.
 
By The Associated Press
Key changes to the text of the draft Iraqi constitution, which was submitted without the approval of the Sunni Arabs:
- The preamble places additional emphasis on atrocities under Saddam Hussein. The earlier version said Saddam oppressed "the majority" - a term Kurds and Sunnis said identified too closely with Shiites. Those "of the western region" are Sunnis, emphasizing that they too suffered under the old regime:
… inspired by the suffering of Iraq's martyrs - Sunni and Shiite, Arab, Kurd and Turkomen, and the remaining brethren in all communities - inspired by the injustice against the holy cities (and the south) in the popular uprising and (burnt with the sorrows of the mass graves, the marches and Dujail and others); recalling the agonies of the national oppression in the massacres of Halabja, Barzan, Anfal and against the Faili Kurds; inspired by the tragedies of the Turkomen in Bashir, and as in other parts of Iraq, (the people of the western region have suffered from the liquidation of its leaders, symbols, tribal leaders and displacing its intellectuals, so we worked hand in hand and shoulder to shoulder) to create a new Iraq, Iraq of the future, without sectarianism, racial strife, regionalism, discrimination and (elimination).
- The constitution bans organizations that "advocate, instigate, justify or propagate" racism, terrorism, the declaring of someone as an infidel, sectarian cleansing and "especially the Saddamist Baath in Iraq and its symbols, under any name." The version finished Sunday struck the word "party" from the phrase "Saddam's Baath Party," which could enable a future Baath Party to emerge.
- In a concession to Sunnis in the version finished Sunday, a future parliament will be permitted to establish the rules for implementing federalism:
Article (113): The federal system in the republic of Iraq is made up of the capital, regions, decentralized provinces, and local administrations.
(Article (114):
1st - This constitution, when implemented, shall endorse the region of Kurdistan and its existing power as a federal region.
2nd -This constitution shall endorse the new regions that will be established according to the provisions of the constitution.
Article (115): The Council of Representatives shall pass a law that fixes the executive procedures relating to establishing regions by simple majority in a period that does not exceed six months from the date of the first session.)
 Load-Date: August 29, 2005

 

End of Document
