

King Abdullah II: Peace is the only alternative in the Middle East
April 3, 2001, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 513 words
Byline: By JAMAL HALABY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: AMMAN, Jordan
Body




Jordan's King Abdullah II said that U.S. help was "essential" to bringing peace to the volatile Middle East.
"A just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East is the only choice for the region and its peoples," Abdullah told The Associated Press in an interview Monday. "We will do everything we can to ensure that the peoples of the region enjoy the right to live in peace and dignity, free from the fear of war, violence and oppression. We know that in the United States, we have a committed, supportive and able partner."
His remarks came shortly before he left for Britain en route to the United States, where he will meet with President Bush for the first time on April 10. The meeting will deal with strengthening U.S.-Jordan relations and getting the Mideast peace process going again.
The Jordanian king, who is accompanied by his wife Queen Rania and senior aides, was also expected to meet other administration officials and members of Congress during his one-week stay in the United States.
In the interview, Abdullah implicitly referred to what is widely seen here as a receding involvement by the Bush administration in Middle East peacemaking.
"The United States has played a tremendously positive and important role in the peace process since its launch in Madrid," Spain in 1991, he said.
"This role remains essential, and we will be discussing how we can work together, and with regional parties to restore calm and get the peace process back on track," he added.
He praised the historically strong ties with the United States, which were nurtured under Abdullah's father, King Hussein, who died of cancer in February 1999. Hussein's moderate policy, liberal outlook and warmth toward Israel has earned the hearts of Israelis and a reputable standing worldwide.
"The United States and Jordan share the same values of freedom, liberty, peace and tolerance," Abdullah said. "We are also in agreement on the need to follow liberal economic policies and remove all barriers to the development of free markets."
Since ascending to the throne two years ago, Abdullah has invigorated economic reforms initiated under Hussein in 1989 to ease the burden of $7 billion foreign debt and a deep recession battering the kingdom.
Abdullah's government has since amended Jordan's economic legislation to encourage a flow of foreign capital into the cash-strapped Arab kingdom. The laws virtually abolish bureaucratic procedures and offer a wide range of incentives to investors, including tax-free business transactions.
The United States is one of the largest donors to Jordan, with annual economic and military aid estimated at $225 million. At least five industrial zones spread across Jordan house joint ventures with Israel in line with U.S.-encouraged businesses to bolster Middle East peacemaking. Output from the zones enter the United States free of tariff and quota.
Amman and Washington are also bound by a free trade agreement, which is expected to bolster trade exchange between them. The accord, which was concluded last November, still requires congressional approval.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo AMM103 of April 2
 Load-Date: April 4, 2001

 

End of Document
