

Major acts of violence in Afghanistan since the fall of the Taliban
September 5, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 300 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A summary of major acts of violence in Afghanistan since the fall last year of the Taliban regime:
Sept. 5, 2002: A gunman fires in the direction of President Hamid Karzai in Kandahar, where he was to attend his brother's wedding. Karzai escapes injury, but Kandahar governor Gul Agha is wounded. U.S Special Forces protecting the president return fire, killing three people.
Sept. 5: A bomb explodes near the Information Ministry in a congested area of Kabul, killing at least 10 people.
Sept. 1: A small bomb explodes under a wooden pushcart near the ruined former Soviet Embassy, killing one person and wounding three, including a British peacekeeper on patrol. It is the latest in a series of small explosions in the Afghan capital in the previous two weeks.
Aug. 9: A construction warehouse holding stocks of explosives blows up in the eastern city of Jalalabad, killing at least 14 people and devastating an entire neighborhood. The cause of the blast was unclear, with some officials saying it was an accident and others saying the building may have been targeted by terrorists.
July 6: Vice President Abdul Qadir is shot and killed while leaving his office in Kabul by two men who escaped.
April 8: Defense Minister Mohammed Fahim escapes uninjured when a bomb explodes near his convoy in the eastern city of Jalalabad, killing four bystanders lining the road to greet him.
Feb. 14: Aviation and Tourism Minister Abdul Rahman is beaten to death at Kabul airport, allegedly by Muslim pilgrims unable to travel to Mecca. Karzai later blames the killing on a conspiracy within his government, but the cause of the slaying was never resolved.
Jan. 28: Afghan troops and U.S. special forces soldiers storm a hospital in Kandahar, killing six al-Qaida fighters who had been holed up in a ward for two weeks.
 Load-Date: September 6, 2002

 

End of Document
