

Marine commander: Fallujah offensive has 'broken the back of the insurgency'
The Associated Press
November 18, 2004, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 617 words
Byline: By ROBERT BURNS, AP Military Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The senior U.S. Marine commander in Iraq said Thursday that the U.S.-led offensive in Fallujah has "broken the back of the insurgency" by seizing their main base of operations.
"We feel right now that we have, as I mentioned, broken the back of the insurgency. We've taken away this safe haven," Lt. Gen. John Sattler told reporters at the Pentagon in a video teleconference from Fallujah.
He said that assessment was based on what U.S. officials found in records uncovered in insurgent command posts inside Fallujah. Sattler's conclusion is far more optimistic than an assessment made shortly before the offensive by Marine intelligence officers, who said the insurgency would rebound if U.S. troop levels in the area were significantly reduced after the offensive.
Sattler made no mention of the intelligence assessment, but he stressed the importance of bringing essential services back on line in Fallujah as quickly as possible and starting reconstruction work.
He said the insurgents are now "scattered" in Iraq with fewer resources available to carry out attacks.
"Each and every time we can force these individuals to go to new locations, expand their circle of friends - if you want to call it that - to include some that they don't know and they don't trust, they'll bring in rookies, more junior people that will, in fact, make mistakes," he said.
"And that's why I mentioned that this has disrupted them, I believe - my personal belief - across the country. This is going to make it very hard for them to operate," he added.
Sattler cautioned that remnants of the insurgents who had controlled Fallujah for months are still a problem. A group of insurgents attacked U.S. Marines and Iraqi government forces from a house inside the city Thursday, killing one Marine and one Iraqi soldier, Sattler said. One Marine and one Iraqi soldier also were wounded.
Sattler at one point said Fallujah "is not quite secure at this point," but later he said he had misspoken. "The town of Fallujah is secure, but we're in the search-and-clear phase that will make it safe - relatively safe is the best word," he said.
Bomb-making materials and improvised explosive devices need to be recovered or disarmed, he said, and the Marines are still looking for remaining insurgents who may be lying low with the intention of disrupting efforts to reconstruct the city.
He said U.S. forces have found a number of documents from the insurgents' command posts inside the city that lists the names of some of their fighters, including some from outside of Iraq.
Sattler said the total U.S. death toll so far in the Fallujah offensive, which began Nov. 7, stands at 51, with about 425 wounded in action. Earlier in the week U.S. officials put the number of dead at 38.
He declined to give a firm estimate of the number of insurgents killed in the fighting, but he said the 1,200 figure cited in some news reports was "a safe number." He said 1,025 captured insurgents were in detention, and that about 150 who had been captured were subsequently determined to be non-hostile and were let go.
Sattler said city residents who fled before the U.S.-led offensive will not be allowed back until conditions are safer. He said the resettlement would be done in phases, starting with residences in the northern part of Fallujah.
Fallujah typically has a population of about 200,000. The vast majority fled before the fighting began.
"The town must be secure before we let the Fallujah people back in," he said. He gave no specific estimate of when that would happen, saying only that it would take "some time."
Sattler said 25 to 30 civilians have been treated for injuries, but he was unaware of any civilians being killed during the offensive.
 Load-Date: November 19, 2004

 

End of Document
