

More civilians bear the brunt of the insurgency in Mosul
The Associated Press
April 3, 2004, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 722 words
Byline: By MARIAM FAM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSUL, Iraq
Body




Fewer U.S. troops patrol the streets of Iraq's third-largest city, while more Iraqi security forces drive through busy markets or sprawl on median strips in firing positions.
Deadly attacks on local police, translators and government officials also have become more familiar in Mosul, once seen as a success story of the U.S.-led occupation.
U.S. military officials say insurgents have shifted from attacking American forces to targeting Iraqi security forces and most recently civilians, including foreigners helping with reconstruction and Iraqis perceived as cooperating with the Americans.
Families and friends swap news of such attacks and threats, and some people stay off the streets at night because of it. The violence appears aimed at scaring Iraqis who are to take over from the Americans on June 30.
"I think it's an indicator of how desperate the enemy forces are at this time," said Lt. Col. Joseph Piek, a military spokesman here. "They're not achieving a significant amount of success in attacking the security forces so they seem to be looking for soft targets."
"The enemy is looking for opportunities to drive wedges between...the people and the Iraqi security forces and the coalition," Piek said. The effort was in vain, he said.
In February, Task Force Olympia, which controls Mosul and other parts of the north, took over from 101st Airborne Division troops. Its officials focus on letting Iraqis assume more responsibilities daily.
Under the 101st, U.S. troops and residents in the predominantly Arab Sunni city enjoyed relative calm after the ouster of Saddam Hussein's regime until a recent spike in attacks forced the military to carry out more raids and arrests. The city, about 225 miles northwest of Baghdad, is also home to significant Kurdish and Christian communities.
Several former Iraqi officials on the U.S. most-wanted list, including Saddam's sons, Odai and Qusai, have been killed or captured in Mosul, a prewar stronghold for Saddam supporters and home to the northern headquarters of the now disbanded army.
Brig. Gen. Carter Ham, commander of Task Force Olympia, said attacks by former regime loyalists were more prevalent but less lethal, usually drive-by shootings against symbols of authority, such as police. Terrorists - foreign and domestic fighters - focus on more sophisticated and deadly operations that usually show good intelligence and surveillance, he said.
Some Kurdish Iraqi officials in the north believe Ansar al-Islam, a group thought linked to al-Qaida and suspected of engineering some attacks in Iraq, operates in Mosul. Jaish Ansar al-Sunna, believed to be a splinter of Ansar al-Islam, had claimed responsibility for a Jan. 31 attack on a Mosul police station that killed nine Iraqis and wounded 45.
Criminals also are paid to attack civilians, Ham said without providing details.
"It is a very deliberate and very difficult process to identify what is unfortunately a very committed and very capable enemy," Ham said.
Iraqi forces, provincial council members and translators working with the military have been attacked and have had their families threatened. Some translators working with the military mask their faces when accompanying troops.
Last Saturday, rebel rockets slammed into a Mosul government building, killing two civilians. On Sunday, gunmen killed a Briton and a Canadian working as security guards for foreign electrical engineers at a power station. Insurgents also opened fire on a convoy carrying Iraq's minister of public works.
Four American missionaries working on a water project in the city were killed by insurgents in March.
Some Iraqi workers have taken time off because of safety concerns, Piek said.
Inaam Khaleel, widow of a police officer fatally shot near his home, had tried to persuade her husband not to rejoin the force, fearing for his life. The husband, Col. Islamil Ghatheeth, was a retired officer under Saddam.
Now that he's dead, she wants her son, a firefighter, to quit. He refused.
The family of Iyad Mohammed says he was killed because he rented a house to a U.S. research institute taking part in reconstruction. Relatives blame extremist Islamic groups.
They said that after gunmen killed Mohammed, they left a note with a grim warning: "This is the fate of all those traitors of the country and religion, who deal with the Americans."
 Load-Date: April 4, 2004

 

End of Document
