

Najaf mosque raises more problems for the Bush administration in the Muslim world
The Associated Press
August 18, 2004, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 659 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Bush administration is supporting the Iraqi government as it uses diplomacy and the threat of force to oust radical Shiite cleric Muqtada al-Sadr's militia from a holy shrine in Najaf. At the same time, it is trying to steer clear of becoming the target of an angry Muslim world.
Arab leaders - already suspicious of U.S. intentions throughout the Middle East - are cautioning the United States to avoid damage to the Shiites' third holiest site.
By contrast, al-Sadr's use of the mosque and his drive against a U.S.-blessed interim government in Baghdad is getting scant attention, even though many Arab leaders are privately leery of him.
"If the U.S. doesn't do anything, al-Sadr is likely to grow even stronger, and the United States cannot afford to let that happen," said Jim Phillips, an analyst at the Heritage Foundation. On the other hand, the United States faces criticism if al-Sadr is confronted directly.
In fact, Phillips said, "In the Arab tradition, storing weapons in a mosque is not beyond the bounds of war." But the United States is trying to minimize the damage by having the Iraqis do any final assault - if it becomes necessary - on the shrine, he said.
Al-Sadr accepted a peace plan Wednesday that would disarm his militia and remove its members from their hideout in the shrine. But al-Sadr has made contradictory statements in the past, and aides to the cleric said he still wanted to negotiate details of the deal.
Kenneth Katzman, senior expert on Iraq at the Congressional Research Service, said, "Any major damage to that mosque is going to be, undoubtedly, blamed on the United States, whether it is justified or not."
The fact that al-Sadr's forces are using the mosque as a hiding place complicates efforts by the Iraqi government and U.S. forces to squeeze him into submission.
Secretary of State Colin Powell, at a news conference last week, spoke as much to the Muslim world as to reporters at the State Department when he said, "We do not, in any way, wish to get involved with the mosque. It's a very holy place for all Shiaa."
Still, Powell denounced al-Sadr and his militia as outlaws and said they must be disarmed.
Iran and Saudi Arabia called Monday for the United Nations to intervene in Iraq to stop the fighting in Najaf.
Non-Arab and predominantly Shiite Iran is deeply interested in the security of Iraq's holy sites. On Wednesday, Iran Foreign Minister Kamal Kharrazi said entry of U.S. forces into the gold-domed mosque of Imam Ali bin Abi Talib "would be provocative for Muslims worldwide," according to Iran's official news agency.
Arab League spokesman Hossam Zaki said in Cairo, meanwhile, "If force is used in a context that would harm sacred places, it will have very serious and negative repercussions on public opinion."
And in Kuwait, senior Shiite cleric Sayyed Abdul-Hussein al-Qazwini said, "We should wait for a peaceful solution as long as there is a chance for one."
The State Department, keenly aware of Arab skepticism about U.S. intentions in Iraq, tracked closely the latest attempt at a peaceful resolution in Najaf. Spokesman Adam Ereli said of the mosque: "The U.S. position is that the mosque is an Iraqi holy site and that the Iraqi government is responsible for its disposition."
Before peace efforts picked up steam, though, Iraqi Defense Minister Hazem Shaalan said the government was prepared to raid the shrine to oust the militants.
Past efforts to negotiate a cease-fire and disarm the militia have broken down. Only a few months ago, Katzman said, the United States thought al-Sadr's militia had been destroyed. "But it is back, even bigger and more extensive," he said.
The analyst said there is no military solution to the al-Sadr problem. "The key to the problem is to find some sort of structure in which he can participate and achieve what he thinks is his just share of power," Katzman said.
-----
Barry Schweid is the diplomatic correspondent for The Associated Press in Washington.
 Load-Date: August 19, 2004

 

End of Document
