

Names In The Game; Items on Brutus the Buckeye, Brunei soccer, Musashimaru
November 23, 2001, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 467 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




COLUMBUS, Ohio (AP) - A fairly obvious clue led Columbus police to the suspected culprits in the Brutus the Buckeye caper.
The costume for the Ohio State mascot had been reported missing inside a stolen car. When patrol officers spotted the car behind a building near campus, they staked it out.
Two men approached the car early Thursday morning. One of them was wearing a striped, scarlet-and-gray shirt with "BRUTUS" in block letters on the front.
That's the mascot's shirt.
"These were not exactly brilliant thieves," said Sgt. Earl Smith, spokesman for the Division of Police.
Police arrested two Columbus men and charged them with receiving stolen property. One also is charged with burglary. Other charges may follow, Smith said. The men are not students.
---
BANDAR SERI BEGAWAN, Brunei (AP) - Mick Jones is proud to be launching the world's newest soccer league.
But first the coach must persuade Brunei fans to support local teams instead of England-based Liverpool and Manchester United, the two most popular clubs in this tiny, oil-rich nation of 340,000 people.
Brunei is unique in the world for having only a single competition-ready team, known as the Wasps. Normally, it plays in Malaysia's premier league, but doubles as the national side in international events such as World Cup qualifiers.
Since the Wasps won the Malaysian Cup in 1999, however, several veterans have retired and the quality of the team has plummeted.
In April, the United Arab Emirates beat Brunei 12-0 in an Asian World Cup qualifying match.
Jones and Matusin Matasan, general secretary of the Brunei Amateur Football Association, have ambitious plans to improve the standard of play and, hopefully, make Brunei competitive.
Besides the semiprofessional Wasps, the country has several amateur teams that play only in tournaments organized by BAFA, which have proven inadequate to develop young talents.
Matusin and Jones now want to start up a regular 10-member league that will play year-round national championships and a national cup.
"In other countries football is an industry, but here it is played for leisure, as a pastime," Matusin said. "We must now change that mindset."
---
FUKUOKA, Japan (AP) - Hawaiian Musashimaru and Tochiazuma dispatched their opponents on Friday, the 13th day of the Kyushu Grand Sumo Tournament, setting up a showdown for the title between the top two wrestlers.
At Fukuoka Kokusai Center, yokozuna (grand champion) Musashimaru, or Fiamalu Penitani, displayed his dominance, chasing out sekiwake (junior champion) Kotomitsuki to remain atop the table with a 12-1 record.
With two days remaining, Musashimaru leads Tochiazuma by one victory and can clinch his first title of the year if he wins their head-to-head on Saturday. Tochiazuma would have to upset the favored Hawaiian twice to win the trophy.
 Load-Date: November 24, 2001

 

End of Document
