

Out of the Cabinet, Afghan warlords find places back in the provinces
The Associated Press
December 26, 2004, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 416 words
Byline: By PAUL HAVEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KABUL, Afghanistan
Body




Afghan president Hamid Karzai appointed two warlords and former Cabinet members to influential governorships Sunday in a bid to keep the strongmen happy - but outside of his central government.
Gul Agha Sherzai, the former public works minister, was named governor of southern Kandahar province, a post he controlled once before. Sayed Hussain Anwari, the former agriculture minister, was named governor of Kabul province, which includes the capital city.
The appointments were announced Sunday.
Karzai had fired the two men, along with powerful former Defense Minister Mohammed Fahim, as part of a sweeping Cabinet reshuffle on Thursday, earning praise for kicking warlords out of his government in favor of professionals.
A presidential spokesman, Khaleeq Ahmed, said the men had been effective ministers and were only dismissed because they lacked the university degrees now constitutionally required for all Cabinet members.
"They were qualified people, but unfortunately because of all the warfare in Afghanistan, people who chose jihad did not finish their education," he said. "But we wanted to promote them and keep them in the government so they could continue their good work."
The appointments are likely to stir unease among human rights groups, who claim the warlords abuse rights. Many of the strongmen in Karzai's former Cabinet had been pressured to take the jobs in the capital to cut them off from their regional power bases.
But some are being sent back as the international sentiment shifts toward giving priority to a clean, professional Cabinet.
More than three years after coming to power, the central government still relies on private armies to help control the vast, lawless countryside. Karzai must walk a political tightrope, keeping the strongmen in check without alienating them.
Fahim, a major Tajik strongman and the head of the northern alliance that helped the United States oust the Taliban in 2001, is still without a new job. There is talk, however, that he is likely to be offered a post as security adviser to the president - a non-Cabinet position that would skirt the education requirement.
Afghan state-television on Sunday said Fahim would be allowed to keep his rank and his bodyguards indefinitely, under orders of Karzai, adding that the president considered him one of Afghanistan's most respected figures.
In other news, former Central Bank adviser Noorullah Dilawari was named to head the bank, replacing Anwar ul-Haq Ahadi, who took over as Finance Minister.
 Load-Date: December 27, 2004

 

End of Document
