

Over the centuries, the Church of the Nativity has survived conflicts large and small
April 9, 2002, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 835 words
Byline: By SUSAN SEVAREID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BETHLEHEM, West Bank
Body




Over the past 1,600 years, rulers have threatened to destroy the Church of the Nativity, looters have pillaged its marble and monks have come to blows with chains and broomsticks over who should clean each sacred stone and beam.
Its sanctity has been tarnished at times, but not since the Samaritan uprising of 529 has the church marking the biblical birthplace of Jesus been seriously scarred in conflict. In the latest battle around it - an unprecedented standoff between Israeli soldiers and armed Palestinians holed up inside - interfaith relations are more likely to be damaged than the thick, stone building.
The siege of the Church of the Nativity entered its second week Tuesday with rumors of negotiations in progress but no outward sign that resolution was near. Israeli tanks ringed the church and dozens of soldiers manned rooftop lookouts. Streets were littered with wrecked cars, pipe bombs and broken ammunition boxes.
The Rev. Jerome Murphy-O'Connor, a professor of the New Testament at the Ecole Biblique in Jerusalem, said he knew of no other time that armed men had taken refuge inside this basilica or any other in the Holy Land.
"When Salah el-Din took Jerusalem, they weren't taking refuge in the churches," Murphy-O'Connor said, referring to the 12th-century Arab-Muslim conquest of Jerusalem led by the man known in the West as Saladin.
The Church of the Nativity was dedicated in 339, and the extent of the damage to the basilica in the Samaritan uprising of 529 - a time when many Christian shrines were destroyed - is no longer clear. When the Emperor Justinian rebuilt the church, he had its octagonal apse reshaped to make it more practical for worship. That 6th-century structure essentially is what survives today.
The church was spared the Persian invasion of 614 when, legend says, the invaders saw a mosaic on the facade showing the Magi - who brought gifts to the infant Jesus - dressed in Persian robes. Considering the site already theirs, they left the basilica alone.
Local Muslims, who for centuries had been permitted to use part of the church for prayer, spared it from a 1009 order of the Fatimid caliph Hakim to destroy Christian shrines. During the Arab Muslim conquest, many churches - including Jerusalem's Church of the Holy Sepulcher - were heavily damaged or destroyed, but the Church of the Nativity survived.
Fighting continued through the 11th century, until in 1099 the crusader Tancred swept in and secured the church without a battle in its grounds.
Pillaging and looting marred the centuries that followed, even for the Church of the Nativity. Historians say marble walls and columns that were added in 12th-century renovations of the church ended up in the mosques of Haram el-Sharif, an Islamic holy site on ground also sacred to Jews as the Temple Mount in the Old City of Jerusalem.
Over the years, fires and earthquakes added to the damage done to the church by people, said interfaith scholar Daniel Rossing. But in the past three centuries, infighting among Christian sects overshadowed outside threats.
A dispute among Greeks, Armenians and Latins in the 1980s over who had the right to clean a two-square-yard patch of wall and an overhead beam led to blows between clerics armed with chains and broomsticks. At one point, a ladder was yanked out from under a monk who was 15 feet up trying to wash the beam, recalled Rossing, then director of the Department for Christian Communities in Israel's Ministry of Religious Affairs.
Handling maintenance of an area in effect means controlling it, meaning every inch of the church is coveted. Rossing, charged with negotiating a solution to the dispute, still won't describe how the matter was resolved, saying only that the arrangement was elaborate.
The latest flareup has Israeli officials and Christian leaders meeting to try to end the crisis without further bloodshed.
"The church is in danger because both sides are armed," said Archbishop Aristarghos, chief secretary of the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate. He said Christian leaders and the Israeli government agreed "every effort should be made to reduce the tension."
Murphy-O'Connor said it was "despicable" that weapons were brought into a church and said the gunmen must surrender, even if that means starving them out.
The possibility of an Israeli assault - despite Israeli assurances to the contrary - has proved enough to anger Christians. Murphy-O'Connor says he doesn't expect one and is confident the church will survive the siege, but he and Rossing say interfaith understanding is taking a beating.
"This is reactivating anti-Semitism, there's no doubt about it," Murphy-O'Connor said. "Christians feel very seriously about it."
The standoff, Rossing notes, only makes it more difficult to get people of all faiths committed to working together to keep physical conflicts out of holy sites.
"It's putting our great strides in interfaith understanding to an extreme test," he said. "It takes decades to build up trust. … That trust has been destroyed."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY195
 Load-Date: April 10, 2002

 

End of Document
