

Papers from the Nixon era show a president wrestling with troubles now in the hands of Bush
May 6, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 827 words
Byline: By NANCY BENAC, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: COLLEGE PARK, Md.
Body




"Your help to Israel is seen as hostile to the Arab world," the Saudi foreign minister told Richard Nixon in 1973. Some things don't change.
Documents released by the National Archives on Monday show Nixon wrestling with many of the problems that are on the front burner for President Bush today, including terrorism, tensions between India and Pakistan, and perceptions that U.S. policy in the Middle East is favorable to Israel.
Nixon denied a tilt toward Israel in his meeting with Saudi Foreign Minister Omar Saqqaf and other Arab leaders. "I am not now, nor have I ever been, nor will I ever be affected by domestic politics in my search for peace," he said.
The struggle against terrorism was evident back then.
In a December 1972 telegram that could have been written today, the U.S. Embassy in Tel Aviv warned: "Terrorists have initiative to strike anywhere in world at any time and only well-organized and constantly alert anti-terrorist measures can stop them."
The telegram was written three months after Palestinian commandoes kidnapped members of the Israeli Olympic team in Munich, Germany, and 11 Israelis were killed.
Nixon, like Bush now, pledged to put pressure not only on terrorists but those who help them.
"Any nation that harbors or gives sanctuary to any of these international outlaws we will cut off all economic support," he told aide Alexander Haig in a 1972 phone call.
Trouble between India and Pakistan threatened grander U.S. schemes, then and now. Nixon saw the two great nations of the Asian subcontinent as allies against Soviet expansionism; Bush wants both on his side in the war against terror.
Now, the Bush administration is working to contain Pakistani ambitions in Kashmir. In 1971-72, Nixon was furious with India for what he saw as its meddling in the Pakistani province that eventually gained independence as Bangladesh.
He was convinced India's ambitions extended to all of Pakistan. "It was not right for India to destroy Pakistan," he told Arab ambassadors in October 1973. "Today Pakistan still survives."
In the more than 107,000 pages of Nixon-era documents made public for the first time, another day in the long, tangled effort to broker peace in the Middle East is laid out as Nixon and his advisers worry about how to prod Israel and its Arab neighbors toward a settlement.
In his conversation with the Arab leaders, Nixon tries to assure them that Secretary of State Henry Kissinger can be fair even though he is Jewish.
"Some of my Arab friends, I know, have asked how they can trust Dr. Kissinger," Nixon tells them. "But I can say that above all he wants a fair and a just peace."
The meeting happened just weeks before Egypt and Syria fought Israel in the Yom Kippur War.
Three decades later, the Bush administration is trying to counter similar criticism that its peace efforts favor Israel.
In 1972 meetings with Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai, Nixon and Kissinger acknowledged that U.S. forces on the Japanese island of Okinawa had been armed with nuclear weapons, but insisted that was in the past.
"We have moved all nuclear weapons off Okinawa," Kissinger says. "They have already left."
The United States had removed the weapons from Okinawa by 1972. The fact of a nuclear presence on Okinawa was only made public in 1997, when documents were declassified.
The documents released Monday include records of Oval Office conversations, papers preparing Nixon for meetings, and draft upon draft of evolving foreign policy. Dealing mainly with world affairs, they do not illuminate the Watergate scandal that was engulfing him domestically.
Nixon's handwriting is scrawled across some papers, and even now, whole pages are blacked out for national security reasons and stamped "sanitized copy."
Sometimes, the transcribers of presidential conversations came up with their own methods for censoring copy. In the transcript of a December 1972 talk between Nixon and Haig, then a deputy national security adviser, Haig's complaint about a newspaper headline reads like this: "How dumb can these *&$!*@ be." 
Former President Lyndon Johnson appears in the transcript of a June 1972 conversation with Haig, in which he complains about a congressional effort to declassify documents from his administration. In the exchange, Johnson looks to the Nixon administration to help block the papers' release, arguing that secret information about Nixon might come out, too.
Johnson makes a veiled threat that documents could be revealed related to Nixon's secret contacts as a presidential candidate with the South Vietnamese through Anna Chennault, the Chinese-born widow of American World War II hero Claire Chennault.
Nixon had suggested to the South Vietnamese that they would get a better deal if they held off on peace talks until he was elected.
Johnson's warning to Haig: "I don't know what the feeling is there, but you know all about the Madam Chennault stuff. ..."
Haig responded tersely, "Yes, sir."
---
 
On the Net: http://www.nara.gov 
 Load-Date: May 7, 2002

 

End of Document
