

PART IV: The latest week in the war in Iraq, day by day
The Associated Press
April 19, 2003, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 1037 words
Byline: By LARRY McSHANE, Associated Press Writer
Body




A day-by-day look at key developments around the world during the latest week of the Iraq war:
---
SUNDAY, April 13:
It was a Sunday surprise: Seven U.S. POWs were let go by Iraqi troops.
The unexpected release followed 22 days of imprisonment. All seven were in relatively good condition, and they were flown to Kuwait for a medical checkup. Five were comrades of previously rescued POW Jessica Lynch.
While Saddam Hussein was still missing, his DNA wasn't. Gen. Tommy Franks, commander of the U.S. troops, disclosed that American authorities have DNA from Saddam. The disclosure raised hopes that forensic experts could determine whether the Iraqi president was killed in U.S. airstrikes on government compounds.
Saddam's hometown of Tikrit was under assault by U.S. troops. And President Bush warned Syria not to harbor fleeing Iraqi leaders, and asked for patience as the United States and allies restore order in Iraq.
---
MONDAY, April 14:
Welcome to Tikrit.
U.S. Marines, who had expected to find Saddam's most fanatic loyalists in the deposed president's hometown, instead met only light resistance. A senior Pentagon general said "major combat engagements" probably were over in the 26-day-old war.
"I would anticipate that the major combat engagements are over," Maj. Gen. Stanley McChrystal told reporters.
Syrian officials denied they had a program to develop weapons of mass destruction, and said they aren't harboring fleeing Iraqi leaders. Secretary of State Colin Powell suggested there would be economic or diplomatic sanctions against Syria if those denials proved bogus.
After days of looting in Baghdad, the pillaging finally slowed down. Discussions began to restore the Iraqi capital with power, water, security and other vital services. Powell said the United States would help Iraqis recover stolen antiquities and restore artifacts that were damaged.
---
TUESDAY, April 15:
Eighteen years on the run ended for Abul Abbas.
The Palestinian terrorist, who masterminded the 1985 hijacking of the Achille Lauro cruise ship and the murder of elderly American tourist Leon Klinghoffer, was caught in Baghdad by U.S. special operations troops. Klinghoffer's daughters said they were "delighted that the murderous terrorist Abul Abbas is in U.S. custody."
In the Biblical city of Ur, Iraqis met under American auspices to begin shaping a new government. The meeting in the birthplace of Abraham drew dozens of Iraqis to a gold-colored tent. And it brought anti-American protesters to a nearby city.
"No to American, and no to Saddam!" chanted thousands of Shiite demonstrators, taking their new freedom of speech out for a spin.
A tip led commandos to a Baghdad home with a sizable chemical laboratory, along with documents allegedly for producing chemical and biological weapons.
---
WEDNESDAY, April 16:
Things turned ugly in Mosul.
Iraq's third-largest city, for the second straight day, was the scene of confrontations involving U.S. troops and local people. Over the two days, 17 Iraqis were killed and 17 wounded on the same street in Mosul, local officials said. U.S. officers said their troops were only returning fire.
President Bush urged the United Nations to lift economic sanctions imposed on the Iraqi economy for nearly 13 years. And the administration lowered the national terror alert level to "yellow," or elevated. It had been raised to "orange," or high, shortly before the war started.
Inside one of Saddam's ornate palaces, Gen. Tommy Franks briefed Bush on the war via videoconference.
---
THURSDAY, April 17:
Time ran out for a Saddam half brother, too.
Barzan Ibrahim Hasan, one of the toppled leader's three half brothers, was captured by U.S. Special Forces. The presidential adviser had "extensive knowledge of the regime's workings," U.S. Central Command said.
Saddam's fate remained unresolved.
In a Baghdad bank, thieves blew a hole in the vault and lowered children inside to grab handfuls of cash. U.S. troops calmed angry depositors by arresting the thieves and removing $4 million in U.S. dollars for safekeeping.
Near Tikrit, U.S. Marines broke up clashes between club-wielding members of Saddam's clan and rivals from the countryside who came to the city for food.
---
FRIDAY, April 18:
Iraq's most wanted list got shorter.
Samir Abd al-Aziz al-Najim, the former Baath Party Regional Command Chairman for east Baghdad, was in U.S. custody after being handed over by Iraqi Kurds near Mosul.
Iraq's newly revived police arrested former Finance Minister Hikmat Mizban Ibrahim al-Azzawi in Baghdad and turned him over to the Marines, according to U.S. authorities.
The mastermind of Iraq's nerve agent program, Emad Husayn Abdullah al-Ani, surrendered to the Americans, raising hopes for a breakthrough in the search for banned weapons. And a member of the Abu Nidal terrorist group, Khala Khader al-Salahat, surrendered to U.S. forces.
At a Baghdad mosque, thousands of Iraqis demonstrated against the U.S. occupation as a cleric reportedly urged American soldiers to leave before they were expelled from the country.
Saddam - or at least his image and voice - resurfaced on Abu Dhabi television. A video of Saddam greeted by a cheering crowd on the streets of Baghdad was shown, and audio of a Saddam speech was later played.
Both were purportedly made April 9, two days after a U.S. airstrike that targeted Saddam and his sons.
---
SATURDAY, April 19:
Freedom of worship returned.
Shiite Muslims began a pilgrimage - severely restricted for decades under Saddam Hussein's regime - that could bring as many as 2 million faithful in coming days to one of their holiest sites, in Karbala.
Seven U.S. soldiers freed from Iraqi captivity flew from a U.S. air base in Germany to their home bases in Texas. Meanwhile, scores of Iraqi fighters headed home, freed by their Kurdish captors after weeks at a northern prison camp.
British and Iraqi workers reopened the rail line between Umm Qasr and Basra - the expected route for aid to southern Iraq. The first convoy of food aid reached Baghdad from Jordan.
Marine Gen. Rich Natonski countered a Muslim cleric's claims to control the city of Kut, declaring at a meeting with tribal leaders that "the government of this province and this city is where I meet with this council."

 

End of Document
