

Poll: How the voters in Iowa saw the top four candidates
The Associated Press
January 20, 2004, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 536 words
Byline: By WILL LESTER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Iowa voters were looking for a Democratic presidential candidate with experience and a campaign message that would wear well against President Bush, according to an analysis of caucus participants.
John Kerry and John Edwards benefited from this late shift in voters' thinking, according to entrance polls conducted for the Associated Press.
Kerry, a senator from Massachusetts, fared well among most voter groups and persuaded those who attended the caucuses that he had the best experience and background to compete with Bush.
Edwards, a North Carolina senator, successfully communicated his empathy with the problems of regular people and his optimistic approach to campaigning.
Howard Dean, the former Vermont governor who had been the front-runner, didn't score well enough with groups that were expected to support him strongly - young adults, strong opponents of the Iraq war and first-time caucus-goers. Dick Gephardt, the Missouri congressman who bowed out of the race Tuesday, split the labor support he so badly needed with the three other strongest candidates.
A look at the support, or lack of support, for the top four candidates:
KERRY: Kerry got strong support across the board. He was especially strong with older voters and the 15 percent who said experience is the most important candidate quality - and the 26 percent who said the ability to beat the president in a general election was most important.
Four in 10 decided in the last week who they would support, and Kerry did best among them at 39 percent, followed by Edwards with 35 percent.
EDWARDS: Edwards got strong support from those who said it was most important to have a candidate who "cares about people like me." Six of 10 of his supporters were women. Edwards did well among voters who thought the economy was the top issue, tying with Kerry among those voters - almost a third of the total. His carefully calibrated stand on the war with Iraq appealed to those with mixed feelings about the war. Those strongly for or against the war leaned toward other candidates.
DEAN: The story of Dean's performance in the Iowa caucus was largely about unmet expectations. He was expected to do very well among those who strongly disapproved of the war with Iraq, but he finished behind Kerry with that group. He expected to do well among young adults, but Kerry edged him among those voters, and Edwards finished almost as strong. Among first-time caucus-goers, Dean finished behind Kerry and even with Edwards.
GEPHARDT: The problems faced by Gephardt in Iowa can be clearly seen by looking in detail at the labor vote. Almost half of Gephardt's voters were from labor households. But he split that vote with Kerry, Edwards and Dean. Gephardt was strongest among those who thought trade was the top issue, but only one in 20 voters felt that way. Among voters who thought experience was the most important candidate quality, only one in five supported Gephardt, who was elected to the Congress in 1976. Among those who thought it was most important to have a candidate who could beat Bush, Gephardt got only 6 percent, according to the entrance polls conducted for the AP and the television networks by Edison Media Research and Mitofsky International.
 Load-Date: January 21, 2004

 

End of Document
