

Putin anchors Russia in the West, but his ambitions in the East trouble Washington
May 23, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 557 words
Byline: By DEBORAH SEWARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Russian President Vladimir Putin has firmly steered his country toward the West in the last year, but his ambitions in the East trouble Washington and could lead to some testy talk at this week's U.S.-Russian summit.
Putin moved quickly to condemn the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks in the United States, and that goodwill helped pave the way for the arms control agreement to be signed Friday in the Kremlin and a new NATO-Russia agreement to be initialed next week in Rome.
In another effort to improve relations with his country's former enemies in the West, Putin will seek better economic, transport and energy ties at a European-Union-Russia summit that comes only a day after the NATO-Russia summit.
Putin will press for even closer economic relations with the West at the G-8 summit in Canada in late June, where he will meet Bush for the sixth time.
"The series of summits in May and June may help get rid of the legacy of the Cold War, ending Russia's isolation and bringing it back into Europe," Sergei Markov, director of the Institute for Political Research, said this week.
While some of the Russian political and military elite continue to smart over Russia's loss of superpower status a decade after the Soviet collapse, a new generation of pragmatists led by Putin see a chance to recover some of the country's international influence through improved ties with the West.
"There is a chance now for real partnership," Sergei Rogov, the head of the USA-Canada Institute said Wednesday.
But while Putin is actively pursuing better economic and political ties with Europe and the United States, he also has been busy tending to relations with three nations in the Middle and Far East which Bush has called "the axis of evil" - Iran, Iraq and North Korea.
Just two days before Bush's arrival in Russia, North Korean Foreign Minister Paek Nam Sun was in Moscow for talks that Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov said were of "exceptional significance" and were believed to have included discussions of Russian help for building a nuclear power plant.
While Russia has somewhat cooled its relations with Iraq and no longer is openly objecting to proposed new sanctions, any U.S.-led military action against Baghdad could lead to new strains between Moscow and Washington.
"The United States ignores our opinion in a less obvious way compared to what it does to its closest allies," analyst Vyacheslav Nikonov, head of the Politika think tank, said, referring in part to plans of military action against Iraq.
And Russia's continued nuclear cooperation with Iran remains a source of tension between Moscow and Washington.
Putin and Iranian President Mohammad Khatami strengthened their own personal relationship during a summit of Caspian Sea leaders last month. Russia insists that the United States has no business interfering with the pursuit of what Moscow considers its legitimate interests in Iran, including nuclear agreements.
Russia also seems increasingly uneasy about the growing U.S. military presence in Central Asia and recently has taken new steps to increase its own diplomatic and military activity in that vital region.
Despite U.S. disapproval, Russia in the past year has taken significant steps to strengthen its relationship with China, signing a major new friendship treaty last summer to solidify reconciliation between the two neighbors.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY113
 Load-Date: May 24, 2002

 

End of Document
