

Saddam's lawyers complain they were kept in the dark in the trial
The Associated Press
July 1, 2004, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 318 words
Byline: By JAMAL HALABY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: AMMAN, Jordan
Body




Lawyers on a team set up to defend Saddam Hussein watched their client's court appearance on television Thursday, complaining they were kept in the dark about the proceedings and asserting the deposed Iraqi leader cannot get a fair trial.
"The tribunal being put in place by the Americans is a disguised execution squad," said French attorney Emmanuel Ludot. "These judges are still under the shock of emotion and pain," he said. Saddam "will either be judged in fear or in vengeance."
Ludot and the others watched the proceedings from the Jordanian capital, where the defense team's leader, attorney Mohammad Rashdan, is based.
Rashdan was hired by Saddam's wife, Sajida Khairallah Telfah. The defense team also includes lawyers from Lebanon, Tunisia, Libya the United States, Britain and Belgium.
Attorney Tim Hughes of Britain said he and his colleagues were "kept in the dark" about the proceedings. He said the lawyers were ready to go to Iraq, but "we will be wanting to have full assurances" of their safety.
Issam Ghazawi, a member of Saddam's defense team, said he had received threats in a telephone call Wednesday from someone claiming to be with the Iraqi Justice Ministry who warned anyone who tried to defend Saddam would be "chopped to pieces."
Ziad Aziz, the eldest son of former Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz, who was being tried along with Saddam, briefly stopped by the law office Thursday to sign documents appointing the team to defend his father. "I leave it to God and his mercy," the young Aziz said.
Elsewhere, questions about the proceedings were raised even by those, like Syrian analyst Ahmad Haj Ali, who said Saddam should be tried.
"Any ruler who caused pain for his people deserves to be brought to trial," Haj Ali said. "I think trying Saddam Hussein is necessary, but after the Iraqi people gain their freedom and build their institutions. Only then can they try him," Haj Ali said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos
 Load-Date: July 2, 2004

 

End of Document
