

Some of the victims of the terrorist attacks
October 31, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 416 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Some of those confirmed dead, reported dead or missing in the terrorist attacks Sept. 11:
 
MICHAEL A. ASCIAK, 47, of Ridgefield, N.J., worked at Carr Futures and was adept at fixing things with his hands. While on vacation this year, Asciak followed his wife, Elaine Asciak, to work to the elementary school where she teaches and fulfilled requests to assemble tables, mount pencil sharpeners and adjust blackboards. "He was always trying to help someone," she said. Michael Asciak converted their attic into a family room and spent hours maintaining the yard. His best student was his 11-year-old daughter. Not long ago, she fixed the VCR by herself.
JASON D. CAYNE, 33, of Morganville, N.J., was a municipal bond broker and partner at Cantor Fitzgerald who loved to spend time with his wife, Gina Cayne, and three daughters. Friend Jay Glazer recalled seeing Cayne dancing with his daughters at a wedding. "He had no rhythm, but you could tell he was in heaven, and they were having the time of their lives," Glazer said.
 
JOHN BERGIN, 39, of New Dorp, N.Y., took advantage of his firefighter's schedule. He owned a tent rental business and was two weeks shy of finishing renovations on his own bar, a lifelong dream. Bergin also used his free time to take care of his three children while his wife returned to her career as a teacher. "We were lucky, with his schedule, he could do all these things with the kids," said his wife, Madeline Bergin. "And there was never a question that he would do it." He was about to get more time to devote to his family and his business, as he was two and a half years short of retirement from the fire department.
 
DOLORES MARIE COSTA, 53, of Middletown, N.J., was a vice president of Fred Alger Management. "My wife had a heart of gold - she was very soft," said her husband, Charles. She liked to crotchet and often made colorful afghans for her friends and spent her evenings talking about life with her husband. She would have turned 54 on Sept. 13.
 
JAMES D. HALVORSON, 56, of Greenwich, Conn., worked for Marsh & McLennan Cos. As head of Marsh's Global Infrastructure Group, he traveled the world arranging insurance for major construction projects. Because his travels took him to hot spots such as Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Pakistan and Russia, his family thought he was safe on the 99th floor of the World Trade Center. "The irony of it all is that he's been ducking bullets in the Middle East and around the world for years," said his wife, Maureen Halvorson.
 Load-Date: November 1, 2001

 

End of Document
