

Some 40 countries air views on the situation in the Mideast at special Security Council meeting
August 20, 2001, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 335 words
Byline: By DAFNA LINZER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Representatives from over 40 countries attended a special Security Council meeting Monday to discuss the situation in the Middle East and an Arab resolution calling for council action to halt 11 months of violence.
Security Council meetings are normally reserved for the 15 council members but at the request of Arab states, Monday's session was open to any country that wished to comment on the situation. More than half of the speakers signed up represent Muslim countries that have condemned the Jewish state's role in the violence.
Since fighting broke out last September, more than 570 people have been killed on the Palestinian side and more than 150 on the Israeli side.
The first two scheduled speakers were the Palestinian representative and Israel's ambassador. The United States and the other 14 council members were scheduled to speak Monday morning as well.
Last week, the Palestinians circulated a draft resolution calling for an end to the Israeli takeover of Orient House - the unofficial Palestinian headquarters in traditionally Arab east Jerusalem - an immediate cessation of violence, and the creation of "a monitoring mechanism."
Israel has rejected several attempts to send international observers to the region and hopes the United States - it's closest ally - will veto this latest attempt. Jerusalem has said however that it could accept an expanded CIA role.
The Arab draft did not define the "mechanism" or clarify how it would differ from international observers, but says it should "help create a better situation on the ground" and help the parties implement recommendations from an international commission headed by former U.S. Sen. George Mitchell. Those recommendations include a cooling-off period, confidence-building measures, and a resumption of peace talks.
The United States blocked two previous attempts to send international observers to protect Palestinians - and Secretary of State Colin Powell indicated last week it would oppose a third attempt because of Israeli objections.
 Load-Date: August 21, 2001

 

End of Document
