

Taliban compound hit from the air as Marines "tighten the noose" on the ground
November 28, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 1490 words
Byline: By GREG MYRE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KABUL, Afghanistan
Body




More Marines poured into Afghanistan Tuesday, and Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said America was "tightening the noose" around Osama bin Laden and his Taliban allies. Taliban control in their southern stronghold appeared to be crumbling.
However, a senior Taliban representative denied speculation that the group's top leader Mullah Mohammed Omar had been injured or killed in U.S. air strikes Tuesday against a compound southeast of Kandahar.
Former Taliban ambassador to Pakistan, Abdul Salam Zaeef, said Omar, remained unharmed, the Afghan Islamic Press, a Pakistan-based news agency, reported Wednesday.
"Mullah Mohammed Omar … is safe and sound. He hasn't been hurt, nor any other Taliban leader," Zaeef said.
He said U.S. planes had hit the house of a local Taliban leader in Kandahar's Dand area. However, it was not an al-Qaida or Taliban base, he said. He gave no details of casualties and his claim could not be independently verified.
The news agency said the Taliban did know the whereabouts of bin Laden, who Zaeef said was not in Taliban-controlled territory in southern Afghanistan.
Rumsfeld said the Pentagon ordered airstrikes Tuesday against a compound near Kandahar after learning that it was being used by senior leaders of the Taliban, al-Qaida and Wafa, a Saudi humanitarian group that was among several groups named by the United States as aiding bin Laden and his network.
U.S. F-16 jets and B-1B bombers attacked two targets with precision-guided weapons, military officials said.
The anti-Taliban northern alliance said it crushed a bloody, three-day revolt by bin Laden's foreign fighters who had surrendered last weekend in the northern city of Kunduz.
There were no hostilities reported near or in the compound Wednesday morning. The grounds of the prison were littered with mutilated corpses and unexploded mortar shells.
However, U.S. Gen. Tommy Franks, who runs the U.S. military campaign in Afghanistan, told reporters at the U.S. Central Command headquarters in Tampa, Fla. that 30 to 40 hard-core fighters were still holding out in the mud-walled fortress near Mazar-e-Sharif.
With the collapse of Taliban resistance in the north, attention has focused on the south, where the Islamic militia which protected bin Laden remains in control of the city of Kandahar and a handful of provinces.
President Bush launched military operations Oct. 7 in Afghanistan after the Taliban refused to surrender bin Laden, alleged architect of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks in the United States.
In Washington, U.S. officials said that of an estimated 4,000 to 5,000 members of bin Laden's al-Qaida terrorist network in Afghanistan, several hundred have been killed, including seven considered to be leaders. The officials spoke on condition of anonymity.
Franks said the hunt for bin Laden and his al-Qaida followers was focusing on two areas: Kandahar in the south and a mountain base called Tora Bora south of Jalalabad in the east near the Pakistan border.
U.S. Marines, who established a base in southern Afghanistan late Sunday, sent out armed patrols Tuesday as part of the American effort to bring the fight to the Taliban's southern homeland.
Less than three days after first landing in southern Afghanistan, more than 600 Marines were on the ground, with at least 400 more on their way. Pentagon officials said they would help choke off escape routes for Taliban leaders and fighters loyal to bin Laden.
Rumsfeld said U.S. efforts "will be shifting from cities at some point to hunting down and rooting out terrorists where they hide."
Franks described the situation inside Kandahar, the dusty backwater city were the Taliban took shape in the early 1990s, as "very confused" - an observation borne out by reports from residents and travelers reaching Pakistan.
Kandahar residents reached by telephone said Taliban fighters were positioning anti-aircraft guns and mortars on hilltops surrounding the city. But the center of the city appeared largely deserted.
"Taliban morale seems low. They're not as active or alert as they used to be," said Mohammed Asan, who traveled Tuesday from Kandahar to the Pakistani border town of Chaman in search of work.
He said people in Kandahar were aware of the Marines' presence from foreign radio reports.
Ghulam Mahmood, another traveler from Kandahar, said residents were afraid for themselves. "Will civilians get killed in the cross fire? They don't know what to expect."
The Taliban have vowed to defend Kandahar rather than abandon it as they did Kabul, the capital, and other cities. However, the South Asian Dispatch Agency, a private Pakistani news service with a correspondent in Kandahar, quoted unidentified Taliban fighters in the city as saying they had been ordered to prepare to leave on short notice.
Taliban authority appeared under strain elsewhere in the south.
In the town of Spinboldak, 9 miles from the Pakistani border, witnesses said Afghan refugees in a Taliban-administered camp raided two warehouses and looted blankets and food which had been delivered from Pakistan.
In Spinboldak itself, few Taliban soldiers patrolled the streets and their main checkpoint was vacant, according to a local farmer, Ghoar Noorzai. Taliban guards could not be seen on the Afghan side of the border at Chaman.
"They roam around, but they don't bother people," Noorzai said of the Taliban.
Pashtun tribesmen opposed to the Taliban claim they have cut the main road leading from Spinboldak to Kandahar. The Taliban admitted Tuesday the highway had been closed for three days but would not say why.
With Taliban power waning, representatives of four Afghan factions opened a U.N.-sponsored meeting near Bonn, Germany, to map plans for a new, multiethnic government after two decades of war and civil strife.
James F. Dobbins, the U.S. Central Asia envoy, called the first day of talks a positive start. The delegates agreed their goal was to establish an interim administration that would lead to a grand council, or loya jirga, possibly by March, the Afghan New Year, U.N. spokesman Ahmad Fawzi said.
The council would approve a transitional administration to govern for up to two years, leading to a second council which would approve a constitution guaranteeing rights for all Afghans, women included, and provide for elections, Fawzi said.
"We want a new Afghanistan that emerges from the dark ages into the modern," said northern alliance delegation leader Younus Qanooni.
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan and President Bush were to meet in Washington on Wednesday to discuss efforts to form a transitional government and rebuild the country.
In northern Afghanistan, alliance officials estimated the death toll in the prison uprising in Kunduz at 450 Arabs, Chechens, Pakistanis and other foreigners who came to Afghanistan to fight with the Taliban. At least 40 alliance troops were killed, they said.
On other matters, Franks said U.S. forces in Afghanistan are searching more than 40 laboratories and other facilities suspected of conducting secret work on chemical, biological or nuclear weapons.
Franks said results from initial tests of samples taken from some sites were not yet available. The more than 40 sites are in parts of Afghanistan no longer under control of the Taliban militia.
Five U.S. special forces troops who were wounded in the uprising were flown to a U.S. military hospital in Germany. One CIA operative is reported missing.
A Swedish TV journalist, who had been covering the siege of Kunduz, was killed in an overnight robbery at a house in Taloqan, the base for scores of foreign reporters covering the uprising.
Ulf Stroemberg of the Swedish network TV4 was the eighth journalist to die in Afghanistan in the past two weeks.
In Montreal, a weekly newspaper said reporter Ken Hechtman had been taken prisoner near Kandahar.
Alastair Sutherland, the Montreal Mirror editor, said correspondents from USA Today and the London-based Guardian newspaper informed the Mirror of the 33-year-old Hechtman's detention. Initial reports indicated Hechtman was held by the Taliban, but Sutherland said later the identity of his captors was unclear.
In the aftermath of the uprising, dozens of bodies and body parts were scattered across a courtyard in the mud-walled fortress. Outside, three escaped Taliban prisoners lay dead in a ditch. A villager, laughing, picked up one body and kicked it in the head.
The fighters were taken prisoner during the surrender of Kunduz, the last Taliban stronghold in the north. On Tuesday, shopkeepers in Kunduz heeded instructions and reopened for business, trying to restore stability.
A jail in the village of Qurbragh, on the former eastern front between the towns of Taloqan and Kunduz, held many Taliban prisoners Tuesday. Visiting reporters were not allowed to speak with them.
Jailers said that other foreign soldiers taken prisoner had committed suicide in a trench during the fighting in Kunduz. The account could not be independently verified.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos
 Load-Date: November 29, 2001

 

End of Document
