

The question in state-controlled Iraq: Will the public resist or stand aside?
October 28, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 800 words
Byline: By ELLEN KNICKMEYER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAGHDAD, Iraq
Body




True or false? Iraqis back their leader 100 percent. Wars and sanctions have only hardened their resolve, and all 22 million of them would proudly die for Baba Saddam - Father Saddam.
In one of the world's most tightly controlled states, no one would dare to openly reply "false."
But a few telling details suggest a place different from the slogans: an Iraq where people speak wearily of praying for peace, where rallies for Saddam fail to draw much of a crowd, and where faint voices are beginning to dare question the beloved leader's policies.
"God willing, there will be no war," said a worshipper at a Baghdad mosque, sounding a bit numb at the prospect of another showdown with the United States.
Each side is looking for a sharply different response from the Iraqi people if war comes. The West hopes they at least will not resist an invasion. Saddam is counting on them to do just that.
It is hard to know how which way they will go.
Public criticism of the Iraqi leader is never heard. Tales of executions emerging from Iraqi prisons with Saddam's general amnesty last week point to the fate of those jailed for perceived opposition.
Iraqis speak of being afraid to complain even in the privacy of their own families - although some say they see a slight loosening now, as the threatened Iraqi leader openly courts his people's support.
The state-run media strive to convey a nation united in patriotism. Television crews visit classroom after classroom to film students waving reedy arms in salute to Baba Saddam.
Camera crews stop adults on the streets and coax them to come up with new varieties of Saddam-worship.
Television shows hour after hour of celebrations for Saddam - almost all of it canned footage of old rallies that sometimes are in surreal contrast to the workaday life on the streets.
Impromptu rallies have been few, scattered and small.
On Oct. 15, the state held a referendum on keeping Saddam in power for another seven years. Voting was obligatory and after a 100 percent "yes" vote was declared, the ruling Baath Party organized celebratory demonstrations across the capital.
But after closing streets for the rallies, Baath officials glumly reopened some of them when the expected crowds failed to materialize.
In a city of 5 million people, journalists estimated only about 160,000 people showed up for a whole string of street parties. Many were Baath stalwarts in military uniforms.
Away from the rallies, people strolled the streets in the cool of evening, window-shopping or gathering in grassy public squares to talk.
There was celebratory shooting in the air, but that also happened last year, perhaps more so, when Iraq beat Jordan in soccer, some Baghdad people said.
The regime in recent weeks is making increasing efforts to prop up its support by giving cars, land and home loans to senior Baath Party officials and other high-ranking loyalists.
Saddam's amnesty for all criminal and political prisoners - the number freed is still uncertain - brought by far the most dramatic outpouring of public support.
"Thousands of thousands of thank yous to our president, Saddam Hussein," a Kurdish woman enthused after she and others streamed out of al-Khadamir prison.
However, the release brought a surprising rise in tensions among the thousands who showed up at prisons to await relatives. Women whose sons were not among the freed joined the singing of tributes to Saddam but also badgered government officials and shouted for an accounting.
With foreign journalists looking on, Saddam's security apparatus responded mildly, firing only into the air to break up the crowds.
Last week Saddam told Iraqis what he expected of them in case of war: "If God Almighty … decides to put you again to the test in a situation of fighting on a large scale, then the Almighty, the nation and history will expect you to deliver an effective stand."
Their reward, he said, would be "in this world and the next."
Officials put up banners urging a fight "For Saddam and homeland."
"Everyone will fight," said Mohammed Mudhafr al-Adhamy, a political science instructor and member of the Saddam-controlled Parliament. "We like foreigners, but we don't like to be controlled by foreigners."
Many Iraqis say the same, even out of earshot of government guides who must accompany foreign reporters to interviews. A history of invasions has bred a defiant streak.
Saddam's terrorized people cannot be expected to lead a revolt, but may support one if they see the regime falling, a Western diplomat said.
Until then, Iraq's silent majority will survive as it has for two decades under Saddam: by holding its tongue.
"We don't care about it," said Jawan Mohammed, a woman living in a Baghdad slum called Saddam City, where children scampered along a lake of open sewage. "We've been used to it a long time now."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY175
 Load-Date: October 29, 2002

 

End of Document
