

The U.S.-led campaign against terrorist groups is making itself felt around the globe
December 24, 2001, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 2868 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Sept. 11 will shadow much of the world in the new year.
The war in Afghanistan has gone much quicker than many expected, but Washington cautions that the campaign against Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida network is far from over. And the world wonders where the Bush administration will aim next.
The falloff in travel is hurting tourism businesses in rich and poor countries alike, worsening the economic slowdown that was evident even before Sept. 11. Bloodshed in the Middle East has worsened.
Yet there are bright spots. Much of the world is showing a rare unity in dealing with terrorism. The United States and Europe are getting involved again in trying to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Washington's relations with Moscow and Beijing have improved markedly.
The Associated Press asked some of its correspondents around the world to assess the prospects for 2002. Here are their reports:
--- Asia
 
By TED ANTHONY
BEIJING - China was hoping 2002 would be its bragging year on the Asian stage, basking in its new World Trade Organization membership and the prestige of the 2008 Olympics. But attention lies elsewhere: The watchword in Asia for the coming year is terrorism.
Muslim movements - in Afghanistan, Pakistan, India's Kashmir region, Indonesia, the Philippines - have been snatching headlines from economic convulsions that have dominated recent years.
Atop the list: Afghanistan, birthing a delicate provisional government after the rigorously Islamic Taliban crumbled at the hands of U.S. and Afghan opposition forces for refusing to hand over Osama bin Laden.
In neighboring Pakistan, uneasiness remains among Muslims who object to President Pervez Musharraf's support for the United States. Central Asian countries also face fluid situations as they balance the war on terrorism with placating militant Muslims in their populations.
Tension between India and Pakistan, two longtime antagonists that now have nuclear arms, has ratcheted up since the terrorist attack on India's parliament.
In the Philippines, the Abu Sayyaf insurgency continues to sow disorder as the military hops island to island in pursuit. Indonesia, the world's most populous Muslim nation, faces sectarian conflict on some islands and separatist movements on others.
Nepal, under a state of emergency, is battling Maoist rebels months after Crown Prince Dipendra gunned down most of the royal family.
In East Asia, Japan is struggling to get its economy moving, and reunification talks between the Koreas need a jump-start.
And China? Its relations with the United States have improved markedly in the post-Sept. 11 world, but other bedevilments loom large. Among them: dealing with a Taiwan averse to the reunification the mainland demands. China's Communist Party also must find replacements for several aging top leaders expected to start relinquishing their posts next autumn.
--- Middle East
 
By DAN PERRY
JERUSALEM - For Israelis and Palestinians, the question is whether the new year will bring an end to 15 months of violence.
As 2001 winds down, Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat has promised after intense U.S. and European pressure to crack down on Hamas and Islamic Jihad militants whose campaign of suicide bombings has killed dozens of Israelis. But in Israel there are growing calls to bring down Arafat's 7-year-old government.
Arafat says he wants to renew peace talks, but prospects are unclear as Prime Minister Ariel Sharon appears ready to offer only half the land the Palestinians seek for a state. Some Israelis propose another interim deal, or a unilateral Israeli pullout from the West Bank and Gaza instead.
Continued stalemate could bring further deterioration, especially if the moderate Labor Party bolted Sharon's governing coalition. That would leave Sharon at the mercy of hard-liners calling for the destruction of the Palestinian Authority, and could also lead to early elections.
Israelis are also concerned an American attack on Saddam Hussein's regime could draw them into a war with Iraq. Iraq is seen as a potential next target in the U.S. war on terror - but Libya, Sudan and Syria also have long been accused by Washington of supporting extremists.
Most Arab governments, in many cases themselves threatened by militants, support the U.S. campaign. But many ordinary Arabs accuse the Washington of targeting Islam and Arabs, not terrorism.
The war on terror has created economic trouble for Arab states. Egypt has seen crucial tourism revenues plummet, and oil prices have been falling since Sept. 11.
In Iran, despite strong support from voters last June, the supporters of reformist President Mohammad Khatami are still being stymied by religious hard-liners who control the judiciary and military.
--- Europe
 
By JEFFREY ULBRICH
BRUSSELS, Belgium - The war on terrorism remains a key factor, but the big news in Europe in the new year will be money.
Twelve of the European Union's 15 member-states abandon their francs, marks, drachmas and pesetas New Year's Day for the euro, the most concrete step yet in the EU's effort to forge a real union.
NATO also will be working to draw Europeans closer together. At the 19-nation alliance's summit, the allies again will throw open the door to membership. Nine nations from the Baltics to Bulgaria are candidates.
Expanding will also occupy much of the EU's time, with a dozen candidates knocking at the door, although the EU still has to overhaul its rules so it can function efficiently with nearly double the number of nations.
The struggle against terrorism is on everybody's mind, especially those nations that have contributed troops to the fight in Afghanistan, and elections in France and Germany, two of the EU's economic powerhouses, will be closely watched.
In the always-worrisome Balkans, the coming year might be Yugoslavia's last. The leadership in Montenegro, which with Serbia makes up the Yugoslav federation, is determined to declare independence. The United States and its allies are opposed, fearing Yugoslavia's breakup could foment further regional separatist unrest.
In Kosovo, November elections have set the stage for a measure of self-rule through an ethnic Albanian-dominated legislature that includes a strong minority Serb faction. With the Serbs opposed to ethnic Albanians' hopes of independence, future violence remains possible.
Macedonia, too, is a possible flashpoint. Despite agreement on a Western-brokered peace deal meant to snuff out ethnic Albanian insurrection, 2001 closed with more violence from a new rebel faction that rejects the peace agreement.
--- Latin America
 
By JOHN RICE
MEXICO CITY - With the world's attention focused on terrorism and war, Latin America enters 2002 struggling with its own crises.
A punishing four-year recession has Argentina in a political crisis as anger over double-digit unemployment, hunger and poverty boils over into bloody rioting and looting.
The unrest has been aggravated by repeated austerity drives imposed by President Fernando de la Rua, who was forced to resign Dec. 19 as violence spread across the country.
Venezuela's populist president, Hugo Chavez, is increasingly clashing with the country's business community over laws to increase the state's role in the economy. As the oil-fueled economy slips, Chavez has accused his foes of trying to destabilize the country.
The honeymoon has worn off for Mexican President Vicente Fox, who is just finishing his first year after ending the 71-year reign of the former ruling party. Fox has had trouble getting a key tax measure approved by an opposition-dominated Congress. A new U.S. focus on cooperation with Mexico was diverted by the Sept. 11 terror attacks.
Peru's new president, Alejandro Toledo, found Peruvians impatient for change after the flight of former authoritarian President Alberto Fujimori. Allegations of flip-flopping, nepotism and an $18,000-a-month salary have sent Toledo's approval ratings plummeting.
Latin America's largest country, Brazil, chooses a new president next fall, with the leftist Workers Party leading in opinion polls to succeed President Fernando Henrique Cardoso.
In Chile, President Ricardo Lagos enters the third year of his six-year term battling a stagnant economy and high unemployment, but Chile's economy is expected to be among the region's strongest in the new year.
--- Russia and the Commonwealth of Independent States
 
By DEBORAH SEWARD
MOSCOW - Russian President Vladimir Putin enters the new year having made his mark as a world leader in 2001. He won accolades for his swift support of the U.S.-led anti-terror campaign, a major speech in Berlin delivered in impeccable German, and his defense of international security treaties.
Putin clearly is putting Russia in the West, defying his generals and many lawmakers still wary of Moscow's former enemies. His most significant step is the warming of ties between Moscow and Washington and his relationship with President Bush.
Russia's economy is humming along steadily, buoyed by oil revenue. But rosy forecasts for 2002 depend mainly on world oil prices stabilizing. Russia will pursue membership in the World Trade Organization and again seek favorable terms for repaying huge debts due in 2002.
At home, the Chechen conflict drags on, with the Muslim rebels showing no signs they are ready to lay down their arms.
Elsewhere in the former Soviet Union, instability is higher in Georgia, with a new bout of violence in the breakaway region of Abkhazia. Azerbaijan's president, Geidar Aliyev, continues to squelch the political opposition and media.
In Belarus, little progress in economic improvement and democratic development is expected. Poverty and economic decline continue to weigh heavily in Ukraine.
All five of the former Soviet republics in Central Asia are supporting the United States' anti-terrorism campaign. American troops are based in Uzbekistan, with a small contingent in Tajikistan.
But those countries remain politically repressive and economically depressed, and there are few signs that closer relations with Western nations are doing much to improve the lives of ordinary people.
--- Africa
 
By RAVI NESSMAN
JOHANNESBURG, South Africa - Africa continues to suffer from AIDS, internal conflicts and elusive efforts to resolve the Congo war, which threatens the stability of central Africa.
More than 28 million of the 40 million people infected with HIV live in sub-Saharan Africa and most of the infected have little hope of getting the medicine needed to treat the disease, despite the drugs' reduced cost and U.N. efforts to create an international AIDS fund.
The momentum for peace in Congo has picked up since President Joseph Kabila succeeded his assassinated father. However, no agreement has been reached on the future makeup of the Congolese government, and Rwanda and Uganda seem unwilling to complete troop pullouts from eastern Congo so long as groups hostile to them remain in the region.
Peace prospects seem brighter in Sierra Leone, where more than 30,000 ex-combatants in a brutal 10-year civil war have turned in their weapons. National elections are scheduled for May 14. But the country's feared rebels have abandoned numerous accords in the past.
Zimbabwe's presidential election in March is almost certain to be marred by violence, mainly by militants loyal to President Robert Mugabe. Mugabe has banned election monitors and foreign journalists from the country.
Kenya also faces crucial elections in which President Daniel arap Moi likely will not take part for the first time in more than 20 years.
Sporadic ethnic and religious fighting in Nigeria, along with insurrections in Liberia and Central African Republic, show no sign of abating.
The biggest question is whether Somalia will become a target in the U.S.-led campaign against terrorism. U.S. officials have cited some links between al-Qaida and the Somali group Al-Itihad al-Islamiya.
--- Caribbean
 
By PAISLEY DODDS
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico - The Caribbean is looking at bleak economic prospects as tourism-dependent islands, already hit with lukewarm business, struggle with the post-Sept. 11 drop in travel.
No world region is more dependent on tourism, which employs one of every four adults in the Caribbean.
Cuba, battered by lackluster sugar harvests, had put its hopes on sweetening its slowly recovering economy with tourism profits, but the terrorist attacks and Hurricane Michelle have been blows.
Efforts in the United States to loosen the travel ban and trade sanctions on Cuba are now being given second priority as American lawmakers focus on the war against terrorist groups.
For islands like St. Lucia where banana exports have fallen 50 percent, the drop in tourism comes as former British colonies in the region and elsewhere prepare to lose preferential treatment in European markets due to a World Trade Organization ruling.
Caribbean countries also face increasing pressure to share financial information and curb secretive offshore banking practices linked to money laundering.
In Haiti, opposition is mounting against President Jean-Bertrand Aristide's government as it struggles to rebuild a shattered economy and make good on promises of jobs and basic services.
Jamaica, scheduled for elections this year, faces instability as politically motivated violence rises and drug traffickers use the island as a transshipment point for cocaine.
The U.S. territory of Puerto Rico is still trying to persuade Washington to halt Navy bombing exercises on the outlying island of Vieques. Prior to Sept. 11, President Bush had promised to stop Vieques exercises by 2003, but Puerto Rican leaders now fear the war on terrorism could push back the date.
--- Australia and the Pacific
 
By MIKE CORDER
SYDNEY, Australia - Prime Minister John Howard, elected in November for a third term will make labor law reform one of his top priorities in 2002, but domestic politics looks like it's again being dominated by his conservative government's hardline stance on asylum seekers. The navy will continue patrolling waters of northern Australia, intercepting boats carrying refugees and transporting them to detention centers on Pacific island nations.
Australia is helping to organize a regional summit in Indonesia aimed at improving the fight against people-smuggling.
In March, Britain's Queen Elizabeth II will attend a summit in Australia of leaders from Britain and its former colonies. The visit is expected to re-ignite the republican debate in Australia; in a 1999 referendum, Australians voted overwhelmingly against dumping the queen as head of state.
New Zealand's Labor Prime Minister Helen Clark will be trying for a rare double in 2002 - winning a second election in a row. Only once since 1949 has Labor had two consecutive terms in power, and its first woman premier wants to extend her run in office at elections due by year-end. Polls so far suggest she will hold on to power.
In the northern city of Auckland, opening races in the America's Cup sailing regatta begin with the final scheduled for early in 2003.
In Fiji, failed businessman George Speight will go on trial, likely in February, on treason charges related to his leadership of a May 2000 nationalist coup that toppled the country's democratically elected government.
Papua New Guinea also has parliamentary elections expected around midyear with Prime Minister Sir Mekere Morauta facing strong opposition over his package of unpopular economic reforms.
--- United Nations
 
By EDITH M. LEDERER
UNITED NATIONS - The United Nations will be in the forefront of international efforts to combat terrorism and to help Afghans build a broad-based government and start reconstructing their war-battered country.
But Secretary-General Kofi Annan has made clear as he embarks on his second five-year term that the aftermath of the Sept. 11 terror attacks on the United States cannot consume all the energy of the United Nations.
The issues that confronted the global community on Sept. 10 are still urgent: reducing the number of people living on less than a dollar a day, halting and starting to reverse the AIDS epidemic, global warming and environmental destruction, and the scourge of war.
In his Dec. 10 address accepting the Nobel Peace Prize, Annan said the mission of the United Nations in the 21st century will be defined by a new awareness of the sanctity of every human life and a recognition that peace belongs not only to states or peoples "but to each and every member of those communities."
"The sovereignty of states must no longer be used as a shield for gross violations of human rights," he declared.
From this vision, he said, flow three key priorities for the United Nations: eradicating poverty, preventing conflict and promoting democracy.
In practical terms, the United Nations will be continuing efforts to bring peace to Congo and Sierra Leone, to reunify Cyprus, and to get U.N. weapons inspectors back into Iraq.
Major U.N. conferences will focus on ways to promote economic development for the world's poorest people - and to finance it - and on the rapidly aging global population.
The United Nations will also end its administration of East Timor and launch the former Indonesian province as the world's newest independent nation May 20.
End Adv for Sunday, Dec. 30
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY330-335
 Load-Date: January 2, 2002

 

End of Document
