

The degree of real sovereignty which Iraqis will have depends on the level of violence by insurgents
The Associated Press
June 28, 2004, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 844 words
Byline: By ROBERT H. REID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAGHDAD, Iraq
Body




Regardless of Security Council resolutions and other legal documents, it is the insurgents who will determine how much genuine authority the newly sovereign Iraqi government will have as it begins the march to democratic rule.
Insurgents even influenced the pace of the transfer of sovereignty from the U.S.-run Coalition Provisional Authority to the appointed government of Prime Minister Iyad Allawi. The handover had been expected Wednesday but was pushed forward two days - in large part to prevent the militants from disrupting the historic step.
No advance word about the change in handover plans was announced. Instead, journalists were summoned early Monday to what they were told was a short-notice press conference by the outgoing U.S. governor, L. Paul Bremer.
Only after journalists were ushered into a conference room and their mobile phones taken were they told what they were about to witness.
On paper, the handpicked government is fully sovereign - albeit with major constraints. Some were imposed by the Americans - who maintain primary security responsibility - to leave a Western influence on the new Iraq. Others were imposed at the insistence of the influential Shiite clergy which sought to limit the powers of an unelected government.
The new government's primary mission will be to organize elections by Jan. 31 so that it can go out of business. Still, the Americans and their partners hope that sovereignty will serve as a psychological boost for Iraqis, who have been increasingly frustrated by and hostile to foreign military occupation.
U.S. military officials believe the insurgents, most of them from the Sunni Muslim minority, are a loose amalgam of Iraqi nationalists, supporters of Saddam Hussein, Islamic fundamentalists and foreign zealots.
American officials hope that Iraqis will believe they are now in control of their country and that the insurgency will lose steam - despite the continued presence of tens of thousands of U.S. and other foreign soldiers who are now a Multinational Force rather than occupation troops.
Everything, however, depends on security.
As the Iraqis and their international partners gradually restore law and order, the Americans can fade slowly into the background - removing their troops from the streets and into heavily fortified camps. That would mean fewer U.S. casualties - and fewer dire reports in the U.S. media as the November presidential election draws near.
But if the Iraqis stumble, all that will change. Circumstances will force a continued strong American role - and with it constraints on sovereignty.
The U.N. resolution approved unanimously by the Security Council on June 8 gives the American-run multinational force authority "to take all necessary measures to contribute to the security and stability in Iraq."
U.S. military officials interpret this to mean they - and not the Iraqis - remain the final authority in security matters - including whether Allawi imposes some form of emergency rule in Iraq.
Continuing violence would force the Americans to step in more and more into Iraqi affairs, effectively limiting the authority of the new government.
Iraqis will hardly believe they are in charge of their own country if they continue to see thousands of heavily armed Americans roaming their cities and towns. And that will continue to fuel resentment against a foreign presence and feed the insurgency.
Chances that the Iraqis themselves can cope with the security crisis aren't good - at least until the Americans and their partners can train and equip enough police, soldiers and national guardsmen. That could take several years.
For months, political operatives around Bremer, who departed Iraq soon after the transfer ceremony, boasted about the thousands of Iraqis who had stepped forward to defend their own country in the army and police. But large numbers of them melted away during the twin Shiite uprisings in the south and the Sunni revolt around Fallujah last April.
During the five-city insurgent offensive Thursday, poorly armed and poorly trained Iraqi police fled police stations and government buildings in Baqouba, Mosul and elsewhere. American troops backed by jets, tanks and Bradley Fighting Vehicles, had to recapture those facilities.
At recent car bombings and ambushes in Baghdad and other cities, young men routinely swarm around the crime scene, looting and setting fire to vehicles while the Iraqi police stand idly by.
In April, the Americans approved formation of a volunteer force to take responsibility for security in Fallujah and end the bloody three-week siege by U.S. Marines. The move was highly touted by Bremer's aides and senior U.S. officials as a possible model for Iraq - "an Iraqi solution to an Iraqi problem."
The move proved to be a disaster. Fallujah fell into the hands of radical clerics, who may be harboring terrorist Abu Musab al-Zarqawi.
---
Robert H. Reid, based in Brussels, Belgium, is a former Cairo bureau chief and roving Middle East correspondent for The Associated Press. He has reported on the Iraq conflict since October 2002.
 Load-Date: June 29, 2004

 

End of Document
