

The prostitute, the addict, the AIDS victim - for many of world's children, survival is bitter struggle
September 10, 2001, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 1630 words
Body




EDITOR'S NOTE - With the approach of this week's United Nations summit on the world's children, the first of its kind in a decade, Associated Press correspondents around the world profiled an 8-year-old AIDS sufferer, a 10-year-old tinsmith and three teen-agers caught up in war, prostitution and drug addiction.
---
 
By The Associated Press
By RAVI NESSMAN
ALEXANDRA, South Africa - Mpho, in many ways, is like any other 8-year-old girl. She loves to do puzzles, play, tease her older brother.
But underneath her floppy yellow hat, her short-cropped hair is pitted with bald splotches, patches of skin rendered barren by lesions and repeated infections caused by her weakened immune system.
This South African girl is one of the 1.4 million children around the world infected with HIV, and her grandmother worries that every day might be her last.
"Sometimes, when she doesn't cough at night, I wake up and check on her," her grandmother, Magdeline, said.
Mpho and her grandmother, who have asked not to be fully identified because of the stigma attached to AIDS in South Africa, live in a one-room house in Alexandra, just outside Johannesburg, with Mpho's 10-year-old brother. Magdeline has no job, so they survive on food donations from a clinic, school and church.
In 1999, the children's mother died at age 28, succumbing to the inevitable for AIDS sufferers in Africa, where almost no one has access to the necessary medicines. Their father took off when their mother became sick and now they only see him in court, where they have sued for child support.
Mpho, who caught HIV during childbirth, has been told her mother is dead, but doesn't quite believe it.
"My mother's in the hospital, and I'm missing her," she said.
As she sat with her grandmother, Mpho was quietly anxious to run to the playground. She wore a Teen-age Mutant Ninja Turtles shirt and smiled shyly, hiding her large brown eyes.
This was one of her good days.
Every morning she wakes up with a nosebleed. She rarely eats, she suffers chronic throat infections and her hearing is damaged. She gets rashes, headaches and terrible coughs.
Sometimes children snatch Mpho's hat and play drums on her bald spots. It makes her angry, but she still loves to play with them.
The other night, she dreamed she was healthy and her mother was back home.
"I was happy," she said.
---
 
By KATHY GANNON
KABUL, Afghanistan - His nails clogged with grease, Faizl Mohammed takes hold of a steel bar to pound a sheet of shiny tin.
He works 11 hours a day, six days a week. He has never been to school.
This Afghan boy is 10 years old.
His day begins around 5 a.m., with sweet black tea and sometimes a piece of bread, then he goes to the mosque to pray and study the Quran, the Muslim holy book. By 7 a.m. he's at work.
"When I first started this work I used to hurt my hands, but not very often anymore," he says. He has to yell to be heard above the pounding in his tinsmith shop and a dozen others that line the dusty Kabul street.
Ravaged by drought and two decades of war, Afghanistan is one of the world's poorest countries. The United Nations calls it a humanitarian catastrophe. The streets of the capital are rutted by rocket craters and teem with children scavenging and begging.
Faizl comes from a family of 10 people. His father is a day laborer, taking whatever job is available. Two of his brothers also work in the tinsmith shop.
The more experienced boys can earn up to 150,000 Afghanis a week, or $2.50, says the boss, Mohammed Qasim.
But Faizl is still an apprentice. He makes 50 cents a week.
---
 
By DAVID CRARY
NEW YORK - Nick was 11 when he started smoking marijuana, 12 when he became a dealer. At 15, he was downing Ecstasy pills every weekend.
"It looks just like a pretty little drug," he said. "Kids don't realize the hard stuff that's inside."
Now 17, Nick is back at his northern New Jersey home after five months at a residential drug-addiction program in California. Police had given him the choice of the program or jail.
According to federal surveys, illegal drug use by America's youth has declined slightly in the past three years, but remains an epidemic. The latest data, from 1999, found that 9 percent of youths ages 12-17 had used an illegal drug in the past month.
By Nick's account, drug abuse in his part of suburbia is pervasive.
"A lot of kids don't know what do to with their time - that's why drugs are so big," said Nick, who asked that his surname be withheld. Even honor roll students drink and take cocaine in the summer, he says.
Besides Ecstasy, Nick used LSD, cocaine, heroin and Special K - ketamine hydrochloride. It is similar to PCP and can be fatal in large doses.
"It was easier to get than alcohol," Nick said.
Through his first few years of heavy drug use, Nick said his parents were unaware of any serious problem. But at 15, he overdosed on PCP and needed emergency hospital treatment.
That led to his first treatment program, a local operation using the 12-step method modeled on Alcoholics Anonymous. Nick hated it and deliberately got expelled.
Eventually, his parents sent him to a residential program near Santa Cruz, Calif., run by Narconon, a private drug-treatment program.
"Instead of teaching you that drugs are bad, it teaches you that life is good," Nick said. "At first, I didn't want to be there, but by the end, I liked it."
He's now adjusting to life without drugs, and trying to make money selling puppies.
Nick doubts drug abuse can be curbed by those in authority.
"There's nothing you can say to someone who wants to do drugs - it's a personal thing," he said. "Think how many adults go to bars and drink. It's just the way it is."
---
 
By DILIP GANGULY
BATTICALOA, Sri Lanka - When she hears the rumble of Sri Lankan army trucks, Arunachalam Athisa and her classmates grab their satchels and run into the forest.
Once they hid for 24 hours, without food or water.
Yet being one of hundreds of thousands of children living in a war zone has not dampened Athisa's dream: "To become a doctor so that I just don't stand and see people die."
Most teen-agers in the northern region of the island are suspected of being members or sympathizers of the war for Tamil independence, and the Sri Lankan army periodically comes to Athisa's village, Muthalaikudah, to conduct ID checks.
Athisa is 15 and says she decided to become a doctor two years ago when her uncle died for lack of medical care after a grenade blast.
She studies math, science, English, Tamil, music, social studies, commerce and physical education. She chose Hinduism, the predominant Tamil religion, as an elective.
Athisa's school of 850 students has no computer. After years of neglect, nothing is left of the science laboratory. When it rains, classes are canceled because the roof is damaged by mortar blasts and it leaks.
Athisa has one ball point pen and a pencil. To save paper, she practices math with chalk on a slate.
Frail and soft-spoken, she is the youngest of seven children. Her father, a farmer, raises just enough rice to feed them all if the monsoon season is good. The village has no piped water, no medical care and no cooking gas.
Her daily meal is rice, a boiled banana and a pinch of salt. Once a week, she gets potatoes.
Athisa says the best moment of her life was last year, when her mother gave her a 100-rupee note ($1.20) for her birthday. She saved it for a village fair, where she bought pins and ribbon to braid her long, black hair, ate ice cream and bought her brothers and sisters peanuts.
She is good at her studies. She placed in the first division in her school, with a grade of 70 percent.
She imagines getting on a bus one day and traveling to Colombo, the capital, to study medicine.
"I have read in our books," Athisa said, "that if I am sincere and if I try hard, I can become what I want to become."
---
 
By BUSABA SIVASOMBOON
BANGKOK, Thailand - Daeng was sick. She pleaded with her boss to give her the day off. His answer was a blow to her face and a flogging until she passed out. Then it was back to work, having sex with a man for $7 an hour.
The Thai Red Cross has estimated there are 200,000 prostitutes in Thailand, up to 40,000 of them minors, some as young as 10. Daeng is 15, and one of the luckier ones. She was rescued.
One of eight children of an illiterate, poor couple, she got separated at age 13 from her family in a crowded Bangkok railroad station with just 20 baht (40 cents) in her pocket.
Daeng worked on a construction site for a year, until a girlfriend took her to a restaurant for a waitressing job. The floor above the restaurant turned out to be a brothel, and the owner claimed Daeng's friend had sold her to him.
The owner's son beat the girl relentlessly. Then his mother came in and spoke kindly, telling her "it was OK to sleep with men," Daeng said.
She was one of 20 prostitutes imprisoned in the brothel by Bangkok's port, forced to service two or three customers a night, mostly construction, factory and port workers. She earned nothing: only clothes, food and a thin mattress.
When she got depressed, the owner forced her to take methamphetamine pills. In a drug-induced high she slashed her arms several times.
"I got used to being a prostitute. I hated myself for doing it. I felt like I was an animal," she said.
Early last year, social workers led police to the brothel. The owner's son was arrested and is on trial. Daeng has testified against him.
She is now at a rehabilitation center, where she is required by law to spend two years. She tells her story in a halting whisper and refuses to give her full name. But she has learned to read and write, to sew and to cut hair. In a few months she will rejoin her family.
"Once I leave I will try to set up a hairdressing shop," she said. "That's what I want to do." And finally she smiles.
End Adv for Sunday, Sept. 16
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY365-371 of Sept. 10
 Load-Date: September 17, 2001

 

End of Document
