

The time of the Taliban is at an end in Afghanistan
December 7, 2001, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 651 words
Byline: By KATHY GANNON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KABUL, Afghanistan
Body




In the five years that the Taliban ruled, the Islamic militia became inextricably linked to Osama bin Laden. He financed their warriors, built their roads - and, eventually, brought about their collapse.
The Taliban, whose name means "students," began in 1994 as religious vigilantes committed to ridding this war-wrecked land of banditry and lawlessness.
Preaching an austere and uncompromising brand of Islam, they swept to national power in the mid-1990s, welcomed by many Afghans who were fed up with the collection of feuding warlords who ruled after the collapse of a pro-Moscow government in 1992.
The Taliban seized the capital, Kabul, in 1996, throwing out the warring factions led by Burhanuddin Rabbani. Their hardline interpretation of Islam was like a magnet for militant Muslims worldwide.
Bin Laden arrived in Afghanistan from Sudan several months before their sweep through Kabul. He was quick to swear allegiance to the Taliban and began to pump money and manpower into the movement, according to one of its founders, Mullah Mohammed Khaqzar.
A movement founded on the principle of law and order was transformed into the patron of a worldwide terrorist network, setting the stage for the showdown with the United States after the Sept. 11 terror attacks.
"People should look at the Taliban as a mix of good and bad," said Khaqzar. "They brought security and peace, but they imposed too many restrictions and pressure on the people and allowed foreigners to take control of our country."
Bin Laden's money and fighters bolstered the authority of the Taliban's supreme leader, Mullah Mohammed Omar, to impose a brutal mix of strict Quranic interpretations and tribal customs.
Afghans were forbidden to listen to music, watch television, admire artwork. Men had to wear beards as long as their fists. Women were banned from most work and from going to school. They had to gaze at the world - always with a male escort - from the tiny netted hole of a burqa.
Children could not keep pet pigeons, play chess or fly kites. By the end of Taliban rule, women were not even allowed to wear shoes with hard soles. The sound was considered provocative.
After the Taliban leadership refused to hand over their "guest" bin Laden to the United States, President Bush launched an air campaign Oct. 7, throwing America's military might behind the opposition northern alliance, a collection of warlords and ethnic minorities.
For the first month, the attacks produced few results. After relentless bombing of Taliban front lines, militia defenses around the northern city of Mazar-e-Sharif collapsed on Nov. 9.
Within 10 days, the Taliban had fled Kabul and most other major cities, running away in chaotic retreats to the place their movement was born, the southern city of Kandahar.
Taliban leadership agreed to surrender Kandahar on Thursday. By Friday morning, when opposition forces moved into the city, most of the Taliban were already gone.
It was unclear where the Taliban had gone or whether they would try to fight on as guerrillas against the new, U.N.-backed administration. Omar was nowhere to be found.
As a political force, however, it was clear the time of the Taliban was over.
"The Taliban rule is finished," Hamid Karzai, Afghanistan's new interim leader, said Friday. "As of today, they are no longer a part of Afghanistan."
Afghanistan still faces major obstacles before it becomes a decent place for its people to live.
Tribal feuding threatened the Kandahar deal within hours of its creation, and gangs of bandits or fighters - the distinction is often unclear - continue to roam the countryside, robbing and killing passers-by. Women in Kabul remain shrouded in their burqas; they aren't confident enough to remove them yet.
But with the support of international powers, the new government will have money and legitimacy that Afghanistan hasn't seen in years. The Taliban, it appears, will not play a role.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY190-192
 Load-Date: December 8, 2001

 

End of Document
