

The end of war lacks the punch of its beginning
The Associated Press
April 30, 2003, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 643 words
Byline: By DARLENE SUPERVILLE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Bush has been saying the war will be over when Gen. Tommy Franks tells him it is. Franks says it will be over when Bush gives the word.
Wars don't always end with the bang that heralds their beginning.
Bush will try to give the Iraq war a sense of finality with an address to the nation from the deck of an aircraft carrier Thursday night in which he is expected to announce that the combat phase is done.
Anything more definitive would be proven wrong the first time U.S. soldiers meet an unexpected, violent challenge, as happened at a demonstration Monday when, according to troops, people shot at them. The soldiers opened fire and killed 13 Iraqis.
In the Civil War, Confederate Gen. Robert E. Lee and his battered troops turned themselves in to Union Gen. Ulysses S. Grant on April 9, 1865, at Appomattox Court House, Va. It was not until May 26 that the last of the Southern soldiers surrendered.
The Korean War has never ended officially even though there's no more fighting.
The 1991 Persian Gulf War was never formally finished, either. President George H.W. Bush announced Feb. 27, 1991, that allied forces had liberated Kuwait and would suspend military operations against Iraq. Iraq agreed to a cease-fire on allied terms.
The United States and its rebel allies defeated the Taliban government in Afghanistan, scattered terrorists there and installed friendly leadership, but that war - and the broader campaign against terrorism - goes on.
"As often as not, wars just sort of trail off rather than coming to a formal and well-defined end," Loren Thompson, a military analyst at the Lexington Institute, a think tank, said in a recent interview.
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld has characterized the Afghanistan operation as being in a "stabilization security mode" with some combat confined to areas along the Pakistani border.
Rumsfeld is routinely asked if the Iraq war is over and says, in various ways, no, not really. Will an end be declared? "I would guess so," he mused. "Can I tell you for sure? No. But I would guess there will be an end.
"This isn't World War I or World War II that starts and then ends," he said. "How it will shake out in Iraq remains to be seen."
Ralph Beebe, who teaches history at George Fox University, said wars generally have ended with a concession, though not always formal, by the loser. He cited the Civil War, when Lee decided to surrender after realizing the high cost, in lives lost, of continuing to fight.
The situation in Iraq is different. Saddam Hussein and many other leaders of the toppled government are nowhere to be found, and some Iraqi troops seemed to disappear while thousands are in U.S. custody.
"I'm guessing that there won't be anything that formal because it will be months and months and probably years before the mess is straightened out," Beebe said. "In the final analysis, it's over when stability is regained."
Even so, aircraft carriers are leaving the region, U.S. and British troops are making the long journey back home and meetings to plan an interim Iraqi government are under way.
Bush plans to address the war's conclusion when he spends Thursday night on one of those carriers, the USS Abraham Lincoln. Aides say he won't declare an outright victory because there is much left to do in Iraq.
Gregory Urwin, a military historian at Temple University, said the United States usually ended wars with treaties, as happened in World War I and World War II.
But such an agreement with Iraq is very unlikely. For one thing, Saddam is missing, perhaps dead.
Urwin said the administration may consider other factors before declaring the war over.
"In this case, as in so many others, politics will have a say," he said. "Maybe they want to wait until closer to the elections or until they determine the whereabouts of Saddam Hussein.
"That would give a nice sense of finality," he said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos RE202, LON121

 

End of Document
