

The questions burn: Where is bin Laden? And the anthrax killer?
June 24, 2002, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 724 words
Byline: By CALVIN WOODWARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Everyone in Washington agrees the war on terrorism is much bigger than Osama bin Laden. Everyone is sure his al-Qaida group will carry on even if he is never seen again.
But they want him - and how.
Frustration over the missing man behind the Sept. 11 attacks spilled out Sunday when members of Congress sized up the threat his network still poses to America regardless of whether he is dead or alive.
"If he's alive," said Senate Minority Leader Trent Lott, R-Miss., "I'd like him to stick his head up and let us get a good look at him. And then I'd take it off."
"In a heartbeat," agreed Rep. Saxby Chambliss, R-Ga.
There was a hint of frustration, too, over other unfinished business from the fall, the anthrax investigation.
Lawmakers echoed Bush administration officials in pleading for patience, saying the case is scientifically complex.
But Democratic Sen. Barbara Boxer of California said authorities are spending too much time reorganizing themselves into an anti-terrorism bureaucracy and not enough on the bottom line: crushing al-Qaida and finding out who spread the deadly anthrax germs at home.
"I have to say we just need a renewed effort to keep our eye on both of these things," she said on the talk show circuit. "That anthrax killer is out there. We need to nab this person."
The open pining for more results in the anti-terror war was stimulated in part by an audio interview made public over the weekend in which bin Laden spokesman Sulaiman Abu Ghaith said the al-Qaida leader and most top lieutenants are alive, well and ready to attack again.
"Lot of bravado there," said Boxer, noting bin Laden did not look well at all when last seen on video.
But Sen. Bob Graham, D-Fla., chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, put some stock in the claims.
"It's not surprising that there is a statement that bin Laden is still alive," he said on "Fox News Sunday." "That's the best assessment of U.S. intelligence." A White House official found nothing surprising in the statement, either
Graham said bin Laden might be somewhere in Pakistan's western tribal lands.
Whatever its boss' fate, al-Qaida appears to be regenerating, Graham said, and even the Hamburg, Germany, cell believed central to the Sept. 11 attacks has been showing signs of life.
"What we have seen is a disturbing pattern of the reformulation of al-Qaida and their renewed willingness and capability to conduct terrorist attacks," he said.
Added Sen. Richard Shelby of Alabama, the intelligence panel's top Republican: "They could hit us any day."
Administration officials have pointed to numerous indications of al-Qaida activity but question whether the network still has the command structure or communications to plan something from the top.
They believe midlevel operatives are having to do their own hasty planning with whatever tools they can muster, and the result could be more frequent but less sophisticated attacks than before.
A White House official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the administration viewed Ghaith's taped remarks as no surprise, but wouldn't discuss whether bin Laden is alive or whether a new attack is likely.
Lawmakers said al-Qaida does not need bin Laden in order to go on.
"This snake can crawl without its head and we need to be aware of that," House Majority Leader Dick Armey, R-Texas, told CNN's "Late Edition."
He cautioned everyone to be especially careful on Independence Day because of its symbolic value as a terrorist target.
The congressional leaders offered no evidence of an impending attack other than the uncorroborated warnings issued lately, including one that al-Qaida could use fuel tanker trucks against Jewish targets in the United States.
Graham said al-Qaida appears to be more capable of attacking Americans than it was a month or two ago.
With all the foreboding from Washington, and the desire to track down the man behind the worst terrorist attack on America, it was left to Afghan President Hamid Karzai to sound a note of confidence about the progress made against both al-Qaida and the Taliban militia.
"They are a defeated force," he said. "They are on the run."
And bin Laden?
"Osama bin Laden must know that, whatever acts of terror he thinks he can commit, will not remain unanswered, and that his days are anyway numbered," Karzai said.
"But he will be found one day, sooner or later. That is for sure."
 Load-Date: June 25, 2002

 

End of Document
