

The search for an elusive exit strategy: Is one possible in the war on terror?
October 16, 2001, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 685 words
Byline: By EUN-KYUNG KIM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




In an open-ended war against terrorism far different than past conflicts, the Bush administration warns that even success in Afghanistan won't mean a quick and clean exit.
The White House is starting to think about what Afghanistan might look like when, or if, U.S.-led military strikes succeed in kicking out Osama bin Laden's terrorist network and smashing his ruling Taliban protectors.
Beyond that, there's no clear solution in sight.
"This will be a long war," President Bush said recently. "It requires understanding and patience from the American people."
Unlike many past wars, military troops fighting terrorists cannot simply storm into enemy territory, eliminate the opponent, then leave. In Afghanistan, for example, the United States will be pressured to ensure that whatever government follows the Taliban is stable enough to prevent another outbreak of war, or more support for terrorists.
"Fighting a war on terrorism is quite different than extracting Iraq from Kuwait or even bringing down the Nazi regime," said Jack Spencer, a defense analyst at The Heritage Foundation.
While insisting it won't choose Afghanistan's next leaders, the Bush administration is consulting with Afghanistan's neighbors and foes of the ruling Taliban militia to determine the shape a future government.
Bush administration officials have denounced the Taliban as unrepresentative of the people and have insisted on change.
Even if the United States roots out bin Laden's terrorist network in Afghanistan, the U.S. campaign is expected to go beyond that. Few experts believe the United States will ever get to the point where leaders can declare they have won the war against terrorism.
Past war strategies hardly fit. Even Secretary of State Colin Powell would admit his so-called Powell doctrine - set clear goals and then use overwhelming force to achieve victory - doesn't apply because it's uncertain when victory can be declared.
"Forget about exit strategies," Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said in a recent newspaper editorial. Then, as the United States launched its initial attack on Afghanistan, he said the strikes were part of a "much larger effort against worldwide terrorism," one likely to last "for a period of years, not weeks or months."
Former Pentagon strategist Michele Flournoy compared the war against terrorism to another ubiquitous war - the one against crime.
"Is there an exit strategy for that, where you would stop law enforcement, where you stop policing, then think there's never going to be more crime? Of course not," said Flournoy, a senior adviser at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
But some critics fear that providing a plan and time frame for withdrawal is the only way to prevent the campaign against terrorism from turning into another Bosnia - where American peacekeepers remain years after they were expected to return home - or even Vietnam.
White House spokesman Ari Fleischer says Bush is opposed to the idea of leaving U.S. troops in Afghanistan indefinitely, and opposed to the idea of using troops for "nation-building" activities, such as building schools and creating a civil society. Bush has said the United Nations might lead such efforts.
The terrorism campaign is harder to define because U.S. authorities are still trying to determine the sources of threats.
"Who would have thought that a couple of guys on an airplane with knives would turn those things into bombs that took down the World Trade Center?" said Harland Ullman, a national security analyst at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. "How do you deal with that? There's no order of battle."
Ullman called the liberal use of the word "war" by politicians and the media misleading because "this is not a war."
"A war is between entities that have some sort of confirmed aims and objectives and prevention is not really an objective that you can ultimately declare victory," he said.
"The problem here is that because it is not a war, and it is an ongoing campaign, there may never be an exit strategy. It's like war against cancer and disease. You just keep plowing through it."
 Load-Date: October 17, 2001

 

End of Document
