

The elder Bush helps the son in courting Saudi support; Gulf respect still stands
April 26, 2002, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 478 words
Byline: By SONYA ROSS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




As he works to repair U.S.-Saudi relations, President Bush has called in some low-key but high-level help: his father.
Former President Bush linked up in Texas on Friday with Saudi Crown Prince Abdullah, who had just finished two days of meetings with the younger Bush and his aides.
Abdullah and the former president spent 90 minutes together on a train from Houston to College Station, where Bush gave Abdullah a private tour of his presidential library. Later, the elder Bush was giving a library tour to another Arab leader, King Mohammed VI of Morocco, who met with Bush the son earlier this week.
The former president's involvement was cast as personal catch-up with friends he had made when Arab allies helped in the 1991 Persian Gulf War.
But it was also clear that his foreign policy expertise, as well as the respect he retains in Arab circles, was being employed for the benefit of the current administration.
"Everybody knows that a president needs help, and he should be able to call on the people he needs to help him," said Lee Hamilton, Middle East policy expert at the Woodrow Wilson Center. "Calling on his father to help him should be applauded," said Hamilton, former Democratic chairman of the House International Affairs Committee.
As a general rule, President Bush's aides consider his contact with the former president to be private.
Friday was not the first time the elder Bush stepped in to help his son. Last June, after Abdullah complained that President Bush seemed too beholden to Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, the elder Bush personally called Abdullah to vouch for his son's policies.
The father's message then apparently resonates in Saudi Arabia even now, as the United States tries to assuage Arab worries that Bush has sided unfairly with Israel.
"The father has done great things for the region. Therefore, the son should be given the benefit of the doubt," said Nail al-Jubeir, a Saudi Embassy spokesman. "His advice is always taken seriously and, in some cases, sought after. That relationship is still there, and it is very dear to us."
The son spent a good deal of time alone with Abdullah, talking, he said, about faith and family and the fact that Abdullah has a farm and "understands the land."
"I am convinced that the stronger our personal bond is, the more likely it is relations between our countries will be strong," Bush told reporters.
But Richard Murphy, Mideast expert at the Council on Foreign Relations, said Bush should bear in mind that his father did not rely solely on personal relations - he also responded seriously to Saudi concerns about security in the volatile Middle East.
"They know each other and they cooperated closely on Desert Storm, so there is a personal trust there," Murphy said. "But the elder Bush is not the president. What is needed is for the new generation to be as effective as the father's."
 Load-Date: April 27, 2002

 

End of Document
