

The Mideast propaganda war: the battle that never ends
July 25, 2001, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2001 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 799 words
Byline: By GREG MYRE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BETHLEHEM, West Bank
Body




The scratchy loudspeakers atop the old stone mosque carry the midday call to prayer across Bethlehem's main square, and moments later Sheik Abdul Majid Ata launches his diatribe against Israel.
"We will get the Jews out of our land," the preacher bellows to the faithful, who spill into the street outside. "We will not forget our martyrs. They are going to paradise, and the (Israeli) dead are going to hell."
Posters of slain Palestinian militants, their automatic rifles at the ready, are plastered on the arched marble entrance of the Omar bin al-Khatab mosque, just 100 yards across the square from the Church of the Nativity, the traditional spot of Jesus' birth.
Israelis and Palestinians are supposed to be observing a cease-fire, accompanied by a halt of incendiary rhetoric. But political leaders, religious figures and media on both sides continue to stoke the fires of a propaganda war.
With both sides placing great importance on international support for their cause, the battle often focuses on scoring public relations points - with each accusing the other of spreading lies and whipping up incitement.
Israel believes fiery and sometimes televised political sermons by mosque preachers encourages young Palestinians to launch attacks.
"We must educate our children on the love of holy war for the sake of God and the love of fighting for the sake of God," Sheik Mohammed Ibrahim al-Madhi said in a mosque sermon broadcast on state-controlled Palestinian TV last month.
The constant recycling of violent images on Palestinian television has also drawn Israeli criticism.
The death of Mohammed al-Dura, a 12-year-old Palestinian boy who was shot as he huddled in his father's arms, has been replayed hundreds of times, usually in slow motion and set to nationalistic songs. Such videos also edit in pictures of smiling Israeli soldiers, who appear to be delighting in the Palestinian deaths.
The Palestinians, meanwhile, accuse Israeli leaders, including Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, of relentlessly demonizing Yasser Arafat and creating the impression that most Palestinians are dangerous militants.
Sharon has often called Arafat a "terrorist" and compared him to Osama bin Laden, the Saudi national sought by the United States for a series of deadly bombings against U.S. targets.
Not to be outdone, Israel's ex-Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said Arafat was "much worse" than bin Laden, and claimed the Palestinian leader heads the "largest terrorism organization in the world."
One extreme Israeli group, Zu Artzeinu took out a full-page ad in a right-wing newspaper last week that urged Israelis to assassinate Arafat.
"You, the soldier who sees Arafat or his helicopter through the sights of a gun or a tank … do not hesitate! Kill Arafat!" the ad read.
And Rabbi Ovadia Yosef, spiritual leader of the ultra-Orthodox Shas party, the third largest faction in parliament, suggested Arabs should be "joyfully hit with rockets."
"It's forbidden to be merciful to them," Yosef said. "They are evil and damnable." His advisers later explained he was referring only to those attacking Israel.
Israel's own media, including state-funded Israel TV, was once known for its correspondents' dovish leanings - but has become markedly more nationalistic in tone, with interviewers often berating government officials for Israel's ineffectual response to the Palestinian uprising.
Just a year ago, Israel's then-Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Arafat held regular negotiations and described each other as "partners for peace." No one mistook them for friends, but they refrained from public criticism.
After the violence erupted last September, each side quickly slipped back into the familiar habit of daily recriminations. The poisoned atmosphere complicates efforts to end the bloodletting, and at present, there appears to be no prospect of reviving peace talks that collapsed in January.
The Israelis have attacked Palestinian broadcasting with both words and bombs.
Attack helicopter hammered the Voice of Palestine radio broadcasting tower in the West Bank city of Ramallah in October, and television transmission facilities and studios in Gaza City was blasted in November.
Arafat has full control over the Palestinian broadcast media, and could order the rhetoric toned down with a single phone call, Israel argues.
"The incitement in their media is helping to prolong this uprising," Sharon spokesman Raanan Gissin said.
Radwan abu Ayyash, chairman of the Palestinian Broadcasting Corp., bristles at the Israeli claim.
"Sharon is our director of programming," he said sarcastically. "I'd like to show more entertainment programs. My kids are upset that I've pulled Sesame Street off the air. But when Sharon launches a military operation, then I have to cancel our animal programs and show the bloodshed."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY107
 Load-Date: July 26, 2001

 

End of Document
