

The president of the United Arab Emirates dies at 86
The Associated Press
November 2, 2004, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 511 words
Byline: By TAREK AL-ISSAWI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DUBAI, United Arab Emirates
Body




The president of the United Arab Emirates, who helped forge a federation from seven backwater Persian Gulf states and built it into a high-tech commercial crossroads of gleaming skyscrapers, has died. He was 86.
Sheik Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan - the absolute ruler of the country, the world's ninth largest oil producer, for more than 30 years - had been ailing for several years and did not attend Arab summits. He had a kidney transplant in August 2000.
His eldest son, Sheik Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan, has been heir apparent since 1969, when his father named him crown prince of Abu Dhabi, the capital and richest of the seven emirates.
The rulers of the seven emirates must choose the next president and are expected to pick Sheik Khalifa, though it was not clear when a decision would be made.
Abu Dhabi TV interrupted regular broadcasting with news of Sheik Zayed's death, but no cause of death was reported. The announcement was followed by an Islamic cleric appearing on TV reading verses from the Quran.
The official Emirates news agency, WAM, also announced news of his death, saying: "The presidential court announces to the people of the Emirates, the Arab and Muslim worlds, and the entire world, that the leader of the nation and the builder of its civilization, His Highness Sheik Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan, died on the evening of Tuesday, Nov. 2, the 19th of Ramadan. May God have mercy on him."
Sheik Zayed became the ruler of the emirate of Abu Dhabi in 1966. He helped put together the seven emirates - small desert provinces ruled by Arab tribes - into a federation, then ruled it since it gained independence from Britain in 1971.
Since then, he oversaw the emirates' development to a world-leading financial and banking center. The city of Abu Dhabi - which only 40 years ago was no more than a collection of huts clustered around the ruler's fort, is now a modern metropolis of more than 1 million, with high-rises, tree-lined streets, flower beds and lush parks.
Though oil profits fueled the emirates's expansion - the country is the world's ninth largest producer and fifth largest exporter - officials have diversified the economy with an exphasis on trade and commerce. Dubai, the second-richest emirate in the federation, earns most of its revenues from trade, with a busy seaport and airport.
But following the Sept. 11, 2001 attacks on the United States, the Emirates were among several Middle Eastern countries that came under pressure from Washington to reform its financial and banking sectors, which had been linked to the funneling of funds to international terrorist groups, like al-Qaida.
With the president ill, Sheik Maktoum bin Rashid Al Maktoum - of Dubai's ruling family - has become the public face of the Emirates, building close ties with the West and Arab neighbors.
Sheik Zayed died a day after announcing the Emirates' first Cabinet reshuffle since 1977.
Sheik Khalifa, born in 1948, is also deputy commander of the armed forces and, as chairman of Abu Dhabi's executive council, handles most of the emirate's day-to-day affairs.
 Load-Date: November 3, 2004

 

End of Document
