

Thumbnails of the top five ministers in the new interim Iraqi cabinet
The Associated Press
May 8, 2005, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 289 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Brief biographies of the top five ministers in the new interim Iraqi Cabinet:
-Saadoun al-Duleimi, Sunni, defense minister: from a powerful tribe in Iraq's restive Anbar province, heartland of the insurgency. A lieutenant colonel in Saddam Hussein's General Security Directorate.
Left Iraq in 1984 and lived in exile in Saudi Arabia until returning after Saddam's fall in April 2003.
-Bayan Jabr, 55, Shiite, interior minister: studied engineering at Baghdad University in the 1970s. Fled to Iran during a crackdown on Shiites and joined the Supreme Council of the Islamic Revolution in Iraq. Served as minister of housing and reconstruction in the first U.S.-picked provisional Cabinet.
-Ibrahim Bahr al-Uloum, 50, Shiite, oil minister: was also oil minister in the first U.S.-picked provisional Cabinet and escaped an assassination attempt during that time. Holds a doctorate in petroleum engineering from the University of New Mexico and worked as an engineer for the Kuwaiti Oil Ministry for five years.
-Hoshyar Zebari, 55, Kurd, foreign minister: has held the post in each interim body since the first U.S.-picked provisional Cabinet. Belongs to a powerful tribe in northwestern Iraq and is an uncle of Massoud Barzani, one of two leaders who control the Kurdish areas. Was a spokesman for Barzani's Kurdish Democratic Party and active in opposition contacts with the United States before the war.
-Ali Abdel-Amir Allawi, Shiite, finance minister: wealthy businessman with degrees from Harvard and MIT. Previously a consultant to the World Bank and head of a London-based investment company, Pan-Arab. A nephew of former Pentagon favorite and deputy prime minister Ahmad Chalabi and a cousin of former interim Prime Minister Ayad Allawi.
 Load-Date: May 9, 2005

 

End of Document
