

Thumbnails of the top five ministers in the new interim Iraqi cabinet
The Associated Press
April 28, 2005, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 332 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Ibrahim al-Jaafari: prime minister, acting defense minister. Al-Jaafari, 57, is a senior figure in the Shiite Dawa Party, which ran one of the main Iraqi armed groups that tried to topple Saddam Hussein's Baath regime. He fled to Iran in 1980, then to Syria and finally to Britain. After Saddam's fall he was appointed to the Iraqi Governing Council. Educated as a physician, he worked as a doctor in his hometown, Karbala.
---
Ahmad Chalabi: deputy prime minister, acting oil minister. Chalabi, 60, an MIT graduate and mathematician, left Iraq in 1958 and became one of the most visible Iraqi exiles as he lobbied Washington to help topple Saddam. After the war, he was named to the Governing Council and was touted by some in Washington to become Iraq's next leader. But he fell out with the United States, moved to build ties with other Iraqi Shiites and made a political comeback.
---
Hoshyar Zebari: foreign minister. Zebari, 55, belongs to a powerful Kurdish tribe in northwest Iraq and is uncle of Massoud Barzani, one of the two leaders who control the Kurdish areas. He was a spokesman for Barzani's Kurdish Democratic Party and was active in opposition contacts with the United States before the war. He has held the foreign minister's post since the first interim government was formed in June 2004.
---
Bayan Jabr: interior minister. Jabr, 55, was a Shiite activist while studying engineering at Baghdad University in the 1970s. He fled to Iran during a crackdown and joined the Supreme Council of the Islamic Revolution in Iraq. After Saddam's fall, he became minister of housing and reconstruction in the first, U.S.-picked provisional Cabinet.
---
Ali Abdel-Amir Allawi: finance minister. Allawi, a wealthy businessman with degrees from Harvard and MIT, was previously a consultant to the World Bank and heads a London-based investment company, Pan-Arab. His uncle on his mother's side is Ahmad Chalabi. On his father's side, he is a cousin of outgoing interim Prime Minister Ayad Allawi.
 Load-Date: April 29, 2005

 

End of Document
