

To the West, Shevardnadze is a hero of the Cold War; to his people, a ruler who tolerates corruption
The Associated Press
November 22, 2003, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 636 words
Byline: By MISHA DZHINDZHIKHASHVILI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TBILISI, Georgia
Body




When he first came to power, Eduard Shevardnadze was a Cold War hero in the eyes of many of his compatriots. Fourteen years later, Georgia's president is widely viewed as an unwelcome holdover from the Soviet era.
Summing up that sentiment Saturday was a sign held by one of the tens of thousands of demonstrators who poured into the streets of the capital to demand his resignation.
"Shevardnadze, your century was the 20th. Now it is the 21st," it said.
Shevardnadze was indeed an icon of the late 20th century. As Soviet foreign minister under Mikhail Gorbachev, he played a key role in ending the Cold War by pushing through the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan, signing landmark arms control agreements, and helping negotiate German reunification in 1990.
As president of independent Georgia, however, the 75-year-old Shevardnadze quickly lost his heroic aura as the country was ravaged by corruption, bled by crime and sank into poverty.
Born on Jan. 25, 1928 in the village of Mamati near Georgia's Black Sea coast, Shevardnadze rose through the ranks of the Communist Party, its Komsomol youth organization and Georgia's police force.
As the Soviet republic's interior minister, he gained a reputation for purging corrupt officials and forcing them to give up ill-gotten cars, mansions and other property.
Shevardnadze was named Communist Party chief of Georgia in 1972 and Soviet foreign minister in 1985. He resigned from the job five years later to protest plans to use force to quell unrest in the Soviet Union. He joined Boris Yeltsin in resisting an attempted coup against Gorbachev in August 1991, and returned to the foreign minister's job briefly later that year.
Shevardnadze returned to Georgia after its first elected president, Zviad Gamsakhurdia, was ousted in a 1992 coup; Shevardnadze was elected speaker of parliament and became the country's leader. Gamsakhurdia died under mysterious circumstances in 1993, and Shevardnadze was elected president for his first five-year term in 1995 under a new constitution.
The country he inherited was wracked by chaos. Fighting broke out in 1990 in the northern province of South Ossetia, bordering on Russia, after the nationalist Georgian government voted to deprive the province of its autonomy. The region has won de facto independence from Tbilisi.
Another secessionist uprising erupted in the province of Abkhazia. The small region, bordered by the Black Sea and Russia, has been effectively independent since separatists drove out government forces during a 1992-93 war. The two sides reached a cease-fire in 1994, but peace talks on a political solution have stalled.
Even the capital Tbilisi was run by politically connected gangs and gang-related politicians, and legislators had to be reminded to check their guns before entering parliament. Shevardnadze managed to disarm the most notorious gang, the Mkhedrioni or Horsemen, only in 1995, after an assassination attempt.
Then there was economic hardship. In addition to losses from the Abkhazian conflict, Georgia has lost Soviet-era orders for its factories. Every winter, Georgians suffer long gas and electricity outages, and the average salary hovers just around $50. In spite of Shevardnadze's Communist-era record as a "clean-hands" politician, corruption still grips the country at every level, and his lieutenants have earned notoriety by building extravagant villas and whizzing about in luxury cars.
Shevardnadze shepherded Georgia into the Council of Europe, and said on occasion - to Moscow's considerable irritation - that Tbilisi would one day "knock on NATO's door." U.S. officials forged close ties with Shevardnadze, and the U.S. government sent military advisers to train Georgian troops and gave millions of dollars in aid in hopes of keeping Georgia in the western orbit.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo TBL107
 Load-Date: November 23, 2003

 

End of Document
