

U.N. nuclear inspectors to return to Iraq by the end of the week
The Associated Press
May 26, 2003, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 480 words
Byline: By SUSANNA LOOF, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: VIENNA, Austria
Body




U.N. nuclear inspectors will return to Iraq by the end of this week to check on radioactive material at the country's largest nuclear facility, an agency spokesman said Monday.
The inspectors will head to the sprawling Tuwaitha nuclear complex and investigate whether nuclear material stored there under International Atomic Energy Agency seal since 1991 remains safe and accounted for, IAEA spokesman Mark Gwozdecky said.
The Tuwaitha complex, 30 miles southeast of Baghdad, was looted in the aftermath of the U.S.-led war.
"The mission is limited to verifying Iraq's safeguards obligations," Gwozdecky said.
Inspectors will "determine what is missing and what it will take to recapture that material and ultimately repackage it and reseal it and secure the facility," he added.
Before the war, the Tuwaitha site held two tons of low-grade enriched uranium and several tons of natural uranium, and a storage facility near the site held several hundred other radiological sources - material that potentially could be used to fashion a "dirty bomb."
IAEA weapons inspectors left Iraq before the war began in March. They had returned in November, four years after their pullout following accusations that Iraq was failing to cooperate with a search for weapons of mass destruction initiated after the 1991 Gulf War.
In March, the weapons inspectors said they had found no evidence Iraq held nuclear weapons. Agency officials have said more inspections were needed before a conclusive judgment could be made.
The new mission will be limited to inspecting whether Iraq is fulfilling its obligations under the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, Gwozdecky said.
"This is not related to weapons inspections," he said. "The future role for U.N. weapons inspectors in Iraq is a matter for the U.N. Security Council. … We await the guidance of the Security Council."
The scope of the coming mission was limited by the United States, Gwozdecky added.
"The IAEA was informed by the United States that at this stage, the occupying powers are responsible for the health and safety of the Iraqi people, including nuclear health and safety issues," he said. "The IAEA stands ready, if requested, to provide assistance in these areas."
The agency's director, Mohamed ElBaradei, hinted last week that the agency would like more authority in Iraq.
"We have a moral responsibility to establish the facts without delay and take urgent remedial action," ElBaradei said, partly alluding to issues of health and safety.
It was unclear Monday exactly when the new inspection team would leave Vienna, where the IAEA is headquartered, but "before the end of the week is the planning time frame," Gwozdecky said.
The team will include inspectors with "a mixture of skills … including people who know the site," he said.
The U.N. agency did not say how long the team would stay in Iraq.
---
On the Net:
IAEA, www.iaea.org/worldatom 

 

End of Document
