

U.S. troops battle militants in the heart of the Iraqi capital
The Associated Press
September 12, 2004, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2004 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 315 words
Byline: By HAMZA HENDAWI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAGHDAD, Iraq
Body




Militants pounded central Baghdad on Sunday with one of their most intense mortar barrages ever, targeting the Green Zone and destroying a U.S. vehicle along a major street. At least 13 people were killed and 55 wounded when a U.S. helicopter fired at crowds around the vehicle, Iraqi officials said.
Elsewhere, a suicide attacker detonated an explosives-packed vehicle at the gates of Abu Ghraib prison, killing himself but causing no other casualties, the U.S. military said. American guards fired at the vehicle before the driver could reach the gate, the military said.
Rockets and mortars began raining down before dawn on the Green Zone, which houses Iraqi and U.S. offices, and other parts of central Baghdad. As the shelling continued after sunrise, U.S. troops backed by armored vehicles moved into the streets searching for the attackers.
Insurgents opened fire on the Americans, destroying a Bradley fighting vehicle on Haifa street, a major avenue in the center of the capital. The four U.S. crewmen escaped with minor injuries, U.S. officials said.
As the Americans withdrew, jubilant fighters and young boys swarmed around the burning vehicle, dancing and cheering. Several young men placed a black banner of al-Qaida-backed Tawhid and Jihad, led by terror mastermind Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, in the barrel of the Bradley's main gun.
Suddenly, a U.S. Apache attack helicopter swooped down and opened fire around the Bradley. Witnesses said several people, including a correspondent for the Arabic language Al-Arabiya television station, were killed.
Maj. Phil Smith, a spokesman for the 1st Cavalry Division, said the helicopter fired to try to destroy the burning vehicle "for the safety of the people around it."
Health Ministry official Saad al-Amili said 13 people were killed and 55 wounded - all on Haifa street. Scattered shoes, pools of fresh blood and debris littered the street.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos BAG101-108
 Load-Date: September 13, 2004

 

End of Document
