

U.S. Navy revives training on Vieques but it could be the last round on the Puerto Rican island
The Associated Press
January 13, 2003, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 445 words
Byline: By IAN JAMES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: VIEQUES, Puerto Rico
Body




Fighter jets dropped inert bombs on Vieques Monday in what the U.S. Navy says will be its final round of exercises on the outlying Puerto Rican island after nearly six decades of use.
F-18s began dropping inert 25-pound bombs on a firing range shortly after authorities detained five protesters who broke through a Navy fence in an attempt to thwart the maneuvers.
Thousands of sailors in the USS Theodore Roosevelt battle group are participating in the exercises, which could last a month and include ship-to-shore shelling and air-to-ground target practice.
The exercises have been hotly contested since off-target bombs killed a civilian guard in 1999, prompting protests resulting in the Navy agreeing to end the maneuvers this year. Although the military considers the training more valuable than ever now that the United States is considering a war in Iraq, most of the island's 9,100 residents still want the Navy to leave.
Activists say the bombing has stunted the island's economy, poisoned the environment and harmed the health of inhabitants, all of which the Navy denies.
Still there are some who are concerned about what will happen when the Navy goes.
Navy officials have said they may close nearby Roosevelt Roads Naval Station, one of the island's largest employers with some 4,800 employees and an estimated yearly contribution of $300 million to the economy.
"If they abandon Vieques and Roosevelt Roads, it will destroy the economy," said Luis Sanchez, a pro-Navy activist camped outside the Navy's fences.
Over the years, more than 1,000 protesters have been arrested for trespassing on Navy lands. Some have served prison terms.
The latest arrests occurred early Monday when five members of the Puerto Rico Independence Party broke through a fence and were detained by Navy security guards. One of the men shouted "Peace for Vieques" as guards handcuffed him and led him away.
In a 2001 nonbinding referendum, 68 percent of Vieques residents voted to stop the bombing immediately; 30 percent said they wanted the Navy to stay and resume use of live ammunition.
The military held its first training on Vieques in 1947 and has used it ever since to train sailors for conflicts from Korea to Afghanistan.
Long maintaining that Vieques was the only place where it could practice simultaneous mock assaults by sea, land and air, the Navy has said it would need several locations to replace Vieques' versatility.
Last week, the Navy announced it had found those alternatives and would turn to ranges in Florida and elsewhere in the U.S. mainland.
Following a cleanup, the Navy is to turn over its 14,000 acres - about one-third of Vieques - to the U.S. Interior Department.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos VIQ101-103

 

End of Document
