

U.S. troops rehearse for urban warfare in the Kuwaiti desert, near the Iraqi border
The Associated Press
January 13, 2003, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2003 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 643 words
Byline: By PATRICK McDOWELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SOUTH OF THE KUWAIT-IRAQ BORDER, Kuwait
Body




U.S. soldiers trained Monday for some of the most dangerous fighting they could encounter - room-to-room, building-to-building warfare - as more troops poured into Kuwait in the biggest U.S. military buildup since the Gulf War.
The exercises are intended to sharpen the readiness of troops for the kind of fighting they could encounter if President Bush orders an invasion of Iraq to force Baghdad to give up its alleged weapons of mass destruction.
At abandoned buildings in an old quartz mine in the Kuwaiti desert, A Company of Task Force 315 of the U.S. Army's 3rd Infantry Division carried out repeated rehearsals - day and night - of clearing out enemy defenders and trying to spare civilians.
Though the training in a dust-blown desert encampment is far different from a built-up urban area, the style of battle in both cases exposes infantry to greater casualties than normal as they move between structures and make split-second life and death decisions.
"There are fundamental differences in attacking a camp like this and a real downtown area," acknowledged Capt. Josh Wright, 29, of Girard, Ill., A Company commander. "You would have all different kinds of things in a city - people at a market, mothers taking their kids to school."
But he said that the Army had become accustomed to operating in urban environments in Bosnia, Kosovo, Afghanistan and Somalia.
U.S. planners have speculated that President Saddam Hussein might concentrate his resistance in Baghdad, raising the likelihood of greater U.S. casualties and forcing the United States to pay a high political price if large numbers of civilians and U.S. soldiers are killed.
Along with training and open desert tank maneuvers, troops of the 3rd Infantry Division's 2nd Brigade have also been honing their skills in both dummy fire and live fire urban warfare exercises this week.
On Sunday and Monday, platoons in A Company traded off playing roles as the attackers and defenders at the mining camp. Though the desert night was pitch black, the soldiers' night vision gear lit up the area for them like they were watching old black and white television sets. The attacking forces rushed up the flanks of the buildings in fast-moving Bradley fighting vehicles.
The Bradley's dropped their rear hatches and disgorged squads of troops who took up position on the outer walls.
"Window right!" came the command. "Frag it!"
An imaginary grenade was lobbed in a window and a couple of soldiers entered sweeping the room with flashlights and M-16 assault rifles. From other buildings, defenders opened fire with blanks, touching off short firefights as attacking forces cleared other buildings room by room.
A trio of defenders in a corner room of one the last, sand-covered buildings held out until their door was kicked in and attackers jumped through a whole in the wall.
"I love you Americans!" joked Pfc. Josh Vasquez of Canton, Ohio, raising his hands. "I surrender!"
Later he commented: "In reality we had been dead 20 minutes before - the tanks and Bradley's would have taken us out."
Night time urban warfare is one of the most dangerous missions a soldier can undertake. Col. Stephen Twitty, 39, of Chesnee, S.C., the task force commander, estimated that half the attacking infantry were killed or wounded in the opening round.
"I'm grading this as a C," Twitty said. "We'll try to get it up to an A."
The second run went better, with the attackers moving into place and taking the buildings smoothly and methodically. One of the challenges of fighting with night vision gear, Wright said, is trying to slow down tasks that soldiers know they can perform rapidly in daylight and convince them to take their time to do them more thoroughly in a dark environment.
"We're not having a bad day when we take casualties in training," Wright said. "We are having a bad day when we're taking casualties in war."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos planned

 

End of Document
