

WASHINGTON TODAY: In the 'Who's Up? Who's Down?' game, Blair tops the list
November 6, 2002, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Commentary; Washington Dateline
Length: 664 words
Byline: By GEORGE GEDDA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Tony Blair, Jacques Chirac and Gerhard Schroeder all lead countries allied with the United States. But that's about all they have in common, at least from President Bush's perspective.
In the "Who's Up? Who's Down?" game, there is a clear pecking order among the three, with Blair, the British prime minister, clearly up; Schroeder, the German Chancellor, down; and Chirac, the French president, somewhere in between.
For leaders having to deal with the United States, some resentment is inevitable and perhaps understandable, given American military and economic supremacy worldwide.
To many, Bush's focus on terrorism leaves little room for other priorities, and there is not much sympathy for his view that in the war on terrorism, "you're either with us or against us."
Bush has had to struggle against a world wary of his military designs on Iraq and there is grumbling about his go-it-alone policies on many other international issues.
Still, the picture is not all bleak. Bush has won broad support for his leadership against international terrorism. Scores of countries are taking part in the reconstruction of Afghanistan, where terrorists once roamed freely.
For Bush, his Iraq campaign would be a lot lonelier were it not for the steadfast support of Blair, whose view of President Saddam Hussein parallels that of his American colleague.
But Bush is still smoldering over the way Schroeder used his opposition to Bush's Iraq policy as the centerpiece of his recent re-election campaign.
Chirac has dismayed Bush with his soft-line approach toward Iraq. But differences between Washington and Paris over Iraq have given way with the help of intense diplomacy. A new U.N. Security Council resolution with broad support is in the works.
A roster of other leaders and how Bush sees them:
-Russian President Vladimir Putin: He has been wary all along about Bush's pugnacious attitude toward Iraq but has been agreeable on a host of other issues. But does Russia have to provide Iran with the know-how to menace NATO countries in Europe with missiles, as U.S. officials claim it is doing?
-Chinese President Jiang Zemin: Relations are on the upswing as Jiang, 72, prepares to assume a reduced role in his nation's government. Jiang opposes North Korea's nuclear weapons program but seems averse to applying pressure against Pyongyang. As always, Taiwan remains a potential flashpoint between Washington and Beijing.
-Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf: The good news for Bush is that Musharraf, a bulwark in the anti-terror war, will remain in charge for the foreseeable future. But Islamic parties have grown exponentially during Musharraf's tenure.
-Qatar's emir, Sheik Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani: He has allowed the U.S. military to establish an elaborate command and control center in his Persian Gulf country for use if Bush decides to remove Saddam by force.
-Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat: Bush tolerated Arafat for 18 months, then suggested that he be replaced, convinced that Arafat was not serious about peace with Israel.
-Indonesian leader Megawati Sukarnoputri: Much like Arafat, Bush and his aides believe she has confronted terrorism timidly, possibly leading to the Bali bombing of Oct. 12.
-Turkish leader Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who led his Islamic-rooted party to victory in elections: He is barred from becoming prime minister because of a 1999 conviction. Bush wonders whether Erdogan's party will govern the traditional U.S. ally as moderately as it promised during the campaign.
-Brazilian President-elect Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva: He will take office Jan. 1. He is a longtime friend of Fidel Castro but says the Cuban revolution holds little appeal nowadays. Bush could find him a prickly partner on trade issues.
Speaking of Castro, in the "Who's Up? Who's Down?" sweepstakes, he's down, just above the leaders of the "axis of evil" triumvirate of Iraq, North Korea and Iran.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - George Gedda has covered foreign affairs for The Associated Press since 1968.
 Load-Date: November 7, 2002

 

End of Document
