

What the U.S. says about the Saudi religious police
April 25, 2002, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2002 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 300 words
Body




In its world survey of human rights in 2001, issued in March, the U.S. State Department accused Saudi Arabia's religious police of continuing to intimidate, abuse and detain citizens and foreigners. It refers to the force as Mutawwa'in.
Excerpts:
"The Mutawwa'in generally are free to intimidate and bring to police stations persons whom they accuse of committing 'crimes of vice' based on their own religious interpretations. There are few procedures to safeguard against abuse, although the government claims that it punishes individual officers who violate regulations."
---
"The Mutawwa'in have the authority to detain persons for no more than 24 hours for violations of the strict standards of proper dress and behavior. In the past, they sometimes exceeded this limit before delivering detainees to the police. During the year, Mutawwa'in reportedly in practice handed over detainees to police within the 24-hour period; however, in some cases prisoners were held by police for longer periods, depending on the offense. Current procedures require a police officer to accompany the Mutawwa'in at the time of an arrest. Mutawwa'in generally complied with this requirement. "
---
"The Mutawwa'in reportedly detained young men for offenses that included eating in restaurants with young women, making lewd remarks to women in the shopping malls, or walking in groups through family-only sections of shopping centers. Women of many nationalities were detained for actions such as riding in a taxi with a man who was not their relative, appearing with their heads uncovered in shopping malls and eating in restaurants with males who were not their relatives. Many such prisoners were held for days, sometimes weeks, without officials notifying their families or, in the case of foreigners, their embassies."
 Load-Date: April 26, 2002

 

End of Document
