

Wiesenthal, lauded as 'the conscience of the Holocaust,' laid to rest in Israel
The Associated Press
September 23, 2005, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2005 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 554 words
Byline: By STEVEN GUTKIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HERZLIYA, Israel
Body




Nazi-hunter Simon Wiesenthal was remembered Friday as "the conscience of the Holocaust" as he was laid to rest in Israel, the country that grew out of the ashes of those dark days.
Hundreds of dignitaries, Holocaust survivors and admirers attended the funeral ceremony for Wiesenthal, who died Tuesday in his sleep at his Vienna home at 96. A survivor of five Nazi concentration camps and seven other prisons, Wiesenthal spent the rest of his life pursuing Nazi war criminals and bringing them to justice.
"Today we are burying the conscience of the Holocaust," Rabbi Marvin Hier, dean and founder of the Simon Wiesenthal Center in Los Angeles, said before the ceremony began. "Nobody did more to keep alive the memories of the Holocaust than Simon Wiesenthal."
Rabbi Michael Melchior, Israel's deputy minister for education, said Wiesenthal taught an entire generation about the Holocaust. But instead of being embittered, Wiesenthal drew upon his past to seek hope and optimism, Melchior said at the ceremony.
"Simon Wiesenthal taught an entire generation that you learn from the past and use your knowledge to build the past, so that there will be hope in the future, hope for the Jewish nation and for the entire humanity," he said.
Dignitaries from the U.S., Austria and Israel placed wreaths on Wiesenthal's grave, and mourners placed stones, a Jewish tradition.
Wiesenthal weighed just 99 pounds when a U.S. Army armored unit liberated him and other inmates at Mauthausen in May 1945.
Enlisted by the Americans to research war criminals, he spent more than 50 years hunting Nazi war criminals, speaking out against neo-Nazism and racism, and to being a voice for the 6 million Jews who perished in the Holocaust. Wiesenthal, who lost 89 relatives in the Holocaust, estimated he helped bring some 1,100 Nazi war criminals to trial.
"When history looks back I want people to know the Nazis weren't able to kill millions of people and get away with it," he once said.
Hier recalled that Wiesenthal asked to celebrate his 90th birthday at the Hotel Imperial in Vienna. Asked why there, Wiesenthal replied, "Because it was Hitler's favorite hotel," Hier said.
He wanted to show "that the Jews have outlived the Nazis," Hier remembered.
Wiesenthal had kosher catering and a Jewish prayer service at the affair, he added.
Wiesenthal was perhaps best known for his role in helping find one-time SS leader Adolf Eichmann, who organized the mass murder of the Jews. Eichmann was tracked to Argentina, abducted by Israeli agents in 1960, and tried and hanged by Israel.
Wiesenthal often was accused of exaggerating his role in Eichmann's capture, although he never claimed sole responsibility.
Among others Wiesenthal tracked down was Austrian policeman Karl Silberbauer, who he believed arrested the Dutch teenager Anne Frank and sent her to her death at the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp.
Wiesenthal never caught up with one prime target - Dr. Josef Mengele, the infamous "Angel of Death" at Auschwitz, who died in South America in 1979.
Hier recounted how at their last meeting, Wiesenthal described running after the cattle car that took his mother to her death. "She never heard his desperate cries, the cries of a loving son," he recalled Wiesenthal as lamenting.
"Because of your life's work, the whole world has heard you," Hier replied.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos
 Load-Date: September 24, 2005

 

End of Document
