

'Nightline' the Book Views 'Nightline' the TV Show
July 12, 1996, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: UNDEFINED
Length: 339 words
Byline: By CLIFF EDWARDS, Associated Press Writer
Body




Many remember well when America was held hostage for 444 days after Iranian students stormed the U.S. Embassy in Tehran in 1979 and detained 52 Americans.
And many probably remember the TV program that highlighted the indignity and humanized a situation far removed from most of our lives.
ABC-TV's "Nightline" wasn't planned to last long and Ted Koppel wasn't the network's first choice for anchor.
Some 16 years later, the book "Nightline" (Times, $ 25) examines the events that led to the program and made it a powerhouse news show that has regularly taken on with style the likes of network competitors Johnny Carson, Jay Leno and David Letterman.
Written by Koppel and former "Nightline" producer Kyle Gibson, the book provides a homey, insider's view of the show and of the chronicling of world events that has been its hallmark.
We learn that the seemingly unflappable Koppel, a former ABC diplomatic correspondent, had strong doubts about whether he would get the nod as the program's anchor and initially thought the show's title "crappy."
"Nightline" has since evolved from ABC News chief Roone Arledge's simple move to grab more TV news time into a show that pioneered bringing people together from around the world for debates and introspection - with Koppel as maestro and moderator.
And the book tells it all. We revisit historic shows on apartheid in South Africa and on the rally at Beijing's Tiananmen Square, and examine events that led to the making - and undoing - of presidents.
Koppel discusses shows in which he thinks his interviews went too far and those that didn't go far enough. And there was the time one particular guest took him on - and won.
The interesting anecdotes don't end with Koppel. Gibson talked to producers, past and present, as well as to the show's bookers and reporters to gather some hysterically funny stories that belie the image of "Nightline" as a seamless show day in and day out.
Fans of modern history and fans of "Nightline" will be fans of this book. It's interesting, compelling and fun.
 Load-Date: July 12, 1996

 

End of Document
