

A covered dish amid the boxes: Clintons move in
The Associated Press
January 6, 2000, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 654 words
Dateline: CHAPPAQUA, N.Y.
Body




After the moving vans departed, and some of the boxes were stowed, a pal brought over some dinner for the new homeowners. A typical scene, perhaps, except that the new neighbors showed up in an armored limousine, with a motorcade of Secret Service agents, staff and reporters in tow.
President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, were unpacking, with help from the president's mother-in-law, on their first night in what the family says will be its post-White House home.
"Like any new homeowners, they're excited," White House spokesman Joe Lockhart said Wednesday evening. "They're excited to go in and get to work making it their home."
As Lockhart spoke outside the gracious, $1.7 million Dutch colonial home in this well-to-do hamlet north of New York City, the president and Mrs. Clinton were visible walking through the brightly lighted rooms of the home's first floor.
Soon, the vans filled with Clinton's entourage pulled away, and the Clintons settled in for the night.
A friend who also lives in Westchester County and has vacationed with the Clintons in Massachusetts brought over home-cooked food for dinner. A crowd of reporters and onlookers were held behind barricades at the top of the Clintons' new street. A neighbor brought a bottle of champagne, Lockhart said.
The Clintons were heading back to Washington today, and the president planned to return later in the day to the Israeli-Syrian peace talks in Shepherdstown, W.Va.
While some of the 17,000 residents in upscale Chappaqua have complained about the attention drawn by the Clintons, many seemed eager to greet them.
"I think there's been some disturbance for the people" on the Clintons' street, said Wilma Rapp. "Other than that, people feel pretty good about the Clintons. You tell somebody you live in Chappaqua and they say, 'Oh! Hillary!"'
The town already has had its share of the famous: actor Chevy Chase and actress Glenn Close, and New York Yankees center fielder Bernie Williams.
Initially, Mrs. Clinton, who needs a New York address to run for the U.S. Senate, was scheduled to arrive alone to unpack. An unexpected break in the president's schedule allowed him to accompany the first lady, Lockhart said.
The Clintons' furniture and other goods arrived Tuesday afternoon in two moving vans. The president has said they both plan to live in Chappaqua after he leaves office in January 2001.
Lockhart said the couple and Mrs. Clinton's mother, Dorothy Rodham, were eager to start the task of organizing the family possessions. The Clintons took time over the holidays to choose items Mrs. Clinton would take with her from the family's private residence at the White House.
Even before their arrival, the Clintons had caused several minor stirs.
In September, protesters upset by U.S. policy in East Timor marched outside the home, even though it was still vacant. In November, the government quashed plans to sell T-shirts reading "Secret Service, Chappaqua Bureau, Presidential Detail," saying use of the Secret Service label was illegal.
Local officials soon made parking on the Clintons' cul-de-sac illegal to spare neighbors any imposition from the media. Authorities also approved installation of an 8-foot fence and a guard booth on the Clintons' property; neither is yet in place.
New York City Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, Mrs. Clinton's likely Republican opponent in this year's Senate race, played on the "carpetbagger" theme he has used against Mrs. Clinton in offering a backhanded welcome to her and the president.
"I feel very, very proud of the fact that people from around the country want to come to New York, including people from Arkansas," Giuliani said. "We welcome all newcomers, and recognize the fact that they are newcomers."
Similar sentiments were offered by Gov. George Pataki, another Republican, during his state of the state address in Albany: "Why, even people from Hope, Arkansas, understand that New York is the best state to live in."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo XHAR103
 Load-Date: January 7, 2000

 

End of Document
