

A day at the White House, a blur of disparate activity
The Associated Press
December 17, 1998, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 660 words
Byline: By SANDRA SOBIERAJ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Yes, Thursday marked Day 2 of the airstrikes and the eve of the House impeachment debate. But at the White House, it was also "Wright Brothers Day." And a time to firm up next year's budget. And an occasion to don black tie in celebration of the Special Olympics.
Life goes on for President Clinton.
"It would be an understatement to say the president has been tested over the last week," spokesman Joe Lockhart said. "But I think what you can see - and what he has demonstrated - is that he is up to the challenge."
A temporary suspension of White House lobbying against impeachment - in deference to the military action against Iraq - was announced in the morning but didn't last through the day. Republican leaders said they would open House debate on the impeachment vote on Friday.
Much like her efforts at earlier crisis points in the Monica Lewinsky affair, first lady Hillary Rodham Clinton joined the telephone campaign to beat back mounting support for the president's removal from office. She also consulted with historians and constitutional experts, her spokeswoman said, but was not preparing to make any public appeal on the matter.
"She's talked to members" of Congress, said spokeswoman Marsha Berry. "She's talked to folks who are experts on our Constitution and historians, other folks in that area. She's concerned. It's an issue she takes seriously. She's one who likes to have a lot of information."
Vice President Al Gore also went back to the phones lobbying House members, an aide said, for "a good chunk of the morning." And the president would not concede defeat in the House until the final roll call, Lockhart said. "On a vote this important and this solemn, yes, there's always a chance."
The president's attention, meanwhile, was stretched to the bursting.
After a morning "bomb damage assessment" briefing by National Security Adviser Sandy Berger, Gen. Henry Shelton, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and others, Clinton worked the phones trying to hold together world support for his attacks on Iraq's Saddam Hussein for defying United Nations weapons inspectors. The president had "constructive and productive" conversations with the leaders of France, Egypt, Jordan and Israel.
By afternoon, he and Gore were huddled with economic advisers working through a list of budget items that must be decided before Clinton's Jan. 19 State of the Union address, which speechwriters worked on in their separate meeting Thursday.
In among the tumble of activity, Clinton released $ 102.2 million in emergency aid to a half-dozen states and territories cleaning up from Hurricane Georges. He signed a proclamation declaring Thursday, the 95th anniversary of Wilbur and Orville Wright's first flight at Kitty Hawk, N.C., "Wright Brothers Day."
And both of the Clintons were headlining a black-tie gala honoring the Special Olympics' 30th anniversary under a giant, heated pavilion on the South Lawn. Whoopi Goldberg, Sheryl Crow, Eric Clapton and Tracy Chapman were adding wattage - and decibels - to the event, which was being taped for broadcast on TNT Sunday.
On Friday, Clinton was scheduled to join a regular summit of European Union leaders to review trade tensions, confer again with his budget team and meet with his AIDS advisory panel. Then, the Clintons' night-after-night lineup of Christmas receptions begins.
White House communications director Ann Lewis said the president remained "hands-on" in every facet of governance despite the confluence of war and impeachment. As an example, she said she handed him a budget memo on education before he left the White House Friday on his grueling four-day peace mission to the Middle East.
Somewhere in between his visits with Israelis and Palestinians, his work plotting the airstrikes on Iraq, and his inevitable concern with salvaging his presidency from impeachment, Clinton found time to review the proposal and OK it with a scrawl in the margin: "Good. We should be doing more of this."
 Load-Date: December 17, 1998

 

End of Document
