

A freer Chinese media? The message is medium
The Associated Press
March 28, 1998, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 697 words
Byline: By CHARLES HUTZLER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BEIJING
Body




From live TV reports on America threatening to attack Iraq to stories on lurid local crimes, China's news media are showing flashes of vibrancy amid their usual stodgy coverage of government leaders.
While the endless meetings, speeches and factory tours of the Communist Party elite are not out, more lively and timely reporting is appearing. Even People's Daily, the staid party paper of record, is wearing a human face.
"We want to reduce vague, substandard reports and do more things readers are interested in," said Li Renchen, deputy editor in chief of People's Daily.
So far, the changes appear slight and largely cosmetic. But should the loosening go unchecked, the long-restrained media may be headed for a period of freedom unseen since the heady democracy movement of the late 1980s.
People's Daily joined the trend in January, introducing new weekly sections on the economy, arts and society.
To find out what readers wanted, People's Daily used that most capitalist tool, a market survey. It helped. An article in the new society section criticizing the common use of official funds for parties drew one of the largest responses ever, Li said.
Just as the made-over People's Daily debuted, party General Secretary Jiang Zemin and Li Peng, the party's No. 2 official and an old-style conservative, were widely quoted as favoring a watchdog role for the press.
China Central Television ran reports on one eastern city's polluted water supply. Mass poisonings from liquor spiked with industrial alcohol and the bombing of a bus crossing a Yangtze River bridge all received timely if not always probing coverage.
In the past, such catastrophes would have been ignored or reported days or weeks later once censors sorted out a sanitized version.
At the height of the latest U.S.-Iraqi tensions, China Central Television sent a crew with a mobile satellite transmitter to Baghdad, the network's first such overseas foray. The nightly national newscast featured split-screen interviews between anchor and on-the-spot reporter.
Insiders at CCTV and other front-line state media remain leery of the censors' softer touch. Party media czars periodically have allowed newspapers and TV news shows to exceed established limits only to beat them back in the next political campaign.
Chinese reporters know where the new boundaries lie. Reports on pollution, natural disasters and some crimes seem fair game, as does coverage of official corruption, within reason.
But real changes will need new rules, and a media law first proposed 10 years ago is not on the legislature's table.
"Without a news law, there's no guaranteed freedom of speech," said Wang Shan, a writer and political commentator who has to publish many of his works abroad. "Liberalization will have to be protected by law."
Only a year or so ago, the government's Propaganda Department fired the editor of one overly aggressive Beijing newspaper. Propaganda chief Ding Guangen also ordered all national newspapers to check their headlines with him before going to press.
Ding clamped down on all media and arts to help Jiang, the party leader, ward off rivals in the twilight of party powerbroker Deng Xiaoping's life.
Having survived Deng, smoothly reacquired Hong Kong and been feted at the White House, Jiang is feeling more confident these days in allowing a freer rein for the press.
He also seems to care more about his public image than his fellow party leaders. One CCTV insider, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Jiang had ordered the network to use his voice more in news reports rather than having a narrator read over videotape of him.
Another factor in the media changes is the market reform started 20 years ago. Leading newspapers today must compete with tabloids that feature lighter, more entertaining fare, and government officials no longer want to subsidize operations.
Sharp limits remain in place, though, and the party shows no sign of dismantling the Propaganda Department's links to news rooms.
When tensions flared in the Persian Gulf, news media were prohibited from running reports that might put a favorable cast on a possible U.S. military strike, the CCTV source said. China opposed the use of force.
 Load-Date: March 28, 1998

 

End of Document
