

A look at the major parties running in Israel's general elections
The Associated Press
May 13, 1999, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 657 words
Body




---
Members of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's Coalition:
 
 Likud: led by Netanyahu. Likud's founding ideology advocated Israeli rule over all of the biblical Land of Israel, including the areas claimed by the Palestinians. However, the ideology has been diluted, with Netanyahu signing land-for-peace agreements with the Palestinians. The party first came to power in 1977 with the support of Sephardic Jews of Middle Eastern origin.
Shas: led by Arieh Deri. Shas was founded in the early 1980s as a grassroots movement of religious Sephardi Jews. Founder Rabbi Ovadia Yosef ruled that saving lives is more important than keeping territory, but his followers have always been more hawkish. Shas' support has grown with each election and in 1996, Shas became the third-largest party in the 120-seat parliament, with 10 seats. Deri is appealing a fraud conviction that has hurt his political clout.
 
 National Religious Party: led by Yitzhak Levy. The party is the patron of the Jewish settlement movement in the West Bank and Gaza Strip and opposes handing over land to the Palestinians.
 
 Israel B'Aliya: led by former Soviet dissident Natan Sharansky. The party's constituents are the nearly 1 million immigrants from the former Soviet Union.
 
 The Third Way: led by Avigdor Kahalani. The single-issue party advocates keeping the Golan Heights which Israel captured from Syria and blocking its return at any price.
 
 United Torah Judaism: led by Rabbi Avraham Ravitz. The party advocates a Jewish state run by religious, not civil law. It seeks political clout to improve living standards for its followers.
 
 Tsomet: Ran on a joint slate with Likud in 1996, led by former army chief Rafel Eitan. Tsomet opposes relinquishing war-captured territories in exchange for peace. Eitan advocates drafting ultra-Orthodox men into the army and separating religion and state.
---
 
 Opposition Parties:
 
 Labor: led by Ehud Barak. Labor governed Israel from its founding in 1948 until 1977. Under the leadership of the late Yitzhak Rabin, it negotiated the historic peace agreements with the Palestinians which led to limited autonomy. From its socialist beginnings, Labor moved toward advocating a market economy. In Monday's election, it will run as part of an umbrella group called "One Israel," together with the small, predominantly Sephardi Gesher faction and Meimad, a group of moderate religious Jews.
 
 Meretz: led by Yossi Sarid. Meretz advocates civil liberties, the creation of a constitution and the separation of religion and state.
 
 Hadash: led by Hashem Mahameed. Hadash is Israel's communist party, advocating a secular state with equal rights for all Israel's citizens. It draws support mainly from Israeli Arabs.
 
 National Democratic Alliance: led by Azmi Bishara, the first Israeli Arab to run for prime minister. Bishara's partner is Ahmed Tibi, a former adviser to Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat.
 
 ---
 
 New Parties:
 
 Centrist: led by former defense minister Yitzhak Mordechai. The party was founded this spring by three Likud moderates and the outgoing armed forces chief of staff. All four have personal gripes against Netanyahu, and the party philosophy is based on toppling the premier. Party takes moderate views on territorial compromise.
 
 Shinui: led by former TV journalist Yosef "Tommy" Lapid. Shinui had been part of a coalition with Meretz until Lapid took over this year. The party's central campaign message is to curtail the political clout of the ultra-Orthodox.
 
 National Union: led by Benny Begin, son of former Prime Minister Menachem Begin. The party was founded this year by right-wing members of Netanyahu's coalition government disappointed with the premier. Begin opposes relinquishing any territory to the Palestinians.
 
 Pnina Rosenblum: led by Pnina Rosenblum, a former beauty queen turned cosmetics magnate. Rosenblum's agenda includes tackling social ills such as domestic violence, poverty and unemployment.
 Load-Date: May 13, 1999

 

End of Document
