

A New Boris Hits the Hustings
May 13, 1996, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 751 words
Byline: By CANDICE HUGHES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ASTRAKHAN, Russia
Body




The reception awaiting Boris Yeltsin at this decaying southern outpost of his fractious empire was as flat and tepid as the Volga River he sailed in on.
Nobody cheered when he stepped off the presidential cruiser "Rossiya" onto the hot, sunny dock. But Yeltsin is a practiced pol who loves to work a crowd, and he plunged in despite the lukewarm greeting.
Later, in the city park, few even bothered to listen to his speech. Instead, people argued fiercely among themselves about the June presidential election.
"I'm for the party of Lenin," 75-year-old Mikhail Mitinsky proclaimed, squaring off against a man passionately defending democracy. "Yeltsin destroyed a great power and sold it off to the West."
Five weeks before the election, Yeltsin is plunging into territory dominated by Communist frontrunner Gennady Zyuganov with a new message.
The Boris Yeltsin who campaigned along the Volga last week was not the fire-breathing anti-Communist of the early days of the race. He was Boris the Munificent, Czar of all Russians, lavishing kingly gifts on almost anyone who asked.
Before Yeltsin left for Astrakhan and Volgograd, he was warned it wouldn't be smooth sailing. He was pulling even with Zyuganov, but it looked like his Red Scare strategy was beginning to backfire.
Important supporters were urging moderation and warning that the country could be heading for civil war. Aides were worried about the provincial heartland, where the June 16 election will be decided.
Yeltsin needed something to woo voters wavering between two Russias: the democratic market economy with its new and daunting demands and the old secure, paternal, centralized state.
"Now the hard part begins," campaign adviser Anatoly Chubais said on the eve of Yeltsin's three-day journey. "Now we have to work the other side's turf."
The trip last week to the two main cities on the lower Volga was a turning point.
Yeltsin was by turns fatherly and stern, as a good king should be. He didn't even mention the Communists. Instead, he dipped into the treasure of the realm with costly decrees and promises.
He clucked in sympathy when people told him how poor they've become. He promised things would get better soon. He promised to take care of them.
Wading into a crowd in Volgograd, he hoisted children in his arms and kissed housewives on the cheek. He granted tax relief on the spot to some Afghan war veterans and gave 10 billion rubles to the local university for a new science library.
It was a boffo performance and a group of bearded, uniformed Cossacks, whose ancestors were whip-wielding vassals to the pre-revolutionary czars, roared their approval: "Lyubo! Lyubo! Lyubo!"
Others, however, were underwhelmed.
"He didn't really say anything," Ivan Ivanov, an elderly man in a jacket adorned with war medals, said afterward. "Only promises, which we don't much trust."
Yeltsin's trip was made on the Victory Day weekend, one of the most festive Russian celebrations, and he tried to milk the holiday mood for all it was worth.
He even ventured on stage at an open-air concert in Volgograd, where thousands of young people intoxicated by a day of food, drink, sunshine and free music gave him a rousing welcome. "It was unforgettable," an exhilarated Yeltsin said later.
But that was the high point. Everywhere he went, people crowded in to grill him about skimpy salaries, measly pensions and shrinking student stipends, about the war in Chechnya, about their fears for the future.
Five years of often chaotic market reforms have impoverished millions of people and shredded the old social safety net. People blame Yeltsin.
"How will we live?" voices cried out. "What about our children?" they asked. "When will things get better?"
Yeltsin has spent billions in the past few months to pay overdue wages and raise retirement benefits. He's promised billions more. But few have felt the impact yet of his pre-election largesse.
"It's a little too late," an elderly professor in Volgograd, Anatoly Bogreyev, said as Victory Day fireworks blazed over the river. "He should have done all this sooner. Now it just looks like a transparent campaign tactic."
Like the Red Scare strategy, the Generous Czar approach has perils, too. Cynicism runs deep in the Russian heartland, and Russians tend to be ambivalent about the czars. The last one was overthrown and shot along with his family.
"All these promises just irritate people," said Nadezhda Rodionova, a pro-Yeltsin newspaper columnist in Astrakhan. "He ought to just appeal to their common sense."
 Load-Date: May 13, 1996

 

End of Document
