

A quiet transition in the Holy Land; Muslims pass on partying
The Associated Press
January 1, 2000, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 546 words
Byline: By DINA KRAFT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




On the Mount of Olives, where the Bible says Jesus will return to Earth, the new millennium arrived quietly. In the surrounding Muslim Middle East, it was even quieter.
Fears of large-scale disruptions never materialized in the Holy Land, though police had feared delusional tourists might commit suicide to hasten the second coming of Christ.
Many streets in Jerusalem were deserted as Orthodox Jews, indifferent to the millennium hoopla, observed the 17th Sabbath of the Hebrew calendar year 5760 at home with traditional Friday evening meals and prayers.
"It's a very special night for us - it's the Sabbath," said Ilana Sharon, 42, as she walked home from a prayer service in the Orthodox neighborhood of Makor Baruch.
On Friday evening, hundreds of worshippers chanting hymns marched peacefully in a candlelight procession up the Mount, where according to tradition Jesus ascended to heaven. Brown-robed Franciscan monks carried a 10-foot-long wooden cross.
"This is where everything we believe began," said Jude Alvarando, 29, a theology student from the Philippines, as he walked along the walls of Jerusalem's Old City.
"The year 2000 is based on the birth of Christ here," he said.
Around midnight, a lone American stood atop the Mount and yelled he was God's messenger. He was immediately surrounded by dozens of Israeli border police and detained.
In nearby Bethlehem, Jesus' birthplace, tens of thousands of Palestinians packed a floodlit Manger Square, cheering as 2,000 doves of peace were released at the stroke of midnight to the sounds of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony.
For many Palestinians, the celebrations were a warmup for the independence bash they expect to hold in 2000.
"At the turn of the millennium, my people will see independence," said a hopeful Firaz Abdallah, a 26-year-old Palestinian-American from Long Beach, Calif.
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, addressing the largest rally since his 1994 return from exile, told tens of thousands of Palestinians in Gaza City that statehood would become a reality in 2000. "We are with you, Arafat," the crowd chanted.
Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak said in his millennium message that Israelis would have to prepare for painful land concessions to reach peace with their Arab neighbors.
Many Muslim countries did not have any big formal celebrations marking the millennium this year, which fell during the holy month of Ramadan, a time for prayer and reflection.
The Saturday morning editions of two leading English-language dailies in Pakistan made no mention of the millennium on their front pages - aside from printing the date.
Iranians and their Persian Gulf neighbors also largely ignored the dawning of the new millennium. Iran follows the Persian calendar, which counts this year as 1378.
Not every Muslim land was so subdued.
In Istanbul, Turkey, red and blue fireworks exploded over the Haghia Sophia and the Blue Mosque landmarks. Tens of thousands of Turks gathered in Taksim Square to celebrate the new year with a popular Turkish rock group, Athena. Similar gatherings took place elsewhere in Turkey.
Saudi Arabia banned New Year's celebrations, saying the holiday was not mentioned in the Koran. One of Kuwait's more extreme Islamic groups, Salaf, urged Muslims not to celebrate the "alleged millennium."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos JRL102,110, XJL107, GAZ103
 Load-Date: January 2, 2000

 

End of Document
