

A shoe, a closet, a chair cushion: Remains of the storm
March 3, 1997, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 667 words
Byline: By DAVID A. LIEB, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SARDIS, Ark.
Body




The house that Dennis and Christy Bailey built six months ago is scattered across the countryside, save for a few random items: a toy truck on a child's bed, three baskets of laundry and a closet that shielded them from a tornado that killed 10 neighbors.
"As soon as I felt the wind, we all went back there in the closet," Bailey said. "By the time it stopped, I had a wall touching my shoulder and that was it."
The closet stands like a tattered lean-to amid the debris of what until Saturday was the Bailey home. The Baileys - with two sons and a daughter ages 2 to 8 - must once again create a new home.
"I'm sorry your place was destroyed. I'm just grateful God spared you and your children," Gov. Mike Huckabee said Monday to a tearful Mrs. Bailey. She and her family survived winds raging to an estimated 260 mph.
At least 25 people in Arkansas died as a result of Saturday's storms, which raked the state from its southwestern corner to the Missouri Bootheel in the northeast. The latest came Monday, when a man died of injuries he suffered in Marmaduke. An elderly man missing near Arkadelphia was found safe. The same weekend storm system killed at least 22 people in other states, most of them in floods.
The governor said that in just five hours Saturday, the state had 14 tornadoes - more than in all of last year. It was the worst single-day death toll in Arkansas since May 15, 1968, when tornadoes killed 45 people.
"The reality of the loss is overwhelming," Huckabee said after visiting the Baileys near their littered lot. "Even through that, you can still hear them say, 'I'm glad to be alive."'
In Little Rock, Lee Rhodes had a choice of shelters: his unanchored trailer home or a nearby cinder-block grocery store. He chose the store, then was crushed when a dairy case fell on him. His trailer was untouched.
"The store blew completely away," said Gordon "Pete" Caple, Rhodes' boss at Caple's Garage. "The funny thing - he would have been safer in the trailer. The storm didn't even touch it."
The head of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, James Lee Witt, toured the hardest hit areas of Arkansas on Monday in advance of a trip Tuesday by President Clinton.
Clinton authorized federal emergency aid for storm victims in a 260-mile cross-state path covered by the storm. In an Oval Office meeting with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, Clinton said: "I'm very concerned about it. It's a bad situation.
Tornadoes killed a total of 26 people in Arkansas during Clinton's 12 years as governor.
Witt, himself a former Arkansan, looked over a pile of cars, clothes, furniture and home siding that once was a trailer park. Traveling with Witt was Sen. Dale Bumpers, D-Ark., who said, "It's a scene of total and utter destruction. It's very similar to scenes reminiscent of World War II."
Witt said 387 people phoned in applications for government disaster help Monday, the first day requests were taken.
Witt, Bumpers and other state and local officials walked through downtown Arkadelphia, pausing to look at asphalt roofing and wooden chunks flung like spears into the side of the Arkansas Employment Security Department office.
At the Shaw's Garden Restaurant - now just six brick pillars and part of a back wall - Judy Sligh told the group how National Guardsmen pulled her from underneath a counter.
"I don't feel like I've lost anything except things that can be replaced, because my life was at stake," she said.
In Sardis, Charles Dunn wept for his parents, who died as the storm ripped apart their home on its march southwest of Little Rock.
"I don't understand it," he said. "It would be different if someone had done something to them, then I could go and settle the score. But there's not a damn thing you can do. I don't know why it took them away."
The same winds that left Dunn's parents dead in their back yard lifted his 2-year-old nephew, Kyle Glasco, out of the home. He was found in trees more than 1,000 feet away, uninjured, missing only one shoe.
Dunn found the missing shoe Sunday.
 Load-Date: March 4, 1997

 

End of Document
