

Activist fights genital mutilation in the United States
March 24, 1997, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 693 words
Byline: By DONNA ABU-NASR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Meserak Ramsey wages a one-woman campaign, wandering from one African or Middle Eastern store to another, beseeching immigrants to spare little girls the painful price their cultures require - mutilation of their genitals.
She pleads with immigrants not to mutilate their daughters. But in California and the Washington area, she finds she is often too late.
"Some men say it's a good thing. They say American women jump from man to man because their sexual organs are driving them to have sex," she said, anger filling her voice. "I put up a fight with them. I tell them, 'Let me cut you, too."'
Ramsey speaks from experience. She had the surgery as a youngster in her native Ethiopia.
"I walk like a woman, but I'm not a complete woman because of what they did to me," she said in a recent interview.
Soon she will not have to fight alone. A law passed by Congress last September and taking effect this Saturday outlaws genital mutilation in women under age 18.
The measure, sponsored by former Rep. Pat Schroeder, D-Colo., makes the procedure a federal crime punishable by up to five years in prison.
The law also requires the Immigration and Naturalization Service to give immigrants information discouraging female circumcision. But it does not make the threat of such mutilation a basis for an asylum claim.
The procedure drew national attention last spring when a young woman from the African nation of Togo was granted U.S. asylum as a refugee fleeing the procedure.
An estimated 100 million women have had the procedure in dozens of African and Middle Eastern nations where the centuries-old custom is observed by Muslims, Christians and others.
The procedure can range from cutting the hood of the clitoris to more drastic removal of the clitoris and tissue at the entrance to the vagina. In some cases, the remaining tissue is joined together in a process called infibulation.
The Department of Health and Human Services estimates about 160,000 females in the United States have had the procedure or will have it done. But David Smith, associate director of the office that oversees HHS programs helping refugees, concedes the estimate may be high.
Schroeder, who now works with the Institute for a Civil Society in Boston, said it was hard to win support for the law in Congress because some legislators did not believe the procedure was being done in this country and because some Orthodox Jews feared it would lead to criticism of male circumcision.
"It's not like circumcision for men. It's much like Lorena Bobbitt," said Schroeder, referring to the woman who severed her husband's penis with a knife after a domestic dispute.
But Dr. Michael Rich, who specializes in adolescent medicine at Boston's Children's Hospital, said the new law is more a political statement - that Americans disapprove of this procedure - than an answer to the problem.
"If someone is performing (the operation) in this country they're probably not terribly concerned about U.S. laws," Rich said. "The community is going to close off and protect the people who are performing it. This is not something that people are forced to do. This is something that people want to do."
Rich said Americans accept cosmetic surgery as part of their culture even though the benefits do not warrant the risks of general anaesthesia.
"Yet, we are applying a double standard in the sense of (genital mutilation) because we don't buy the traditional piece of it or understand what goes into it," he added.
Schroeder disagreed, saying those who have cosmetic surgery are adults to begin with.
"Obviously some people are very angry and want to say these are big Anglo white people trying to step all over our culture," she added. "But I say … almost every woman on the planet is horrified by this if they have time to think about it."
Ramsey, 43, is also angry at those who criticize the law, saying they are not aware of the psychological and physical effects of the procedure.
She recalled that when she married an American she did not know she was different until her husband asked what was wrong.
"At that time I didn't know what was taken from me. I told him I was involved in a car accident," she said.
 Load-Date: March 24, 1997

 

End of Document
