

After Bombings, Israeli Arabs Fear Losing The Trust Of Jews
March 8, 1996, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 689 words
Byline: By DAN PERRY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TAIBE, Israel
Body




Math teacher Mohammed Amin Tibi proudly ushered the visiting sociology teacher from nearby Tel Aviv into the elementary school classroom in this Arab-Israeli town.
"Tell him what your favorite class is," he instructed the 20 Arab boys and girls, who observed the Jewish visitor with bright curiosity.
"Gym!" replied one boy, before several others chanted, "Hebrew! Hebrew!"
Tibi beamed - his pride reflecting decades of effort, seemingly only halfheartedly reciprocated by most Israeli Jews, by the Arab citizens of Israel to be accepted as regular Israelis.
Now, after a series of Islamic militant attacks, Israel's 1 million Arab citizens are fearful of losing their neighbors' hard-earned trust.
On Monday, police arrested an Israeli Arab suspected of helping an Islamic militant carry out the latest suicide bombing in Israel. The Islamic militant group Hamas has claimed responsibility for the four bombings, which killed 61 people since they began Feb. 25.
Concern deepened Thursday as police announced the arrest of a prominent Israeli Arab politician on suspicion he helped send millions of dollars to families of Hamas members who have been killed or deported from the West Bank and Gaza.
A Tel Aviv court ordered Suleiman Ahmad Agbarieh, deputy mayor of the town Umm-el-Fahm, held for four days while police investigate. The politician denied any wrongdoing, saying the foundation he led helped the needy in general.
Israeli police have still not identified the first man, a Bedouin from northern Israel suspected of driving the suicide bomber from Gaza to Tel Aviv, where the bomber on Monday detonated the blast that killed him and 13 others.
Israeli leaders such as President Ezer Weizman have called on Israelis not to judge the Arab minority - a sixth of Israel's population - by the actions of a few. Nevertheless, allegations that an Israeli Arab played a role in the bombings have aroused deep fears among Israeli Jews.
"There is no telling who the next suicide bomber might be," said Miki Maior, a nanny from Tel Aviv. "Anyone who looks like a Palestinian, I will try to avoid."
A Jerusalem Post newspaper editorial said that while Israeli Arabs should not be viewed as a hostile group, "it would be a mistake to ignore the fact that Islamic fundamentalism does not stop at the Green Line" - the border between Israel proper and the once-Israeli-occupied, now part-autonomous Palestinian areas.
The Arabs who live in Israel are the descendants of Muslim and Christian families who stayed behind when others fled or were driven out with the creation of the Jewish state in 1948. They were granted citizenship and equality under the law.
In 1967, Israel occupied the rest of former Palestine - the West Bank and Gaza - where the Arab population is more than twice that of Israel proper. Fear of becoming, in effect, a binational state was a main reason why Israel never annexed those territories.
The 1993 Israel-PLO peace agreement granted most West Bank and Gaza Palestinians autonomy, and the Palestine Liberation Organization hopes to turn the areas into an independent state in a final peace settlement with Israel.
Despite family ties and a common culture, the result has been a clear distinction between Israeli Arabs and the other Palestinians. Israeli Arabs largely sat out the 1987-1993 Palestinian uprising against Israel.
Still, Israeli Arabs argue their towns and villages lag far behind Jewish communities in housing, roads, schools, clinics, utilities and other services.
And most Arabs - except the minority Bedouin and Druze - are barred from army service, so they miss perquisites that go to military veterans, including jobs and education.
Anti-Israel protest is relatively rare among the Israeli Arabs. And while Israeli Arabs are poorer on average than Jewish Israelis, they enjoy a far higher standard of living than Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza, where per capita income is barely a tenth that in Israel.
"When I am in the West Bank, I feel more Israeli than Arab," said Tibi, 34, who teaches in the 20,000-resident Israeli-Arab town of Taibe, 25 miles northeast of Tel Aviv. "I am like a king over there."
 Load-Date: March 8, 1996

 

End of Document
