

Albanians expand barricades; Serbs off the streets of Serbian stronghold
The Associated Press
October 2, 1999, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 611 words
Byline: By ROBERT H. REID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KOSOVO POLJE, Yugoslavia
Body




After U.N. officials failed to convince Serbs to open a main road, ethnic Albanians set up barricades of their own Saturday, blocking access to the commercial center of Kosovo Polje, a Serb stronghold.
The new blockades in this town just southwest of Pristina have set back U.N. efforts to ease tensions that escalated after a grenade attack Tuesday killed three Serbs and injured about 40 others. Serbs responded to the attack by blocking the highway from Pristina to the western city of Pec.
"We are blocking the roads because the Serbians are still there," said one Albanian, referring to a nearby Serb barricade on Kosovo's main east-west highway. "If the Serbians remove their barricade, we are gone in 30 seconds," the man said.
Watched by British and Norwegian soldiers, a crowd of more than 50 people waved red-and-black Albanian flags in front of the town hall, where in 1987 an obscure Communist official, Slobodan Milosevic, rallied Kosovo Serbs, promising he would never permit the ethnic Albanian majority "to beat you again."
That speech is often considered one of the watersheds in the ethnic conflict which climaxed with the 18-month Yugoslav crackdown on ethnic Albanians, prompting NATO to bomb Yugoslavia for 78 days before President Milosevic withdrew his troops and accepted a U.N.-backed peace plan.
Kosovo Polje is also an important location for Serbs because it is the site of their 1539 defeat to Ottoman Turks, which paved the way for 500 years of Turkish domination of Kosovo and the rest of Serbia.
In Belgrade, a Serbian opposition party accused peacekeepers of "doing nothing" to prevent violence by ethnic Albanians against Serbs in Kosovo, claiming NATO considers such incidents "merely as statistic data."
The Serbian Renewal Movement, led by opposition veteran Vuk Draskovic, blamed the NATO-led peace force of idly standing by when "Albanian terrorists" stoned two buses recently near Podujevo.
"Because of such … attitude, nine Serbs have been killed, 27 Serb houses have been destroyed … in the past nine days" in the province, the party said in a statement.
Elsewhere, Yugoslavia's Tanjug news agency said several grenades have been thrown at Serb homes in the American-controlled city of Gnjilane over the past two days. There were no injuries, Tanjug said.
In Kosovo Polje, a few Serbs peered from windows in nearby apartment houses at the ethnic Albanian protesters, but none ventured out. The few elderly Serbs who normally sell cigarettes and other small items in front of the town hall were nowhere in sight Saturday.
About a half-mile up the road toward Pristina, another Kosovo Albanian crowd swarmed around the intersection of the main road from Pristina to Pec.
Farther down the road, Serbs were manning the barricade they set up Tuesday. British troops were keeping the rival groups apart.
U.N. police said small groups of Serbs had also set up makeshift blockades along unpaved farm roads that wind through their neighborhoods along the edge of town, fearing that ethnic Albanians might try to infiltrate the area.
To prevent trouble, U.N. police set up their own roadblock at the western end of Pristina, preventing most civilian vehicles from heading toward Kosovo Polje.
In the mid-afternoon, more than 100 ethnic Albanians began a sit-down strike on the railroad tracks here. British soldiers and American U.N. police were trying to convince them to leave for fear that railroad engineers might not be able to stop trains in time.
On Friday, U.N. negotiators claimed the Serbs reneged on an agreement to lift their barricade. The U.N. officials angrily accused local Serb leaders of adding additional demands and broke off the talks.
 Load-Date: October 2, 1999

 

End of Document
