

Albright says Israeli security is at the center of her agenda
September 10, 1997, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 869 words
Byline: By JACK KATZENELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Secretary of State Madeleine Albright joined Israel today in demanding that Yasser Arafat wage an uncompromising war on Islamic militants to rescue the Middle East peace process.
At the start of her mission to salvage the historic peace effort launched four years ago, Albright also told Israeli Prime Minister Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu that he must create a climate of trust by treating the Palestinians as partners.
However, her emphasis was clearly weighted toward Israel's concerns about security in the wake of recent suicide bombings by Islamic militants that killed 25 people.
Albright said she would tell the Palestinian leader in their meeting on Thursday that "security is at the center of my agenda."
"There is no moral equivalent between killing people and building houses," Albright said, referring to Palestinian demands that Israel freeze Jewish settlement construction as a condition for resuming negotiations suspended since March.
Speaking after a three-hour meeting with Netanyahu, Albright said the Palestinians must resume security cooperation with Israel and also take unilateral action to crush the infrastructure of the terror groups.
The Palestinians have accused Netanyahu of trying to sabotage the peace process and using last week's Jerusalem bombing as a pretext to stop the scheduled handover of West Bank land.
Netanyahu said he remained committed to the peace process, then turned to Albright and said: "If you are able to persuade the Palestinian Authority to wage war against the terrorists, then I believe the road will be open to continue the peace process to a successful conclusion and I am convinced we can achieve peace."
Netanyahu said he would ease some of the restrictions imposed on the Palestinians, including a sweeping travel ban, if the Palestinians delivered on the issue of terrorism.
Albright told Netanyahu she expected Israel to refrain from any unilateral actions that would preempt negotiations on a final settlement - an apparent reference to Israel's construction of a Jewish neighborhood on disputed land in Jerusalem and the expansion of Jewish settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
"Clearly Israel also has a responsibility to shape an environment which will give that process a chance to succeed. This means that Israel should be taking steps that build confidence and refrain from actions that undermine confidence and trust," Albright said.
"It is very difficult to create a serious environment for negotiations when unilateral actions are taken that … prejudge issues reserved for permanent status negotiations."
A senior Palestinian official, Hanan Ashrawi, was sharply critical of the way Albright began her one-week visit to the region, saying she displayed "a wholeheartedly one-sided approach."
In the West Bank town of Nablus, about 200 Palestinian women affiliated with the Islamic militant group Hamas burned a U.S. flag and a poster depicting Albright stabbing the Palestinian people.
Palestinian security officials said they have questioned about 200 Hamas activists and have detained 110 since the Sept. 4 suicide bombing in Jerusalem. Fifteen of the total were detained overnight.
David Bar-Illan, a top aide to Netanyahu, said the arrests appeared to be "cosmetic and a gesture to the secretary of state rather than an effective step against the terrorist organizations."
Bar-Illan said Netanyahu would propose to Albright that efforts to force further Israeli troop withdrawals be put aside and talks focus on final status issues such as borders, refugees, Jewish settlements and Jerusalem.
"We prefer to dispense with the whole interim agreement stages mainly because instead of promoting confidence they seem to promote nothing but irritations and confrontations," he said.
Ashrawi, speaking to reporters in the West Bank town of Ramallah, said Albright's allusion to Israel's violations was only a "symbolic nod."
"At some point, the United States has to decide whether it wants to serve only Israeli interests or whether it wants to serve the interests of peace in the region," said Ashrawi.
The visit is Albright's first to the region since becoming secretary of state eight months ago. It comes as political contacts are stalled, Arafat refuses to make mass arrests of Islamic militants, and Israel says it won't turn over any more land until he does.
Israel's Channel 2 TV said Albright would propose a 45-day freeze on the building of Jewish settlements in the West Bank, an offer the Palestinians were likely to turn down as insufficient.
The Israeli daily Maariv reported that Albright will propose "a new code of conduct" to end recriminations and a "political safety net" to guarantee Israeli withdrawals by mid-1998 if a permanent settlement is not reached.
Putting a human touch on her diplomacy, Albright met with 11 bombing victims at Jerusalem's Hadassah Mount Scopus Hospital. She moved from room to room and briefly spoke to the victims, some of whom had bandaged limbs, facial burns and scars.
Daniel Miller, a 19-year-old Jewish seminary student from Miami, who suffered wounds in the legs and eye, told Albright to remember the bombing victims "when you go to embrace Arafat."
"I don't intend to embrace Arafat," Albright said.
 Load-Date: September 10, 1997

 

End of Document
