

Albright beckons Iran to work with the United States
The Associated Press
March 17, 2000, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News; Washington Dateline
Length: 925 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




In a dramatic shift, the Clinton administration invited Iran on Friday to enter a "new relationship" with the United States to stabilize the Persian Gulf and reverse more than two decades of icy distance.
Lifting a ban on U.S. imports of Iranian luxury goods, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright said both the United States and Iran had fought conflicts begun by Iraq's "lawless regime" and they should work together to reduce tensions in the region.
"Iran lives in a dangerous neighborhood," Albright said in a landmark speech. "We welcome efforts to make it less dangerous."
In Tehran, Hamid Reza Asefi, an Iranian Foreign Ministry spokesman, said of the speech and the lifting of a U.S. ban on imports of caviar, rugs and some other luxury goods: "Iran thinks it is positive and welcomes it."
There was no indication that Iran was taking the Clinton administration up on its proposal for formal talks. "Dialogue must take place devoid of sanctions," said Hadi Nejad Hosseinian, Iran's ambassador to the United Nations.
"Iran will seriously consider the steps announced this morning, and is ready to adopt proportional and adequate steps but is not prepared for drastic change," he said.
"We are not expecting any rapid reaction to it," Albright said of the dramatic American overtures.
But she told reporters enthusiastically that "a new chapter in our relationship" was opening. "Iran and the United States must move together in a balanced way," she said.
"Iran is obviously a country of strategic importance," Albright said.
The initiative drew mixed reactions on Capitol Hill. Sens. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., Chuck Hagel, R-Neb., and Dick Lugar, R-Ind., reacted favorably.
But Sen. Connie Mack, R-Fla., called the move unprincipled. "Principled foreign policy stands up to terrorism," Mack said in a statement. And Sen. Frank Lautenberg, D-N.J., called it premature. He said Iran should compensate American victims of Iranian terrorism.
Also, Rep. Brad Sherman, D-Calif., and 10 other House Democrats wrote President Clinton condemning "unilateral concessions."
Peter Rodman, a former White House and State Department official, commented: "I am not against a few gestures, but we should continue to husband our leverage so long as significant aspects of their policy are profoundly hostile to us."
Robert McFarlane, who headed the National Security Council in 1984, said the administration was moving in the right direction.
"The problem lies, however, in our dealing with a fragmented government in Tehran in which the pragmatists may not be able to deliver as a consequence of the clerics' dominant role," he said.
Abraham Foxman, national director of the Anti-Defamation League, said it was premature to begin normalizing relations "with a nation that has sponsored international terrorism, developed weapons of mass destruction, has shown continual hostility toward the state of Israel and is about to try 13 innocent Jews on trumped-up charges of espionage."
Malcolm Hoenlein, executive vice chairman of the Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations, said, "We have not yet seen performance from the Iranian government, and the United States has made other unilateral concessions."
"While the Iranian people have spoken, we have not seen any change from the government on domestic or foreign policy, including terrorism, the peace process and weapons of mass destruction," Hoenlein said in a telephone interview from New York.
Albright said the planned trial next month of 13 Iranian Jews on charges of espionage for the United States would be a "barometer" of U.S.-Iranian relations.
"Surely, the time has come for America and Iran to enter a new season in which mutual trust may grow," Albright said.
Her speech and remarks later at a news conference contained a string of deferential and near-apologetic statements.
She said the United States has relations with a number of countries less democratic than Iran, has no intention of interfering in the country's domestic affairs and recognizes that Islam is central to Iran's cultural heritage.
Also, Albright said the shah's government, which was overthrown by reformers who, in turn, were dislodged in an Islamic revolution, was brutal to the Iranian people, and that the United States had been "regrettably shortsighted" in its policy of tilting toward Iraq during the Iran-Iraq war.
"Neither Iran, nor we, can forget the past," Albright said. "It has scarred us both."
In that vein, Albright called the seizure of the U.S. Embassy in Tehran in 1979 disgraceful and traumatic to the Americans held hostage for more than a year. She also criticized Iran as a supporter of terrorism, an opponent of Mideast peacemaking and as bent on acquiring weapons of mass destruction.
Conciliatory statements by Iranian President Mohammed Khatami and then the election last month to parliament of candidates considered moderate by some American analysts set the stage for the administration's overtures.
Still, Albright said, "We need to see some effect on their external policy. We haven't."
Albright said the Clinton administration would look for ways to increase contacts between American and Iranian scholars, artists, professionals, athletes and nongovernment groups. "We believe this will serve to deepen bonds of mutual understanding and trust," she said in her speech to the 3-year-old American-Iranian Council, a private group.
Also, Albright offered U.S. cooperation in settling claims the two countries have against each other.
"We have concluded the time is ripe to broaden our perspective," she said.
 Load-Date: March 18, 2000

 

End of Document
