

Alleged plotter says 1972 Olympics attack put Palestinians on the map
September 4, 1997, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 683 words
Byline: By DINA KRAFT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RAMALLAH, West Bank
Body




The botched hostage-taking of Israeli athletes during the 1972 Munich Olympics nonetheless achieved its purpose, says one of the alleged masterminds: It moved the Palestinians' plight to center stage.
"Five hundred million people were only looking for sports, not for political events, but Munich put the Palestinian cause inside every house," said Mohammed Oudeh, better known by his code name, Abu Daoud.
Israeli and American intelligence experts say Oudeh, now a 60-year-old lawyer, helped plan the deadly raid in which eight Palestinian militants took over a dormitory housing Israeli athletes 25 years ago Friday - Sept. 5, 1972.
The militants, members of the terror group Black September, demanded the release of 200 prisoners jailed in Israel and safe passage for themselves out of Germany. Israel refused to negotiate.
After a 20-hour standoff, nine Israeli athletes, five Palestinians and a German policeman died during a bungled rescue effort at Munich airport. The Palestinians had killed two Israeli athletes earlier in the Olympic village.
Yossi Melman, an Israeli writer on intelligence matters, said Oudeh "was heavily involved, up to his teeth."
But Oudeh, a former guerrilla who had plotted to assassinate Jordan's King Hussein, insisted he played no role in the Munich attack.
"Perhaps I was very close to the people involved and they told me some details afterwards," Oudeh said.
He puffed on a Cuban cigar in his office located at the bottom of marble stairs of the Civil Affairs building in the West Bank town of Ramallah.
Oudeh, a longtime activist in Yasser Arafat's Fatah faction, settled in the Palestinian autonomous areas in 1996, along with other former PLO guerrillas permitted by Israel to return from exile as part of the Israeli-Palestinian peace accords. He was never charged in the Munich attack.
As director of Fatah membership, he ostensibly runs the inner workings of the group. However, Palestinian insiders say the suite of spacious, sparsely decorated white rooms is merely a retirement perk for Oudeh, who wields no real political influence.
In an interview this week, Oudeh defended the Munich hostage-taking, saying it was the only way a powerless people could resist its mighty occupier.
"When a man like a Palestinian has no aircraft with which to attack, when he is the weaker, he will look everywhere for revenge," he said.
Oudeh said Israel was to blame for the deaths of its athletes because it did not give in to the attackers' demands to take the hostages to Cairo, where he said they would have been released.
In the two decades after the hostage drama, Oudeh lived in exile in Lebanon, Jordan and Eastern Europe, where he cultivated close ties with Communist bloc intelligence organizations.
These connections might have given him an edge in staying one step ahead of Israeli assassins tracking Black September members after the massacre.
Israel has acknowledged involvement in some of the 12 assassinations. It called off the effort to kill those involved in the attack in 1973, when Israeli agents killed a Moroccan waiter in Norway in a case of mistaken identity.
Melman, the Israeli intelligence expert, said it was likely Oudeh would have been on the hit list.
In 1981, assailants shot Oudeh seven times in the head and body as he stood outside the Victoria Hotel in Warsaw. Oudeh needed a year to recover. He said he believed his attackers were Arabs recruited by Israel's Mossad spy agency.
Israel never claimed responsibility for the assassination attempt. It attributes the shooting to PLO renegade Abu Nidal, who carried out a bloody campaign against Fatah activists between 1980-83.
Oudeh said he became accustomed to life on the run. "It was normal to be in danger. Everyone had to be careful and fear death, but I was not scared," he said.
Now that the threat has passed and he is comfortably settled, Oudeh said he would write his autobiography and also address what happened in Munich.
He acknowledged that the subject would be forever associated with his name.
"Yes," he said clasping his large hands together and laughing nervously, "Once more, Munich."
 Load-Date: September 4, 1997

 

End of Document
