

Ambiguous about peace deals, Arafat's Fatah movement led the gun battles
The Associated Press
May 17, 2000, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 895 words
Byline: BY SAMAR ASSAD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RAMALLAH, West Bank
Body




When Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat gave an order to cease fire, uniformed Palestinian policemen quickly withdrew.
But scores of young men in jeans and T-shirts - activists in Arafat's Fatah movement - kept shooting at Israeli troops who returned fire, and what had been routine street brawls turned into the bloodiest gun battles in two years.
Fatah's leading role in this week's violence illustrated Palestinian ambivalence toward making peace with Israel. Like a majority of Palestinians, Fatah backs the agreements, but feels that Israel has callously reneged on many promises.
The movement's prestige is closely tied to the fate of the peace talks. In times of setbacks - such as Israel's current refusal to release more Palestinian security prisoners - Fatah activists are often targets of frustration in their communities and feel the need to show they can stand up to Israel.
That's what happened in Monday's gun battles with Israeli troops, said Marwan Barghouti, who commands thousands of Fatah activists in the West Bank, many of them battle-scarred veterans of the 1987-1993 uprising against Israel.
"The purpose of the gun fire was to boost the morale of the protesters and, to an extent, of Fatah, and not to shoot Israeli soldiers," Barghouti said during a visit Wednesday to Ramallah, where relatives of prisoners had gathered to draw attention to the plight of their loved ones.
Fatah activist Izzat Arif, 22, said violence may have been the only way to get attention. "Sometimes Israel needs a rude awaking," he said.
About 1,650 Palestinians remain in Israeli jails, serving sentences for attacks on Israelis. About 1,000 belong to Islamic militant groups opposed to peace with Israel, but another 400 are Fatah members, some in jail for more than a decade.
Monday's events began with marches by thousands of Palestinians on behalf of the prisoners. At first, everything went according to a well-worn routine. Palestinians hurled stones at Israeli soldiers who fired rubber-coated steel pellets and tear gas.
At one of the regular battle grounds, a traffic circle near Ramallah, about 400 Palestinians faced a phalanx of helmeted Israeli soldiers. About two hours into the clashes, an Israeli officer was wounded by Palestinian fire. Sometime later, another shot followed, wounding a Palestinian journalist behind the Israeli lines. From there, the tension quickly escalated, and the ensuing gun battle lasted for about four hours.
One Palestinian man, wearing a white T-shirt, black pants and dark glasses, peered around the corner of a building before firing his Kalashnikov assault rifle toward the Israeli positions.
Such scenes were replayed in other West Bank towns. Armed Fatah men took the lead in a charge on Joseph's Tomb, a tiny Israeli enclave in Nablus, in which one Palestinian was killed when he tried to shoot his way into the compound.
Barghouti said his activists had not planned in advance to use live rounds and that they acted out of frustration over the growing number of casualties. Three Palestinians were killed and more than 320 injured.
"On the contrary, the president (Arafat) said no gun fire, and when the shooting began, he gave the order for the (Palestinian police) troops to withdraw, and that's when Fatah began to use their weapons," Barghouti said.
Israel said the Palestinians used live fire first. Fifteen Israeli soldiers were hurt, several by live rounds. The top West Bank army commander, Maj. Gen. Moshe Yaalon, singled out the role of Fatah in the shootings, but said uniformed Palestinian police also participated.
The events showed that at times, Arafat is not in full control of the movement he founded. While he may have condoned low-level violence as a way of pressuring Israel, it is widely believed that Monday's protests spun out of control.
Hundreds of Fatah members carry arms obtained on the black market and have vowed not to give up their weapons until the conflict with Israel is over. On the other hand, they are fiercely loyal and can serve as Arafat's enforcers.
Remarkably, Israeli-Palestinian peace talks proceeded as if the violence never happened. In the past, negotiations would have been suspended immediately. However, with a September peace treaty deadline fast approaching, Arafat and Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak had too much at stake to plunge into a crisis.
Israeli commentators said Barak passed his toughest test yet this week by seeking and winning parliament approval for the transfer of three villages near Jerusalem to the Palestinians on a day the West Bank was burning.
"Barak showed those who doubted him in Washington and in the Arab world that he was trustworthy, courageous and had political daring," columnist Nahum Barnea wrote in Israel's Yediot Ahronot newspaper.
However, the Palestinians said Barak did not deserve praise.
Legislator Hanan Ashrawi said Barak's foot-dragging was responsible for the growing tensions, and that he should have handed over the three villages months ago. "It is a little too slow, too late," Ashrawi said.
The next test for both sides will come on Friday and Saturday, billed as "days of rage," with more marches on behalf of the prisoners.
Palestinian legislator Burhan Jarar said that if Israel did not relent, there could be more violence. "If there are no releases, I see this movement (of support for prisoners) … go out of control," he said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY193
 Load-Date: May 18, 2000

 

End of Document
