

Amid guerrilla attacks, civilians are caught in the cross fire
The Associated Press
January 20, 2000, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 565 words
Byline: By ANDREW KRAMER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NAZRAN, Russia
Body




Umar Vakhayev returned to his house in Chechnya to find guerrillas armed with rifles and grenade launchers lounging in his living room.
The retired school principal said that made his home in the southern village of Shatoi a potential target for Russian shelling - and he decided to flee to the neighboring republic of Ingushetia.
"They were courteous to me," Vakhayev, 58, said of the rebels. "But I knew that if I protested, they would kill me on the spot."
Chechen civilians are increasingly caught in the cross fire between Russian and rebel forces, with both sides making little effort to shield people from the firefights and air and artillery strikes that have devastated many towns and villages.
Russian shelling of villages suspected of harboring militants has appalled Western governments and human rights groups, who say that many civilians have been wounded or killed, although there are no figures.
But the other side of the problem is the rebels' use of civilian areas to shield their positions and operations, even when residents are opposed to their presence. Rebels have shot some civilians who object to them establishing positions in their villages.
"The local civilians are stuck between a rock and a hard place," said Peter Bouckaert, a researcher with the New York-based Human Rights Watch.
While most Chechens oppose the Russian occupation, many are critical of the various rebel factions, saying the insurgents don't care about the safety of the civilian population and bring unnecessary suffering down on them.
Russian Su-24 and Su-25 dive-bombing jets and helicopter gunships regularly buzz between the snowy peaks around Shatoi, shooting at houses and people moving about on the roads, Vakhayev said. One rocket hit a school and killed six people in December, he said.
Still, he blames the rebels for his flight to Ingushetia, where he lives in a squalid refugee camp.
"I came to my own home and they wouldn't let me in," he said bitterly. The rebels had made themselves at home, and one fighter was fetching canned food from the cellar.
Vakhayev said the fighters belonged to the Wahhabi sect, a strict Islamic movement based in Saudi Arabia that has attracted followers among the Chechen rebels. Many villagers dislike the Wahhabis more than other rebel groups, blaming them for provoking Russian bombing raids and accusing them of mistreating civilians.
Human Rights Watch documented an incident when Wahhabi fighters in the Chechen village of Gekhi shot five local residents in the legs after the unarmed men tried to persuade the rebels to leave.
Kheida Saratova, 30, a former telephone operator from Shatoi, said she blames the war on Wahhabi groups that provoked Russia's wrath by invading the neighboring republic of Dagestan in September. The invasion, along with terrorist apartment bombings in Moscow and other Russian cities, helped spark the war.
"Because of their behavior, (Russia) is destroying us," Saratova said.
Other Chechens blame both sides.
Bauddin Lorsanov lives in Alkhan-Kala, just southwest of Grozny. The village has been stormed twice by the Russian army and attacked by rebels as well.
"The militants came here for just two days, knocking out one Russian armored vehicle and killing two soldiers - and prompting the Russians to destroy the entire village," Lorsanov said. "And the federal soldiers, who came after, were just as bad as them, a rival gang."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NAZ101
 Load-Date: January 21, 2000

 

End of Document
