

Amir Says He Shot Rabin 'For the Glory of God'
January 23, 1996, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 550 words
Byline: By, JACK KATZENELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TEL AVIV, Israel
Body




"Everything I did, I did for the glory of God," the confessed assassin of Yitzhak Rabin said Tuesday, as the prosecution began presenting evidence at his trial.
But Yigal Amir told the Tel Aviv district court that his aim was not necessarily to kill Rabin, only to "end his activity as prime minister."
The 25-year-old former law student, who did not answer the charges against him when his trial opened Dec. 19, avoided the words "guilty" or "not guilty" when he was asked for a plea on Tuesday.
"I had nothing against Yitzhak Rabin as a man," Amir said, adding that this was why he had aimed for the spine when he shot Rabin after a Nov. 4 peace rally in Tel Aviv. "If I had wanted to kill him, I would have aimed for his head."
But then he contradicted himself, saying he fired two more shots because he didn't want "to leave any chance that (Rabin) would stay alive as prime minister."
Also, in a confession presented to the court by police officer Nissim Daoudi, Amir admitted planning the assassination for two years, since Rabin signed Israel's 1993 peace accord with the PLO.
Amir admitted the signed confession was not coerced.
The trial will proceed as though he had pleaded not guilty - as is customary under Israeli law if the defendant challenges any aspect of the charge sheet. Amir faces life in prison if convicted.
At one point in the hearing, Amir's sister Hadas was expelled from the courtroom after she tried to exchange words with the defendant.
Four police officers who helped arrest Amir after the shooting testified Tuesday. One said that immediately after the arrest Amir asked "Did I kill him, did I kill him?" When told that he had, Amir replied, "Good," the officer said.
Throughout the hearing, Amir spoke rapidly but was calm as he stood in the dock, wearing a black skullcap and a purple-and-black sweater over a white shirt.
The spectators in the packed courtroom were silent, hanging on Amir's words, and Judge Edmond Levy repeated the defendant's remarks so everyone could understand. Levy asked Amir several times to slow down so the stenographer could keep up.
Amir, who believed Rabin was giving the Palestinians land that God promised the Jews, justified the attack on theological grounds, saying tradition permitted killing Rabin as an "oppressor" of Jews.
Asked whether he had any regrets, Amir said: "No."
Defense attorney Jonathan Goldberg said he had told his client not to make a statement Tuesday and simply plead "not guilty."
Goldberg criticized the court for rejecting his request for a delay of several months so he could better study the evidence.
"I think they are making a fast trial, way too fast for anyone to defend it," said Goldberg, who immigrated to Israel from Houston, Texas, several years ago and now lives in the West Bank.
Amir's other lawyer, Mordechai Offri, asked the court that he be allowed to step down from the case. Earlier, he said he would quit if Amir used the trial as a platform for his political beliefs.
Levy said he would rule on Offri's request when the trial resumes Sunday.
Amir confirmed Tuesday that his brother, Hagai, made and gave him the fatal hollow-point bullets. However, he denied Hagai was part of a conspiracy to kill Rabin.
Hagai Amir faces a separate trial on conspiracy charges, along with a friend of the brothers, Dror Adani.
 Load-Date: January 23, 1996

 

End of Document
