

AP News in Brief; Clinton hails the fallen, vows retribution
The Associated Press
October 18, 2000, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 713 words
Dateline: NORFOLK, Va.
Body




Alternating between words of grief and retribution, President Clinton sought Wednesday to comfort the sailors and families of the USS Cole. He praised the fallen as patriots and sternly warned the "hate-filled terrorists" whose attack killed 17 aboard the Navy destroyer: "We will find you and justice will prevail." Under a gray sheet of sky, Clinton addressed a memorial ceremony at a Norfolk Naval Station pier crowded with destroyers and aircraft carriers. Sailors in white dress uniforms lined every deck of every ship.
 
Suspects in soldiers' killing hunted down
JERUSALEM (AP) - Less than a week after Israel promised to hunt down the Palestinians who killed and mutilated two soldiers, security sources said Wednesday commandos had captured at least six suspects believed to have taken part in the gruesome mob attack. Details of the operation were shrouded in secrecy, but in Israel, the news was greeted with grim satisfaction. Israelis were horrified by television footage of the attack, and Prime Minister Ehud Barak himself had promised: "We will settle accounts."
 
Inflation prompts boost in 2001 benefit checks
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Retirees will get the biggest cost-of-living increase in their Social Security checks in nine years - an average of $29 a month - beginning in January. The cost-of-living announcement, affecting 45.2 million Americans getting Social Security checks, came Wednesday, just weeks before a hotly contested presidential election in which senior votes could make the difference in several crucial states. The 3.5 percent boost - an adjustment the Social Security Administration always announces in October - is aimed at preventing rising inflation from eroding beneficiaries' buying power.
 
Campaign's final 20 days: It's the economy, and civility and. …
 
ST. LOUIS (AP) - The debating done, Al Gore hitched his election hopes to the volatile economy Wednesday and rival George W. Bush plunged into Democratic terrain for the final 20 days of their nip-and-tuck presidential campaign. Heading into the homestretch, Gore is promising to fight big business on behalf of working families - a populist theme he struck repeatedly during the faceoff. Bush is sticking with his message of civility, smaller government, lower taxes and a break from what he refers to as the cynicism and scandal of Washington.
 
Market tumbles on earnings, inflation fears
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Stocks dropped sharply in volatile trading Wednesday, shaving more than 400 points off the Dow Jones industrials before bargain hunters moved in and helped the market recover most of its losses. Investor despair over a generally bleak earnings outlook and a huge decline in IBM sent the Dow below 10,000 for the first time since March 14. The Dow closed at 9,975.02, down 114.69, after an earlier drop of more than 433 points had sent the blue chip index to its lowest intraday trading level since March 24, 1999.
 
Independent counsel: First lady gave 'factually false' testimony
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - Independent Counsel Robert Ray concluded Hillary Rodham Clinton gave "factually false" testimony when she denied having a role in the White House travel office firings. Ray said he decided not to prosecute Mrs. Clinton because he could not prove she intended to deceive or even knew that her contacts with White House aides had instigated the May 1993 firings. But in his final report Wednesday he wrote that the evidence established beyond a reasonable doubt that Mrs. Clinton, during eight separate conversations with senior presidential aides and advisers, helped prompt the firings of seven White House travel office workers.
 
Big Apple braces while world watches: Subway Series, baby!
 
NEW YORK (AP) - Even The New York Times, the old gray lady herself, is giddy. For the first time in memory, the newspaper ran a banner over its masthead, above news of the presidential debate and the Mideast crisis. In red ink, no less. "It's a Subway Series! Yankees Join Mets," the paper proclaimed. Forgive fans in other parts of the country for being less enthusiastic. "It's a horror, is what it is," said Chris Gerstell, 24, who works at Boston Beer Works, across from a quiet Fenway Park. His Red Sox, haunted by the Yankees for most of the 20th century, lost the 1986 World Series to the Mets.
 
 Load-Date: October 19, 2000

 

End of Document
