

AP News in Brief; Ice storm blankets the South, cutting power to thousands
December 27, 2000, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1047 words
Dateline: LITTLE ROCK, Ark.
Body




An ice storm across the southern Plains knocked out power to a half-million homes and businesses, and stranded travelers through the region. The weather has also caused numerous accidents and traffic deaths and forced the Arkansas governor to shut down state government. With temperatures around the freezing mark Wednesday in much of Arkansas, Entergy Arkansas reported 210,000 customers in the dark and said it could be Jan. 5 before all power is restored. About 100,000 others in Arkansas were without power. The lights were also out for 120,000 people in Oklahoma; 106,000 in Texas; and 50,000 in Louisiana.
 
Bomb-making gear found at home of suspect in Mass. rampage
MALDEN, Mass. (AP) - Investigators seized bomb-making chemicals, blasting caps and magazines on explosives Wednesday from the apartment of a software engineer accused of gunning down seven co-workers at an Internet consulting company. Michael M. McDermott, a hulking, 42-year-old man with shoulder-length hair and a bushy black beard, may have also taken part in complex scientific discussions over the Internet about how to make explosives. McDermott was ordered held without bail Wednesday after pleading innocent to seven counts of murder. Prosecutors are investigating whether the rampage was prompted by a tax dispute.
 
Palestinians criticize U.S. plan; summit in doubt.
 
JERUSALEM (AP) - A Mideast summit planned for Egypt on Thursday was thrown into doubt after Palestinians criticized a U.S. peace plan, and Israel's prime minister indicated he might not attend. A senior Palestinian official speaking on condition of anonymity, said the U.S. proposal - an effort by President Clinton to reach agreement before he leaves office on Jan. 20 - was not acceptable. The official said it was rejected by the Palestinian leadership. The move cast serious doubts on plans for Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat to hold a summit Thursday in Sharm el-Sheik, Egypt, to try to find common ground on Clinton's proposal.
 
Clinton appoints first black to Southern appellate court
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - President Clinton on Wednesday put the first black judge onto the 4th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, which serves several Southern states and covers more minorities than any other circuit. Clinton's nomination of Richmond, Va., lawyer Roger Gregory had been stalled in the Senate, but the president used a recess appointment to put him on the bench while Congress is out of session. He said he would nominate him again when Congress returns in January. The 4th Circuit comprises Maryland, North Carolina, South Carolina, Virginia and West Virginia. The court has had a vacancy for more than 10 years.
 
Census figures to show population, political shifts
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - States with booming populations in the South and West are expected to gain seats in the House at the expense of states in the Northeast and Midwest when the first figures from this year's census are released Thursday. The biggest winners in the once-a-decade reapportionment of the 435 House seats appear to be Arizona and Texas, states with burgeoning immigrant populations forecasted to gain two representatives each, according to several estimates by private demographic research groups based on 1999 figures. New York and Pennsylvania, meanwhile, are expected to lose two seats apiece, while California's delegation, currently the biggest at 52, is expected to grow by one.
 
FBI puts child pornography suspect on 'Most Wanted' list
 
WASHINGTON (AP) - The FBI for the first time placed a child pornography suspect on its Ten Most Wanted Fugitives list Wednesday - an American musician charged with producing and distributing explicit photos and videos from Thailand. Eric Franklin Rosser, 48, a keyboard player who ran a music school for children in Bangkok, is wanted for numerous offenses including the production of a videotape in Thailand which depicts him having sex with an 11-year-old girl, the bureau said. Attorney General Janet Reno announced the new name on the list at a news conference with FBI officials. The FBI is offering up to $50,000 for information leading to Rosser's arrest.
 
Ford moving quickly to settle in Firestone tire cases
 
MIAMI (AP) - Ford Motor Co. is moving quickly to settle accident cases involving Explorers with Firestone tires, resolving at least six legal claims in a single day, a lawyer said Wednesday. Bruce Kaster, a leading lawyer in defective tire cases, said Ford expressed "heartfelt condolences" and embarrassment about tire quality problems in settling six cases he was handling. As many as 200 lawsuits have been filed against Ford and Firestone over tire-related crashes. Kaster said he arranged a series of one-hour sessions between Ford attorneys and his clients on Friday and completed each meeting with an agreement.
 
Robert Downey Jr. pleads innocent to drug charges
 
INDIO, Calif. (AP) - Robert Downey Jr. pleaded innocent Wednesday to drug charges stemming from his Thanksgiving weekend arrest at a desert resort. Downey, 35, who was arrested only four months after being released from prison in another drug case, entered innocent pleas to felony possession of cocaine and felony possession of the tranquilizer diazepam, each punishable by up to three years in prison. The actor, nominated last week for a Golden Globe for his recurring role on the TV show "Ally McBeal," also pleaded innocent to a misdemeanor charge of being under the influence of a controlled substance, which carries a maximum one-year sentence.
 
Grant Hill out for year with ankle injury
 
ORLANDO, Fla. (AP) - Grant Hill will undergo season-ending surgery on his ankle, a devastating blow to the Magic and their hopes the five-time All-Star would lead them to an NBA title. Hill, acquired from Detroit in the off-season, is expected to be sidelined for 6-to-8 months, general manager John Gabriel said Wednesday. The 6-foot-8 forward was originally injured at the end of last season while with the Pistons. He had surgery April 28 to repair a broken bone in his left ankle in which four pins and a plate were inserted. In four games for the Magic, who are 12-16 and third in the Atlantic Division, Grant averaged 13.8 points, 6.3 rebounds, 6.3 assists and 1.25 steals in 33.3 minutes a game.
 
 Load-Date: December 28, 2000

 

End of Document
