

Arabs bring Israeli housing issue back to the General Assembly
April 24, 1997, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 556 words
Byline: By ROBERT H. REID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




In the first emergency session of the U.N. General Assembly in 15 years, the Palestinian observer urged world leaders Thursday to punish Israel if it builds Jewish housing in a disputed part of Jerusalem.
The observer, Nasser al-Kidwa, also defended violent demonstrations by Palestinians against Israeli plans to construct a 6,500-unit housing project on land the Palestinians want as a future capital.
"Those who call the collective expressions against the Israeli action as 'Palestinian violence' either cannot comprehend or have bad intentions bordering on racism and hated," al-Kidwa said.
But Israel's acting ambassador, David Peleg, said his government had "taken pains" to find ways to settle differences with the Palestinians and argued that the planned housing project "does not violate any of the agreements with the Palestinians."
The emergency session, expected to last two days, marked the fourth time a U.N. body has debated the housing project, which the Israelis call Har Homa and the Arabs Jabal Abu Ghneim.
Arab states called for the session under a seldom-used provision which enables the General Assembly to consider issues that threaten peace if the 15-member Security Council fails to do so.
Last month, the United States used its veto twice to block council resolutions criticizing Israel for the Har Homa project. After the first veto, the General Assembly voted 130-2 for a resolution criticizing the Har Homa decision.
The Arabs then sought Thursday's emergency session, the first since 1982. They circulated a draft resolution demanding "immediate and full cessation" of the Har Homa project.
It also recommends that all countries stop assistance to Israeli private or public groups involved in settlement activities. A previous draft would have recommended a ban on trade with such groups. A vote on the issue was expected Friday.
The United States and Israel traditionally oppose any U.N. role in issues between Palestinians and the Israelis because of widespread support within the U.N. membership for the Arab position.
But the president of the General Assembly, Razali Ismail of Malaysia, said the organization had a role to play because "a threat to peace and security in any part of the world has a direct bearing on universal peace and security."
During the debate, al-Kidwa said the government of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu had undermined the three-year-old peace process by strengthening the Jewish presence in east Jerusalem.
"It is our right to demand an immediate halt to such Israeli policies and actions and, in the case of non-compliance, to demand from the international community the imposition of punishment," said al-Kidwa, designated as an observer because Palestinians do not have a separate state.
Defending his government's commitment to peace, Peleg accused the Palestinians of embarking "on a regional and international campaign to exert pressure and to isolate Israel if we do not accept all Palestinian positions."
Jerusalem is considered holy to Muslims, Christians and Jews alike. The Palestinians want the eastern part of it as the capital of a future state, but Israel insists that the city will remain united under its rule.
In Syria, three state-run newspapers urged the General Assembly to impose swift sanctions against Israel to stop it from building new settlements on Arab lands.
 Load-Date: April 24, 1997

 

End of Document
