

As new crisis looms, jitters behind the calm on Baghdad streets
November 2, 1997, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 642 words
Byline: By WAIEL FALEH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAGHDAD, Iraq
Body




Signs of nervousness peak through the calm in Iraq's capital, where some residents worry that a standoff with the United Nations will worsen food shortages or lead to a military confrontation.
Iraq's currency, the dinar, is jittery, and its leadership shows no signs of backing down from a threat to expel American arms inspectors trying to determine whether Iraq has followed U.N. orders to destroy its weapons of mass destruction.
Fakhria Aboud, a 58-year-old mother of eight, said she fears a missile strike on Baghdad like strikes of the 1991 Persian Gulf War.
"I am trying to build up a stock for my family in case something happens," she said, pushing a cart full of vegetables and groceries down a street. "We have filled all the containers at the house with heating oil, and it is time to stock up on food."
Delshad Ahmad, a Kurdish store owner, also was worried the crisis would escalate.
"I have just gotten myself together and made some money to buy a car," said Ahmad, 36. "I really hate to see things deteriorating because such a situation will affect my life savings the way it did in 1991."
Sanctions imposed by the United Nations after Iraq's 1990 invasion of neighboring Kuwait, which led to the Gulf War, prevent Iraq from exporting oil - its major source of income. The sanctions have devastated the economy, and will not be lifted until U.N. inspectors certify Iraq has destroyed its major weapons systems.
The government makes food available at below-market prices through a U.N. oil-for-food program, which permits Iraq limited oil sales to buy food and medicine. Some items were scaled back last week, but Eric Falt, a spokesman for the U.N. program, expressed hope Sunday that distribution would continue.
U.N. officials object to Iraq's demand that all Americans on the U.N. weapons inspection team in Iraq leave the country by Wednesday. The outraged chief inspector last week suspended field work.
The United States has not ruled out military action to try to end the crisis, and the top four congressional leaders, appearing before Americans Sunday on NBC's "Meet the Press," seemed to endorse that option.
"The only thing that he (Saddam Hussein) seems to understand is action, and that's what's going to have to happen," House Democratic Leader Dick Gephardt said. He, Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott, Senate Democratic Leader Tom Daschle and House Speaker Newt Gingrich, said they agree the Iraqi president must be made to back down.
Baghdad, however, does not appear ready to do so.
The U.N. teams were to resume inspections Monday, though three of 10 American inspectors have left Baghdad and two arriving inspectors were refused entry Sunday.
Four Iraqis demonstrated Sunday outside the Red Cross building in Baghdad, protesting what they said was American bias against their country. State-run newspapers, meanwhile, disputed U.N. inspectors' complaints that Iraq was blocking their work.
Faiq Tawfiq al-Aubaidi, 45, a retired government worker among the protesters, said the United States - which has pushed for stronger sanctions on Iraq - was taking a stance "against our people."
Al-Thawrah, the daily newspaper of Iraq's ruling Baath Party, urged the Security Council to be more balanced, saying the U.N. Special Commission in charge of the arms inspection was being "exploited by the United States in the ugliest of ways to achieve sly political gains."
"The U.N. Special Commission cannot deny the fact that Iraq has complied with Security Council resolutions," the editorial said. "The inspection teams will never do Iraq any justice so long as the United States is in control of this mission and … dictating its reports."
The dispute already has upset the Iraqi dinar. Before the trouble arose last week, the dinar was trading at 1,550 to the dollar. The rate fell to 1,750 to the dollar, and it was trading Sunday at 1,700.
 Load-Date: November 2, 1997

 

End of Document
