

Astronomers take to the sky to chase spectacular meteor storm
The Associated Press
November 16, 1999, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 568 words
Byline: By JOSEPH B. VERRENGIA, AP Science Writer
Dateline: MILDENHALL AIR FORCE BASE, England
Body




What may be the heavens' last major meteor storm for a century has attracted astronomers from six nations to study the spectacular trail of "shooting stars" aboard a pair of U.S. jets loaded with scientific instruments.
In parallel formation, the jets began a flight from Britain to Israel late Tuesday with the experts focusing on the long debris trail shed by Comet Tempel-Tuttle and a drizzle of "shooting stars."
At the peak of the meteor shower early Thursday, when thousands of meteors per hour are expected to streak across the black velvet of space, the aircraft will fly back along the coast of North Africa to the Azores, taking readings from above the clouds and smog.
The shower could be the best display of the meteor shower known as the Leonids for the next 100 years, prompting professional and amateur stargazers to prepare ground observations in dark rural areas ranging from mountain peaks to desert sand dunes.
Weather permitting, views of the Leonids should be best in Europe and the Middle East in the early hours Thursday.
Views in the United States should be less spectacular. But meteors are notoriously fickle, and astronomers say that people who stay up all night should be rewarded with celestial fireworks across much of the Northern Hemisphere.
The Leonid shower occurs annually with varying degrees of strength. Astronomers calculate that Jupiter's tremendous gravitational pull, among other cosmic forces, will nudge the comet that causes the shower off course, pushing its debris trail away from Earth for one or two of its 33-year orbits around the Sun. That could mean less spectacular displays for decades.
The two research aircraft, operated by NASA and the U.S. Air Force, will fly at 30,000 feet above clouds and urban smog. The array of instruments will study the meteors' velocity, chemistry and behavior as they slam into Earth's atmosphere from the vacuum of space.
The planes will fly at a constant 80 miles apart to allow stereoscopic measurements of the incoming meteors. "It's vital that we travel at the same speed, same altitude and same distance," said Steve Butow, a physicist with SETI and an Air Force pilot.
Many of the researchers from the United States, Canada, Japan, the Netherlands, England and the Czech Republic are independent astronomers and amateurs. The Air Force joined the effort because it is concerned that meteors could damage 600 orbiting telecommunications and national security satellites.
Astronomers are especially interested in whether meteors might have seeded Earth with life-supporting organic compounds in the planet's early years.
"Comet impacts are like nuclear blasts and very little survives," said SETI Institute meteor specialist Peter Jenniskens. "Meteor showers might be another way of getting organics here in a form that would be usable. These particles have been arriving for billions of years. It would be a steady supply of organics."
Finding meteors during the next two nights should be easy - but the flights do have to keep borders on the ground in mind when chasing the "falling stars." Some countries along the route, including Libya, Syria and Turkey, have declined permission for overflights, and mission planners were laying down a path threading between them.
"If we see a fantastic fireball," Butow said, "our ability to deviate off-track and capture it with our instruments will be constrained by geopolitical realities."
 Load-Date: November 17, 1999

 

End of Document
