

At The Movies: 'The Siege'
The Associated Press
November 5, 1998, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment News
Length: 804 words
Byline: By TED ANTHONY, AP National Writer
Body




AT THE MOVIES Logo
The line between fiction and prediction has always been blurry. That's by design: Good fiction is not merely something that didn't happen, but something with that certain cautionary-tale chance of being real.
"The Siege," a disturbing, engrossing new film by director Edward Zwick ("Glory," "Legends of the Fall"), is cut from this type of cloth - something so terrifying yet so close to home that it makes the very foundations of American culture seem suddenly tentative.
New York is the target. Islamic terrorists are the aggressors. After a prologue involving the kidnapping of a sheik in the Lebanese desert and TV clips of President Clinton reacting to the (real) bombing of an American military barracks in Saudi Arabia, we meet Anthony "Hub" Hubbard.
Hub (Denzel Washington) is an intense FBI agent with an equally intense partner, Frank Haddad (Tony Shalhoub), a Lebanese-American. Trying to solve an inexplicable bus bombing that does nothing more than soak its victims in blue paint, he meets up with Elise Kraft (Annette Bening), an American spy with her own agenda.
The paint was but a warning. Multiple terrorist bombings ensue, each worse than the last: a real bus, a Broadway theater and, finally, a major New York building.
New York grows ever more jittery. People hit the street when a bus backfires. Discussions about Arab-Americans turn ugly. Madison Square Garden even cancels all events. Says a TV announcer: "New York City has been brought to its knees by the events of the past week. Retail sales are down 17 percent."
Finally, the unthinkable happens: Martial law is declared to root out the terrorists. Military checkpoints rise. New Yorkers of Middle Eastern descent are rounded up for interrogation. A stadium becomes an internment camp and it provides the film's most frightening scene. Gen. William Devereaux (Bruce Willis) is in charge, and it's not pretty. The martial law scenes work because it's the Army's presence that's demonized, not the military itself.
Who's right? Devereaux, Hub or Elise? They're all on the same side, but each has a different agenda.
It would be easy to screw up this kind of movie. Making it merely an action thriller would ignore the very real moral dilemmas involved. Turning it into a preachy, dense ethical drama would render it plodding and unwatchable.
Zwick, however, has straddled the line for a synthesis of the two that's perfect in tone and in execution, crisply paced and harrowing. Its biggest strength is its approach to violence: Some is explicit, but most is depicted - almost operatically - only in its aftermath.
Washington is wonderful, as usual, as New York crumbles around him. Only once - at the very end - does his moralism turn preachy. Bening's multifaceted Elise is a case study in moral relativism, a symbol of the nation she serves. She has done unsavory things in the name of democracy, but she also fervently believes in her country. From her comes the best line of the movie: "It's easy to tell the difference between right and wrong. What's hard is choosing the wrong that's more right." Sami Bouajila, as her lover-informant Samir, is intense and - maybe - morally ambivalent.
Shalhoub steals the show. He's already the best character actor around ("Gattaca," "Men in Black" and the TV sitcom "Wings"), and here he does it one better. Through his Frank Haddad we see an American dream gone sour, a country where how you look - even if you're an FBI agent or an FBI agent's son - can place you under immediate suspicion. Through him, Zwick makes sure the film doesn't demonize people of Middle Eastern descent.
As Devereaux, Willis starts strong but tapers off. His best scenes are early, when he is a reluctant warrior who warns against martial law. The military is a broad sword, he says, not a scalpel. But after the War Powers Act is invoked and his forces deploy in Brooklyn, he becomes the cliche power-hungry general - with, admittedly, a few interesting twists.
In its loud scenes of chase and destruction, and in its quiet, intense moments of contemplation and mourning, "The Siege" is a graphic and cerebral look at what could happen next year - or next week. Its message rings clear: Once a country turns to harsh measures to control chaos, it's hard to turn back.
"The Siege," a Twentieth Century Fox film, is produced by Zwick and Lynda Obst from a screenplay by Zwick, Lawrence Wright and Menno Meyjes.
---
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions:
G - General audiences. All ages admitted.
PG - Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children.
PG-13 - Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children.
R - Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.
NC-17 - No one under 17 admitted.
 Load-Date: November 5, 1998

 

End of Document
