

Attorneys say mountain of evidence won the bombing case
June 2, 1997, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 615 words
Byline: By STEVEN K. PAULSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DENVER
Body




The road to Timothy McVeigh's conviction wandered through fields of Kansas grain, Oklahoma oil fields and the deserts of Arizona. It was not the excursion to the Middle East and Northern Ireland the defense had planned.
The government built a mountain of evidence - including phone calls, rental documents, explosives residue on his clothes, and his own anti-government writings - to convict McVeigh of conspiracy and murder in the Oklahoma City bombing, the deadliest act of terrorism on U.S. soil.
Prosecutors pointed out the Kansas shop where Timothy McVeigh rented his Ryder truck. They pointed out the route McVeigh drove to drop off his getaway car in Oklahoma City. A motel manager in Kingman, Ariz., showed where McVeigh put together a Christmas package of blasting caps to build his weapon of terror.
The evidence was purely circumstantial. Prosecutors relied on the testimony of questionable witnesses, people with faulty memories, and evidence possibly tainted in the FBI lab.
Prosecutors responded to the problems by cutting their case to the bone, scrapping key FBI crime lab witnesses criticized in a government report and choosing eyewitnesses who didn't contradict themselves.
It didn't seem to matter that no one saw McVeigh build the bomb and no one saw him light the fuse. As prosecutor Larry Mackey summed up the circumstantial case against McVeigh: "He's either the bomber or he's the unluckiest man in the world."
In their opening statements, defense attorneys promised they would prove McVeigh innocent. But their case was hobbled when the judge ruled they could not present evidence from a federal informant who said she uncovered a white supremacist plot to blow up a federal building months before McVeigh carried out his bombing.
And it was not allowed to bring in theories that lead attorney Stephen Jones had floated for months - that the bombing conspiracy may have involved terrorists from as far away as the Middle East or Northern Ireland.
Instead, the defense was left only to discredit the evidence the government decided to use. And in the end, they couldn't do it.
"What lost the case for the defense was the lack of an alibi and no testimony by Timothy McVeigh," said Denver attorney Andrew Cohen, who attended the trial.
There wasn't a main piece of evidence that was the key to the prosecution's case. Although it was mostly circumstantial, there were a lot of circumstances.
- The prosecution presented evidence that McVeigh used a number of aliases, including Bob Kling, the name used by the man who rented the Ryder truck that blew up the Murrah building.
- They also offered proof that he rented sheds that could have been used to store the two tons of ammonium nitrate fertilizer used in the bomb.
- The prosecution presented Eldon Elliott, the body shop owner who identified McVeigh as the man who rented the Ryder truck that matched the serial number on an axle that was sent flying when the bomb exploded.
- Prosecutors showed jurors anti-government literature from McVeigh's car, and a computer message from his sister's computer. The message used an obscenity to refer to federal agents and said they would "swing in the wind one day" for their "treasonous actions against the Constitution." It ended with the words: "Die, you spineless, cowardice bastards."
Finally, the government called McVeigh's Army buddy Michael Fortier and his wife, Lori, who testified McVeigh told them months in advance of his plot to blow up the federal building to avenge the FBI siege at Waco.
The defense tried and failed to discredit them as two people out to save their own skins, who were willing to lie in hopes they could make money off the bombing on the talk show circuit.
 Load-Date: June 3, 1997

 

End of Document
