

Away from the speechmaking, colorful protests and a visit to the zoo
The Associated Press
September 5, 2000, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 646 words
Byline: By DAVID CRARY, AP National Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




An American rabbi traded business cards with Iranian journalists. The president of the Republic of Congo made a side trip to the Bronx Zoo. At the U.N. Millennium Summit, the official agenda - full of weighty rhetoric about the world's future - tells only a fraction of the story.
While early-arriving world leaders attended symposiums and luncheons a day ahead of the summit opening, thousands of protesters staged colorful demonstrations Tuesday behind police barricades a block from the U.N. complex. Members of Falun Gong, the meditation sect targeted by a crackdown in China, silently performed slow-motion exercises next to raucous protests by Taiwanese- and Iranian-Americans.
Traffic in the neighborhood was horrendous, thanks to security precautions and police-escorted limousines, and some events began late. At an international prayer breakfast in the stylish Waldorf-Astoria hotel, Croatian President Stipe Mesic had to hurry off to another engagement before the first main prayer.
Another leader, Republic of Congo President Denis Sessou-Nguesso, got out of Manhattan altogether, becoming the first head of state to visit the Congo Gorilla Forest at the Bronx Zoo. The 6.5-acre wildlife habitat has drawn more than a million visitors since it opened in June 1999.
"He was all smiles," said Wildlife Conservation Society spokesman Stephen Sautner of the VIP visitor.
In the General Assembly building, the first major summit-related event was a symposium called Dialogue Among Civilizations, featuring an address by Iranian President Mohammed Khatami. To an audience not always fully attentive, he stressed the need for different cultures to understand one another while respecting fundamental differences.
Onlookers in the gallery included a group of anti-Zionist rabbis from New York, two of whom recently visited Iran. Rabbi Yisroel Dovid Weiss, wearing a black beaver hat over his long sideburns, eagerly introduced himself to journalists from Tehran sitting across the aisle.
"The Jewish people have no strife with the Muslim people," Weiss said later.
Across First Avenue, Iranian-Americans demonstrating under a sea of red, green and white balloons were unimpressed by Khatami's prominent role at the symposium, and scoffed at his reputation as a reformist.
"He's a fake, he's part of the regime," said Alireza Jafarzadeh of the National Council of Resistance to Iran. "He can't even manage dialogue within his country, let alone prescribing it for the rest of the world."
While many of the Iranian-Americans boomed their complaints through bullhorns, most of the Falun Gong members in the adjoining protest zone sat or stood in silence. Slogans on their bright yellow T-shirts urged the release of jailed colleagues in China, yet spokesman Jason Loftus of Toronto said the demonstration was not meant as an anti-Beijing protest.
"We're not against the Chinese government," he said. "We're here to show we're peaceful."
The Falun Gong contingent got some moral support from the Taiwanese-Americans crowded behind the next row of metal barricades.
"They're looking for freedom, too," said Amy Chen, a 59-year-old who emigrated from Taiwan to New York 30 years ago.
Chen and her fellow protesters weren't sure their protest would catch the eye of any top Chinese leaders, but they wanted to vent their indignation at all suggestions that Taiwan and China unify.
"We like Taiwan the way it is," Chen said.
Surveying the multitude of protesters were a dozen hard-hatted construction workers taking a lunch break from their jobs erecting the Trump World Tower, a residential skyscraper towering over the U.N. complex.
One of the workers, Sean Geraghty, categorized both the protests and the summit itself as a waste of time, and griped at the fact that leaders such as Fidel Castro and Yasser Arafat were attending.
"Only in America," said Geraghty, who emigrated from Ireland in 1982.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NYR105, NYR109, NYR114, XUN102
 Load-Date: September 6, 2000

 

End of Document
