

B-52 bombers are Big and Ugly and only the elite can fly them
May 22, 1997, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 547 words
Byline: By HELEN O'NEILL, AP National Writer
Dateline: MINOT AIR FORCE BASE, N.D.
Body




They're called "Buffs" by the military, for Big Ugly Flying Fellows - or some variation thereof, some of which aren't printable. Their heavy metal bellies can carry 70,000 pounds of bombs, mines and missiles as they roar through the sky.
On the ground, they look clumsy, like a row of giant gray whales beached on the prairie. In the sky they become transformed into weapons of deadly efficiency.
When 1st Lt. Kelly Flinn was named a B-52 pilot, she became part of the elite. And not just because she is the first and only woman to fly the bomber.
The B-52 is the workhorse of America's nuclear strike force. During the Cold War, B-52s with nuclear weapons were kept in the air at all times.
The Air Force has about 600 B-52 pilots who fly 94 planes at two U.S. bases: Minot and Barksdale, La.
Flinn has said that a bomber pilot is all she ever wanted to be.
By all accounts she is one of the best. "Incredibly sharp, professional warrior," reads a performance review from last August. "Flinn is an outstanding officer and aviator - her performance stands head and shoulders above her peers."
Now her career and reputation are on the line as the 26-year-old pilot faces a court martial for having an affair with a married man, lying about it to investigators and disobeying an order to end it.
Conviction could mean dismissal from the Air Force and the end of her life as a "baron," as members of the 23rd Bomb Squadron are known.
Many believe that life has ended anyway. Even if she gets the honorable discharge that she has requested, Flinn will no longer fly with the 23rd. But she would be eligible to fly for the National Guard or the Air Force Reserve.
That may not be the case if she is granted less than an honorable discharge.
Her lawyer said her main goal is to get back in the cockpit as soon as she can.
In the shadow of a B-52, it's easy to see the allure. There is a majesty to the Buff as it screeches down the runway, nose low, wings slightly drooping as it lifts into the wind.
There's history, too. The B-52, which has a crew of five, is the oldest bomber jet in the Air Force, used to carpet-bomb the countryside in Vietnam and pound Iraq's Republican Guard during the Persian Gulf War.
The B-52 is a $ 13 million piece of machinery, with eight engines and a wingspan of 185 feet. It weighs 185,000 pounds empty.
With a speed of 650 mph, it can fly 8,800 miles before being refueled, and the refueling can be done in the air in close formation. Thus, its range is limited only by the crew's endurance.
"The mental stress is much more rigorous than the physical stress," said Lt. Col. Cliff Sjolund, still sore after flying a nine-hour training mission from Minot to Montana the night before.
"It gets pretty rough, flying 400 feet off the ground when the wind is blowing and there's a tanker 12 feet away that is filling your jet with gas and there's turbulence and clouds that might be thunder in the distance."
Still, he said, it would be tough to be told he couldn't fly them anymore.
"It's got elephant ears and dog legs and no one ever calls it pretty," he said, gazing up at one christened the Old Crow Express and painted with a cigar-smoking, goggled bird leaning cheekily against a missile. "But once you get behind the controls of a B-52, you never want to fly anything else."
 Load-Date: May 22, 1997

 

End of Document
