

Balloonists abandon bid to fly round the world
The Associated Press
February 4, 1998, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 562 words
Byline: By CLARE NULLIS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GENEVA
Body




Three European balloonists who overcame a leaky capsule, slow winds and military risks in Iraq, abandoned their round-the-world dreams Wednesday after China refused to let them cross its airspace.
With no chance of picking up the jet-stream winds needed to speed them over the Pacific, the Breitling Orbiter 2 drifted over India toward a final landing in either Burma or Thailand.
The crew sought consolation in stunning views of the Taj Mahal and the knowledge they had spent longer in the air than the previous record-holder, American adventurer Steve Fossett.
"It's very, very sad. We have champagne which is staying unopened," said the team's flight director Alan Noble, who on Tuesday toasted breaking Fossett's endurance record.
"We've learned a lot about how cruel the weather can be and how difficult the political situation can be," Noble told reporters at Geneva airport control center.
He said it was too early to predict whether Swiss pilot Bertrand Piccard, Belgium's Wim Verstraeten and British flight engineer Andy Elson would try again next year. If they do, the team will first secure overflight permission from China, he said.
Beijing objected that the slow-moving silver balloon would have been a safety risk to other aircraft during the busy Chinese New Year holiday. Chinese leaders remained unmoved by frantic appeals from European diplomats, including Swiss President Flavio Cotti.
Noble was gracious in defeat. "We fully understand the position of the Chinese government and appreciate their difficulties," he said.
The European balloon - the latest in a series of attempts to achieve the elusive nonstop round-the-world feat - set out Jan. 28 from a Swiss Alpine village.
It somehow lost one-third of its fuel the first night. It was also plagued by a small leak in the pilot's gondola and weak winds.
Ignoring fears about the risk of U.S. air strikes against Baghdad, the team flew illegally through the northern no-fly zone in Iraq set up to protect Kurds. It caused panic among air traffic controllers in Syria and disregarded orders to land for identification in Iran.
But it was China that turned out to be the only insurmountable problem.
While waiting in vain for clearance from Beijing, the balloon drifted too far south over India and was out of range of the high-altitude jet-stream winds, Noble said.
Nevertheless, the balloonists plan to try to stay afloat as long as possible to extend their world endurance record before landing Friday on the Burmese coast or in Thailand, he said.
Fossett, the former record-holder, stayed afloat in the Solo Challenger for 146 hours and 44 minutes before lack of fuel forced him down near a remote village in India, about 375 miles southeast of New Delhi.
British tycoon Richard Branson is also out to beat the record - although he has not yet decided whether he will take off this year.
'I'm very pleased about the new world record and every hour we fly makes it more difficult for Mr. Branson to take it off us. So it's not a total failure," Noble said.
Fossett still holds the world distance record of 10,000 miles.
Despite the huge cost of the exercise and the disappointment, the crew has no regrets, Noble said.
"I spoke to Bertrand Piccard and he still sounded very bouncy," Noble said. "He said 'Okay we didn't go around the world but we've had a great flight, seen some wonderful places and we've had a ball."
 Load-Date: February 4, 1998

 

End of Document
