

Barak: chance of success at Camp David 'like the toss of a coin'
The Associated Press
July 6, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 635 words
Byline: By JACK KATZENELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Prime Minister Ehud Barak said Thursday that the chances of success at next week's Camp David summit meeting with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat are 50 percent, "like the toss of a coin."
The Palestinians also tried to lower expectations: Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat said it is unlikely that disputes over borders, Jerusalem, Palestinian refugees and Jewish settlements will be resolved in a few days at the Maryland retreat. He said more high-level meetings may be required to reach a peace treaty by Sept. 13, the deadline the sides have set.
Both Barak and Arafat are heading to the summit at a time when their popularity at home is at a low. But the Israeli leader said he was not deterred by the weakening of his coalition government on the eve of his departure for Camp David.
The Russian immigrants' party - Israel B'Aliya - and the National Religious Party announced Wednesday that they would leave the coalition because they are opposed to the concessions they expect Barak will make to the Palestinians. This leaves the government with only 59 of the 120 seats in parliament, but Barak said he would push on with the peace process.
The prime minister said the summit offers a historic opportunity. A failure to seize it could lead to more bloodshed between Israel and the Palestinians and they would end up in the same position as before, if not worse, he said.
"We have to decide whether we want the conflict to continue for another 30 years," he added.
Barak acknowledged that the issues to be discussed at Camp David are the thorniest in the Israeli-Palestinian dispute. They include the permanent borders between Israel and a Palestinian state, the future of Jerusalem and the problem of the hundreds of thousands of Palestinian refugees who want to return to what is now Israeli soil.
Asked how he assessed the chances of success at the summit, he said: "Fifty percent, like the toss of a coin."
The Palestinians demand that Israel give up the entire West Bank and Gaza Strip and east Jerusalem, evacuate all the Jewish settlements in those heavily Palestinian territories and withdraw to the border that existed before the 1967 Mideast war, when Israel captured the areas. Such a withdrawal would still leave the Palestinians with only 22 percent of what was once the British mandate of Palestine, the land between the Mediterranean and the Jordan River to which both peoples lay claim, Erekat said.
Palestinian leaders want to establish their capital in east Jerusalem, and they maintain that the Palestinian refugees from the 1948 war have the right to return home to what is now Israel.
On the Israeli side, Barak has said Israel will retain control over the main blocs of Jewish settlements in the West Bank and Gaza, that Jerusalem must remain united under Israeli control and that the refugees will not be allowed to return.
Palestinian leaders are pessimistic about the chances of success at the summit and say Arafat will not retreat from any of his positions. The speaker of the Palestinian parliament, Ahmed Qureia, said there is no common ground on any of the issues.
However, Israeli Justice Minister Yossi Beilin, a close confidant of Barak, said Thursday the gap between the two sides is being exaggerated. "The positions of the two sides have never been closer," he told army radio.
Israeli opposition leader Ariel Sharon on Thursday rejected suggestions that his hawkish Likud party join Barak's coalition to strengthen the prime minister on the eve of his departure for Camp David.
"Do you think we should join a government which is willing to give up the (West Bank's) Jordan Valley?" Sharon said in a reference to Barak's readiness to give up part of that area to the Palestinians.
Barak said the Likud is welcome to join the coalition, but only if it accepts his government's policies.
 Load-Date: July 7, 2000

 

End of Document
