

Barak says he will propose new package to the Palestinians in coming days
The Associated Press
February 21, 2000, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 585 words
Byline: By DANA BUDEIRI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak said today that he would try to work out a new "package" of understandings with the Palestinians to break the impasse in peace talks.
The Palestinians say they will not resume contacts until they get answers from Barak on crucial issues, including a pledge that Israel carry out an additional West Bank troop pullback ahead of a final peace treaty, due in September.
U.S. mediator Dennis Ross is to deliver the answers, the Palestinians said. Ross was to meet with Barak today and with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat on Tuesday.
"It is imperative that there be intensive American efforts in the coming few days, coupled with American pressure, in order to force Israel to respect dates," Arafat adviser Nabil Abourdeneh said.
Barak, in turn, reiterated today that dates are "not sacred."
The two sides have already missed a Feb. 13 deadline for reaching a peace treaty blueprint. Barak on Sunday proposed that negotiators extend the target date for a framework agreement to May. The Palestinians say the two sides should forget about a framework and instead focus on reaching a full treaty by September.
Another point of contention is the Israeli withdrawal from 6.1 percent of the West Bank, which was due Jan. 20. The Palestinians demand that as part of the pullback, Israel hand over West Bank suburbs of Jerusalem.
Barak has refused, apparently fearing a backlash from Israeli hard-liners who accuse him of preparing to divide the city. The Palestinians hope to establish a future capital in traditionally Arab east Jerusalem.
In a speech to U.S. Jewish leaders today, Barak said he would try to break the impasse.
"We will try in the next few days to shape a kind of package through contacts with the Palestinians that would help take the wagon out of where it is right now and put it back on track," Barak said.
He did not elaborate on the content of the proposed package.
The Israeli daily Maariv reported that the package is to include the opening of a second land route for Palestinians between the West Bank and Gaza Strip that initially was to have been inaugurated in January. Israel would also improve the quality of its 6.1 percent pullback offer and resolve purchase tax disputes, Maariv said.
Yasser Abed Rabbo, a senior Palestinian negotiator, said the Palestinians fear that Ross' visit will concentrate on secondary issues "that do not require any effort on the part of the U.S. envoy, and could be achieved with a phone call."
Abed Rabbo said that dealing with issues like the northern safe passage and purchase tax are an attempt by Israel "to give the false impression that there is progress in the peace process."
Israeli Justice Minister Yossi Beilin said Barak was trying "to create a more positive atmosphere in relations between the Palestinians and the government."
Also today, new government figures showed some 7,120 homes are under construction in Jewish settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip now, compared to 5,400 under Barak's hard-line predecessor.
While the figures released today seemed to contradict Barak's election pledge to shift national resources away from settlement construction, Israeli peace activists said Barak was belatedly making good on his promise. They noted that the government imposed a partial construction freeze in December and that the slowdown would only be felt gradually.
The Palestinians, who wish to establish an independent state in the West Bank and Gaza, maintain that the settlements are illegal and should be dismantled.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo JRL102
 Load-Date: February 22, 2000

 

End of Document
