

Bats, balls, whites and cell phones: cricket at the park
The Associated Press
June 27, 1999, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 846 words
Byline: NY369 of June 15, By JOSEPH WHITE, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: RESTON, Va.
Body




The most vital pieces of equipment at this cricket match weren't the bats, balls, wickets or even water jugs in the 90-degree heat of a Saturday afternoon.
Nope. The match between the Fairfax Cricket Club and Mobil 2 might not have been possible without a good supply of cellular phones, useful for tracking developments an ocean away.
"Thirty-five balls, 36 runs, three wickets left!" yelled one of the waiting FCC batsmen, holding a phone to his ear and excitedly ticking off a barrage of statistics that mean nothing to 99 percent of Americans.
"The contact, you can believe that," said Hal Sheik, taking in the numbers as he also waited his turn to bat. "The wonder of cell phones."
Make no mistake. Everyone who came to this Washington Cricket League match at Lake Fairfax Park loves to play the game. But the sport's World Cup was taking place at the same time - specifically, a final round match between Pakistan and South Africa - and the distraction was just too great to ignore. Someone had to stay behind, watch the game on television and phone in with the updates.
"You don't know how hard it was to come, leaving that game," said Faraz Haider, who moved to the United States from Karachi six years ago and paid $ 275 for the full, 42-game World Cup package on pay-per-vi With barely a ripple of attention from the land of baseball, the 12-team World Cup took place in England from May 14-June 20. Among the few following the action were the 500 or so cricketers in the 26-team WCL, including David Roll, the only American-born player in the entire league.
"I'm fairly recognized because I'm the American guy," said Roll, the league's vice president. "It's a sad statement. It's more due to a lack of exposure. A lot of people don't know it's played here, unless you stumble across a game."
Roll stumbled across the game during a visit to England a few years back. He watched on television as England's Graham Gooch scored an amazing 333 runs in one session at bat against India. Roll saw a few other matches in person and was hooked.
Now, if he could only win over some of his countrymen. But it's not an easy task considering that cricket remains a tradition-laden sport that combines the pace of baseball with the length of golf.
"Most Americans complain about a baseball game that takes 3, 3 hours," said Roll, who lives in Randallstown, Md. "So a cricket game that takes seven hours is going to be a hard sell."
There are cricket hotbeds scattered around the country in places such as Boston, New York, Washington and California, but they are dominated by immigrants from cricket-playing countries.
Roll estimates that 98 percent of the players in the WCL come from the West Indies or the Indian subcontinent, with only a smattering from other major cricket nations - Australia, England, New Zealand, South Africa, Sri Lanka and Zimbabwe.
In fact, most cricket-lovers come to this country expecting their playing days to be over. Haider felt that way when he arrived in Corning, N.Y., as a teen-ager.
"If you say cricket, people thought it was a bug or something," he said. "For two years I had no clue whether I would play cricket again."
He did play again, with the Syracuse University club team, and he was surprised to find such a large league when he moved to the Washington area.
The WCL is celebrating its 25th anniversary and extends as far as Allentown, Pa., making for regular three-hour road trips to play a game as an amateur in a public park with maybe a few curious spectators on hand.
The cricketers, who always wear traditional white clothing, try to explain the game to the curious by using baseball terminology: You hit the ball and run - but only if you want to - back and forth between two bases (known as stumps or wickets). If someone catches the ball in the air, you're out - although that's not the only way to get you out. There is no foul territory. The batter usually has to hit the ball on one hop. Get 10 men out, and the other team bats.
Such rudimentary primers weren't needed in the early days of this country, before the invention of baseball, when cricket was the No. 1 bat-and-ball game.
The legacy lives on in places such as Haverford College near Philadelphia. The college has a library that boasts the most extensive collection of cricket memorabilia in the Western Hemisphere, and it's the only college that still offers a varsity letter in the sport.
Roll says any hope of a full revival lies in grass-roots programs for children and television exposure. There's talk of a plan by corporate sponsors to build a cricket field near Disneyworld for international matches that would air on one of the sports cable channels. A place in the Olympic Games would also help.
Even then, Roll and his friends find it hard to imagine cricket ever becoming a major sport in the United States.
"Americans are very funny about their sports," Roll said. "This is like an island. What's played here isn't played anywhere else in the world, and what the rest of the world plays isn't played here."
Except on Saturday afternoons at places like Lake Fairfax Park.
 Load-Date: June 27, 1999

 

End of Document
