

Behind-the-scenes diplomacy works to ease India-Pakistan tensions
The Associated Press
July 10, 1999, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 696 words
Byline: By ASHOK SHARMA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW DELHI, India
Body




As India and Pakistan trade shell fire over Kashmir, anger and frustration have frequently led to breakdowns in diplomatic channels.
But the lines of communication remain open, thanks to a small group of scholars, ex-generals and retired bureaucrats.
Known as the Track Two Initiative, the bilateral group has played a crucial behind-the-scenes role at times when the public rhetoric from both sides suggests the possibility of all-out war.
Track Two's biggest test came June 27, when former Pakistan Foreign Secretary Niaz Naik, a member of the group, flew to New Delhi to meet Indian Prime Minister Bihari Vajpayee on what was described as a private visit.
At the time, contact between the governments had officially been severed. At least two phone conversations between the Indian and Pakistani prime ministers had ended in a deadlock.
"Naik's visit shows Track Two has succeeded," said Kuldip Nayar, a newspaper columnist who was India's former ambassador to London. Naik's meeting with Vajpayee broke the ice, Nayar said, at an important juncture when war talk was rising on both sides.
The group, which meets without fanfare, gets its name from the arcane language of diplomacy: Track One is the direct tie between governments, while Track Two represents the nongovernment, person-to-person contact between the two nations.
Earlier this year, a visit to Pakistan by Vajpayee was an event so rare that it was widely viewed as a harbinger of peace between the two nuclear-armed neighbors.
By May, those hopes had all but vanished as Islamic guerrillas seized strategic mountain peaks in Kashmir. India says the fighters are armed and led by Pakistan.
Pakistan denies its soldiers are involved, except in retaliatory shelling against Indian field guns across the cease-fire line drawn after the two nations fought their third war in 1971.
The privately funded Track Two group meets at least once a year, alternately in India and Pakistan.
Its members, all people of influence who do not hold government positions, explore ways to ease tension and promote neighborly relations. Ideas are bounced around that diplomats would be reluctant to broach formally.
"The non-governmental effort is aimed at creating a public opinion in favor of removal of disagreements," said I. A. Rahman, a human rights activist in Pakistan and key participant in Track Two dialogue.
"We feel that the governments of India and Pakistan over the years have created certain myths about security, territorial integrity, ideology and national interests," Rahman said.
But during the last four years, Rahman said, more people have realized "that if the two countries keep on fighting, both will miss the chance of the 21st century."
Speaking by telephone from Lahore, Pakistan, Rahman praised both governments for not blocking private efforts toward reconciliation.
The latest India-Pakistan confrontation, the worst since the last war, came when it was least expected. Less than three months ago, 95 lawmakers from the two countries had met in Pakistan for the first time.
That was followed by Vajpayee's bus ride to meet Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif in Pakistan's border city of Lahore to inaugurate an affordable transport route for ordinary citizens to travel between the two countries.
Despite the current fighting, the buses still run - an important link between relatives on both sides of the border separated by the bloody partition that carved the two independent nations out of British India in 1947.
Even though fears of a wider war are receding, the two sides will need time to put relations back on track. "The confrontation has badly shaken mutual trust," said Nayar.
"Physical aggression can be reversed. But transgression of the territory of trust takes time to make right. That is the principal tragedy," said India's Foreign Minister Jaswant Singh.
Assuming the current conflict is resolved, Track Two diplomacy may have an important role in coming months by helping the two governments mend the fences and re-establish mutual trust.
C. Raja Mohan, an Indian defense analyst, says the semiofficial and private efforts help.
"But there are limits. Ultimately, it is Track One which has to solve the problems."
 Load-Date: July 10, 1999

 

End of Document
