

Beyond the rhetoric: risks and benefits of NATO enlargement
The Associated Press
May 1, 1998, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 744 words
Byline: By TOM RAUM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Opponents of NATO expansion invoked stark images of nuclear confrontation at the Polish border, of a jilted Russia befriending China and Iran and of costs to taxpayers of untold billions. Supporters talked of slight costs, European unity, peace and prosperity.
Trying to determine the actual impact - and costs - of bringing Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic into the Western military alliance is another thing.
Despite the self-assured and contrary rhetoric from both sides, it may be just too early to know whether the benefits of NATO enlargement outweigh the risks.
The Senate voted 80-19 Thursday to include the three former Soviet satellites in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization - and to keep the door open for more to follow.
On the political level, the outcome was a clear foreign-policy victory for the president. And in the final days, he put a heavy effort into achieving it.
On Thursday, when he was occupied with his first full-fledged news conference of the year, President Clinton worked the phones through the day, calling members in a successful effort to ward off weakening amendments. Defense Secretary William Cohen leaned on former Senate colleagues in person while Secretary of State Madeleine Albright lobbied with long-distance phone calls from China.
Addressing workers Friday at a sheet-metal factory in California's Silicon Valley, Clinton called NATO expansion "a big deal" and said it means "your children likely will never have to go there (Europe) to fight and die in a war."
While 11 more of NATO's 16 current members still must ratify the enlargement, the outcome is no longer seriously in doubt now that the United States has approved the deal.
In fact, NATO leaders already are planning a ceremony to formally welcome the three new members at a heads-of-state meeting in Washington in April 1999 to coincide with NATO's 50th anniversary.
The scariest argument raised by opponents was that the sleeping Russian bear might reawaken, angered at the notion of NATO at its very doorstep, and rethreaten its former satellites. That could bring the United States into defending, with nuclear weapons if necessary, territories once part of the Soviet empire.
It could mean nuclear war, Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan told colleagues. Sen. Robert G. Torricelli, D-N.J., raised the specter of U.S. forces suddenly having to defend the Polish frontier.
Supporters play down the risk, suggesting a larger NATO would lead to increased stability.
Jeremy Rosner, who spearheaded the Senate lobbying effort for the White House and State Department, said Friday there have never been any plans to station U.S. troops or nuclear weapons in any of the three new member nations - nor are there now.
Critics point to the core NATO agreement - that all nations would respond with force if any individual member were attacked. That's never been tested.
"It is not legally binding as to what you do," Rosner said in an interview. "It may include use of force, but that isn't specified."
As to integrating the three countries' military structure into NATO, "we're already working together in NATO operations," including in Bosnia, Rosner said. He said the actual inclusion of the three in NATO will be relatively seamless.
As to cost, the administration estimates enlargement will cost roughly $ 1.5 billion over 10 years, of which $ 400 million would be borne by American taxpayers. Critics estimate $ 60 billion to $ 125 billion over the same period - with Americans paying tens of billions.
But much of the variance in cost estimates come from differing assumptions and threat assessments. Again, it's another one of those only-time-will tell situations.
Another concern: An angry Russia will block action on the START 2 arms control agreement. But the Duma, the communist-dominated lower house of Russia's parliament, had already been stalling on the disarmament measure.
Finally, many opponents said they were worried about the next round. Among those waiting in line: Romania and Slovenia and the Baltic republics of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. Critics contend these three Baltic republics would be difficult to defend because they are small and next to Russian territory.
That may be the case, supporters argue. But, after all, West Berlin was also militarily indefensible. And yet it was never attacked - largely because Moscow knew what the consequences would be.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Tom Raum covers Congress and international affairs for The Associated Press.
 
 Load-Date: May 1, 1998

 

End of Document
