

Birthday cake, instant noodles, delivered to hostages in the Philippines
The Associated Press
July 8, 2000, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 565 words
Byline: By AARON FAVILA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JOLO, Philippines
Body




Boxes of food, a birthday cake, and other supplies were delivered Saturday to 20 mostly foreign hostages who have been held by Muslim rebels for weeks in the dense Philippine jungle, officials said.
There was still no indication of when leaders of the extremist Abu Sayyaf group might free their captives. Some have been held as long as 76 days.
A German journalist and a group of 13 Christian evangelists were the latest to be taken hostage. Local officials said Saturday that the people who kidnapped Andreas Lorenz of Der Speigel magazine have received $2,270 for his early release, but that report could not be independently confirmed.
Negotiations led by Robert Aventajado, an aide of President Joseph Estrada, were suspended early last month after the rebels increased their demands, which include a ransom demand of $1 million for each of the 20 hostages.
The Abu Sayyaf kidnapped three Germans, two French, two Finns, two South Africans, a Lebanese, nine Malaysians and two Filipinos on April 23 from a Malaysian diving resort and brought them to Jolo Island, part of Sulu province, about an hour away by boat.
One Malaysian was released last month in what government negotiators described as a goodwill gesture.
Businessman Wee Dee Ping, who helped win the release of the Malaysian, said the remaining Malaysian hostages may be released sooner than the others.
"Government negotiations are ongoing to secure the release of all the hostages, but there are indications the Malaysians could be freed ahead of the others," he said.
On Saturday, Abdusakur Tan, governor of southern Sulu province, sent a cake for German Marc Wallert, who was being held captive along with his mother and father.
The German and Malaysian governments also sent boxes of food, including instant noodles, bottled water and canned goods, for the captives.
Presidential press secretary Ricardo Puno said Friday that the hostages appeared to be relatively safe and faced no immediate threats. But he said the dispute among the rebels over ransom payments could delay the hostages' release because of the difficulty of reaching a consensus in negotiations.
The Abu Sayyaf is the smaller but more violent of two Muslim rebel groups fighting for an independent Islamic state in the southern Philippines.
The larger rebel group, meanwhile, put up heavy resistance to government troops advancing toward their headquarters in the southern Philippines, the military said Saturday.
Moro Islamic Liberation Front guerrillas damaged two army tanks with rocket-propelled grenades but suffered casualties Friday night as the military cleared a network of bunkers and trenches near the rebel stronghold, Camp Abubakar.
One marine soldier was killed and 15 army troopers were wounded late Friday before the guerrillas retreated toward Abubakar, a sprawling 24,700-acre community with farms, schools and a rebel military academy on the main southern Philippine island of Mindanao.
The military has been bombarding the rebel stronghold with air force bombers, helicopter gunships, and mortars since last week and before the lapse of the June 30 deadline set by Estrada for substantive progress in peace talks.
Estrada has said he will extend the deadline for a peace deal only if the rebels abandon their secessionist goal and halt attacks.
The rebel group has rejected Estrada's condition and has not recognized the deadline for the peace talks.
 Load-Date: July 9, 2000

 

End of Document
