

Blood Scandal Taints the Ethiopians' Promised Land
February 3, 1996, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 809 words
Byline: AP Photo JRL102, By HILARY APPELMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Ever since she was a child, Yafa Sahalu remembered hearing about Israel.
"Jerusalem is the dream," said Yafa, who came here with her family during the first airlift of Ethiopian Jews in 1985. "God promised us we would go."
Years of hardship failed to dim the luster of the Promised Land. But the revelation that Israel's blood bank was secretly throwing away Ethiopian donations for fear they were contaminated with the AIDS virus stunned the Sahalus and the rest of Israel's 56,000 Ethiopian Jews.
The rejection of the blood struck a nerve far deeper and more painful than the myriad other slights the Ethiopians have felt in Israel. It touched upon their very Jewishness, the one thing they clung to through centuries of exile.
"I was accepted in Israel," said Nathan Sahalu, Yafa's husband. "I was invited to their weddings. I danced with them. I laughed with them. Now, even if I'm invited, I'm not going. Something is not the same."
A protest last weekend by an estimated 10,000 Ethiopians deteriorated into rock-throwing that injured more than 70 people, stunning other Israelis, who had stereotyped the Ethiopians as a quiet, cheerful people.
The medical argument - that Ethiopians have a higher incidence of AIDS than the rest of Israeli society - did little to shake the Ethiopians' conviction that the blood policy was racist.
"We are blood brothers with all the Jewish people," pleaded a sign at the protest.
"We were lied to for many many years," Adisu Masala, a leader of the Ethiopian community, said of the blood rejection. "The decision was very stupid. It was discrimination."
The violence came at a difficult time for the government of Prime Minister Shimon Peres, who faces general elections amid stirrings of discontent from other ethnic groups left out of Israel's economic boom.
In its wake, Peres promised to look into the problems facing the Ethiopian community - from education to housing to suicides in the army.
"We have kept quiet for a long time," protest leader Muski Shibro-Zivan wrote in Israel's Maariv newspaper. "We want the real problems to be addressed."
Nathan and Yafa Sahalu, on the face of it, are a success story among Israel's Ethiopian immigrants.
They walked across the desert to Sudan, where they lived for a year in refugee camps before coming here during Operation Moses, Israel's covert airlift that rescued 7,500 Ethiopian Jews from severe famine and drought.
Fourteen thousand more arrived in Operation Solomon in 1991, during Ethiopia's civil war.
After living five years in temporary housing, the Sahalus moved into a spacious apartment in Neve Yaacov, a new neighborhood in northern Jerusalem, aided by a government grant that covers 85 percent of their mortgage.
Nathan, a thin 41-year-old with short-cropped hair and a white knitted skullcap, works in a factory that makes aluminum window frames.
Yafa, 31, is a hospital aide. She has brown eyes and an easy smile, and tucks her hair under a soft blue velvet hat in keeping with observant Jewish tradition that requires married women to cover their hair.
They speak fluent Hebrew, and their six children play with Israeli friends. A painting above their couch depicts an Israeli village scene with a black-hatted European Jew in the foreground.
They escaped the isolation in segregated communities that faced many Ethiopians. While Israelis sometimes called them "cushi" - a derogatory word for blacks - they said they never felt discriminated against here.
Until now.
"The way I feel is, I'm nothing," said Yafa, gesturing with her hand as if she were throwing away a piece of garbage.
She said she worries her children will branded with the stigma of AIDS and that she gets bad feelings at work from people she had thought were friends.
"People tell me that Ethiopians have HIV," she said. "I get on the bus, everyone's staring at me."
"I'm afraid to sit close to people, to shake hands like I used to," added Nathan. "They think we'll pass it on to them."
Masala compared the blood rejection to the debate after the first Ethiopians arrived over whether they were really Jewish. At the time, some rabbis demanded they undergo a symbolic conversion.
"Even the Russian Jews who are coming from a communist country, where for many years there was no Judaism - nobody asked them for conversion," Masala said. "Why? Because they are white."
The cries of racism have forced Israelis into self-examination over how they have treated the Ethiopians, after years of patting themselves on the back for their rescue.
"Suddenly, it turns out that what has been described as a major success story is not," said Eytan Gilboa, a political science professor. "This is like a vote of no-confidence in society."
"After this, I don't know whether it will be too difficult to live in Israel," said Yafa, cradling one of her daughters to her shoulder.
"We just pray to God, like we did in Ethiopia."
 Load-Date: February 3, 1996

 

End of Document
