

Bomb explodes near school bus in the Gaza Strip, killing two Israelis and wounding nine
November 20, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 555 words
Byline: By DINA KRAFT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




A bomb exploded Monday near an armored bus taking children and teachers from a Jewish settlement in the Gaza Strip to an elementary school. Two adults were killed and nine passengers wounded, among them five children.
A little-known splinter of a tiny radical PLO faction, the Damascus-based Omar Al Mukhtar group, claimed responsibility in a leaflet faxed to a Western news agency.
However, roadside bombings in Gaza mostly have been carried out by Hamas and Islamic Jihad, two Islamic militant groups that have tried to wreck Israeli-Palestinian peace agreements with bombing and shooting attacks against Israelis.
Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak said the attack was "very grave."
He convened his security Cabinet for a special session Monday. "This will not pass without a response," Gilead Sher, a senior adviser to Barak, told Israel army radio. Last week, Israel struck Palestinian command centers after deadly attacks on Israelis.
The Palestinian Authority said in a statement that it opposes violence, regardless of who commits it, and that it has launched an investigation. Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat called a meeting of senior security officials, the statement said.
The school bus left the isolated Jewish settlement of Kfar Darom in the heart of the Gaza Strip at around 7:30 a.m. local time Monday. Students and teachers were en route to an elementary school in Gush Katif, a bloc of Jewish settlements in the south of the strip.
Three assailants, who were hiding among bushes along the side of the road, exploded a 122 mm mortar shell by remote control when the bus was several dozen yards away, said an army spokesman, Maj. Yarden Vatikay. Shrapnel hit the bus.
The explosion killed two adults and wounded nine other passengers, among them five children, the army and hospital officials said. One adult and one child were in serious condition.
After the blast, the three men ran toward Palestinian-controlled land, where they were out of reach of the Israeli security forces. Army bulldozers cut down trees in the area of the attack and an armored personnel carrier took up position on the road nearby.
Army officials said the armor of the bus and the considerable distance between the explosion and the bus helped blunt the impact of the attack.
About 6,500 Jewish settlers live in the Gaza Strip, among 1 million Palestinians.
Jewish settlers have come under repeated attack in the past seven weeks of Israeli-Palestinian fighting. Several roadside bombs have exploded next to armored settler convoys in Gaza, and Israeli motorists have been fired on in the West Bank. Last week, four Israelis were killed in such attacks.
On Saturday, a Palestinian policeman opened fire on Israeli soldiers guarding farm land near Kfar Darom, a heavily guarded settlement of 250 people. One soldier was killed and two were wounded in the attack.
In all, Israeli-Palestinian fighting has claimed more than 230 lives since Sept. 28. The vast majority of the victims have been Palestinians.
Israeli Foreign Minister Shlomo Ben-Ami said the attack was especially grave because the explosion was set off from a Palestinian-controlled area.
Last week, Arafat called on Palestinian gunmen to halt their fire from areas under his control, but his decree did not extend to attacks from parts of the West Bank and Gaza that are under Israeli rule.
 Load-Date: November 21, 2000

 

End of Document
