

Briefs from the United Nations Millennium Summit
The Associated Press
September 8, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 865 words
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




Peruvian President Alberto Fujimori proposed Friday that bank accounts and other property of international drug traffickers be seized and the money used to help ease extreme poverty in developing nations.
Addressing the U.N. Millennium Summit, Fujimori suggested that mechanisms be created to "permit these evilly obtained resources to be confiscated for the benefit of poor countries," which he said are harmed most by drug production and trafficking.
Much of the world's cocaine is produced in Peru, which also suffers from widespread poverty.
The Peruvian president also defended his recent re-election and his record during his decade in power. "No one has mentioned any evidence of fraud," said Fujimori, referring to complaints about irregularities during the recent balloting.
At a news conference, Fujimori dodged reporters' questions about the case of jailed American Lori Berenson, convicted of treason by a military tribunal in 1996 for allegedly helping a rebel group.
He referred questions to his justice minister, who maintained it was a matter for the courts.
---
 
UNITED NATIONS (AP) - India's prime minister on Friday justified his country's nuclear arms arsenal and pressed a demand for membership on the U.N. Security Council.
In a speech to the U.N. Millennium Summit, Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee said India had to take up the nuclear option although it preferred disarmament.
"The spread of nuclear weapons in our neighborhood made us especially vulnerable," Vajpayee said in reference to Pakistan, which also became a declared nuclear power when both countries conducted tests in 1998.
"India's bitter experience has taught her that she has to be strong to defend peace," he said, departing from his prepared text.
Vajpayee stressed India's demands for a role on the Security Council.
"India is ready to play its role in an expanded Security Council," he said.
---
UNITED NATIONS (AP) - North Korea filed a formal protest against the United States on Friday, saying it was humiliated by the forced search of its U.N. delegation members en route to New York.
The 15-member delegation, which included the North's No. 2 leader, Kim Yong Nam, returned home after the search earlier this week at the airport in Frankfurt, Germany.
In a letter to U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan, North Korea said security officials forced several members of the delegation to take off their clothes and shoes and "thoroughly searched even the sensitive parts of the body, as if they were criminals."
North Korean officials said that after four or five diplomats were searched, a protracted argument erupted and the New York-bound American Airlines plane left without the group.
"These acts of the United States are possible only by hooligans," read an angry letter by North Korea's U.N. mission.
The United States has confirmed that U.S. security officials "patted down" the diplomats and searched their luggage, but denied they were strip-searched. The State Department has said the search was a result of a mix-up, and that the incident could have been avoided had the delegation given advance notice of its itinerary.
---
UNITED NATIONS (AP) - Secretary-General Kofi Annan added his voice Friday to concerns over high oil prices, warning that they could plunge economies into recession and jeopardize recent financial recoveries in the developing world.
"In the past, sharp increases in oil prices have triggered recessions that hurt all countries, including the oil exporters," Annan said in a statement. He noted the "potential of a serious impact on inflation and interest rates in major importing countries remains."
Annan said he hoped OPEC leaders "would be especially sensitive to the impact of their decisions on the world economy and particularly on the poorest countries."
High oil prices have featured into several of the speeches made by leaders who are attending the U.N. Millennium Summit.
His comments came ahead of a Sunday meeting of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries in Vienna at which members will discuss production quotas. Market experts believe the cartel will increase daily output by as much as 700,000 barrels in a bid to stabilize the market.
---
UNITED NATIONS (AP) - The United Nations will spell out "Thank You NY," using office lights on both sides of its headquarters, on Sunday and Monday evenings "for all that New Yorkers have put up with this week," U.N. spokesman Fred Eckhard said.
Protests near the U.N. added to the usual rush-hour mess. Periodic closures of streets and avenues near U.N. headquarters on the city's east side forced commuters there to find new routes.
On Thursday, New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani sent a letter to President Clinton asking that the federal government reimburse the city $25 million for its expenses, ranging from overtime for the police and fire departments to sanitation costs.
"The secretary-general is aware that there was a great deal of disruption in the lives of ordinary citizens, but he hopes that they are proud of this reaffirmation that their city, and ours, is truly the capital of the world," he said.
"He would like to thank the people of New York for their courtesy, understanding and support," Eckhard said.
 Load-Date: September 9, 2000

 

End of Document
