

Buchanan says America ready to 'roll the dice' and choose him over Bush, Gore
The Associated Press
March 17, 2000, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Political News
Length: 993 words
Byline: By RON FOURNIER, AP Political Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Pat Buchanan said Friday that despite his single-digit showing in polls "America is ready to roll the dice" and elect him president over Republican George W. Bush and Democrat Al Gore.
"The willingness to take a look at a third party is greater than it's ever been," said Buchanan, a conservative who joined forces with a left-wing activist for his third try at the White House.
In an interview with The Associated Press, the Reform Party candidate said Bush hasn't "demonstrated the grasp of foreign policy or international affairs that would justify putting the presidency of the United States in his hands."
He accused Gore and President Clinton of capitalizing on violence in America, such as the outbreak of high-profile shootings. "I do believe both the president and vice president exploit and demagogue tragedies and horrors in this country every time they occur to advance their agenda, first, and, secondly, to demonize their political opponents," Buchanan said.
And he said the major political parties have lost touch with Americans. "Both are very hollow," he said.
The former Nixon White House aide and longtime TV commentator abandoned his failing GOP campaign last year to bolt to the Reform Party, where he is not assured the nomination.
He hopes to build a disparate coalition of anti-abortion, anti-trade, anti-establishment voters in a fractionalized party founded by Ross Perot, the unpredictable billionaire who has not ruled out a third presidential race.
Buchanan said Perot would be a formidable obstacle to the Reform Party nomination, but he seemed undaunted. "Am I afraid? Nope," he said.
In the hour-long session with AP reporters and editors, Buchanan also said he:
-Agreed with the Clinton administration's decision Friday to lift a ban on U.S. imports of Iranian goods. "I think we should engage with the Iran regime" in response to its movements toward democracy, he said. Even though Iran and Cuba are still "deeply hostile" to the United States, America should reconsider sanctions that hurt people in an effort to punish the regimes, he said.
-Would suspend normal trade relations with China as long as the nation made threatening gestures toward Taiwan or the United States. As president, his message to Beijing would be: "You've got to start behaving like a normal country." He accused Clinton of accepting "anything short of war" from China in order to maintain trade with the Beijing.
-Won't return to the GOP, even if he loses in November. "You can't go home again." He said he has affinity for party regulars but "at it's upper levels the Republican Party is snobbish. It's exclusive."
-Would eliminate the Department of Housing and Urban Development and strip the Education Department of its primary and secondary school divisions. Buchanan said he would appoint somebody like Wisconsin Gov. Tommy Thompson, a Republican, to oversee a broader effort to turn federal programs over to states.
-Plans to complain to the Federal Election Commission on Monday to force his inclusion in presidential debates. Buchanan said he expects to hit the 15 percent in polls to meet a threshold set by a debate commission. Even if he fails to do so, Buchanan said he should be included in the fall debates because the Reform Party qualifies for federal campaign money.
- Revealed that he won the endorsement of liberal activist Lenora Fulani with a promise to support same-day voter registration. He announced the proposal this week, along with several other campaign finance initiatives he unveiled in 1995. Yet Buchanan, who hopes to court supporters of failed GOP nominee John McCain, said campaign finance reform "is not some cutting edge issue with me."
A combative, colorful character, Buchanan winced at the suggestion that some of his new found allies subscribe to "political collectivism" - a term he apparently associated with communism.
"Whenever I hear the term 'collectivism,"' Buchanan said with a deep-throated laugh. "I release the safety clip from my revolver."
He said McCain's stiff challenge to Bush underscores the public's yearning for anti-establishment candidate.
"They are ready," Buchanan said. "The American electorate is more ready to roll the dice than it has ever been in my lifetime. The allegiance to the two parties is smaller than it has ever been. The willingness to take a look at a third party is greater than it's ever been."
"The establishment of both parties lacks the hold on the country (they) used to have," he said.
Buchanan said his first task is to unite a deeply divided Reform Party in time for its summer convention. "In the end, it will look like the Rockettes, it will be so smooth," he said.
Once he's on stage with Gore and Bush, the TV veteran said he will "set this country on fire" in debates. Still, he called his campaign a "longshot."
Bush spokesman Ari Fleischer said Buchanan's comments about the Texas governor's international inexperience "sounds like a federal version of Ann Richards" - Bush's first vanquished opponent in 1994 who argued he was not ready to run the state of Texas.
As for Buchanan's belief that Clinton and Gore profit from tragedy, the former commentator noted that the president has suggested talk-show hosts fueled anger that might have led to the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing. After major shootings, both Clinton and Gore routinely call for gun control legislation.
Still, Buchanan objected to a National Rifle Association spokesman who accused Clinton of having "blood on his hands" for failing to enforce gun laws before the shooting of a black basketball coach in Illinois.
"I don't believe you can hold the president of the United States personally accountable for that death," Buchanan said.
Gore spokesman Chris Lehane dismissed Buchanan, saying he and Bush were in lock-step with the NRA. "Anyone who has seen the face of parents and classmates out in Columbine should have been moved to action," Lehane said, referring to last year's high school shootings in Colorado.
 Load-Date: March 18, 2000

 

End of Document
