

Bumps in the night are undoing of Israeli spy agency's Swiss caper
The Associated Press
February 28, 1998, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 486 words
Byline: By THOMAS BRUNNER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LIEBEFELD, Switzerland
Body




Israel's Mossad secret service works quietly, but not quietly enough for this sleepy suburb of the Swiss capital of Bern.
When strange noises were heard from the basement of 27 Wabersacker Strasse at 2 a.m. - a time when even taking showers and flushing toilets is frowned upon - it was only natural that the police were called.
The cloak-and-dagger operation subsequently revealed became another public black eye for the Mossad - and a threat to Swiss-Israeli relations.
When two police officers arrived at the gray, six-story apartment block, they found three men in the basement but no sign of a break-in. The men apparently had opened the glass entrance door. The cylinder lock would pose no problem for a pro.
Subsequent investigation revealed that the men were about to install high-tech bugging equipment in the shoebox-sized telephone switching system. One of the officers went back outside and found a woman wailing over a man doubled-up and whimpering on the ground.
A Swiss newspaper reported his apparent heart attack was fake.
A Swiss woman in her 50s who lives in one of the upper floors of the apartment building woke up after police arrived and looked out her window.
"I saw one man lying on the ground and shouting, and a woman and a policeman next to him. Then came the ambulance. At the time, I felt sorry for him, but then I found out that the man apparently was faking."
The man and the woman - reportedly Mossad agents like the three men inside - were taken to a hospital, but the other men were held for interrogation. Only one of them, the one with the listening devices, was arrested.
Police released the rest, saying they had no grounds to hold them. The eavesdropping equipment, described only as the most up-to-date possible, was sent to Swiss experts for study.
The Swiss woman who spoke with The Associated Press said that several days before the Feb. 19 incident, she saw two men photographing the building. "They were taking pictures in the most awful weather, and I couldn't understand why," she said, speaking on condition of anonymity.
Who was the target?
Israeli media have reported that it was someone who is a member of the Shiite Muslim guerrilla group Hezbollah in Lebanon with ties to Iranian intelligence.
Swiss television said the agents were watching a supporter of Hamas, an Islamic Palestinian group that has carried out a series of suicide bombings in Israel.
In recent months, Switzerland and Israel have been trying to smooth over relations strained by the controversy over Switzerland's World War II record and its attitude toward Holocaust survivors. The eavesdropping incident was an "unacceptable violation of Swiss sovereignty," said Franz Egle, spokesman for Swiss President and Foreign Minister Flavio Cotti.
The Israeli government offered Switzerland an apology, which Cotti received with reservation, and it hinted that the incident had been in the cause of combating terrorism.
 Load-Date: February 28, 1998

 

End of Document
