

Buried four days, six people defy the odds after quake in Turkey
The Associated Press
August 21, 1999, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 592 words
Byline: PAUL GEITNER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ISTANBUL, Turkey
Body




Six people who had been buried alive in the rubble of Turkey's quake for four long, hot days were saved from their dark prisons Saturday, rewarding the faith of relatives who kept vigil even after experts said the odds of surviving that long were slight.
A French team pulled an 11-year-old girl from the wreckage of a four-story building to applause and cheers from onlookers.
Also rescued were a 10-year-old Israeli girl - whose first wish was for a soda with a straw - a 95-year-old woman; two sisters, ages 10 and 19; and a 9-year-old boy.
The rescues kept hope alive for relatives of the tens of thousands of people still missing following Tuesday's quake.
Yet for every miracle rescue, hundreds of corpses are pulled from the rubble each day. The official death toll climbed by more than 1,000 Saturday to top 11,000.
Experts say people trapped in such situations usually can survive only 72 hours because of dehydration, and the deadline in this case passed early Friday. The almost-tropical heat across Turkey this week only made conditions worse.
Some foreign rescue teams were leaving.
A Dutch team left Adapazari on Saturday, and a British team was preparing to leave. "The reason we came here was to save people. That has ended," Edward Pearne, head of the British crew, was quoted by the Anatolia news agency as saying.
The Swiss Disaster Chain also announced it would be going home Monday, having found no one alive since Thursday.
Yet the Israeli girl, Shirin Franko, was "practically in very good condition" after spending 98 hours in the wreckage of a seven-story building, said Dr. Eugene Leibovitz. The Israeli military pediatrician examined her on site in Cinarcik, a small resort town 30 miles across the Sea of Marmara from Istanbul.
She was "talking, conscious, and even … joking," he said.
A few hours earlier, rescuers recovered her twin brother's body from the debris. The twins' father and grandparents were still buried and presumed dead.
More than 130 Israeli soldiers were working on the site with dogs, drills, and floodlights to search throughout the night.
Their mother, Iris, had been anxiously standing by watching the Israelis work since shortly after she was pulled from the rubble Wednesday.
An Israeli rescue team that had just arrived in the area was directed to lead the search, but none of the Israelis had been found alive until Shirin.
Her mother moved forward as the rescuers carefully extracted the girl from the ruins and placed her on a stretcher.
The soldiers poured water over Shirin's head and Leibovitz gave her a quick exam, looking into her mouth and throat. She was extremely dehydrated and said her eyes hurt, her mother said.
Shirin, after being brought out of the ruins, asked rescuers, "Do you have a Coca Cola with ..."
"With lemon?" one of the rescuers asked.
"No," she answered. "With a can and a straw, or maybe a bottle."
In nearby Yalova, another resort, crowds cheered when the French specialists pulled out 11-year-old Merve Ekinci. Her father, shaking with emotion, jumped out of an ambulance that had rushed him to the site to see her.
The girl, a grimace of pain on her face, was wrapped in a blanket and rushed to a hospital.
Earlier, in the ruins of another vacation home in the same town, a 95-year-old woman was rescued by a Turkish team, weak but alive, and also taken to a hospital.
A French team down the coast in Golcuk rescued two sisters, ages 19 and 10, with the help of Turkish volunteers.
And a Greek rescue team pulled a 9-year-old boy alive from a collapsed building in Degirmendere, near Izmit.
 Load-Date: August 21, 1999

 

End of Document
