

Changes dateline from TOKYO; What next, the world wonders, now that Bush has won?
December 14, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 692 words
Byline: By MARA D. BELLABY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Leaders worldwide congratulated President-elect George W. Bush on Thursday and promised to work closely with him, predicting that U.S. foreign policy would remain relatively unchanged.
But public concern emerged about what lingering effect the prolonged and contested election would have on the world's only remaining superpower.
British Prime Minister Tony Blair and German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder led the flood of congratulations from Europe, with messages of support also pouring in from Denmark, France, Norway and Switzerland.
"The decisive contribution to the reunification of Germany that the U.S. made under your father's leadership is anchored deep in Germans' consciousness," Schroeder said.
China's president, Jiang Zemin, sent Bush a telegram saying he looked forward to working with him, as did Japanese Prime Minister Yoshiro Mori and Australian Prime Minister John Howard.
In Israel, Prime Minister Ehud Barak congratulated the president-elect and predicted that the new administration would continue with the policy of its predecessors.
"Shared values and common interests have characterized relations between Israel and the United States for decades, and I have no doubt that President Bush, whom I know and admire, will continue, together with us, to strengthen and develop these relations," Barak said.
Dmitry Rogozin, head of the Russian parliamentary committee on international affairs, said Bush "will be a predictable and consistent international partner for Russia."
A Bush administration "will focus its attention on the solution of their own problems, on the strengthening of domestic security and will not assume the role of a global Messiah, which Democrats sometimes liked to do," Rogozin told the ITAR-Tass news agency.
In televised speeches Wednesday, both men sought to reassure the world of America's stability and democratic leadership, despite the divisive race.
"Together, we'll have a bipartisan foreign policy true to our values and true to our friends. And we will have a military equal to every challenge, and superior to every adversary," Bush said.
But some expressed fears that the divisive contest had tarnished the next presidency.
"The fix is in, Al Gore is out and it is a bad day for American democracy," the left-leaning Guardian newspaper wrote in London.
In a front-page editorial, Australia's Sydney Morning Herald said: "There will be American-style pageantry, and grand speeches about the best democracy in the world. But the myths have gone. The masks are off. The people have seen the underbelly of their politics, and they know."
Czech President Vaclav Havel said, however, that the election "showed that the United States can deal with even a very difficult postelection situation in a democratic way and within its constitutional tradition."
But some nations bluntly acknowledged hopes that the Republican administration would usher in a new foreign policy.
Welcoming Bush, Afghanistan's Taliban militia issued a plea for a new friendly relationship. The United States and the Taliban, who rule most of Afghanistan, have been at odds over suspected terrorist Osama bin Laden, believed by Washington to be running a global terrorist network from his bases there.
And in Taiwan, many cheered the Bush win, saying they liked his commitment to defending the island nation against China, which sees Taiwan as a renegade province. President Chen Shui-bian said he hoped the two countries would develop closer relations under Bush.
In Beijing, Jiang offered "warm congratulations" - as well as an indirect warning against leaning toward rival Taiwan. Still, Chinese leaders said they expected no major changes in relations between the two powers with Bush as president.
In Kuwait, Bush's victory was hailed primarily because he is the son of the man who led the international coalition that liberated their country in February 1991 from a seven-month Iraqi invasion.
"The word 'Bush' has become a part of Kuwaiti culture," said Abdullah Sahar, who teaches political science at Kuwait University.
"You can call it the politics of obligation," he said. "We want to return the favor, even if it is only by good wishes."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos TOK105,108,109-110; HK101-102
 Load-Date: December 15, 2000

 

End of Document
