

Chinese refusal may halt round-the-world balloon bid
The Associated Press
February 2, 1998, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 476 words
Byline: By PHILIP WALLER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GENEVA
Body




Negotiators tried Monday to prevent a European team's round-the-world balloon attempt from falling victim to China's refusal to let the balloon cross its airspace.
Authorities in Beijing so far have rejected appeals from team officials and Swiss, Belgian and British diplomats to allow the Breitling Orbiter 2 and its three-man crew cross southern China.
If the Chinese don't relent, the balloon will have to take a long detour, leaving it without enough fuel to cross the Pacific Ocean, a spokesman at the team's Geneva control center said. "Everything depends on the Chinese," he said.
The balloon needs to fly over China to benefit from winds that would propel it at speeds of up to 180 mph toward the Pacific Ocean. It had been flying at about 39 mph near the Afghanistan and Pakistan.
To follow the meteorologists' ideal flight path, the balloon must descend to 20,000 feet to fly over Pakistan on Tuesday. Then, if China agrees, the balloonists will climb to 29,000 feet to enter the heart of the jetstream - and what should be a six-day flight to California.
It is not the first time the team has faced political problems in its bid to be the first to orbit the globe by balloon.
Earlier Monday, the Iranian army mistook the balloon for aircraft when it showed up on radar and ordered it to land at the next available airport. The misunderstanding eventually was sorted out when the crew contacted the Iranians.
And on Sunday, the team encountered problems with the Iraqi authorities. Only after frantic diplomatic exchanges between the neutral Swiss government, the International Red Cross and authorities in Iraq was the balloon allowed to fly over Baghdad and on to Iran.
The three-man crew were unable to make contact with air traffic control in Baghdad and so spent 30 minutes in Iraqi airspace illegally before clearance was given.
Swiss pilot Bertrand Piccard, Belgium's Wim Verstraeten and British flight engineer Andy Elson set out in their silver balloon from the Swiss Alpine resort of Chateau d'Oex last Wednesday. For the first few days they averaged less than 9 mph because of technical problems and slow winds.
The crew's luck improved Saturday when they managed to repair a problem in the rear hatch of the pilot's capsule, pressurize the cabin and thus rise to find faster currents.
The crew has enough food and other supplies for more than three weeks. It had initially hoped to complete the trip in about 15 days, but the early delays now make that target unfeasible.
The Breitling Orbiter's first round-the-world bid last year failed when it crash-landed in the sea after just six hours.
Other recent U.S. and European attempts have also failed, including those by Britain's Richard Branson and American Steve Fossett. Branson still hopes to try this year - although the time period when winds are favorable for the journey rapidly is running out.
 Load-Date: February 2, 1998

 

End of Document
