

Christians celebrate Good Friday; Pope carries the cross
The Associated Press
April 10, 1998, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 719 words
Byline: By DANIEL J. WAKIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ROME
Body




Protected from the driving, chilly rain by an aide's white umbrella, Pope John Paul II carried a wooden cross in a solemn Good Friday procession at the Colosseum to symbolize Christ's suffering before his crucifixion.
Thousands of people stood beneath umbrellas outside the ancient monument, holding candles during the evening procession. The pope walked haltingly for a short stretch, carrying the lightweight cross.
The meditation for Friday's ceremony paid special attention to the suffering of women and lamented that Christians long made Jews suffer by holding them responsible for the crucifixion of Jesus.
Earlier, John Paul heard the confessions of 16 people in St Peter's, a tradition he began in 1979.
Elsewhere on Good Friday, thousands of pilgrims retraced Jesus' last steps in Jerusalem, some shouldering wooden crosses or fingering rosaries. In the Philippines, 18 people screamed and grimaced on crosses while nails were driven through their hands and feet. And dozens of repentant men in Taxco, Mexico, whipped themselves or strapped 100 pounds of thorny blackberry stalks to their bare shoulders in penance.
Holy week culminates Sunday with Easter, when Christians celebrate their belief in Jesus' resurrection. John Paul will celebrate an open-air Mass and deliver a message and Easter greetings in more than 50 languages.
Brown-robed Franciscan monks led pilgrims in Jerusalem through the Old City's cobblestone alleys singing hymns in Arabic, Italian, Latin and English. They walked the Via Dolorosa, or Way of Sorrows, which tradition says Jesus took to his crucifixion.
Nuns fingered rosaries and pilgrims held up Bibles and small crosses as the procession made its way to the Church of the Holy Sepulcher. One group reenacted Jesus' last walk in full costume.
Muslim families attending noon prayers at nearby Al Aqsa Mosque had to push their way against the crowd. Friday also marked the end of the Muslim holiday of Eid al-Adha and the start of the Jewish holiday, Passover.
Hundreds of Israeli soldiers were posted along the Good Friday procession route. Israel has been on heightened alert because of threats of suicide attacks by the Islamic militant group Hamas.
Inside the Church of the Holy Sepulcher, pilgrims placed silk cloth and Bibles on the slab where tradition says Jesus was placed after dying. "I'm impressed to see all the nationalities here for the same cause," said Andrew Hayes, a monk from Valyermo, Calif.
John G. Luck, of Ottawa bought wooden souvenir crosses after the procession. "Incredible," he said of his experience.
In Mexico City, more than 1,600 people were participating in an elaborate annual play in which an actor playing Christ carries a 200-pound cross two miles through the streets of the poor Iztapalapa neighborhood. More than 1 million people were expected to attend.
Members of Christian brotherhoods based in Taxco, 100 miles southwest of Mexico City, whipped themselves or carried heavy bundles of thorns - a tradition honored in the picturesque mining town for more than 200 years.
The men consider Holy Week the crest of their devotion. They have undergone at least a year of religious preparation to participate in processions that began Tuesday and mark the days leading to Christ's resurrection. They walk before the faithful and the curious while clouds of incense billow and boys pound somber marches on drums.
Each man has his own reason for enduring the pain, said Javier Ruiz Ocampo, the town's official historian. Some hope to please God for the benefit of a sick relative, or to pay for a sin of their own. Others simply pray for world peace.
Outside San Pedro Cutud village in the Philippines, an annual reenactment of Jesus' crucifixion drew 15 participants and hundreds of tourists. Fourteen men and one woman were nailed to crosses in the hot sun, where they remained for a few minutes in a form of penance.
A man dressed as a centurion used a spear to make a small cut to draw blood from the chest of the men.
Three men also were nailed to crosses outside a chapel in the village of Lugam. And thousands of barefoot penitents crowded the streets of Manila's Quiapo district to worship at the Church of the Black Nazarene.
The crucifixion ritual has continued for more than 40 years in the Philippines, Asia's only predominately Roman Catholic nation.
 

 
 Load-Date: April 10, 1998

 

End of Document
