

City of the Patriarchs Waits For An Explosion
November 16, 1996, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 1130 words
Byline: By HILARY APPELMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HEBRON, West Bank
Body




Ponytails bouncing, four Jewish schoolgirls in long skirts and knapsacks head home up Hebron's Street of Martyrs. A wrinkled Palestinian woman in a white headscarf and long dark robe comes down the street the other way.
They all keep walking until the old woman and one of the girls come smack up against each other, face-to-face. They don't make eye contact and no one says a word.
Finally the woman steps sideways to pass the girls, who keep going up the street, chattering and giggling and not looking back.
No one gives an inch in Hebron.
Two peoples live in the city: 130,000 Palestinians in white stone houses that sprawl across the valley and its rocky hillsides, 500 Jewish settlers in five heavily guarded compounds near the Tomb of the Patriarchs, the fortress-like monument to Hebron's venerable past and troubled present.
The two peoples live next to each other and on top of each other, but not with each other. Several thousand Israeli soldiers are here expressly to keep them from colliding.
But everyone - soldiers and settlers and Palestinians alike - is sure there will be a collision in Hebron. It's just a question of when.
The Tomb of the Patriarchs, a massive stone edifice built by King Herod, is at the center of Hebron, at the site where the Bible says Abraham purchased a cave and field for 4,000 silver shekels to bury his wife Sarah, and where Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and their wives were buried too.
A Byzantine church was later built atop the Jewish holy site, and after the Arab conquest of the city in 638 the building was transformed into a mosque. Today, Jews and Muslims - who both revere Abraham as the father of their peoples - pray in separate areas of the Tomb in a precarious arrangement overseen by the Israeli army.
The city radiates out from the Tomb. The old covered Arab market, jammed with stalls selling spices and cassette tapes, live chickens and sheep intestines, is behind it.
The tiny restored Avraham Avinu Jewish quarter, where 19 families live, is tucked to one side, butting up against the market. Thirty or so other Jewish families and 150 seminary students live within a 10-minute walk from the Tomb, surrounded by Palestinian houses and sandbagged army guardposts.
"Half the (Jewish) families in Hebron have a wall that's also the wall of a Palestinian family," said Orit Struck, a mother of eight. "We're that close."
In the morning, Hebron is softly beautiful - layered with a thick white mist that lifts slowly from the valley as the city wakes up to crowing roosters and prayer calls echoing from mosque loudspeakers.
Palestinian children in striped uniforms jounce down the hilly streets on their way to school, while a red-and-white bus with bulletproof windows and an army escort picks up Jewish children.
Hebron is crawling with Israeli soldiers, assault rifles loaded and aimed at every window and doorway as they edge around corners and through alleys in the old covered market.
The number of troops and emergency drills has increased drastically in recent weeks as agreement on Israel's overdue troop pullout seems close at hand - although despite a flurry of negotiations nothing has happened yet in Hebron except an increase in tension.
Israel was supposed to turn over about 80 percent of Hebron to Palestinian control in March. The rest of the city - which includes the Tomb and the settler compounds as well as 15,000 to 20,000 Palestinians unlucky enough to live near them - is to remain under Israeli control.
The redeployment was delayed following a series of suicide bombings in Israel last spring that killed 63 people, and the election of Benjamin Netanyahu in May put the pullout on hold while the new prime minister tried to win stronger security guarantees for the settlers.
It's hard to imagine two groups of people less suited to living together than Hebron's Jews - among the most militant and ideological of Israeli settlers - and Palestinian Hebronites - long the butt of Palestinian jokes for their hardheadedness.
Years of bloodshed and friction between the two groups has only strengthened their mutual hatred and suspicion. Both sides use the same words to describe each other: Fanatics, terrorists, murderers.
"We're expecting a massacre," said Nabil Halaby, who lives above his clothing store behind the Jewish Beit Hadassah compound. "There is no way to coexist with them. It's just us or them."
"We are surrounded by thousands of terrorists who want to kill us," said Halaby's neighbor, settler leader Noam Arnon.
The determination of the settlers to stay in Hebron is reinforced by memories of the massacre of 1929, when Arab rioters killed 67 Jews in two days and ended the Jewish presence in the city after hundreds of years of peaceful coexistence. A museum in Beit Hadassah displays photographs of ransacked rooms, slashed Torah scrolls, and bloodied victims.
Huge signs in Hebrew and English above part of the Arab market declare: "This market was built on Jewish property stolen by Arabs after the 1929 massacre."
Hebron's Jewish community did not return until 1968, a year after Israel's capture of the West Bank from Jordan, when a group of Jews led by Rabbi Moshe Levinger checked into the city's Park Hotel and refused to leave.
"Hebron is the roots of the Jewish people. We came back to reestablish the ancient Jewish community of Hebron," said settler spokesman David Wilder.
The settlers insist they fear a repeat of 1929. But the most recent massacre in Hebron was carried out by a Jew, Baruch Goldstein, who killed 29 Palestinian worshipers at the Tomb of the Patriarchs in February 1994 before being beaten to death by survivors.
Hebron has resembled an armed camp since then, with soldiers surrounding the Jewish compounds in an effort to keep the settlers and Palestinians apart.
The Palestinians' main vegetable marketplace, adjacent to Avraham Avinu, was shut down, the Street of Martyrs, a major artery that passes in front of Beit Hadassah, was closed to Palestinian traffic, and the Tomb was partitioned to separate Jews and Muslims.
Goldstein's actions receive lukewarm condemnation at most from many Hebron settlers, who insist the Brooklyn-born doctor was reacting to warnings of new Arab violence.
Goldstein acted "out of frustration," said Rafael Chaiken, 20. "He was not a violent person. He was very tense and scared."
He adds matter-of-factly: "It could happen again."
In the end, says Baruch Marzel, a bushy-bearded settler with a framed picture of Goldstein hanging in his trailer home, it won't make a difference who starts the violence in Hebron.
"It could start from a mistake, it could start from an accident," he said. "It could start from one individual shooting. It doesn't matter.
"It's only a question of time. And only God will save the city of Hebron after it will explode."
 Load-Date: November 16, 1996

 

End of Document
