

Clashes in the West Bank as U.S. peace mission begins
March 27, 1997, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 634 words
Byline: By HILARY APPELMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




U.S. mediator Dennis Ross returned to the Middle East on Thursday to try to save the collapsing Israeli-Palestinian peace process as Israel - anticipating more violence - sent troop reinforcements to the West Bank.
Ross met for two hours with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat in Morocco, then flew to Jerusalem on Thursday night and talked with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.
Ross would not talk about the content of his meetings, but in Washington, President Clinton said Ross' discussion with Arafat was helpful.
"I don't have anything else to tell you, but he was encouraged by the response of Chairman Arafat to the matters that we discussed here before he left," Clinton said at the White House.
But the Palestinians are wary of American participation in the peace process, and Israel prepared for more unrest in the West Bank.
The Palestinian legislative council accused the United States of having a pro-Israeli bias, and joined calls for Palestinians to demonstrate Sunday against Israeli land expropriations.
Arafat said Israel's construction of Jewish housing in disputed east Jerusalem was "a real crime against the peace process."
Near the West Bank town of Ramallah, hundreds of Palestinians threw stones at Israeli soldiers on the eighth day of protests against the Israeli construction. Israeli troops fired tear gas and rubber bullets, and Palestinian police moved quickly to disperse the protesters.
Concerned that the violence will intensify with Sunday's protests, Israel deployed more troops around Palestinian cities in the West Bank.
"We will not wait to see how things develop," said the armed forces chief of staff, Lt. Gen. Amnon Shahak.
The gaps between Israelis and Palestinians appeared far more difficult to bridge than the last time Ross visited the region, when he brokered Israel's military withdrawal in January from most of the West Bank town of Hebron.
Israel demands that before peace talks can resume, Arafat send a clear signal to Islamic militants that he will not accept terrorist attacks against Israel, and that Palestinian stone-throwing riots end. Netanyahu claims Arafat gave the militants tacit approval for attacks before last Friday's suicide bombing in a Tel Aviv cafe.
"There can be no advance in the peace process unless we see a total disavowal of terrorism and actions by the Palestinian Authority against terror organizations," said David Bar-Illan, a senior Netanyahu aide.
The Palestinians want Israel to stop construction of the Jewish Har Homa housing project in east Jerusalem, which they claim as the capital of their future state. Israel captured the eastern sector in the 1967 Mideast War.
The Palestinians also want the United States to guarantee that there will be no further settlement building. But the United States, while criticizing Israel's decision to go ahead with the Har Homa construction, twice vetoed U.N. resolutions denouncing the project.
"We condemn the American position," the Palestinian legislative council said in a statement. "We consider this protection and support of Israeli aggression and blatant Israeli violations."
Nabil Shaath, a Palestinian negotiator, said Israel should not be surprised by the Palestinian stone throwing.
"When Israel is treating the Palestinians as an occupier, it must expect that the Palestinians react as a people of the intefadeh," Shaath said, referring to the 1987-93 Palestinian uprising.
In a show of unity, Fatah - Arafat's Fatah faction of the PLO - held a joint news conference Thursday with the Islamic militant group Hamas at the Palestinian Information Ministry to announce joint protests on Sunday.
Hamas has claimed responsibility for last week's suicide bombing, while Fatah, while it organized most of the recent West Bank protests, had been a strong supporter of peace with Israel.
 Load-Date: March 27, 1997

 

End of Document
