

Clashes in the West Bank, U.S. envoy meets with Arafat
March 27, 1997, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 744 words
Byline: By KARIN LAUB, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Israel deployed more soldiers near Palestinian-controlled towns on the West Bank today, and a top U.S. envoy met with Yasser Arafat in a fresh attempt to rescue the disintegrating Mideast peace process.
Palestinians throwing stones clashed again with Israeli troops today. Israel fears that violence will spread over the Easter weekend and peak on Sunday, the Palestinians' annual Land Day protest against Israeli land confiscations.
One Palestinian resident near the West Bank town of Nablus said he saw a convoy of 10 tanks pull into a military base south of the city, but the report could not immediately be confirmed. Clashes were reported today in Nablus, Ramallah and Bir Zeit.
The armed forces chief of staff, Lt. Gen. Amnon Shahak, said Israel was prepared for violence and was not taking any chances. "We will not wait to see how things develop. Therefore, there are forces there (in the West Bank)," Shahak said.
President Clinton's envoy, Dennis Ross, began his peace mission in Morocco today by meeting for about two hours with Arafat.
"The goal of my mission is to take account of the situation in the Middle East for the president and the secretary of state and to give them a report at the end of this week," Ross said.
Ross then left for Jerusalem for talks later today with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu while Arafat will meet in Rabat with the Islamic world's Al Quds, or Jerusalem Committee, made up of 14 Muslim countries and the Palestinian Authority.
Both Israel and the Palestinians have demanded that Ross call the other side to order. But the gaps between Israelis and Palestinians appeared far wider than the last time Ross visited the region, when he brokered Israel's January military withdrawal from most of the West Bank town of Hebron.
"The tensions between the Palestinians and Israelis have reached a very, very serious level," said Edward G. Abington, the U.S. consul-general in Jerusalem and unofficial ambassador to Arafat's self-rule government.
Israel demands an end to the Palestinian stone-throwing riots and a clear signal from Arafat to Islamic militants not to carry out attacks in Israel before peace talks can resume. Netanyahu claims Arafat gave the militants his tacit approval for attacks, including last Friday's cafe bombing in Tel Aviv that killed the bomber and three women.
The Palestinians demand that Ross extract a promise from Israel to stop the construction of a Jewish neighborhood in east Jerusalem, the sector the Palestinians claim as a future capital. Ground-breaking began earlier this month despite worldwide condemnation, and triggered the daily stone-throwing riots in the West Bank.
Ross was not prepared to meet that demand, Abington said.
"He obviously can't deliver guarantees to either side, but he can guarantee that the United States will make a best effort," he said.
Abington said Clinton sent Ross because communication between the Israelis and Palestinians was faltering and the "level of trust has gone down."
Complicating today's talks, the Palestinians have grown suspicious of the United States' motives in peacemaking because it blocked a U.N. Security Council censure of the housing project. The United States has said it opposes the building, but insists U.N. censure only adds to the angry rhetoric.
Arriving in Morocco today, Egyptian Foreign Minister Amr Moussa said the new Jewish neighborhood "is a destruction to the peace process which we all try to salvage."
His Syrian counterpart, Farouk Shara, sounded an expectedly tougher tone, calling on countries to "freeze their ties with Israel and stop all dealings with it. This is the minimum they should do by this meeting."
Fresh violence erupted today near the West Bank town of Bir Zeit, about 10 miles north of Jerusalem. Dozens of Palestinian hurled stones from an overpass at Jewish settlers' cars and an army jeep on the road below. More soldiers arrived and fired tear gas and rubber bullets.
Israeli media said troop reinforcements were being deployed at Israeli checkpoints outside Palestinian-controlled towns in the West Bank, and tanks were ready to move into position quickly.
During three days of gun battles between Israeli troops and Palestinian police in September, the checkpoints had been the focus of clashes.
Israel is concerned violence will escalate over the weekend, especially on Sunday, the anniversary of Israel's expropriation of Arab land in northern Israel in 1976, a move that triggered riots at the time.
 Load-Date: March 27, 1997

 

End of Document
