

Clergy look for hope in the midst of despair
The Associated Press
December 19, 1998, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 510 words
Byline: JULIA LIEBLICH, AP Religion Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




On the week before Christmas, the end of Hanukkah and the start of Ramadan, religious leaders are struggling with how to convey the spirit of the holidays to their congregations in the midst of melancholy.
"It's hard to hold the impending impeachment, the attack on Iraq and the coming of the Christ child all in the same thought," said the Rev. Joanna Adams of Trinity Presbyterian Church in Atlanta.  Arkansas this week, about 50 clergymen prayed for support for President Clinton and the wars he is waging against impeachment and Saddam Hussein.
On the other hand, the Rev. Eugene Rivers, pastor of the Azusa Christian Community in Dorchester, Mass., will be preaching about the "bipartisan cynicism" he believes led Republicans to "lynch the president" and then prompted Clinton to order air strikes to deflect attention.
"I'll be watching 'Wag the Dog' as I write my sermon," he said. "Here is life imitating art."
The lesson, he said, is that people should not put their faith in worldly systems. "You have to focus on what's really important this holiday season, which are the needs of the poor and introducing hope in the face of monumental cynicism," he said.
Imam Talal Eid of the Islamic Center of New England in Sharon, Mass., said he cannot avoid talking about political events on the eve of Ramadan, when Muslims fast between sunrise and sunset.
"Ramadan is the holiest month of devotion. People usually feel happiness," he said. But "we will not see the community having this kind of joy."
Clinton said he wanted to avoid military action on Ramadan. "But whether it's during holy time or not, it's still painful for us to see innocent people dying," the imam said.
While Hanukkah is not a major holiday on the Jewish calendar, Rabbi Peter Rubinstein of New York's Central Synagogue said it's important for Jews to focus on the message of dedication and optimism in the story of the fight for religious freedom. And he believes it is crucial to show unity during the Iraqi crisis.
"It saddens me to see people so distrustful and politicized at a time when the troops need unqualified support," he said.
The Rev. Jerry Falwell said he will preach about refusing to accept responsibility for wrongdoing.
"I will point out that the moral bankruptcy of the president challenges every parent and grandparent to recommit themselves as role models for their children," he said. "The minister's job is to point out that throughout history we have always had moral derelicts. Our faith should not be placed in any human being but the living Christ."
The Rev. John Brudermann preached loudly enough to wake the dead, or at least the men sleeping in the pews at a 7:30 a.m. sermon Friday in the Bowery Mission after the first air strikes in Iraq.
It was tough enough trying to evoke the spirit of the holidays for men whose possessions fit in plastic bags behind the pews, never mind dealing with bombs and impeachment.
"We're living in good times because we're alive," he told his flock. "They're blowing bombs over there, but there's a reason for rejoicing: Jesus Christ."
 
 Load-Date: December 19, 1998

 

End of Document
