

Clinton worked the phones to set up this week's peace talks
The Associated Press
December 14, 1999, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 806 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




American mediators used shuttle diplomacy in the past to set up peace talks. President Clinton used the telephone.
He made 31 calls beginning last summer to Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and to Syrian President Hafez Assad to arrange the talks he will open Wednesday at the White House, a senior U.S. official said.
Barak and Syrian Foreign Minister Farouk al-Sharaa then will hold face-to-face negotiations, without U.S. participation, at least at the outset.
"The parties have come to Washington to meet with each other," deputy State Department spokesman James B. Foley said today.
However, Foley said Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and senior U.S. mediator Dennis B. Ross will be within easy reach, available to participate on request.
While the administration focused public attention on negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians - talks that are sputtering right now - Clinton was secretly working another track: the one that 3 1/2 years ago wound up at a dead end.
"Now is the moment of truth," Clinton said in a letter to Assad a month ago, the senior U.S. official told The Associated Press on Monday.
The Syrian leader, looking at Barak as inclined to swap strategic territory for diplomatic ties, responded positively to the letter and the telephone calls. He told Albright in Damascus last week he was ready to reopen negotiations with Israel.
And he sent al-Sharaa to Washington to talk to Barak on Wednesday and Thursday. That, in itself, is a sign of seriousness.
Al-Sharaa and Barak were due to arrive here Tuesday night on separate planes. Albright planned to meet them.
Past negotiations were held on a lower, often technical level.
Barak is preparing the Israeli people for giving up another slice of land, as Israel yielded the Sinai desert to Egypt, a sliver of territory to Jordan, Gaza and about 40 percent of the West Bank to the Palestinians.
While Assad has his eye on the Golan, all the way to the Sea of Galilee, Israel's storehouse of water, Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat is demanding the rest of the West Bank and part of Jerusalem for the capital of a Palestinian state.
Barak told the Israeli parliament Monday in Jerusalem that renewing the negotiations was a milestone in the "painful historic process toward a comprehensive peace" between Israel and its neighbors.
While hinting repeatedly that Israel would pull back on the Golan plateau and uproot Israeli Jews who live there, Barak has not said whether all 17,000 would be compelled to quit their homes, farms, wineries and industries.
Thousands of settlers protested. The Likud opposition objected.
In Damascus, Assad maintained his customary silence.
Clinton made about 20 of his calls to Barak and about 10 to Assad, said the senior U.S. official, who spoke only on condition of anonymity.
"We were trying to create a comfort level" for the two sides to meet after a lapse of 3 1/2 years, the official said.
Clinton initiated many of the calls in August from his Martha's Vineyard vacation retreat in Massachusetts and continued talking separately to the two leaders by telephone up until Albright's Mideast mission last week.
The president turned several of his calls to Assad and Barak into a four-way conversation, with Albright and Sandy Berger, the national security adviser, joining in the conversations, the official said.
As a result, he said, the issues in dispute have became clearer to the two sides, but a solution remains elusive as Barak and al-Sharaa prepared for their talks.
Zalman Shoval, Israel's ambassador to Washington, said they would be focused on setting up a timetable for negotiations to follow later on.
"The main thing is that after all those years we have now come back to a situation where the Syrians will seriously consider negotiating peace with Israel, something all Israeli governments in the past few years have been trying to get them to do," the ambassador said in an interview.
Shoval, who was appointed by former Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and will leave the post in mid-January, said "there is a lot to do" here this week. "These are serious issues."
The four-part agenda includes Israel's withdrawal, the timing of it, the nature of peace that would result and security arrangements.
Foley, meanwhile, said he could not predict "how these talks are going to play out and when they will reach their end point."
Foley added: "Let me make clear that we do not expect agreement on the Israeli-Syrian tract to emerge from the two days of meetings that are envisaged and scheduled for this week."
Albright, meanwhile, canceled a trip to Panama for a ceremony on the hand-over of the canal Dec. 31 and another to Brussels for NATO's winter meeting Wednesday and Thursday. But Foley said she would go to Berlin late Thursday for a meeting with Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov and six other foreign ministers.
 Load-Date: December 15, 1999

 

End of Document
