

Clinton calls on Israel to reach terms with all the Arabs
The Associated Press
May 18, 1999, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 843 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Encouraged by Ehud Barak's wide margin of victory, President Clinton said today the United States is eager to help Israel's newly elected prime minister pursue land-for-peace accords with the Palestinians, Syria and Lebanon.
"I think the road map is out there," Clinton said, referring to last year's Wye River agreement between Israel and the Palestinians. "And we'll do what we've always done. And I've been working at this for six years, and I'm looking forward to continuing."
He spoke during a picture-taking session in the Oval Office with Jordan's King Abdullah, son of the late King Hussein, who helped engineer success at Wye River. Clinton said he would wait for Barak to form his government before turning to the revival of the peace process. Clinton said both he and Abdullah have talked with Barak.
The president said he was encouraged about prospects for the peace process, because it was a central issue in the election. "And I think because of his military service, the question of General Barak's devotion to the security of Israel is not in question. But he has evidenced an intention to continue the peace process," Clinton said.
"And if he's willing to do it, I think that we're certainly both willing to do it," the president said, referring to himself and Abdullah. "And we're hopeful that we'll have a chance to do so."
Israeli Ambassador Zalman Shoval, in a CNN interview, said the Palestinians "still will have to live up to the commitments" they made in accords with Israel in 1993, 1995 and last October.
Shoval said Israelis of all political views were concerned about the kind of attack Hezbollah guerrillas launched from Lebanon today on northern Israel and they also questioned whether a Palestinian state was desirable.
"The question is what sort of state," he said. "Will it be one of those entities that will make an alliance with Iraq or Syria? That could be dangerous."
Shoval told The Associated Press later that he had submitted his resignation earlier in the day - a traditional step that clears the way for Barak to make his own choice for the high-profile diplomatic post.
Interpreting Barak's easy victory over Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu as "a strong mandate," Clinton made clear in a statement issued by the White House that he expected the conciliatory, new Israeli leader to pursue "a just, lasting and comprehensive peace."
That would mean not only concluding talks with the Palestinians that have not even begun on their demands for a state with its capital in Jerusalem, but negotiating with Syria over the Golan Heights, a strategic border enclave held by Israel.
On the Lebanon front, the primary topic in peace talks would be the security belt Israel and friendly Lebanese militia maintain inside Lebanon's southern border to guard against cross-border attacks.
If Barak follows the practice of his predecessors, he is likely to visit Washington within a month or two. But his immediate task is forming a government. He does not have a majority in the 120-member parliament and may have to work out a deal with centrist parties or the Likud bloc.
Judith Kipper, Middle East specialist at the Council on Foreign Relations and the Center for Strategic and International Studies, said the election of the Labor Party prime minister would return strained U.S.-Israeli relations to normal and put the U.S.-brokered Mideast peace process back on track.
"There is more willingness by Barak to move forward in meaningful ways in the peace process," she said in an interview. "It probably will mean that, as a gesture, the Arabs will re-establish the offices and the contacts they have had with Israel."
Kipper said that "will be encouraging to Israeli public opinion and American mediation efforts and very helpful to the U.S. role in the region."
Netanyahu agreed in October to relinquish another chunk of West Bank territory to the Palestinians and sought negotiations with Lebanon over the security zone.
But Syria said any deal with Lebanon had to involve the Golan Heights. And the accord Netanyahu reached in October with Yasser Arafat with Clinton's mediation was sidetracked when the Israeli leader accused the Palestinians of not keeping their pledge to uproot terrorist cells on land they already held.
Clinton telephoned Barak and Netanyahu on Monday after the outcome of the elections was clear. He said he thanked Netanyahu "for his dedicated service to Israel."
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright followed up, reaching Barak at 3 a.m. Today, she called Netanyahu with her personal good wishes.
Officially, the administration had remained neutral through the campaign. But there was no doubt American policy-makers preferred Barak, who takes a softer line toward the Arabs and whose party has already signaled it would accept a Palestinian state.
As military chief of staff, Barak had cautioned against relinquishing the Golan Heights, which Syria lost in the 1967 Mideast War. But as foreign minister in a Labor government he supported its offer to swap the strategic plateau for peace terms with the Arab country.
 Load-Date: May 18, 1999

 

End of Document
