

Clinton's speech to paint rosy picture of state of the nation
The Associated Press
January 27, 1998, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 769 words
Byline: By SONYA ROSS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Although his own situation is less than rosy, President Clinton will use tonight's State of the Union address to paint an optimistic picture of America under his leadership: economically strong, socially stable and at peace with the world.
The president will propose that Congress not spend any budget surplus before reforming Social Security and prepare for the massive influx expected when baby boomers begin to retire, the White House said today.
He also will urge Congress to pass campaign finance reform legislation and press the case for renewing his authority to negotiate new free trade agreements.
One thing Clinton will not talk about is the controversy over whether he tried to get 24-year-old Monica Lewinsky to lie about an alleged romantic affair between them. The president denied the allegations of an affair Monday, and that he tried to cover it up, and aides hoped the denial would ease the doubts about Clinton's leadership.
"I don't think he pretends that this opportunity in front of Congress (tonight) ought to be about him personally," White House spokesman Mike McCurry said. "The state of the presidency is quite obvious to all of you. We are facing a lot of difficult questions, but the state of this union is strong."
Clinton, looking weary with reading glasses propped low on his nose, practiced his speech Monday. He and speech writer Michael Waldman reviewed the president's suggested revisions on a draft text, while Buddy, the president's dog, lounged on the floor beside an abandoned chew toy.
A central part of Clinton's address will be education. Clinton said Monday he intended to put forth a plan that would put 100,000 more teachers in schools, establish smaller classes in 1st, 2nd and 3rd grades and devote extra funds for after-school programs.
The proposals pick up where Clinton left off with last year's State of the Union speech, when he proposed a 10-point plan that included expanding opportunities for Americans to attend college and linking all classrooms and libraries to the Internet.
In tonight's speech, Clinton said, "I'll set out the next steps in our continuing road. All these steps will help our children get the future they deserve."
Clinton also was to tout the fact that he was proposing the first balanced budget in 30 years, that the economy was in a boom and unemployment was at a 24-year low.
A White House official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said Clinton also would sprinkle in - without a lot of specifics - mentions of his push to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, put a special focus on juvenile crime and stabilize struggling Asian economies. The president also intends to offer "unmistakably clear" language on neutralizing Iraq's ability to make chemical or biological weapons, the official said.
While many details on what Clinton was announcing tonight were already out there, White House officials said there would be some surprises. Clinton plans to propose increasing the minimum wage, now at $ 5.15 an hour, two officials said. One official said the president was not likely to recommend an increase as high as the $ 6.65 an hour that Sen. Edward Kennedy, D-Mass., has proposed.
The president planned to unveil $ 1.7 billion for flexible grants over the next 10 years to create 20 new "empowerment zone" communities, White House officials said. Fifteen of the new zones would be in urban areas and five would be rural.
Typically, 60 million people would tune in at 9 p.m. EST for the State of the Union remarks. Besides a national report card, the annual address also acts as a blueprint of the president's legislative agenda and usually is his most important speech of the year.
This year's audience was expected to be much larger than usual because of the intense media spotlight on the intern affair. Because of that, anxiety among White House aides over how Clinton's response to the scandal has replaced the usual hype and suspense they create around his speech.
White House chief of staff Erskine Bowles conferred over the weekend with congressional leaders to determine the reception Clinton was likely to get. The hope was it wouldn't be like the 1974 address, when President Nixon drew hoots from Democrats over the Watergate scandal.
Lawmakers said Clinton's reception would be proper and respectful.
"I think there is a respect for the office of the president that goes beyond personal feelings about an individual president," said Sen. Dan Coats, R-Ind.
After the speech, Clinton was to travel to Illinois and Wisconsin to promote his agenda. Cabinet members were fanning out across the country as well to highlight specific initiatives.
 
 Load-Date: January 27, 1998

 

End of Document
