

Clinton tells troops they must help young Kosovars win the peace
The Associated Press
November 24, 1999, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 648 words
Byline: By ROBERT BURNS, AP Military Writer
Dateline: CAMP BONDSTEEL, Yugoslavia
Body




Five months after the U.S. military led NATO to victory in Kosovo, President Clinton came to this remote Army base to tell American troops that while it is up to the Kosovars to make today's peace last, the soldiers can help simply by the power of their example as a multicultural success story.
"The peace can only be won by the human heart," Clinton told a crowd of 1st Infantry Division soldiers who gathered in a large tent Tuesday to give their commander-in-chief a rousing welcome on his first visit to Kosovo since the war ended in June.
Afterward Clinton flew back to Washington, ending a 10-day European trip in which he spoke time and again of seizing an opportunity to stabilize the Balkans, not only by strengthening the peace in Bosnia and Kosovo, but also by reconciling historic rivals Greece and Turkey and accelerating the entire region's integration into the rest of Europe.
Sporting a hooded black jacket with the 1st Infantry insignia on the chest, Clinton said the younger generation in Kosovo needs help in breaking away from generations of hatred between the minority Serbs who controlled this province before NATO intervened, and the ethnic Albanians who were driven from their homes by the hundreds of thousands.
"The power of your example will show them that they do not have to be trapped in the pattern which led to the slaughter of a quarter of a million people" in neighboring Bosnia, where similar ethnic conflict is still simmering.
At a time when some in Congress question whether the U.S. military is spreading itself too thin by taking on peacekeeping duties in the Balkans and elsewhere, Clinton told the troops their work is of vital importance to the world.
"The number one problem in this whole world today is the problem of Bosnia, the problem of Kosovo," he said. "It's racial and ethnic and religious hatred and dehumanization.
"All you've got to do is look around the room today, and you see that our military is a stunning rebuke to that. This is the American idea in flesh and blood, all of you. You come from all different backgrounds, all different races, all different religious faiths, all different walks of life. And you're here working together as a team."
Shortly before visiting Camp Bondsteel, Clinton spoke to an appreciative crowd of Kosovars, many of them children whose colorful crayon drawings of doves and other expressions of peace covered parts of the stage on which he stood.
"The time for fighting has passed," he said. "Kosovo is for you to shape now."
In his comments to troops at Camp Bondsteel, Clinton kept the focus on children.
"Every day these little kids see you working together - even if they don't speak our language, even if they've never met any African-Americans or Hispanics before - … they can see," he said. "They have eyes. They will get it."
Clinton, who has had a shaky relationship with the military since the start of his presidency, was cheered heartily by all the crowds he encountered here. Inside the tent where he spoke, and later at a pre-Thanksgiving lunch of lobster tail, turkey and all the trimmings, soldiers pressed eagerly to shake his hand and pose for pictures with him.
After their meal together - joined by the president's daughter, Chelsea - Clinton said the ethnic cleansing in Yugoslavia in the 1990s is "the opposite of everything we believe in, everything we live by, and everything the United States military stands for.
"You just look around this room today," Clinton said. "We just celebrated Thanksgiving with, I bet you, conservatively, 25 different ethnic groups represented among the American military forces here in this room - maybe 50, maybe it's more."
He urged them to talk to young Kosovars to explain why ethnic conflict is a dead end.
"Now they've got to stop and you've got to help them," he said. "And I can't think of a better Thanksgiving present that you could give to them."
 Load-Date: November 25, 1999

 

End of Document
