

Clinton on Iraq: Sometimes force 'the only answer'
The Associated Press
February 17, 1998, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 862 words
Byline: By TERENCE HUNT, AP White House Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Clinton, preparing Americans for possible airstrikes against Iraq, said Tuesday that military force is never the first answer "but sometimes it's the only answer." Unless the international community acts, Saddam Hussein will conclude it "has lost its will," Clinton said.
Cautioning that an attack would not be risk free, the president said, "I know that the people we may call upon in uniform are ready. The American people have to be ready as well."
Clinton used a Pentagon setting and a nationally televised speech to define military goals and a rationale for action.
He said airstrikes would leave Saddam "significantly worse off than he is now." And if one attack does not achieve U.S. goals, "we will be prepared to strike him again," the president said.
Clinton said U.N. inspectors charged with dismantling Saddam's biological, chemical and nuclear weapons have encountered "lies, stonewalling, obstacle after obstacle after obstacle" in the seven years since the Gulf War.
If Saddam is not stopped now, Clinton said, "He will conclude that the international community has lost its will. He will then conclude that he can go right on and do more to rebuild an arsenal of devastating destruction."
"And some day, some way, I guarantee you, he'll use the arsenal," the president said. He said Saddam "could end this crisis tomorrow simply by letting the weapons inspectors complete their mission."
Defense Secretary William Cohen said, "Iraq must understand that our patience is not infinite. And at some point we will have to act to reduce the menace posed by Iraq's weapons of mass destruction and to reduce Iraq's ability to threaten its neighbors."
Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz, replying to Clinton, said the United States has no authority to attack. None of Iraq's neighbors want it to be bombed, Aziz asserted, while countries as far away as New Zealand, Australia and Britain are joining to help the United States.
"It is not a coalition for peace. It is a belligerent coalition to destroy a nation," Aziz said in a CNN interview.
Clinton is expected to continue his public focus on Iraq in coming days, and the White House said he may eventually address the nation from the Oval Office. On Wednesday, Cohen, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and National Security Adviser Sandy Berger will conduct a public forum in Columbus, Ohio, about the showdown with Iraq.
As the administration made its case to the public, a new poll showed American support for military action weakening. Forty percent of those surveyed said they supported a military strike to resolve the Iraqi standoff, compared with 50 percent two weeks ago, the CNN/USA Today/Gallup poll showed. Yet if Clinton did order airstrikes, 76 percent said they would approve.
In a last-minute diplomatic effort, U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan announced Tuesday that he would to travel to Baghdad in an effort to resolve the standoff. White House spokesman Mike McCurry said the United States will insist that Annan have "very clear instructions" from the Security Council and "a very unambiguous message to deliver." Clinton called Annan to review diplomatic efforts with Iraq, a White House official said.
The State Department said U.S. objectives have not changed: unlimited access to more than 60 presidential sites and "dozens and dozens" of others where weapon ingredients may be hidden.
For weeks, Albright and other officials have said diplomacy had virtually run its course. State Department spokesman James P. Rubin said Tuesday that "the window has not yet shut," although he appeared to be skeptical that Annan's mission would produce a reversal by Saddam.
Clinton underscored the conditions that Saddam must fulfill.
"Iraq must agree - and soon - to free, full, unfettered access" to suspected weapon sites "anywhere in the country," he said.
Clinton was briefed at the Pentagon by Marine Corps. Gen. Anthony Zinni, the U.S. commander in the Persian Gulf, and Gen. Henry H. Shelton, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, about military options and the status of U.S. forces.
Amid confusion about the endgame of attacks and calls in Congress for toppling Saddam, Clinton spoke with precision about U.S. goals.
"Let me be clear," the president said. "A military operation cannot destroy all the weapons of mass destruction capacity. But it can and will leave him significantly worse off than he is now in terms of the ability to threaten the world with these weapons, or to attack his neighbors."
Following any strike, the United States will continue monitoring Iraq's activities "with all the means at our disposal," Clinton said. "If he seeks to rebuild his weapons of mass destruction, we will be prepared to strike him again."
Clinton said that economic sanctions against Iraq will remain in place "until Saddam complies fully with all U.N. resolutions."
Clinton said the United States has assembled "a coalition of like-minded nations" against Iraq, and he listed more than 20 countries. But the extent of cooperation by some nations is unclear. Bahrain, one of the countries Clinton listed, said it will not allow the United States to use the island as a staging area for any strike.
 Load-Date: February 17, 1998

 

End of Document
