

Clinton administration vows not to push Israel; DESK: SUBS 17th graf, which begins Syria is demanding etc. to CORRECT that Syria is trying to recover land it captured in the
The Associated Press
January 11, 2000, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 599 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Responding to massive demonstrations in Israel against surrendering the Golan Heights, the Clinton administration on Tuesday vowed not to push for a deal with Syria that fails to meet Israel's security needs.
"We can't push them to make decisions that they believe will be against their interests," State Department spokesman James P. Rubin said. "We wouldn't want to do that."
With Israel-Syria negotiations in recess until Jan. 19, the administration is asking the two sides for recommendations on how to proceed and for revisions in a seven-page U.S. document that could become the basis for a land-for-peace accord.
The United States is hosting the negotiations with the proposition that Israel should exchange territory for diplomatic recognition.
Prime Minister Ehud Barak has indicated his willingness to pull back and give up virtually all of the land. The negotiations with Syria at Shepherdstown, W.Va., stalled Monday over how far back Israel would retreat.
Surrendering the Golan Heights would mean dislodging some 18,000 Israelis who live on the plateau, their dairy farms, industries and wineries and stripping Israel of a safeguard to surprise attack.
That prospect brought out some 100,000 demonstrators in Tel Aviv's Rabin Square Monday night to urge Prime Minister Ehud Barak to hold on to the territory.
Rubin said the demonstration was no surprise. And he reminded reporters that Barak had promised to hold a national referendum on any deal he strikes with Syria.
"We recognize that this is an extraordinarily difficult issue for Israel and that they are going to have to make a national decision about how to proceed if an agreement is reached," he said.
Responding to the sentiments expressed by the demonstrators, many of whom based their opposition on security rather than religious grounds, Rubin said "we cannot urge the parties to go faster in pursuing this agreement than they are comfortable with. It's their decision. They're the ones that are going to have to make the decision."
The administration always understood the Golan Heights issue raised "a lot of serious debate" both in Israel and Syria, he said. "We'll have to see how that opposition unfolds in the coming days and weeks."
Ultimately, he said, "it's Israel that has to judge its needs and we can't make these decisions for them."
Departing Israeli Ambassador Zalman Shoval said, meanwhile, he did not expect an agreement to be reached at the next round of Israel-Syria talks.
"Hopefully, we will reduce the points of disagreement until we reach the common denominator on most issues," he said in a talk at the National Press Club.
"We are on the Golan because of security questions in the past," Shoval said, referring to cross-border attacks before Israel won the highground in the 1967 Mideast war.
"It does no good to just return to the status quo," he said.
Syria is demanding Israel relinquish the territory, and pull back to the Sea of Galilee. Syria thereby would recover territory it captured from Israel in the 1950 and then lost with the Golan Heights in the 1967 war.
"Unless the Israeli public sees with its own eyes that there is a change of attitude by the Syrians in dealing with Israel… some sort of confidence building measures… who knows how they will vote?" Shoval said.
Meanwhile, five members of the Senate Appropriations Committee arrived in Israel to assess costs of a peace treaty and tour the Golan Heights.
"An Israeli-Syrian peace treaty is imperative for the region and the world, but there is no blank check that is going to come out of the U.S. treasury," Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., said..
 Load-Date: January 12, 2000

 

End of Document
