

Clinton: 'I want to finish the job'
The Associated Press
June 15, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 816 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Declaring "I want to finish the job," President Clinton welcomed Yasser Arafat to the White House Thursday as the Palestinian leader looks for a lift in slow-moving negotiations with Israel.
"If we are going to make peace we are going to have to deal with the difficult issues," Clinton said as he sat side-by-side with Arafat in the Oval Office. "The less we say now about it, the better."
Arafat is seeking an immediate Israeli pullback on the West Bank and, ultimately, a state with its capital in Jerusalem.
After Thursday's meeting, Arafat praised Clinton for trying to keep the peace negotiations alive "at this difficult time and in the face of the obstacles we're facing." He criticized Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak, saying Barak "lacks the desire to work with us in order to achieve a comprehensive peace in the region."
White House spokesman P.J. Crowley said Clinton is "satisfied that both leaders are very serious" about a peace agreement. He said Clinton was trying to help "one understand the other" to keep the talks moving along, without judging the positions of either side.
"We are not in the position to pressure them," Crowley said. "They understand that time is not on their side. … I don't think we have any quarrel with the firmness by which the leaders and their negotiating teams are working hard to see what can be done."
Clinton already has endorsed what he called Palestinian "aspirations," but with a mid-September deadline for an accord just over the horizon, Arafat would like to bank on concrete U.S. help to achieve his goals.
"I don't think I should characterize what is going on," Clinton said. "The only thing I can tell you is I want to finish the job, and I'd like to see it finished on time."
Arafat said nothing during the brief picture-taking session.
American mediator Dennis B. Ross joined negotiations here Wednesday and Secretary of State Madeleine Albright invited Arafat to her home in Georgetown for lunch Thursday after the White House meeting.
The Palestinians briefly halted the negotiations on Wednesday in a dispute over a promised Israeli pullback on the West Bank and Israel's refusal to release more than a few Palestinian prisoners.
A settlement is Clinton's highest foreign policy priority in the little more than seven months he has remaining in the White House.
Clinton talked to Barak on the telephone for 40 minutes Wednesday and said the two sides were not ready for a Camp David-style three-way meeting with him.
"I think we need to get the parties a little closer before we can go there," Clinton told reporters. "We don't have a lot of time. We're down to all the hard issues now, and we're working on it. I'm hopeful, but I don't want to hold out false hopes."
Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat said Israel had agreed to release only three of 250 prisoners whose freedom was sought and was trying to delay the pullback due later in the month.
"We will not allow its delay for even one minute," Erekat told The Associated Press.
The pullback, which Israel had promised, would not involve any Palestinian gestures in response. But if it were part of negotiations for an overall settlement it could provide Israel with a useful bargaining chip.
The Palestinian negotiator said the offer to release three prisoners had been rejected. "We don't want goodwill gestures from the Israelis. All we want from Israel is to implement the agreements. They can keep their goodwill gestures for themselves," Erekat said.
The State Department spokesman, Richard Boucher, said there was no halt to the negotiations overall, but some of the talks, which are spread between two U.S. air force bases, may have been interrupted.
The decision to have Ross join the talks indicated the administration was preparing to apply some heat in its quest for a settlement. Refugees, water problems and the promised Israeli pullback this month on the West Bank also were on the agenda for the talks at Andrews Air Force Base in suburban Maryland and at Bolling Air Force Base in southeast Washington.
In Jerusalem, Barak's spokesman, Gadi Baltiansky, said "the only way to bridge the gaps is through talking" and that any other approach would not help solve problems.
Before the flap surfaced, the negotiators were considering an extension of their slow-moving talks on the future of Jerusalem and Palestine's aspirations for a state.
Sources close to the talks had said the negotiators may remain through the weekend to continue their discussions.
The American hosts described the first round of talks in more than two weeks as intensive, but did not say whether there had been progress toward a land-for-peace settlement that would be bound to include approval of a Palestinian state on the West Bank and in Gaza.
The Palestinians want part of Jerusalem, as well, for their capital.
Israeli and Palestinian officials, at U.S. direction, declined to characterize the discussions.
 Load-Date: June 16, 2000

 

End of Document
