

Clinton Tightrope: Punish Saddam But Don't Break the Coalition
September 14, 1996, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 759 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER BURNS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




The U.S.-led coalition that crushed Saddam Hussein's grip on Kuwait in 1991 is under stress as Washington deploys more forces into the Persian Gulf region with threats of responding to Iraq's latest actions.
Some say the coalition has already collapsed. Others think President Clinton still has a hope of punishing Saddam while avoiding the breakup of the alliance.
Saudi Arabia, the main staging point for the coalition in the 1991 Gulf War, said Wednesday it would not participate in any new attack on Saddam. But Kuwait, which supports more U.S. attacks on Iraq, warned Baghdad on Saturday not to take "crazy steps" and defended its decision to allow Washington to base warplanes in the emirate.
From Europe came comments that Clinton's dispatch of stealth planes and another aircraft carrier to the Persian Gulf was a play to the presidential campaign or a move to ensure U.S. predominance in the oil-rich region.
"The coalition as it was during the Gulf War no longer exists," said Dominique Moisie, head of the French Institute for International Relations. "The United States is not followed by their European allies because the American gesticulations are more part of American elections than a coherent vision of the alliance's interest."
Spain and France urged dialogue between Washington and Baghdad. And although Italian Foreign Minister Lamberto Dini said last weekend's U.S. cruise missile strike was a "comprehensible reaction" to Saddam's intervention in fighting among Iraqi Kurds, Italy has been lukewarm to the use of force. Italy and France have been pushing a U.N. food-for-oil deal for Iraq.
France, which provides warplanes with Britain and the United States to patrol the no-fly zones over northern and southern Iraq, warned Saddam on Friday against threatening those planes. "All attacks on reconnaissance planes are unacceptable acts," it said.
But France responded coolly to the earlier cruise missile strike and has refused to participate in patrolling the expanded no-fly zone decreed by Washington.
Seeking to expand its diplomatic role in the Middle East, France's government supports Arab concerns that a destabilized Iraq could break up and cause instability in the region. France, which had strong trade ties with Baghdad before the Gulf War, has also campaigned for eased U.N. trade sanctions on Iraq.
A Spanish official revealed Saturday that Spain refused a U.S. request to land F-117A attack bombers in Spain on Thursday on their way to Kuwait, saying the request was put forth as an order, without showing proper respect.
U.S. officials said they were not offended by the denial and that it resulted from a minor miscommunication.
Even Britain, which has given strong verbal support for Washington's position, has steered clear of assisting strikes on Iraq.
"We see a weakening of the coalition," said Ibrahim Karawan, senior researcher in Middle Eastern affairs for the London-based International Institute for Strategic Studies. "Iraq did not resort to the type of major blunders that brought the coalition together in the first place."
In aiding a Kurdish faction in northern Iraq, Iraqi forces were seen as "acting within their own territorial state," Karawan said. "So what threat do they pose to their neighborhood?"
Jordan, which sympathized with Saddam's plight in 1991 but has since had strained relations with Iraq, didn't condemn the cruise missile attacks outright.
But an official in Jordan's capital, Amman, said Jordanians "do not support attacks on other Arab countries." Jordan also sees "the necessity to preserve the unity of Iraqi territory," said the official, speaking on condition of anonymity.
Turkey, which provides bases for the allied planes enforcing the no-fly zone over Kurdish northern Iraq, was critical of Washington.
"U.S. attacks on Iraq are against international agreements," Turkish Justice Minister Sevket Kazan said.
In Turkey on Saturday, about 5,000 people who lost their jobs or whose businesses went bankrupt due to a U.N. embargo on Iraq held a rally to protest the embargo.
Turkey estimates its losses as a result of the closure of an oil pipeline and the loss of exports with Iraq at $ 27 billion.
China and Russia, which grudgingly accepted the Gulf War mobilization, are also drawing the line this time.
The spokesman for China's Foreign Ministry, Shen Guofang, expressed Beijing's "strong opposition" to the U.S. military buildup.
Russian Foreign Ministry Yevgeny Primakov said that only the U.N. Security Council, in which Moscow has veto power, should authorize the use of military force.
 Load-Date: September 14, 1996

 

End of Document
