

Clinton worked behind the scenes with Assad, Barak
The Associated Press
December 13, 1999, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 704 words
Byline: By BARRY SCHWEID, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Clinton played a secret, persistent role in setting up this week's peace talks between Israel and Syria with a total of 31 telephone calls to the leaders of the two countries, a senior administration official said Monday.
Clinton also sent a letter to Syrian President Hafez Assad a month ago, telling him there were new opportunities to negotiate peace terms with Israel.
Beginning last summer, about 20 of the telephone calls were to Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and about 10 to Assad, who gave his approval for the reopening of negotiations with Israel in a meeting last week in Damascus with Secretary of State Madeleine Albright.
"We were trying to create a comfort level" for the two sides to meet after a lapse of 3 1/2 years, said the official, speaking on condition of anonymity.
Clinton initiated many of the calls in August from his vacation retreat in Martha's Vineyard, Mass., and continued talking separately to the two leaders by telephone up until Albright's Mideast mission last week.
The president turned several of his calls to Assad and Barak into a four-way conversation, with Albright and Sandy Berger, the national security adviser, joining in the conversations, the official said.
As a result, he said, the issues in dispute have became clearer to the two sides. However, a solution remains elusive as Barak and Syrian Foreign Minister Farouq al-Sharaa prepare for two days of meetings beginning Wednesday at the White House with Clinton.
Assad is demanding the Golan Heights, a security enclave along the border that Syria lost in the 1967 Mideast war, while Barak is insisting on diplomatic recognition, including an exchange of ambassadors with the Arab country against which Israel has fought three major wars.
Hoarse with the flu, Barak told the Israeli parliament Monday in Jerusalem that renewing the negotiations was a milestone in the "painful historic process toward a comprehensive peace" between Israel and its neighbors.
While hinting repeatedly that Israel would pull back on the Golan Heights and uproot Israeli Jews who live there, Barak has not said whether all 17,000 would be compelled to quit their homes, farms, wineries and industries nor whether he would yield territory all the way to the Sea of Galilee and its vital water resources.
Zalman Shoval, Israel's ambassador to Washington, said in an interview that this week's talks would focus on setting a timetable for later negotiations.
"The main thing is that after all those years we have now come back to a situation where the Syrians will seriously consider negotiating peace with Israel, something all Israeli governments in the past few years have been trying to get them to do," the ambassador said.
Shoval, who was appointed by former Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and will leave the post in mid-January, said "There is a lot to do" this week. "These are serious issues."
The four-part agenda includes Israel's withdrawal from the Golan Heights, the timing of it, the nature of peace that would result and security arrangements.
Peter Hain, the foreign office minister in the British government, told reporters Monday that Israel should ensure Syria's security even while its own security was being addressed. Specifically, Hain referred to a nuclear weapons arsenal that Israel has never acknowledged.
"There is a deal to be done," Hain said of prospects for a settlement over the next few months. "And I don't think there is any doubt."
Here for meetings with Clinton administration officials, Hain pledged Britain's support for any agreement. "There will be huge costs. We need to make a contribution," he said.
State Department deputy spokesman James B. Foley, meanwhile, dampened expectations for this week's talks, saying, "Let me make clear that we do not expect agreement on the Israeli-Syrian tract to emerge from the two days of meetings that are envisaged and scheduled for this week."
Albright nevertheless canceled a trip to Panama for a ceremony Tuesday on the hand-over of the canal Dec. 31 and a trip to Brussels for NATO's winter meeting Wednesday and Thursday. But Foley said she would go to Berlin late Thursday for a meeting with Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov and six other foreign ministers.
 Load-Date: December 14, 1999

 

End of Document
