

Cohen tours battlefield of the future via computer
March 18, 1997, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 681 words
Byline: By SUSANNE M. SCHAFER, AP Military Writer
Dateline: FORT IRWIN, Calif.
Body




The news from the computerized battlefield of the future wasn't all good. Enemy forces had blasted four of seven Black Hawk helicopters off the screens during an overnight engagement, Defense Secretary William Cohen was told during an early morning briefing.
However, the helicopters did manage to take out 27 enemy artillery systems. And by midday, the friendly blue forces had pushed about 20 miles forward against the enemy, despite a chemical attack in the mountain pass.
Army Sgt. George Thomison gave Cohen a tour of the battlefield of the future. It was displayed on a blinking computer screen surrounded by a cardboard box.
"Pretty impressive. Very impressive," Cohen told the 31-year-old native of Kaw City, Okla., who had jury-rigged the cardboard screen inside his Humvee to keep down the desert glare.
Cohen spent the day viewing the Army's high-tech experimentation with futuristic warfare. Some 4,500 soldiers from Fort Hood, Texas, had come here to fight a month-long series of simulated battles to see whether the new technology could be used by the forces of the future.
"They are kind of blundering into our scouts and being destroyed," Thomison explained to Cohen, who observed as the young sergeant used his dust-covered computer keyboard to explain the ever-changing conflict unfolding amid the gullies and mountains.
Cohen watched intently as the grid map displayed icons representing the tanks, aircraft and artillery positions of the computerized "Mojavians," who were taking on their "Krasnovian" foes, outfitted with present-day technology.
On Tuesday, the third day of the simulated battle, the 1st Brigade of the 4th Infantry Division from Fort Hood was mounting an attack against an enemy motorized rifle battalion near the Granite Mountain Range, a landscape many soldiers say bears an eerie reflection of mountainous desert terrains in the Middle East.
Cohen saw computerized grid maps that blinked with constantly updated black "kill" boxes, blue spots that reflected the movement of friendly forces and red opposing troops as they engaged each other some 30 miles away.
He came away a convert.
"Anyone who comes here an sees the potential for this will come away very enthusiastic. There's no turning back," he said at a news conference.
Gen. Dennis Reimer, the Army chief of staff who accompanied Cohen on the tour, said: "We want to learn how far we can go with this technology." He said the new systems may not only allow the Army to reduce battlefield "friendly fire" accidents and deaths, but also may allow the service to fight battles with fewer, but more lethal, forces.
In effect, the military has attempted to put together a computer network, make it wireless, and have soldiers use in under the most stressful conditions of desert warfare.
Several weeks ago, the Army troops moved about 4,500 combat soldiers and 1,600 pieces of equipment from Texas, after 18 months of preparations. Their M1-A2 tanks, the troop-carrying Bradley Fighting Vehicles, howitzers, Humvees and even trucks have been outfitted with specialized computers and communications systems that are supposed to help them determine where they are, where the enemy forces are and how effectively their weapons are able to be used to envelope or destroy the enemy.
The Fort Hood troops are backed up by satellites, pilotless spy drones and other aircraft that help their computers determine the position of the enemy on a "digitized" battlefield. But the Army has pitted them against an "analog" force, which uses present-day technology - using paper maps and regular radios - to see if the $ 250 million of high-tech equipment can help the 1st Brigade win battles.
The "enemy" forces are actually fellow Army troops, but they remain full-time at Fort Irwin, know the terrain and have learned the tricks of many visiting forces in past years.
The six-week experiment will determine whether the Army will move to outfit its entire forces with such computerized systems, and whether such a force can be used to conquer lesser-equipped, or even a similar force, in the future, Army officials say.
 Load-Date: March 18, 1997

 

End of Document
