

Commentary from the winners
April 7, 1997, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 570 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Comment from some of the Pulitzer winners:
 
 "It's always nice when a little newspaper wins one for covering the community, which is what you're supposed to do. … It's great for the paper, great for the town." - Michael Gartner, editor and co-owner of The Daily Tribune of Ames, Iowa, (circulation 10,000), who won the editorial writing prize for coverage of local issues.
 
 "The newsroom is full of excitement, of course, but it's tempered by the very real awareness of the fact that this (the TWA Flight 800 crash) is a tragedy in which many people died." - Miriam Pawel, assistant managing editor for local news at Newsday, which won the spot news reporting prize for coverage of the crash of TWA Flight 800.
"My mother wouldn't have liked the book. It was too revealing. She was ashamed of our past. Now we're ashamed of being ashamed." - Frank McCourt, winner of the prize for biography for "Angela's Ashes," a memoir of his impoverished Irish childhood whose title refers to his late mother.
 
 "Unbelievable!" - Editorial cartooning prize winner Walt Handelsman, one of two winners from The Times-Picayune of New Orleans, as an eight-piece band broke into raucous jazz tunes in the paper's newsroom.
 
 "When I called Sasha (Zemlianichenko) to tell him about it, he said it was really a prize for Boris Yeltsin. He said 'Yeltsin did the dancing, I just pushed the button."' - Vin Alabiso, vice president and executive photo editor of The Associated Press, on Alexander Zemlianichenko, winner of the feature photography prize for a photograph of the Russian president dancing at a rock concert during his re-election campaign.
 
 "We're all ecstatic. John has now won two Pulitzers for two very difficult assignments in a row, Afghanistan and Sarajevo. I feel personally pleased about this one because the way he covered it forced people to pay attention to the country." - Bill Keller, foreign editor for The New York Times, on John Burns, winner of the international reporting prize for coverage of the regime imposed on Afghanistan by the Taliban. Burns won a Pulitzer in 1993 for coverage of the conflict in Bosnia.
 
 "I'm very pleased that the Pulitzer for music is for a piece of jazz music. I think that it's another sign that our music is important. It means it'll be more easy for other musicians who write in jazz." - Wynton Marsalis, winner of the music prize for "Blood on the Fields."
 
 "The HUD story didn't just do the 'gotcha' part. We wrote about the compelling need for housing among Native Americans and why the fraud in this program is such a disservice." - Michael R. Fancher, executive editor of The Seattle Times, where reporters Eric Nalder, Deborah Nelson and Alex Tizon won the prize for investigative reporting. The team exposed widespread corruption and inequities in the federally sponsored housing program for Native Americans.
 
 "Byron has covered aerospace for about a decade. He probably is as knowledgeable about the Boeing company as any reporter anywhere, and so he just perseveres pursuing stories." - Michael R. Fancher, executive editor of The Seattle Times, on reporter Byron Acohido, who won the beat reporting prize for articles that disclosed problems with Boeing 737s.
 
 "It's a total surprise. I knew that the (publisher) had submitted my book for the Pulitzer, but all publishers submit books." - Lisel Mueller, winner of the poetry prize for "Alive Together: New and Selected Poems."
 Load-Date: April 7, 1997

 

End of Document
