

Crucial events in the confrontation between Iraq, U.S.
The Associated Press
December 17, 1998, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1221 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




From the Gulf War to the standoff over weapons inspections, key events leading up to the current confrontation between the United States and Iraq:
 
 1990
Aug. 2 - Iraq invades Kuwait.
Aug. 6 - United Nations imposes sweeping trade sanctions on Iraq, which are still in force.
1991
Jan. 17 - U.S.-led coalition launches air war against Iraq.
Feb. 26 - Allied troops take control of Kuwait.
Feb. 28 - Cease-fire announced.
March 2 - U.N. Security Council lays down conditions, including destruction of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction and reparations for Kuwait. These conditions must be met before sanctions are lifted.
April 1991 - United States, France and Britain declare a 19,000-square-mile area of northern Iraq a "safe haven" for Kurds and impose a no-fly zone above 36th parallel.
1992
Aug. 27 - A no-fly zone is imposed over southern Iraq to stop Iraqi air attacks on Shiite Muslim rebels. The United States and some allies begin air patrols.
1993
Jan. 7 - After Baghdad refuses to remove missiles that United States says it has moved into southern Iraq, allied warplanes and warships attack missile sites and a nuclear facility near Baghdad.
April 13 - One day before former President George Bush was to arrive in Kuwait, 14 arrests are made for plotting to assassinate him; Washington says plot was organized by Iraqi intelligence.
June 27 - U.S. warships fire 24 cruise missiles at intelligence headquarters in Baghdad in retaliation for what the United States calls the plot to assassinate President Bush.
1994
Oct. 7 - Iraqi troops move toward Kuwait, then pull back when U.S. dispatches carrier group, 54,000 troops and warplanes.
1996
Sept. 3-4 - U.S. ships and airplanes fire scores of cruise missiles at Iraqi anti-missile sites to punish the Iraqi military for venturing into the Kurdish "safe haven" in northern Iraq.
Sept. 11 - Iraqi forces fire a missile at two F-16s in the northern no-fly zone. The United States responds by sending more bombers, stealth fighters and another aircraft carrier to the Persian Gulf region. Iraq accuses Kuwait of an "act of war" for allowing U.S. jets into Kuwait.
November - Two U.S. F-16 pilots fire missiles at Iraqi radar sites near the 32nd parallel in the southern no-fly zone.
Dec. 9 - The United Nations allows Iraq to make limited oil sales under closely monitored deal.
1997
November - Iraq orders American weapons inspectors to leave the country immediately, accusing them of spying. President Clinton orders aircraft carrier to the Gulf to join a military force already in place.
Oct. 7 - U.N. arms inspectors tell the Security Council that Iraq still refuses to disclose full details of its banned weapons programs and is imposing restrictions on the inspections.
1998
Jan. 13 - Iraq effectively blocks a U.N. weapons inspection team led by an American, failing to provide escorts needed to enter sites.
Jan. 27 - Clinton intensifies U.S. pressure on Iraq to open all sites, warning Saddam Hussein not to "defy the will of the world."
February - U.S., British military buildup in the Gulf.
Feb. 23 - U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan works out agreement with Iraq, defusing crisis by promising efforts to remove sanctions.
June 30 - A U.S. F-16 fighter fires a missile at an Iraqi surface-to-air missile battery in southern Iraq after Iraqi radar locks on four British patrol planes. Iraq denies any aggression.
Aug. 5 - Iraq announces it's cutting ties with weapons inspectors, saying it sees no move toward lifting sanctions. It leaves long-term monitoring in place.
Oct. 30 - U.N. Security Council offers a comprehensive review of weapons inspection program to assuage Iraq, but refuses demands to declare the review will lead to lifting sanctions.
Oct. 31 - Iraq cuts off work by U.N. monitors. United States and Britain warn of possible military strikes to force Iraq into cooperating.
Nov. 5 - U.N. Security Council condemns Iraq's actions as a "flagrant violation" of resolutions.
Nov. 11 - United Nations begins withdrawing much of its staff in Baghdad, including arms inspectors and some humanitarian workers.
Nov. 12 - Eight Arab foreign ministers declared that Iraq would be "held responsible for any consequences" from its stopping the work of U.N. inspectors.
Nov. 13 - Iraqi President Saddam Hussein says he is not trying to provoke a crisis and will accept "positively any initiative" to end U.N. sanctions. U.S. military buildup in the Gulf continues.
Nov. 14 - Iraq sends a series of letters to U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan and the Security Council professing willingness to cooperate unconditionally with U.N. weapons inspectors. President Clinton and British Prime Minister Tony Blair cancel ordered military attacks against Iraqi targets.
Nov. 15 - President Clinton says Iraq narrowly avoided punishing military strikes by dropping its defiance of the United Nations, but Saddam Hussein must cooperate with U.N. weapons inspectors without conditions. Defense Secretary William Cohen says the U.S. military will "maintain a steady force" in the region "that is more than adequate to deal with Saddam Hussein."
Nov. 20 - Iraq's deputy foreign minister, Riyadh al-Qaisi, tells chief U.N. weapons inspector Richard Butler that many documents the weapons inspectors seek regarding the production of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and missiles were destroyed, never existed or already had been turned over.
Nov. 27 - A week after Butler's request for weapons documents, Riyadh al-Qaisi responds with three letters about Iraq's chemical weapons and missile programs, including allegations that deadly VX nerve gas was planted on an Iraqi warhead to discredit Baghdad.
Dec. 8 - National Security Council Adviser Sandy Berger says the United States will work step by step with foes of Saddam Hussein to bring down the Iraqi president.
Dec. 9 - Iraq refuses to permit an unannounced U.N. weapons inspection in Baghdad and White House officials respond cautiously. "Sometimes what happens is that they refuse the first time and they go back and they get in," says Secretary of State Madeleine Albright.
Dec. 10 - Defense Secretary William Cohen says Iraq's refusal to allow inspectors access to the ruling Baath Party offices creates a "very serious situation" that could prompt a no-notice military attack.
Dec. 11 - The United States will hold off acting until U.N. chief weapons inspector Richard Butler makes his report on Iraqi compliance to U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan, says Berger. "We want to see this process play it's course," he says.
Dec. 15 - Butler says in his report that Iraq has not met promises made a month ago to fully cooperate with U.N. inspectors and has imposed new restrictions on their work.
Dec. 16 - President Clinton and British Prime Minister Tony Blair order "a strong, sustained series of air strikes" to attack Iraq's nuclear, chemical and biological weapons programs. "Their purpose is to protect the national interest of the United States, and indeed the interests of people throughout the Middle East and around the world," Clinton says.
"The international community gave Saddam one last chance to resume cooperation with the weapons inspectors," Clinton says from the Oval Office of the White House, shortly after anti-aircraft fire began erupting around Baghdad. "Saddam has failed to seize the chance. And so we had to act and act now."
 Load-Date: December 17, 1998

 

End of Document
