

Crude, products soar amid rising tensions in the Middle East
October 3, 1997, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 648 words
Byline: By CLIFF EDWARDS, AP Business Writer
Body




Crude oil futures soared Friday to an eight-month high after the Clinton administration dispatched an aircraft carrier to the Persian Gulf following violations of an Iraqi no-fly zone. The move heightened tensions in a region that supplies a third of the world's oil.
On other exchanges, precious metals rose sharply as the possibility of Middle Eastern conflict caused investors to scramble to safe investments. Corn and soybeans jumped as farmers held on to the fall crop amid strong worldwide demand.
Crude futures had the biggest one-day gain since March 18 after the Defense Department said the aircraft carrier USS Nimitz would skip a port of call in Singapore and steam directly to the Persian Gulf, arriving within a week to help enforce a no-fly zone in southern Iraq. Heating oil and unleaded gasoline futures also jumped.
Iran on Monday violated the no-fly zone while attacking rebels who took refuge across the border in Iraq. The move heightened tensions with Iraq, which had a long war with Iran in the 1980s. In northern Iraq, Turkish forces also were fighting rebels.
"It's a fairly crowded war party over there, and the fact that the U.S. is now potentially getting involved makes the possibility of escalations of tensions that much greater," said energy analyst Ed Kevelson at Paribas Futures Inc. "With this much uncertainty about what might happen over the weekend, no one wanted to go home unprotected."
Crude oil for November delivery on the New York Mercantile Exchange rose 99 cents to $ 22.76 a barrel, the highest since Feb. 19. November unleaded gasoline jumped 1.56 cents to 62.99 cents a gallon; November heating oil rose 2.21 cents to 62.01 cents a gallon. Natural gas for November delivery rose 1.2 cents to $ 3.125 per 1,000 cubic feet.
The energy gains continued a rally from Thursday, when Iraq blocked United Nations weapons inspectors from entering suspected illegal weapons sites, prompting threats of retaliation such as a halt to Iraqi oil exports.
Gold and silver futures also rose sharply on the New York Mercantile Exchange as investors sought a safe haven for their money in the event of military conflict.
Precious metals tend to hold their value during times of military or political upheaval. The rally on that market came despite government reports showing inflation appears to remain in check, reducing the need for the metals as an inflationary hedge.
December gold rose $ 3.40 to $ 336.90 a troy ounce; December silver jumped 13.30 cents to $ 5.303 an ounce.
Soybean and corn futures prices soared on the Chicago Board of Trade after farmers, apparently heartened by reports of heavy export demand and expectations for rising domestic feed demand, opted to store the fall-harvested crop for better prices.
"There's just no selling out there," said grain analyst Dale Gustafson at Smith Barney Inc. "The rally today emphasized that we can't wait until they get the products in the bins in the face of huge sales already taking place."
Soybean inventories in particular remain critically tight after falling to 20-year lows before Sept. 1. The U.S. Department of Agriculture reported Thursday that export demand last week was the strongest in nearly a decade and the second highest on record.
Soybeans also were supported by a new crop estimate from the Sparks Cos. of Memphis, Tenn. The private analytical firm pegged the crop at 2.743 billion bushels, very close to the USDA's current forecast of 2.746 billion bushels.
Many had expected production estimates to increase because of good growing weather.
The National Oilseed Processors Association also reported 27.5 million bushels of soybeans were crushed into oil or meal in the past week, up from 27.1 million a week earlier. That puts the crush 4 million bushels above the same period a year ago.
November soybeans rose 12 cents to $ 6.39 a bushel; December corn rose 7 cents to $ 2.64 1/2 a bushel.
 Load-Date: October 3, 1997

 

End of Document
