

Defining a decade: No name yet for the '90s
The Associated Press
July 21, 1998, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 755 words
Byline: By DEB RIECHMANN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Nearing its end, this is still a decade without a definition: It has no bumper sticker, no catch-phrase, no epitaph.
The 1920s were "roarin"' and the '30s were depressed. World War II dominated the 1940s. The placid 1950s, a time of backyard barbecues, were followed by the turbulent '60s. Author Tom Wolfe called the 1970s the "Me Decade" and it stuck. The 1980s got tagged as the "Greed Decade."
Perhaps future generations will remember this decade as simply a 10-year wait for the new century.
"You could call this the Decade of Breathtaking Anticipation: people waiting to see what happens next," says nostalgia expert Timothy Burke, assistant professor of history at Swarthmore College.
Rather than pondering a name for the '90s, Burke says, pop culture "is mostly focused instead on the coming of 2000 and reflecting on what that means. Things seem OK, but there's a deep, vague anxiety about what's coming next."
Some prominent people and big thinkers took a shot at sticking a decal on the decade when asked by The Associated Press:
"It's the Age of the Computer, no longer the Age of Aquarius," former New York City Mayor Ed Koch said without hesitation. "If you're computer illiterate and you're getting out of high school or college, you're not going to get a first-class job. I'm computer illiterate, but I already had my first-class job."
Faith Popcorn, an author who forecasts the impact of social, economic and political trends on lifestyles and buying habits, said the 1990s should be known as the "'80s With a Conscience." People now do their volunteer work and donations with a this-is-who-I-am attitude, not a look-at-me one, she says.
Allen Sinai, a global economist in New York, had his catch-phrase for the decade written in 1992: It's the decade of "The Comeback Kid. The USA Story," paying tribute to the country's economic and competitive turnaround.
Former New York Gov. Mario Cuomo thinks it's the "Sometimes You're Lucky Decade."
The United States has emerged unscathed from multiple showdowns with Iraq. And, he notes, despite a growing gap between rich and poor, the U.S. economy is humming.
"I don't know that we have done a great deal to deserve this apparent contentment," Cuomo said. "Sometimes, you just get lucky."
Marvin Kalb, director of Harvard University's center on press and public policy, suggests the "Wake Up '90s" - but that's wishful thinking on his part. He says domestic prosperity and the absence of a foreign enemy have lulled the nation into a snooze as its problems continue to mount.
"We have become a nation of Rip Van Winkles," Kalb says.
Author Studs Terkel calls the 1990s the "Decade of National Alzheimer's Disease - forgetfulness of yesterday, forgetfulness of history."
Terkel thinks young Americans have little knowledge about past generations, and little interest in finding out. Some modern-day politicians denounce big government when their own parents benefited from Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal, he adds.
"I hope the new millennium will be the rebirth of memory," Terkel says.
The 1990s has offered up plenty of material for a tagline.
It has been the decade of the Gulf War, the reunification of East and West Germany, the end of the Cold War and the slaying of Israeli leader Yitzhak Rabin.
It was marked by the bombing that killed 168 at a federal building in Oklahoma City, the TWA jumbo jet that exploded over Long Island, N.Y., and the explosion that rocked the Olympic Games in Atlanta.
The Unabomber turned out to be a Montana mountain man, and O.J. Simpson became better known as a murder defendant than as a sports star. Riots erupted in Los Angeles after a jury cleared four white police officers of most charges in the beating of Rodney King.
Olympic ice skater Nancy Kerrigan was kneecapped, and 39 members of the Heaven's Gate cult committed suicide. A baseball strike canceled the 1994 World Series, biologists mapped human genes, Princess Diana and Mother Teresa died, and a sheep named Dolly was cloned and then had a lamb, Bonnie.
In Washington, a Republican-controlled Congress was elected for the first time in 40 years, and welfare was overhauled. There were coffee klatches and Lincoln Bedroom sleepovers at the White House and inquiries into political fund-raising and President's Clinton's libido.
Jack Nachbar, professor emeritus of popular culture at Bowling Green State University, says the media frenzy over people like Simpson, Monica Lewinsky and Princess Di shows the country's mania for celebrity.
His name for the 1990s: "The 15-Minutes-of-Fame Decade."
 Load-Date: July 21, 1998

 

End of Document
