

Delirium sounds the same in every language
The Associated Press
July 8, 1998, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 756 words
Byline: By JIM LITKE, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




Delirium sounds the same in every language. Even so, there was no mistaking the handful of early morning revelers rolling down the sidewalks of swanky Embassy Row for anyone but Croats.
Three days had passed since their countrymen's historic win over Germany in a World Cup quarterfinal match, and barely 48 hours since tens of thousands of their homeboys took to the streets of Zagreb and slam-danced until dawn. But nobody who swore allegiance to the red-and-white checkerboard wanted the party to end, even here on the wide boulevard of Avenue Georges-Mandel.
"All this celebrating, it's understandable," Miro Kovac, the sometime press attache, explained from inside the relative quiet of Croatia's embassy compound. "The phone has been ringing off the hook for three days. This is the biggest thing to happen to us since independence.
"Don't forget, only two years ago we were a nation still at war. This is a sign that we are recovering."
Croatia's semifinal game against France today would make a nice enough story about an underdog team going up against one of soccer's traditional powers. But the political overtones make it so much more.
The tiny nation declared its independence from Yugoslavia in 1991 and maintains it through a series of often-bloody, ethnically motivated clashes that continue even now.
Croatia has a population of just 4.5 million and an even smaller base of active players, only 60,000 in total, from which to draw its national team. But in its short time as a nation, Croatia has become a wellspring of athletic talent. Last month, Toni Kukoc helped the Chicago Bulls win an NBA championship, and only last Sunday, Goran Ivanisevic reached the final at Wimbledon before losing to Pete Sampras.
But soccer is where the Croats are deepest. A dozen of the 22 men on their roster play in the top league in a half-dozen other nations - including England's Premier League, Italy's Serie A and Germany's Bundesliga. Davor Suker, the smooth striker tied for second place in World Cup goals, is one of the most polished scorers in the Spanish League, where he is a star for Real Madrid.
But because no event - not even the Olympics of the Cold War-era - is as fraught with nationalism as the World Cup, Croatia's underdog role and its abundant talent is only a small part of the story.
Think of the U.S. hockey team's win over the Soviets in 1980, while Americans were being held hostage in Iran. For that matter, think of the Iranian soccer team beating the United States in Lyon almost three weeks ago. Then blow up the magnitude of those victories 10 times and you get an idea of how desperately the Croats wanted this win to define them.
"Where people can see their identity best is in sport," said Sepp Blatter, the Swiss who just took over as president of FIFA, soccer's international governing body.
"Let them show it. Soccer is about emotion and passion, and with emotion and passion, there is some danger. But I think we have to live with it. I think it's a movement we can't stop."
Nor would he want to. Nationalism reared its ugly head several times during the tournament, most notably when hooligans from England and Germany rampaged through Marseilles and Lens. The worst incident involved German thugs rioting in Lens, where a 44-year-old policeman was beaten into a coma with an iron bar.
Within moments of the win over Germany, Croatian coach Miroslav Blazevic came out of the dressing room holding a gendarme's cap to show solidarity with the beaten officer. It might have provided the best moment of the entire show so far.
"We didn't come to France to do publicity for our country," said Kovac, the press attache, "but we are very happy about this having happened.
"And we are very proud of the way Croatians celebrated, like people from any other small nation, like Denmark or Finland, like … ," and here Kovac paused to find the exact English word he sought, "normal people."
Of course, not everyone agrees, proof of how truly convoluted the mix between politics and sport can get.
Under the guise of celebrating, some Croats took advantage of the chaos during the parties back home to fire weapons, though not necessarily randomly. A 25-year-old Muslim woman in the divided city of Mostar in neighboring Bosnia was killed and a man wounded by bullets reportedly fired from the Croatian side.
That might be why the United Nations announced Tuesday it would provide protection for its refugee operations in Bosnia. The cause for its concern? That a Croatian win would touch off yet another round of ethnic violence.
 Load-Date: July 8, 1998

 

End of Document
