

Demand for Settlement Housing on the Rise Under Netanyahu
July 25, 1996, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 795 words
Byline: AP Photos JRL104-105 of July 24, By KARIN LAUB, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ELI, West Bank
Body




A faded billboard outside this Jewish settlement advertises garden cottages for $ 49,000, a bargain-basement price that attracted few buyers - until now.
Yitzhak Rabin had made it clear that settlements in the heart of the West Bank stood in the way of peace with the Palestinians.
Hard-line Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has declared that Jews have the right to live anywhere in the biblical Land of Israel, including the land occupied by the country during the 1967 Mideast War.
Netanyahu's declaration has left little doubt that Eli and many more of the 144 settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip will expand considerably during his term.
Since Netanyahu took office in June, dozens of potential buyers have expressed interest in the 250 three-room houses built in Eli during a settlement boom in the early 1990s.
Demand is high and the price of even the smallest house - three rooms occupying 700 square feet - has risen to $ 60,000 since the billboard was erected.
That's still a bargain for many young couples and new immigrants who can't afford $ 300,000-plus apartments in Tel Aviv and Jerusalem. Eli is one of the more distant West Bank outposts, located on a rocky hilltop between the Palestinian towns of Nablus and Ramallah.
"There are many people who want to buy," said Mayor Lior Shtul, who said he believes he can sell 250 homes and double Eli's population to 3,000 by the fall.
Netanyahu was expected to lift restrictions imposed by the previous government that prevented the sale of some 3,000 empty homes in settlements, Israel radio reported Wednesday.
That could increase the settler population by 10 percent in a short period of time, from about 145,000 to 160,000, said Israeli peace activist Mosi Raz.
Netanyahu also favors expanding existing settlements, but will refrain from building new ones for now to avoid a showdown with the United States, the reports said.
Both settlement leaders and Yasser Arafat's Palestinian Authority are anxiously awaiting the outcome of the Cabinet's first debate on settlement policy Friday.
Palestinians are clearly worried about settlement expansion. They feel that every new settler eats away at their hopes of eventually establishing an independent state in the West Bank and Gaza, home to 2 million Palestinians.
Palestinian leaders said Netanyahu's settlement policy will be the true test of his claims that he is serious about peace, just as Netanyahu has said he will gauge Arafat's intentions by how he fights Islamic militants.
"If they go ahead with the settlements, you can kiss the peace process goodbye," said Palestinian peace negotiator Saeb Erakat.
The Palestinians issued similar warnings to Rabin, during whose term, according to Netanyahu, the number of settlers rose by 50,000.
The increase was largely the result of a decision by Rabin to complete construction of 10,000 homes started before he took office and to build 4,000 new ones in areas around Jerusalem.
But the construction over the past four years was accompanied by a dynamic peace process, including an Israeli troop withdrawal from two-thirds of Gaza and one-third of the West Bank, and Palestinian complaints were never more than perfunctory.
If Netanyahu slows down peace negotiations while accelerating settlement construction, Palestinians say there will be a crisis and possibly violence.
A lot depends on whether the new homes are built in the heart of the West Bank or on the periphery, close to Israel's border, where the previous government allowed settlement expansion, said political analyst Joseph Alpher.
"As long as the government is only encouraging construction in big settlement blocs, it is less controversial," said Alpher, whose proposal to annex 11 percent of the West Bank and bring most of the settlers under Israeli rule had served as a blueprint for the Rabin government in final status talks with the Palestinians.
Alpher noted that settler leaders and key players in the Netanyahu government, including Infrastructures Minister Ariel Sharon, are pushing the prime minister to authorize construction in the heart of the West Bank.
The aim would be to prevent Palestinian cities from being grouped so they could serve as the nucleus of a state.
Settlers have already presented their wish lists to the Netanyahu Cabinet. One proposal reportedly seeks to triple the settler population to 450,000 in four years.
"In the end, what will be accepted (by the government) is what is economically feasible," settler spokesman Yehiel Leiter said.
Buoyed by Netanyahu's victory, Shtul has dusted off old master plans, including one to quadruple Eli's population to 6,000 in four years and another to turn it into a city of 100,000.
"There are plots that have already been prepared," he said. "We will be able to start building quickly."
 Load-Date: July 25, 1996

 

End of Document
