

Despair at the India-Pakistan front as casualties mount
The Associated Press
June 11, 1999, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 720 words
Byline: HEMA SHUKLA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DRAS, India
Body




On the eve of talks aimed at ending a month of fighting in Kashmir, a black mood is settling over Indian army camps on the front line. Casualties are mounting. Troops are ill-equipped for high-altitude fighting. The task, they say, is close to suicidal.
Since early May, the army has mobilized its largest fighting force in nearly 30 years against what India says are infiltrators from Pakistan who have occupied mountain peaks on India's side of the 1972 cease-fire line in disputed Kashmir.
On Saturday, Pakistan will send its foreign minister to New Delhi to discuss whether the fighting can be ended. India says that regardless of the talks it will persist until the last intruder is killed or flees back to Pakistan.
In daily briefings in New Delhi, military spokesmen report the fighters are being driven back, Indian airstrikes are punishing them, peaks are being recovered, the "enemy" is taking casualties in the hundreds. India's official casualty rate on Friday stood at about 70 dead and 200 wounded.
The story on the front is much different.
In the fading evening light in a forward artillery camp, at checkpoints along a road under steady artillery bombardment, in bunkers where men shelter from showers of shrapnel, soldiers and junior officers grimly tell stories of death and defeat on the mountains.
No one can say how many have died, but no one believes the official toll.
Amid the gloom, however, the Indian troops show a gritty determination to fight and a conviction that the opposing forces must be evicted at all costs. "We have a job to do and we will do the best we can," said one officer. "We will do our duty."
India says the guerrillas in Kashmir are mostly Pakistani soldiers, a charge Islamabad denies.
On Friday, India produced what it said were transcripts of telephone conversations between two Pakistani generals that proved Pakistan was involved in the fighting.
In a transcript from May 26, army chief Pervez Musharraf tells another general that Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif was concerned the fighting could escalate into a full-scale war.
"We gave the suggestion that there was no such fear," Musharraf said he told Sharif, according to the transcript. "Whenever you want, we can regulate it."
Pakistan called the transcripts false.
"This can't be given any credence or weight," Pakistan army spokesman Brig. Rashid Quereshi said.
As officials traded charges, heavy fighting continued in Kashmir.
The guerrillas are entrenched on the mountain peaks defending their positions against soldiers scaling steep slopes, constantly exposed to gunfire and rocket-propelled grenades.
"We are dying like dogs," said one colonel. Recapturing the peaks, said another officer, is "almost a suicide mission." None of the officers could be quoted by name, and senior officers who earlier briefed journalists on condition of anonymity have been ordered not to speak.
"This is worse than war. Even in war we don't have such senseless casualties," said M. Singh, a corporal and a veteran of India's campaign in Sri Lanka in the 1980s.
Some of the casualties are from "friendly fire," either from Indian artillery or aerial bombing meant to provide cover to the advancing troops, officers said. The risk increased after the air force began high-altitude bombing to stay out of range of shoulder-fired anti-aircraft missiles.
Indian troops wade through chest-high snow. The wind is so strong soldiers must be tied to each other with rope so they don't get blown over a cliff. Their opponents can pick them off with rifles or simply send boulders cascading down the mountain on top of them.
One major said his unit was returning down the mountain when it came under withering fire from above. The soldiers dove into the icy water of a Himalayan river to escape.
Some forward units are living on one meal a day, the soldiers said. Mess camps in the rear cook puris - deep fried flat bread - but by the time it is delivered to the front it is frozen and can barely be chewed. The only drinking water is melted snow.
There is no chance to pitch tents on the slopes. The men sleep in the open.
Few troops have had time to adjust to altitudes of 14,000 feet or more, where the air is thin and every exertion, every upward step, leaves strong men gasping.
Despite the difficulties, the tremendous pressure to recapture the peaks continues.
 Load-Date: June 11, 1999

 

End of Document
