

Enlargement ceremonies over, now the hard part begins
The Associated Press
March 30, 1998, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 573 words
Byline: By JEFFREY ULBRICH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BRUSSELS, Belgium
Body




The European Union started the arduous task of cementing East and West on Monday, opening membership talks with its former Communist enemies and promising a new era of prosperity and brotherhood.
Foreign ministers from 10 Central and Eastern European countries came to Brussels to start five to 10 years of negotiations for membership in what until now has been exclusively a West European economic club.
Only the divided island of Cyprus, which brings its own baggage of problems, fails to fit the mold of former one-party states preparing to join in the next round of EU enlargement.
"It is thanks to the desire for freedom of the people of East and Central Europe that we meet around this table today," German Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel said. "The admission of our partners from Central and East Europe is the logical consequence of European integration."
British Foreign Secretary Robin Cook, whose country currently holds the EU presidency, said the start of membership talks was a milestone in healing the wounds inflicted by World War II.
"By enlarging the European Union, we are finally overcoming the cruel and unnatural division of our continent," he told foreign ministers from the 11 applicant and 15 EU countries. "We are creating the conditions that will help prevent a return to the terrible suffering and destruction Europe has known this century."
Only six of the 11 candidates here Monday are ready to begin real negotiations - Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovenia, Estonia and Cyprus. The other five - Latvia, Lithuania, Slovakia, Romania and Bulgaria - participated in the opening ceremony, then headed home to get their houses in order for a long period of "preparatory talks."
On Tuesday, the first six get down to serious negotiating business.
"Poles have waited for this day for a long time," said Foreign Minister Bronislaw Geremek. "At the end of a troubled and dramatic century we have the chance … to give Europe of the 21st century prosperity, peace and fraternity."
Slovenia, a former Yugoslav republic with 2 million people in a country the size of New Jersey, is perhaps in the best shape of all the candidates - "small but fine," in the words of Foreign Minister Boris Frlec. But small does not necessarily mean swallowed up.
"We realize joining the European Union does not represent a loss of identity - it represents gaining a European identity," Frlec said.
The toughest problem facing negotiators will be Cyprus. The EU has decided to open talks with the Greek Cypriot government before a political solution has been found for the island, which has been split since Turkey invaded in 1974 in response to a failed coup by supporters of union with Greece.
Turkish Cypriots have refused offers to join the Cypriot negotiating team unless their government is recognized as an equal with the Greeks.
Turkish Cypriot leader Rauf Denktash said over the weekend that the EU has "destroyed the chances of a fair settlement in Cyprus by treating one of the equals as the governor of the other."
The EU rejected Turkey's own application to join the membership talks, saying it still had serious economic and political problems as well as continuing human rights violations.
Turkish Foreign Minister Ismail Cem went to Cyprus on Monday to meet with Turkish Cypriot ministers.
"Remember that if pressure and oppression leave you with no other alternative, the decision to integrate with Turkey is always yours," he said.
 
 Load-Date: March 30, 1998

 

End of Document
