

Excerpts from town hall meeting on Iraq in Columbus, Ohio, with Secretary of Defense William Cohen, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and National Security Adviser Sandy Berger. Questions were asked by members of the studio audience and by CNN viewers who telephoned.
The Associated Press
February 19, 1998, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 4218 words
Body




ALBRIGHT: During the next hour and a half, we plan to discuss with you why the confrontation between Iraq and the world matters to us as Americans, how it developed, and what our strategy is for settling it in a way that leaves us, our friends in the region and the entire world safer.
Iraq is a long way from Ohio, but what happens there matters a great deal here. For the risk that the leaders of a rogue state will use nuclear, chemical or biological weapons against us or our allies is the greatest security threat we face. And it is a threat against which we must and will stand firm.
In discussing Iraq, we begin by knowing that Saddam Hussein, unlike any other leader, has used weapons of mass destruction even against his own people.
In fact, he is a repeat offender, having used them both in the battle and against his people.
When the Gulf War ended seven years ago, Iraq was required to destroy such arms, and a special United Nations commission called UNSCOM was created to verify that and to see that weapons would not be replaced.
Despite repeated Iraqi obstruction, UNSCOM has uncovered and destroyed more of those deadly weapons than were demolished during the entire Gulf War. But the evidence is strong that Iraq continues to hide prohibited weapons and materials. There remains a critical gap between the number of weapons we know Iraq produced and the amount we can confirm were destroyed.
There is only one way to learn the truth. UNSCOM's inspectors must have free, unfettered and unconditional access to people, documents and facilities in Iraq.
That is what we're demanding, and that demand has been echoed repeatedly by the U.N. Security Council and by the world.
Unfortunately, Saddam continues to deny UNSCOM access to dozens of suspect sites. He's also trying to discredit UNSCOM and to change its character so that it will no longer be independent and its inspections no longer credible.
As President Clinton made clear in his strong speech yesterday at the Pentagon, the United States will not allow this to happen. Iraq must permit U.N. inspectors to do their jobs as the Security Council has directed. If this does not occur, we must be and we are prepared to use military force.
We support U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan's plan to visit Baghdad this weekend to gain Iraq's full compliance with Security Council resolutions. A peaceful solution remains our preferred option, but it must be a true, not a phony, solution.
Make no mistake, if we use military force it will be because Saddam Hussein has refused to accept a peaceful solution. If we do not use force, it will be because Iraq has finally agreed to give UN inspectors the access they need to do their job.
PROTESTERS: One, two, three, four, we don't want your racist war. One, two, three, four, we don't want your racist war.
ALBRIGHT: The United States…
PROTESTERS: One, two, three, four, we don't want your racist war! One, two, three, four, we don't want your racist war!
ALBRIGHT: … I would like to finish my statement. …
First of all, I'd like to repeat and say that the United States does not challenge Iraq's territorial integrity, nor do we want to see the Iraqi people suffer any further. Our problem and the world's problem is with Iraq's leaders. And today those leaders have a choice.
They can allow U.N. inspections to proceed on the world's terms or they can invite serious military strikes on ours.
 
 COHEN: Thank you very much, Madam Secretary. And let me say that for the past 24 years I've had an opportunity to represent the great state of Maine in the United States Congress, and I've attended many town meetings, none nearly as loud as this, nor as large. …
Walt Whitman said he heard America singing. I hope we can hear America sing and not shout during the course of today's hour-and-a-half discussion. …
Saddam holds the keys to ending this crisis, he holds the keys in his hands, he simply has to let the inspectors back in to do their job. And that's precisely why we're here today to explain why it's important. Thank you.
 
 BERGER: Dealing with the threat that Secretaries Albright and Cohen have described, the threat from Saddam Hussein demands constant resolve by the United States and by the international community, and, at times, action.
As long as he remains in power, we must be prepared to response firmly to reckless actions that threaten the region and our interests.
And we've done that successfully over this decade. President Bush led the Gulf War coalition that ejected Iraq from Kuwait and imposed tough conditions for a cease-fire, including that he destroy his weapons of mass destruction. President Clinton struck hard at Iraqi intelligence headquarters after its agents plotted and sought to carry out the assassination of President Bush in 1993. And when Saddam threatened to walk over Kuwait again in 1994, massing his troops on the border, once again we immediately deployed our troops, ships and planes to the region and Saddam backed down.
And when the Iraqi army forcibly seized Irbil in northern Iraq, we extended the no-fly zone over Iraq, taking control of the skies over Iraq from the southern suburbs of Baghdad to the Kuwaiti border.
Now we need to summon that will again.
What are the alternatives to this approach? Clearly, as Secretary Albright has said, we want a peaceful solution. That is the best option.
But it must be a peaceful solution that establishes the right of the U.N. inspectors to go in the country wherever they believe they have to do go to get rid of his weapons of mass destruction.
Now the alternatives -- some have suggested that we should basically turn away. We should close our eyes to this effort to create a safe haven for weapons of mass destruction. But imagine the consequences if Saddam fails to comply and we fail to act.
Saddam will be emboldened, believing the international community has lost its will. He will rebuild his arsenal of weapons of mass destruction, and some day, some way, I am certain, he will use that arsenal again as he has 10 times since 1983.
Now others suggest that, since Saddam is the problem, the only effective solution is a ground invasion that would remove him from power. …
The costs and risks of that course of action, in our judgment, are too high and not essential to achieving our strategic interests as a nation: containing the threat Iraq now poses. It would require a major land campaign and risk large losses of our soldiers. We do not support that option.
There is no question that the Iraqi people and the world would be better off without Saddam and we would gladly work with its - a successor regime that is ready to live in peace with its neighbors and resume its place in the family of nations. We've worked with Iraqi opposition groups in the past and we will continue to do so in the future.
But let me just conclude with this thought, one that President Clinton raised yesterday.
In order to understand why this is so important, we must remember the past and imagine the future.
The 20th century - the lesson of the 20th century is - and we've learned through harsh experience - that the only answer to aggression and to outlaw behavior is firmness, determination, and, when necessary, action.
In the 21st century, the community of nations may see more and more of this very kind of threat that Iraq poses now, a rogue state with biological and chemical weapons.
If we fail to respond, Saddam and all those who follow will believe that they can threaten the security of a vital region with impunity. But if we act now as one, we will send a clear message to would-be tyrants and terrorists that we will do what it takes to protect our security and our freedom in this new era.
QUESTION: The American administration has the might and the means to attack the Iraqi state. But does it have the moral right to attack the Iraqi nation?
COHEN: The question is also does Saddam Hussein have the moral right to use weapons of mass destruction, chemicals and biologicals, against his own people? The United Nations has determined that he should not possess chemical or biological or nuclear weapons, and what we have is the obligation to carry out the U.N. declaration to make sure he doesn't pose a threat of an immoral magnitude to his neighbors, as he's done in the past.
 
 QUESTION: … this administration has raised concerns about Iraq's threats to its neighbors. Yet none of these neighbors seem to be threatened. … Furthermore, the international community has been opposed to the bombings. If nobody is asking us for their help, how can you justify further U.S. aggression in the region?
ALBRIGHT: It is very clear that the problem here is one to the region. Saddam Hussein has invaded another country before. He continues to try to develop weapons of mass destruction.
And I have been to the region. I have talked to the neighbors. They are concerned about what is going on there. They have made it very clear that they are worried about what Saddam Hussein is doing. And we are going to be a part of a coalition helping them to resolve this problem. …
 
 QUESTION: If push comes to shove and Saddam will not back down, will not allow or keep his word, are we ready and willing to send the troops in?
COHEN: … I just returned from visiting our troops on the U.S.S. George Washington. I visited our troops on the U.S.S. Independence. Each and every one of those young men and women who are out there are prepared to do whatever is necessary in order to contain the threat.
What we are seeking to do is not to topple Saddam Hussein, not to destroy his country, but to do what the United Nations has said in its declarations - and we want to insist that not only words, but deeds. We want the enforcement of the U.N. declarations and these young men and women are prepared to carry out that mission.
We do not see the need to carry out a large land campaign in order to try to topple Saddam Hussein. Our mission is to get the inspectors back; if they can't get back to make sure he can't constitute or reconstitute this threat.
 
 QUESTION: Why do you think the other members of the Security Council have been reluctant to support the military action other than Great Britain?
ALBRIGHT: Let me, first of all, say that what is very important to know is that every Security Council resolution has been supported by members of the Security Council, which is to get full implementation of these resolutions that call on Saddam Hussein to allow the inspection and verification to make sure that these weapons of mass destruction are gone.
We have great support from members of the United Nations and the Security Council. They, as we, would prefer a peaceful solution to this, as we have said. And we are supporting, and we've said that we agree that Kofi Annan should go on this trip to Baghdad. And I believe that we do have the support for what we need to do, because we are fulfilling the Security Council resolutions.
 
 QUESTION: I would like to ask, Mr. Secretary, if he thinks that the ultimate goal of this particular action, which the United States may or may not take, should be the ultimate removal of Saddam Hussein from government. …
COHEN: … I think the difference is there exists between what is desirable and what is doable. I think everyone in that region, as well as the world community, would welcome Saddam Hussein's removal from power. We would welcome the opportunity … to deal with another regime and hopefully have a much more positive and productive relationship.
But what is doable remains another question altogether. … This would require, in our judgment, a rather massive force of land forces, and we don't think that it's necessary in order to contain him. …
 
 QUESTION: Saddam Hussein has made promises in the past to allow U.N. inspectors in, and he has reneged upon those promises. I don't understand how a military strike by the United States is going to ensure future compliance.
BERGER: The U.N. inspectors who have been in the country since 1991-92 - despite the fact that Saddam has tried to conceal, hide, divert - have been remarkably successful. They've destroyed more of his weapons of mass destruction since the Gulf War than were destroyed in all of the Gulf War. …
So, the best result would be to get them back in. If they got back in and they were given access to all parts of the country, we would hasten the day when we were able to say that this country has no more weapons of mass destruction. …
 
 QUESTION: Do you have any concerns that military involvement in Iraq will encourage terroristic attacks here at home?
COHEN: There … is the potential worldwide that we could have acts of terrorism. One of the reasons why we have been so concerned about the spread of biological and chemical weapons is that they might in fact use chemical and biologicals, as we saw during the subway incident in Japan with sarin gas. What we're talking about as far as spreading either anthrax or some other deadly poison.
But the question really is, are we going to live in fear of these threats and therefore be paralyzed from taking action in order to reduce it, or take action to curb it as best we can?
We cannot be intimidated by the threat of acts of terrorism in order to alter our policies. …
 
 QUESTION: Assuming that the United States does do airstrikes on Iraq, I was wondering what the United States is prepared to do if Iraq decides to retaliate by attacking its neighbors?
COHEN: We have obviously taken that into account. We have planned for virtually every contingency. Should Saddam Hussein seek to strike out against his neighbors, we have prepared defensive measures. …
 
 QUESTION: Since we are unsure where Iraq's weapons are, how can we direct a bombing strike against them?
COHEN: We have carefully selected the targets that will be necessary in order to reduce his ability to threaten his neighbors or to deliver weapons of mass destruction. …
 
 QUESTION: There are news media reports that Iraq has moved much of their weapon industry to other countries. Would we consider targeting them in other countries?
ALBRIGHT: First of all, … we have no indication that this is taking place. What we are concerned about is Saddam Hussein, who has a record of using weapons of mass destruction against his neighbors as well as against his own people, and a brutal dictator who is terrifying his people and threatening the region. And our policy is to contain him. That is what we're trying to do.
QUESTION: … the concern that some have expressed, if we hit one of these biological or chemical weapons, a concern about the agent being released into the atmosphere.
BERGER: … it's not appropriate for any of us to discuss specific operational plans should this become - should a military action become necessary - but it has been a cardinal principle of the planning of this operation that we should seek to minimize civilian casualties.
QUESTION: (From Germany) … Although it is my duty to do in the United States Army, but just to let you know that I fully agree with what you need to do. Go ahead and do it. If a soldier or member's life needs to be lost, let it start with mine.
COHEN: First of all, let me respond with respect to the participation of our service men and women. You just heard in that call from Germany, one young man who indicated how committed he is to carrying out the mission that is required. We have a number of people here in the audience today also who represent the United States military.
Let me indicate to all of you are here and all who are watching that we intend to take care of you, that we intend to minimize the risk to your lives, those who are willing to put it on the line for the country.
There can be no guarantee that there will not be casualties on our part … But we have taken into account every contingency. We will do our level best to minimize the risk of harm. …
 
 QUESTION: There are many countries that have these biological and chemical weapons. Six countries in the Middle East alone. You've stated why Saddam Hussein should be singled out, but it is puzzling to people to wonder why it's OK for these other countries to have biological and chemical weapons but not…
ALBRIGHT: I think that it is clear that other countries have weapons of mass destruction. It is a question of whether there is a proclivity to use them. And Saddam Hussein is a repeat offender. And I think it is very important for us to make clear that the United States and the civilized world cannot deal with somebody who is willing to use those weapons of mass destruction on his own people, not to speak of his neighbors.
 
 QUESTION: … I'm a major in the United States Marine Corps. … Sir, with the large cuts in active military forces since the end of the last Gulf War, what is the likelihood that large numbers of reserve forces will have to be called up to support our forces currently in the Gulf if and when we decide to attack Iraq?
COHEN: … We have the forces that are assembled and are in place to carry out whatever military option we need to do right now. So, I don't anticipate any additional forces that will be called up or necessary at this point.
 
 QUESTION: If there is an air attack, … would the B-2 stealth bomber be called into action? And if there was an ensuing ground war, how long would you plan on United States troops being in Iraq?
COHEN: First of all, there is no need for the B-2 bomber. We have the B-52s. We also have B-1Bs in-theater. They are more than sufficient to carry out whatever military strike might be ordered by the president. With respected to ground forces following any strike, there is no anticipated need.
We don't expect to. We do not plan to have any - any ground forces that would be involved in a land type of campaign.
 
 QUESTION: Missiles landed in Israel during the Gulf War yet, at America's request, Israel … was restrained from defending itself. What will our country's posture be this time?
ALBRIGHT: I have recently been to Israel. And there have been obviously discussions about this. Every country has a right to make its own decisions about how to protect itself, and we are consulting very closely with Israel.
COHEN: Also, in addition to what Secretary Albright, in terms of her meetings, I also have met with the defense minister, and we are satisfied that full cooperation will accommodate Israel's defensive needs as well.
 
 QUESTION: … How do we convince the Russians that it's in their vital interest to support an international coalition against Saddam if push comes to shove?
ALBRIGHT: Well, let me say I have spent a great deal of time with our counterpart, Prime Minister Primakov. He fully agrees with the fact that Saddam Hussein has to fulfill his obligations under the Security Council resolutions. And he has been working with all of us to try to get a peaceful solution.
They are concerned about Saddam's weapons of mass destruction, and I believe that we should all be working on a peaceful solution. But if we can't, I am sure that we will all be together in the end.
 
 QUESTION: If he (Kofi Annan) comes back and is unsuccessful, does that mean war?
BERGER: Well, it would - we have not set any artificial deadlines in this process. And I don't want to prejudge either his trip - which we hope will succeed - or what will happen when he comes back or the timetable with which it might happen.
When he comes back, we will evaluate what he has to say. We will listen to him very carefully. He's a very smart man. And if it is a solution that solves the problem, that will be terrific.
But let's be clear what solving the problem is. It's not just putting it under the rug. … These inspectors have to have access to everything in the country. And the inspection regime has to be preserved as a professional rather than a political operation. As long as it meets those tests, we will be very pleased.
 
 QUESTION: If people inside Iraq rebel and rise up, will they be assisted given that they were put down the last time?
COHEN: It has been - it has been our policy to support opposition groups. We will continue to support alternatives to Saddam Hussein politically. That has been our policy and will continue to be our policy.
PROTESTERS: Expletive. Expletive.
QUESTION: … Why doesn't the United States give military support to the democratic opposition in Iraq? And this brings up the whole question of why doesn't the United States give, perhaps release … the Iraqis' billions of dollars in frozen assets and make it available to the democratic opposition in Iraq?
BERGER: I think, as Secretary Cohen has said, we have and we will continue to support the democratic opposition in Iraq. I think one has to be very careful though … if you encourage and almost incite people to rise up against their government, you incur a moral obligation to come to their defense at a moment of peril.
QUESTION: Now if there is no peaceful resolution to the problem, and war is inevitable, and we end up damaging their country even further, are we - the American people, the taxpaying people - going to be responsible for making financial reparations to the country?
BERGER: You know, if I can just answer that. Saddam sits on enormous storehouses of oil. And, as Secretary Albright said before, it's the United States, since 1991, that has been trying to say to him - to give him the right to sell that oil, take that money, buy food and medicine for his people, and distribute it under U.N. auspices so we make sure that it goes to people and not to tanks.
For five years, he refused even to have such a regime. We finally got such a regime in place. He delayed it another six months. We're now prepared to expand that regime. We would like to see him sell more oil so that more food and medicine can get to the Iraqi people and, believe it or not, he's resisting that.
So I think it is - our quarrel is certainly not with the Iraqi people. We would like to help them get the food, the medicine, the other things that they need for their daily lives. There's one obstacle standing in the way of that, and I think all of you know who that is.
… I think we would be prepared, again, to use his oil revenue to try to help his people. I don't think we have to take American taxpayer dollars if he's not prepared to use his own oil revenue to help his own people.
 
 MODERATOR: Before we move to conclusion, we want to give each one of you an opportunity to say what you think is an important point that you want to leave everyone in this hall and in our audience with.
QUESTION: … How can these people sleep at night because we drop - we are not going to be able to stop Saddam Hussein. We are not going to be able to eliminate his weapons of mass destruction, all of them. … All he wants to do, Clinton said, was send a message to Saddam Hussein. … If we want to deal with Saddam … we deal with Saddam, not the Iraqi people.
ALBRIGHT: Let me say that what we are doing is so that all of you can sleep at night, because … we are in a very different kind of a world where we are facing the danger of the spread of the weapons of mass destruction. … And we need to really put a stop to dictators who have weapons of mass destruction and threaten to use them against their people. …
I am very proud to represent the United States wherever I go. We are the greatest country in the world… and what we are doing is serving the role of the indispensable nation to see what we can do to make the world safer for our children and grandchildren and for those people around the world who follow the rules.
BERGER: Part of what we fight for as a country is the freedom to argue. And I appreciate all of you coming. I appreciate most of you listening. … And I think the fundamental point here is two, that I want to make, is twofold.
No. 1, we want to resolve this peacefully. But No. 2, there are some things worth fighting for.
And those include fighting aggression, fighting people who threaten their neighbors, and fighting to make this world a safer and more secure place for my children and for yours. Thank you.
COHEN: If I could just indicate to the audience, this really is a tremendous example of what democracy is all about. The people who are here expressing opposition and criticism would not be allowed to do that in a number of countries, including Iraq.
And what Sandy Berger has just said is the people that you see here in uniform and those who have served in the past and those who are serving us today are fighting for the right of each and every one of us to voice our separate opinions.
That is a celebration of democracy.
Let me say, as secretary of defense, it is my obligation not only to try and identify those problems that confront us today but those challenges of tomorrow.
Most of you here have children and will be building families in the future. And we have a choice to make. There is an old expression that you can pay me now or pay me later. With respect to Saddam Hussein, we can deal with him now, or our children and grandchildren will have to deal with the spread of chemical and biological weapons later.
I think now is the time that we deal with it and not later.
ALBRIGHT: … Let me say that we come to the end of the 20th century, and we have fought dictatorship and horrors throughout this century. This is a job we must do. We need your support. We welcome your questions, and we look forward to having more discussions with you.
 Load-Date: February 19, 1998

 

End of Document
