

EXPLORING THE GLOBAL ECONOMY; Fearing Islam's rise, Turkey squeezes companies funded by workers abroad
November 5, 2000, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News; International News
Length: 947 words
Byline: By LOUIS MEIXLER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KONYA, Turkey
Body




As a 7-year-old boy, Mehmet Emin Polat hawked pretzels and comic books on the streets as he struggled to help his parents make ends meet in Konya, a poor city in the wheat-growing countryside of Turkey.
Today, Polat works from the gleaming steel-and-glass Konya headquarters of his multimillion dollar car-parts company, planning its expansion into Germany.
It's a rags-to-riches story that is transforming parts of largely rural central Turkey into an economic powerhouse, with dozens of new companies fueled by what is believed to be billions of dollars in foreign investments - mostly from Turks working in Europe.
It's also a story that terrifies the Turkish state, provoking a crackdown on the companies and putting Turkey in the odd position of trying to limit the flow of foreign money into the country.
Polat's Konya Sanayi is one of more than 50 Islamic-oriented companies, dubbed the "Anatolian Tigers," that have challenged the way business is done in Turkey, a state that regards political Islam as one of its greatest threats.
The businesses use their nickname to emphasize pride in the long-neglected heartland of Anatolia.
"The state thinks that these businesses are the financial supporters of Islamic activism in the country," said M. Hakan Yavuz, a political science professor specializing in Turkish Islam at the University of Utah.
The companies, focused on basic industries like construction and food, brush aside charges that they support political groups. What's clear is they are using foreign capital to expand aggressively and bring prosperity to central Anatolia, an area that long has been a key source of support for Islamic parties in Turkey.
Started three years ago, Konya Sanayi has developed into a company that groups together 167 auto parts manufacturers with 6,000 employees.
Kombassan Holdings, the largest of the Islamic businesses, started in 1989 and now has 27,000 employees and 30,000 shareholders. It exports an array of products, including paper, tires and farm machinery, to 54 countries.
Kombassan recently bought Hit or Miss, a chain of 252 clothing stores in the United States. Polat's Konya Sanayi is planning to open its first overseas auto supply supermarket in Duisberg, Germany.
MUSIAD, an organization of Turkish Islamic-oriented businessmen, grew from five members in 1990 to 2,300 by last April. It has offices in 27 Turkish cities and representatives in 20 countries.
Today, the Islamic-leaning companies have a market value of several billion dollars, economists say. Most founders are religious, provide prayer rooms for employees and don't serve or sell alcohol, which Islam forbids.
The phenomenal growth began 10 years ago.
At that time, Hasim Bayram, a former high school chemistry teacher in Konya, noticed a shortage of computer paper in his classes and began collecting money from friends and relatives to build a paper factory.
Islam forbids interest payments and therefore business loans, but Bayram quickly discovered an untapped source of funding - Turks working mostly in Germany but also in Austria, France and Switzerland.
These 3 million guest workers have saved billions of dollars but many are unwilling to put their money in banks, either out of religious conviction or because the money was earned in cash and taxes weren't paid. Many were attracted to Islamic companies like Bayram's Kombassan, which offered investors shares and high dividends instead of interest - and the opportunity to invest in a region where they came from.
Dividends are permitted in Islam because they are considered part of a company's profits and payment is not guaranteed.
Money began to flood into Islamic companies. Turkish newspapers reported stories of workers flying back to Turkey with suitcases filled with cash to invest.
Some 65 percent of Kombassan's capital came from abroad, estimated company spokesman Mustafa Kabakci. He did not give a dollar value.
While it's not unusual for foreign workers to send money home, many Turkish guest workers have been abroad for generations and have money not just to support their middle-class families, but to invest.
Turkish businessmen in Germany estimate $5 billion was sent back to Turkey in the last decade. Many Islamic companies were not properly registered with state authorities, did not fully disclose their earnings and traded their shares informally for cash, and not on the Istanbul stock exchange.
That began to change as Turkey noticed the huge amount of unregulated and unreported money flowing into central Anatolia. Turkey recently enacted laws to regulate the flow of cash and began pressing Islamic companies to properly register their shares.
The military, which dominates the government and has repeatedly called political Islam one of the nation's greatest dangers, reportedly has drawn up a blacklist of Islamic-oriented companies.
Now Turkish market regulators are looking into whether the Islamic-leaning companies improperly issued certificates to investors. If wrongdoing is uncovered, the regulators could demand the companies return the money to investors or even prosecute company directors.
Earlier this month, market regulators announced a freeze on the sale of Kombassan's fixed assets such as land, buildings and factories until the company abides by shareholder regulations.
Kabakci said he expects Kombassan to prove to regulators it was not violating regulations and that the sanctions will be lifted.
The crackdown is apparently encouraging companies to look overseas to spend the capital they cannot invest in Turkey and to sell the products they are producing at home.
"We want to become a world brand," Kabakci said.
---
On the Net:
MUSIAD: http://www.musiad.org.tr 
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY190-192, AP Graphic GLOBAL LOGO
 Load-Date: November 6, 2000

 

End of Document
