

Far from the West Bank, a dispute over language and borders
The Associated Press
November 9, 1999, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 559 words
Byline: By JOCELYN NOVECK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS
Body




A day after the launch of historic talks toward a full peace between Israel and the Palestinians, Ehud Barak and Yasser Arafat outlined in emotional terms today how far the two sides have yet to go.
Though the leaders entered a Paris conference hall together, smiling cordially, it was clear that disputes that have arisen in just the last few days were very much on their minds.
Arafat gave the more strongly worded speech, telling the assembled delegates of the 21st Socialist International Congress that he expects Israel to live up to past commitments, and to respect international law.
"Our Palestinian Arab people are still knocking on the door of international legality," he said. "International legality is pivotal in the search for a just and comprehensive peace."
It was a clear reference to the Israeli prime minister's contention, repeated several times over the past two days, that U.N. resolutions calling for Israel to return captured lands "have a different context" when referring to the Palestinians than when referring to Arab nations with fixed and recognized borders.
Barak has been insisting that Israel's security concerns must be taken into account when determining how much land should be given back to the Palestinians. The Palestinians, for their part, interpret U.N. Resolutions 242 and 338 as clearly calling for Israel to return all occupied lands.
Barak did not refer to the issue in his own speech, but gave an emotional explanation at a news conference later.
"The Middle East is still a rough neighborhood," he said. "We can't act as if we were ballooning over Western Europe."
He again enumerated the threats he sees Israel facing: a wave of Islamic fundamentalism; terror attacks "by proxy," where the true author remains unknown; and the threat of nuclear weapons falling into the wrong hands.
"We have to take into account the uncertainties of this region," he said.
In his formal speech, Barak did pointedly mention another source of discord: Sunday's pipe bomb explosions in Netanya, Israel, which injured more than 30 people.
Arafat irritated the Israelis on Monday when he said the blasts were the result of feuding "within the Israeli Mafia." Barak spoke in his speech of "terrorism, which manifested itself again two days ago in Netanya."
Another issue raising emotional responses from both leaders was that of Jewish settlements - one of the most difficult issues to be discussed in the final-status talks launched Monday in Ramallah in the West Bank.
"The principle of a just peace contradicts the continued existence of settlements erected in order to prevent the establishment of a Palestinian state," Arafat complained.
Barak responded that, although he had been elected on a clear mandate against new settlements, he would not stop the "natural development" of an existing settlement, and said the issue was a subject for the negotiations. He spoke harshly of rogue settlements erected by individuals without permission.
On the question of peace with Syria, a key point of discussion for Barak with his French hosts, the Israeli prime minister again said he had not sensed any progress stemming from President Jacques Chirac's Sunday meeting with Bashar Assad, son of the Syrian leader, Hafez Assad.
"But I remain optimistic," he said.
Talks between Syria and Israel broke off in 1996, and the two sides remain at an impasse.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos PAR119,128
 Load-Date: November 10, 1999

 

End of Document
