

Few parties in Jerusalem to greet the new millennium
The Associated Press
December 28, 1999, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 708 words
Byline: By JACK KATZENELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




While much of the world celebrates New Year's Eve, it'll be "Lights out!" in Jerusalem.
Rabbis have barred hotels from staging parties. The only organized event for Christian tourists - a performance of Handel's Messiah at the Jerusalem Convention Center - has been canceled for lack of funds, and police have scrapped a dance party at the city's main soccer stadium for security reasons.
Some say it is simply unreasonable to expect big bashes in Israel. For observant Jews, sundown Friday is the start of the Jewish Sabbath, not New Year's Eve. Saturday is an ordinary day in the Hebrew calendar year 5760, rather than the dawn of a new millennium.
"The state of Israel is not celebrating the end of the millennium like other countries because it is a Jewish state," said Tourism Minister Amnon Lipkin-Shahak.
Trying to preserve that Jewish character, the chief rabbis have told hotel operators that they may not organize New Year's Eve parties.
Hoteliers were told they could rent facilities to Christian groups for such events, but would have to make certain Jewish guests would have no access. The rabbis also decreed that revelers may not play music - live or recorded - because that would violate the Sabbath, when all work is prohibited.
Yonatan Harpaz, director general of the Jerusalem Hoteliers' Association, said Tuesday that even such subdued parties would not take place because hotel owners fear running afoul of the rabbis.
Harpaz said reports began to appear in the media that any hotel that permits a New Year's Eve party would lose its kosher food certificate - without which it cannot make a profit in the Jewish areas of Jerusalem.
The Jerusalem Religious Council, which issues the certificates, denied being the source of the reports but Harpaz dismissed this denial.
"The hotels got the message. None of them would take the risk," he said.
Three major hotels confirmed Tuesday that although they are packed with Christian guests, they will not hold parties.
The one event organized specially for Christian tourists - the performance of the Messiah - was canceled because the Finance Ministry refused to pay $24,000 for security at the concert hall.
Jerusalem Mayor Ehud Olmert was angry.
"I don't understand why it was not possible to honor the commitments and enlist the funds needed for one of the very few events organized for the benefit of the visitors on the millennium night," he told Israel radio.
Tourists could have consoled themselves by joining a dance party in the parking lot at the city's Teddy Kollek soccer stadium, if it had not been canceled as well.
The closed-in parking lot beneath the stands does not have enough emergency exits for 3,000 people if they have to get away quickly in an emergency, police spokesman Shmuel Ben-Ruby said.
Police have been edgy about security for the last day of 1999 and plan to deploy a record 12,000 troops, including volunteers, to protect the city's holy sites.
Police have said there are no specific terrorist warnings, but have expressed concern that extremists, possibly Christians expecting to hasten what they believe will be the Second Coming of Christ, may carry out acts of violence.
For tourists, the only relief from the gloom is to be found at hotels in the Arab neighborhoods of east Jerusalem, because they do not offer kosher food and are not dependent on the Religious Council.
The American Colony Hotel, a favorite among foreign journalists and diplomats, is providing a banquet with champagne, belly dancers and Arabic-style music.
But Jovan Pavel, a tourist from Timisoara, Romania, who is spending New Year's Eve in Jewish west Jerusalem, said he is disappointed.
"In Transylvania we have a great New Year tradition - music, dancing, lots of food and wine. Here I don't think they will have anything special," he said.
Even in Bethlehem, Jesus' birthplace, the Palestinian organizers of the Bethlehem 2000 celebrations may run into an unexpected millennium night problem. They plan to release 2,000 doves at midnight, but the doves may not agree. The birds usually fly by day and sleep by night.
Jawad Musleh, head of the projects department, said the sky will be floodlit in hopes that the doves will believe it is daytime.
"We already tried it out and it went well," he said.
 Load-Date: December 29, 1999

 

End of Document
