

Firefights in the West Bank; two Palestinians killed, Israeli soldier critically wounded
November 10, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 745 words
Byline: By MARK LAVIE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Palestinian gunmen traded heavy fire with Israeli soldiers in two West Bank towns Friday, after thousands of mourners buried a militia leader assassinated in what Israel said was a new policy of pre-emptive strikes. Two Palestinians were killed and an Israeli soldier was critically wounded.
The assassination of Hussein Abayat, regional commander of the Tanzim militia, marked a new stage in Israeli retaliation, said Prime Minister Ehud Barak. "We will continue with such operations," Barak told reporters during a visit to the army's West Bank headquarters. "We will hit those who hit us."
Abayat was killed Thursday when a missile from an Israeli helicopter struck his car. Israel charged that Abayat planned attacks that resulted in the deaths of three Israeli soldiers. The Tanzim militia is affiliated with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat's Fatah party. Before Thursday, Israel had not targeted Palestinian leaders.
Thousands joined Abayat's funeral procession in the Bethlehem area. After the burial, gunmen opened fire on Rachel's Tomb, a Jewish holy site in Bethlehem where tradition says the biblical matriarch Rachel is buried, critically wounding an Israeli soldier. Israeli troops returned fire.
Near the West Bank town of Ramallah, gunmen leading hundreds of rock-throwers traded fire with Israeli troops. Witnesses said Israeli tanks fired shells at an abandoned building from which Palestinians were shooting.
Israeli troops later clamped a closure on Bethlehem and Ramallah, meaning Palestinians were barred from entering or leaving the cities.
Two Palestinians were killed by Israeli fire at the Erez crossing in the Gaza Strip, Palestinian doctors said. More than 180 people, most of them Palestinians, have been killed since fighting broke out Sept. 28.
In Jerusalem, a small bomb went off just outside the walled Old City, slightly injuring a policeman, one of thousands deployed to prevent friction after noon prayers at a main flash point, the Al Aqsa Mosque compound, the third holiest shrine of Islam. Police banned Muslim men under the age of 45 from entering the mosque compound to discourage protests.
Abayat, 37, father of seven children, took a CIA intelligence course in the United States several months ago, according to Palestinians. The U.S. embassy here would not comment.
Church bells rang in Bethlehem's Manger Square in front of the Church of the Nativity, marking the traditional birthplace of Jesus, before the funeral of Abayat, a Muslim who lived in nearby Beit Sahour.
A leaflet circulated Thursday night in Bethlehem after his death singled out Israel's army chief, Lt. Gen. Shaul Mofaz, for retaliation.
In a meeting late Thursday, the Israeli Cabinet discussed possible repercussions of the raid. In the past, such Israeli strikes have often led to more intense violence, rather than quelling it.
The 1996 assassination of an Islamic militant bomb-maker, widely attributed to Israel, triggered a series of suicide bombings that killed scores of Israelis. However, there was little criticism in Israel of the Abayat killing.
The helicopter attack came on the day President Clinton launched his latest attempt to salvage Middle East peace negotiations, meeting with Arafat in Washington.
Arafat, who said after the meeting that he had reaffirmed his commitment to peace, slammed Israel over the bloodshed, saying: "I am not the one initiated the violence. I am not the one who is attacking Israelis."
Clinton planned to meet with Barak on Sunday, probably his final effort to salvage a peace process he had cultivated so carefully for seven years.
Barak said it would be "a little too far-fetched" to expect the talks with Clinton to result in a resumption of negotiations. First, he said, there must be a substantial reduction in the violence.
The White House was clearly unhappy with the new escalation in violence.
Clinton's national security adviser, Sandy Berger, declined to discuss the specifics of the Israeli attack, but said: "Violence breeds violence and we must find a way to break this cycle. It's important for people on both sides to do all they can to try to achieve that."
A newspaper poll Friday showed that two-thirds of Israelis favor continuation of the peace talks, but if no agreement is reached, 58 percent prefer unilateral separation from the Palestinians instead of another interim accord, favored by 30 percent. The Gallup poll in the Maariv daily questioned 570 Israeli adults and quoted a 4.5 percent margin of error.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos JRL109, 111, 113, 119, 121
 Load-Date: November 11, 2000

 

End of Document
