

For Palestinian youths, Israeli soldiers, the script rarely changes
November 10, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 889 words
Byline: By GREG MYRE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GAZA CITY, Gaza Strip
Body




The relentless cycle of death began early in the morning, as a thousand young men descended on the simple, whitewashed mortuary at Shifa Hospital to collect the bodies of three Palestinians killed by Israeli gunfire the day before.
After six weeks of bloodshed in the Middle East, the day's routine was set: an angry march through the streets with the bodies held aloft, solemn midday prayers at an overflowing mosque and a mournful funeral at the "martyrs' cemetery."
Finally, an afternoon advance on the nearest Israeli military outpost, where the deadly clashes began anew.
As the grim drama played itself out Thursday, the only element of mystery was which Palestinian families would receive the heart-wrenching news that one of their young men had fallen.
"Every day I see the men come here and I feel very bad," said Abdulrazaq al-Masry, who runs the mortuary. "I know there will probably be more dead soon."
The violence, which has claimed more than 180 lives, most of them young Palestinians, has produced a new generation of martyrs who inspire even more young men to confront heavily armed Israeli troops with nothing more than stones and bottles of gasoline.
From Shifa Hospital, the three bodies were placed on wooden stretchers and carried back to their family homes in the slums of Gaza City. One of the three, 18-year-old Khalil Abu-Saad, had been wheeled into the hospital a day before with a bullet through his heart.
On Thursday, women in black wailed as Abu-Saad's thin body, wrapped in a Palestinian flag, was carried through the Shati refugee camp along Gaza's Mediterranean Coast.
As the funeral procession grew, two of Abu-Saad's friends raced several steps ahead with a tub of glue, plastering photocopies of his picture on every surface.
"Death to our enemies," shouted a man with a microphone, riding in a 1973 Peugeot that lead the procession. "Paradise for martyrs."
Young boys, wide-eyed and barefoot, emerged from rundown apartments and watched fascinated as the parade of death passed by. Their older brothers joined in, carrying a Palestinian flag.
Gunmen in civilian clothes fired off bursts of automatic gunfire. An Israeli flag was torched. From a truck, an Arabic song blared a message to the Israelis: "We are coming."
Many Palestinians despair of achieving independence through negotiations with Israel, which have dragged on for seven years and are stalemated again.
Israel says Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat must do more to keep demonstrations from escalating into violent confrontations. Palestinian leaders say such anger cannot be bottled up so easily.
Thursday's three funeral marches, totaling perhaps 10,000 men and a small number of women, converged on the Al-Omari mosque in the city center.
"There will be paradise for these men because they were defending Al-Aqsa," said the sheik leading the service, a reference to the mosque in Jerusalem that is part of a shrine holy to both Jews and Muslims. It was the site of the latest conflict's first clashes, which broke out Sept. 28, after a visit by hard-line Israeli politician Ariel Sharon.
A roar rose from the crowd as the bodies left the mosque, as word of more deaths spread through the congested street. Among them, a 14-year-old was shot and killed in Khan Yunis, in the southern Gaza Strip.
"Do you think we can make these kids stop the intefadeh (uprising)?" said Sam Nasser, 34, a neighbor of a youth killed Wednesday. "I have kids, and I can't keep them away."
Crammed onto trucks, stuffed inside minivans, and clinging to the tops of cars, Palestinian teen-agers flocked to the cemetery.
The mourners encircled the three adjacent burial plots. A brother of one of the dead collapses in grief. With little ceremony, the three are interred in Gaza's sandy soil, their graves topped with wreaths of pink and red carnations.
For some, the next stop was the Karni crossing point into Israel, where the soldiers are waiting. Some youths spent their last five shekels, about $1.20, for a taxi to reach the crossing. How did they plan to get home? "We'll take the ambulance, it's free," they joked.
Several hundred teen-agers crept through an olive grove to approach within 100 yards of the soldiers.
They tossed stones and occasionally firebombs, which fell far short of the soldiers. The troops responded sporadically, mostly with tear gas. But when they fired rubber-coated bullets, a youth was struck in the jaw and seriously wounded. He was one of seven hurt Thursday, in a mercifully mild clash compared to most days at Karni.
Back at Shifa Hospital, where the casualties arrive, Dr. Mouaweya Hassanein commanded the emergency room, as he has every day since the clashes began, from 8 a.m. to midnight.
"Sometimes I'm very angry, other times I'm just very sad," said Dr. Hassanein in a weary voice.
Journalists, relatives of the wounded, stone throwers checking on injured comrades are frequent visitors to the hospital. Hassanein sometimes loses his patience with the stone throwers, called "shabab" in Arabic.
"Shabab," he shouted Thursday, shooing them out of the crowded room with his arms, "You must leave, we can't work like this."
As night fell, the day's toll throughout the Palestinian territories was four dead and dozens wounded. More funerals were set for Friday.
"We are giving our blood until we build a Palestinian state," Hassanein said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos AGAZ101-102, 106, 108
 Load-Date: November 11, 2000

 

End of Document
