

For a Holocaust survivor, a poignant reunion with the pope
The Associated Press
March 23, 2000, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 599 words
Byline: By GREG MYRE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




When Edith Tzirer straggled out of a liberated Nazi concentration camp in 1945, her lungs were so ravaged by tuberculosis, she was too weak to walk.
Her protector was a handsome young stranger who gave her a piece of bread and a cup of tea on that cold January day outside Krakow, Poland. And then he carried the 14-year-old girl two miles from the train station where he found her.
Tzirer wept Thursday as she reintroduced herself to the man she says comforted her more than a half-century ago - Pope John Paul II.
"I was a little girl again," said Tzirer, 69, who now lives in Israel. "It was 50 years ago, and everything that happened then came back now."
Tzirer was one of six Holocaust survivors who formally greeted the pope during his poignant visit Thursday to Yad Vashem, Israel's Holocaust memorial on a hilltop on the western edge of Jerusalem.
The pontiff himself can't recall the long-ago day or the teenage girl of half a century past.
"The pope does not dismiss her story out of hand. But he can't remember the details," said Vatican spokesman Joaquin Navarro-Valls said. "She is quite specific. The pope says it is 'quite possible,' because he was in the area at that time."
For Tzirer, that day in Poland is still as vivid as if it were yesterday. She says she was shocked in 1978 when she saw a picture of her old savior, Karol Wojtyla, in a French magazine, and learned he had just become the pope.
"He was strong and tall, an athlete," Tzirer said in an interview with Israeli television. "I asked myself, why me? Why?"
Regardless of what transpired on that day 55 years ago, the pope and the gray-haired survivors were filled with emotion that transcended the politics and diplomacy of Thursday's remembrance. More than a half-century ago, they were surrounded by the terrible Nazi slaughter commemorated at the memorial by an eternal flame that burns in memory of the 6 million who died.
"I remember my Jewish friends and neighbors, some of whom perished, while others survived," said the pope. He met Thursday with several Jewish boyhood friends who grew up with him in Wadowice, Poland, but now live in Israel.
The pope was 19 when the Nazis invaded his homeland in 1939, and he witnessed the persecution of Jews throughout the war years. Wadowice's 2,000 Jews disappeared. Some managed to flee, but others were deported to Nazi camps and died there.
There is no trace of Jewish life in Wadowice now, and Thursday's reunion was the first time most of the survivors have seen the pope since those terrible days.
The wartime experience has strongly influenced John Paul's 22-year papacy, and Jewish leaders say no other pope has done as much to overcome the historical friction between Roman Catholics and Jews.
"This is a turning point for Jews and Christians," said Eli Zborowski, another of the Holocaust survivors who greeted the pope.
Zborowski, a Polish native who now lives in New York, said he would have liked the pope to apologize Thursday for the church's silence during the Holocaust. But he said the pontiff's decision to speak at Yad Vashem was still momentous.
"What he did is a very positive thing that will change history," Zborowski said.
Even for Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak, the ceremony was deeply personal. Addressing the pontiff, Barak paid tribute to his grandparents, who perished in the Treblinka death camp in Nazi-occupied Poland.
"When my grandparents, Elka and Shmuel Godin, mounted the death trains … near their home in Warsaw, headed toward their fate at Treblinka - the fate of 3 million Jews in your homeland - you were there and you remembered," he said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo JRL122,140
 Load-Date: March 24, 2000

 

End of Document
