

For Netanyahu, scandal deepens conflict with the elites
April 18, 1997, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 674 words
Byline: By DAN PERRY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TEL AVIV, Israel
Body




When Benjamin Netanyahu won elections last year, Israel's media, security, business, academic and artistic establishments were all seen as favoring his opponent, peace architect Shimon Peres.
Since then, Netanyahu has sought to frame himself as an outsider constantly butting up against Israel's elite.
Now, with an influence-peddling scandal threatening to bring down the government, Netanyahu's aides are again crying us-versus-them. The current investigation, they say, is a last-ditch effort by Israel's old guard to undo the will of the voters.
"At the heart of this matter is a political campaign," Cabinet Secretary Danny Naveh said Thursday, as prosecutors weighed a police recommendation to prosecute Netanyahu for fraud and breach of trust. "The public in Israel wanted (this) government, and now there is an assault aimed at trying to change this."
The comment typifies Netanyahu's tempestuous 10 months in office. The gulf of distrust has only grown as peacemaking with the Arabs unraveled and Israel's five-year economic boom fizzled.
Netanyahu has quarreled with the heads of the army and security services; accused the universities of fostering "monolithic thinking" that promotes the opposition Labor Party; and faced rising tension between his religious allies and Israel's liberal courts.
The latest scandal stems from Netanyahu's apparent desire to wrest the all-important attorney general's job from the highbrow circles that have always dominated the legal system.
When Netanyahu in January persuaded his Cabinet to appoint Roni Bar-On, an unknown, rumpled Jerusalem attorney linked to his Likud Party, the resultant uproar caused Bar-On to resign after only a day on the job.
Days later, Israel TV alleged that the appointment was part of a ploy by senior officials who expected Bar-On to end the corruption trial of Aryeh Deri, head of the Shas religious party and a key coalition partner for Netanyahu.
Netanyahu denied the allegations and called for the inquiry. After a 12-week investigation, police stunned Israelis this week by recommending to the state prosecutors that Netanyahu be indicted.
On Thursday, Netanyahu appeared before supporters and cast his message: "We are getting endless calls of support from the public (which) say … 'Don't let them make your spirits fall."'
The prime minister's team has hinted that the Labor Party, the police and the media are part of a loose conspiracy to end his rule.
Netanyahu's spokesman Shai Bazak told the Maariv daily that there were "elements in the investigative team" who wanted to help the opposition bring down the government.
And policy adviser David Bar-Illan told the AP, "It may very well be just self-aggrandizing on the part of some of the investigators. … It may be very glamorous to be able to interrogate the prime minister and try and bring him down."
Chief investigator Sandu Mazor on Thursday called such charges "total nonsense." The Labor Party, meanwhile, issued a statement condemning "the unrestrained … incitement against the police."
The liberal intelligentsia's antipathy toward Netanyahu appears to exceed its traditional dislike of his Likud party and its nationalist attachment to biblical borders for Israel.
Although born in Jerusalem, Netanyahu spent his teens in Philadelphia, attended the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and spent most of the 1980s in the United States as a diplomat.
He was elected by a coalition of the disenfranchised - Russian immigrants, poor Israelis, devout Jews and West Bank settlers alienated by the previous Labor government. He has a tendency to surround himself with advisers of American backgrounds, far removed from the old-boys' network that always ran Israel.
Now his fate is in the hands of state attorney Edna Arbel, who is expected to decide by Sunday whether to prosecute the premier.
A decision to press charges could reinforce claims that - in the words of Israel TV reporter Ayala Hasson, who broke the Bar-On story three months ago - "the Likud may have conquered power, but not the elites in the prosecution."
 Load-Date: April 18, 1997

 

End of Document
