

For Israelis, Back to the Fears of the Bunker
March 5, 1996, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 916 words
Byline: By RON KAMPEAS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




As big as a bus. As small as a backpack. As light and flat as a smear of face paint.
These are the dimensions of fear in Israel, a country where peace of mind is a memory and logic has been reduced to the randomness of the next suicide bomb.
Irit Kalisker couldn't shake the thought that the bomber who killed 13 people - including five teen-agers - in Tel Aviv on Monday seemed headed for a shopping center where a children's costume party marking the joyous Purim holiday was taking place.
Dressing her 5-year-old son Amit for a Purim party on Tuesday, she abandoned plans for face paint and a costume, choosing instead a blue sweat suit that barely covered his gangly body.
"I thought, 'Why make him a target?"' she said.
Later, the choice shocked her. "I feel helpless, despairing, not in control," she said.
Those sentiments seemed to define the whole nation after nine days in which four suicide bombers have killed 57 innocent people.
The bombers' element of surprise has thrown the country - which thought it knew what to do in war - out of kilter, said Nahman Shai, who as army spokesman had calmed Israelis while Iraq launched 39 Scud missiles against the Jewish state during the 1991 Gulf War.
"We've lost a certain focus" since then, he told Channel 2 television. "We've got to get it back."
The "focus" Israelis miss is an identifiable reason for the violence.
Ayelet Dror, a clinical psychologist, said Israelis who had expected peace with the Arabs and were getting used to a feeling of prosperous normalcy after decades of war now felt "uncertainty."
"People don't know what the significance of the pain is, as they did in previous wars," she said.
Israelis sifted through arcane details in reports on the carnage, searching for clues that could save their lives in the future.
The backpack containing 33 pounds of TNT - which was set off Monday by a suicide bomber near a central Tel Aviv shopping center - is what obsessed Lauren Gottlieb.
"I saw a man at the bus stop wearing a backpack," she said Tuesday. "I walked home."
Passenger volume on Jerusalem's usually crowded No. 18 bus has dropped 90 percent after two of the bombers set themselves off along its route, said bus driver Meir Ben Tsadok.
The bus is also what five-year-old Anina Bangert remembered as she listened to stories in a Jerusalem nursery school. Usually closed on Purim, the school was open to keep the children under close supervision.
"I saw the boxes with the people inside," she said, referring to the ritual TV footage of coffins and funerals. "I'm scared a terrorist will get on a bus."
For some, it was a matter of simply remaining indoors. Jerusalem's parks, usually packed with barbecues on holidays, were empty.
"Usually, you can't get a pin in here on Purim ," sighed Hagit Alon, who supervises activities at the Israel Museum youth wing. She swept a hand towards a scattering of parents helping to fashion butterfly wings for their kids. "It's so subdued today."
At a mall in Jerusalem's Talpiot neighborhood, a cafe advertising Purim specials was empty, and the smile on a bored waitress' face faded as people walked by. She adjusted the bunny ears on her head.
"All those kids who want to make Purim masks, assemble in the main hall," crackled a woman's weary voice over the public address system. There was silence.
Israelis looked to the government for answers - and some said the government should stop reeling and start acting.
"Their status is that of the sick man who finds out he has cancer," wrote Nahum Barnea, a columnist whose son died in the Feb. 25 Jerusalem bus bombing.
"He finally knows what he is suffering from," Barnea, who backs the peace process, wrote in the Yediot Ahronot newspaper. "It's time for chemotherapy."
While cries for government action were numerous, few seemed to have any idea of what to do.
Even Ariel Sharon, a right-wing legislator who is one of the government's sharpest critics, had trouble with specifics.
"We need to switch from a defensive struggle to an offensive one," he said when challenged by reporters on Israel Television - exactly the same vague terms government ministers had been using.
Others blamed the Palestinians for seeming to renege on the two-year-old peace deal, in which they received a measure of autonomy in exchange for an end to attacks on Israel.
Although the Palestinian leadership has repeatedly condemned the bombers, there was a widespread feeling among Israelis that it has done little to stop them and might even have offered tacit encouragement.
In any case, Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat's condemnations appear to matter little when feelings are running so high.
"There was a fragile trust after the peace, a real attempt to build trust, but now there is a feeling we're being suckered," said Dror, the psychologist. "It's a primitive feeling, like blood revenge."
On the front page of the Yediot newspaper Tuesday, a writer questioned how much peace would cost Israelis.
"Are there really still those among you who toy with the illusion that you can take without giving?" wrote author Amos Oz in a "Letter to a Palestinian Acquaintance." "That we will give without taking?"
One of the few mothers who turned out for Tuesday's Purim celebrations at the heavily guarded Israel Museum said she could find strength only in hope.
"I'm not disappointed in Arafat, I'm disappointed with those Israelis who don't see a different way but war," said Ronit Miles, bottle-feeding 8-month-old Maayan. "I'll still take buses. We have to trust in the future."
 Load-Date: March 5, 1996

 

End of Document
