

For Many Russians, Yeltsin Personifies the Country's Woes
March 9, 1996, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 987 words
Byline: AP Photo NY113, By JULIA RUBIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body




Viktor and Larisa Tkachev are young, educated Muscovites, the kind of people long considered the backbone of Boris Yeltsin's support. They say there is no way in the world they will vote for him in June.
Not when they can't afford to send their daughter to a good school. Not when they haven't been to a restaurant in 10 years, except for one trip to McDonald's. And not so long as Viktor has to travel "abroad" just to visit his parents back home in the former Soviet republic of Belarus.
"Yeltsin has let the entire country collapse. Russia should be a great power," says Viktor, a computer programmer who lives in a cramped 20th-floor apartment in north Moscow.
He will probably vote for the Communist candidate in the presidential race. "The changes have been for the worse, and we need a new president," he says.
Yeltsin's hopes of winning a second term as president are clearly in trouble in small-town Russia, where factories have closed and workers often don't get paid. But even in the capital's apartment towers, shops and university classrooms, the president is widely cursed.
Having wielded vast power for five years, Yeltsin is now the lightning rod for Russians' anxieties and disappointments.
People whose lives have been turned upside down by the transition from communism to a raw democracy blame Yeltsin for sky-high prices, endemic corruption, measly pensions, beggars in the subway, crime, dirt, the flood of Western imports and the war in Chechnya.
He is too weak, or too authoritarian, depending on the critic. A crude provincial, or a wily manipulator.
Yeltsin could still do well if he succeeds in convincing voters he is the lesser of evils, the only choice against the resurgent Communists. Many Russians are still undecided.
 
 "I have the sense he's up there and doesn't see what's going on with ordinary people," scoffs Andrei Borisov, a slight, 31-year-old Afghan war veteran who just got laid off as a driver with an armored-car company.
"He's a kind of czar, and we're the serfs."
Borisov doesn't want to go back to communism. But he says the new system has no place for a worker like himself, and no effective laws or even Soviet-style bureaucrats to whom he could appeal with a problem.
"By nature, I'm a simple worker," he says, standing out in a blowing snow in industrial southeast Moscow, where he came to try to talk his former employer into rehiring him. No luck.
"I think I can't go out and do business," he says. "I don't know how. I don't have the education."
Borisov's family of three lives on the equivalent of about $ 60 a month, his wife's salary as a hairdresser.
He prefers reformist candidates. But if it's Yeltsin vs. the Communists, the Communists get his vote.
 
 Vera Zaitseva, 35, who manages the Ivan the Terrible jewelry store, believes things really are better than in Soviet times.
"If a person works, he can make a better life, which wasn't so before," she says.
But businesses have to struggle against organized crime and corruption, and chaotic tax laws, she adds. She wishes the government could impose order.
"It's the instability - you can't prepare for anything," she says. "A lot of people have lost faith, and they think all businesspeople are bandits."
She voted for Yeltsin five years ago but hasn't made up her mind this time.
 
 The student lounge at Moscow State University's sociology department swirls with smoke and anger.
"I can't bear seeing people who have no money to buy bread - our grandmothers and grandfathers," says Lena Kochetkova, 17, who is too young to vote, but supports the Communists.
"And I can't bear seeing the young men who have to take part in the war - and their mothers when they see them dead."
Students sitting around a table drinking Coke feel Yeltsin has allowed Russian culture to be suffocated by Western influences, and say it's hard to find Russian products in stores. They blame Jews for most of the country's problems.
Yeltsin is hindering Russian soldiers in Chechnya, keeping them from victory, the students say. At the same time, they condemn him for using force to crush an uprising by hard-liners at the parliament in 1993.
"This isn't democracy," says Rodion Sokolov, 20. "This is a super-presidential republic. When people don't agree with him, he shoots. It's the most ordinary totalitarianism."
 
 Sergei Zaitsev, a 44-year-old retired military man who lives in one room of a shabby communal apartment, says Yeltsin has been too weak - all talk and a bit too much drink.
Yeltsin should have pushed through more of his decrees, punished the leaders of the failed Soviet coup, crushed the Chechen rebels, gone after criminals and not allowed the press to insult him, Zaitsev says.
"People should respect the leader and not call him an idiot," says Zaitsev, who has an old portrait of Josef Stalin on his wall along with the Beatles and assorted poets.
He'll probably vote for Yeltsin because he doesn't see a better option.
He doesn't like to complain, but he believes life was better in Soviet times.
As for being able to travel or buy better goods, Zaitsev rubs his fingers in the air and smiles: "What freedoms? Now I can see things, but I still can't afford them. … Give me a separate apartment, or a car, and I'll care about different things."
 
 In the dank passageway underneath Pushkin Square, a couple of Yeltsin supporters collect signatures to put his name on the ballot. Beside them people hold similar petitions for Mikhail Gorbachev's presidential campaign and for Chechen independence.
All three groups manage to attract a steady trickle of people from the river of commuters hurrying past.
Signing for Yeltsin, a 72-year-old pensioner identifies herself to a reporter only as Tatyana. She predicts others will come around to Yeltsin when they remember Soviet hardships.
"Boris Nikolayevich is honest - like a tank, who can save Russia," she says.
"People say we're going through such a hard time. Well, when was it ever easy for us?"
 Load-Date: March 9, 1996

 

End of Document
