

For ill-fated ship, nothing seemed unusual until the blast
The Associated Press
October 14, 2000, Saturday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 832 words
Byline: By ROBERT BURNS, AP Military Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The fateful voyage of the USS Cole began as a journey to the Persian Gulf, standard fare for a Navy warship. It ended in the calm waters of the Arabian Peninsula port of Aden when a seemingly harmless dinghy eased up to the $1 billion destroyer and blew a hole in its hull, killing 17 sailors.
At that moment, dozens of unsuspecting targets - nearly all of them enlisted personnel - were in the ship's eating and cooking areas, as well as an engine room and an auxiliary engineering room. They would have expected nothing more remarkable than another day on duty, albeit in an exotic land with a reputation for violence.
It was the worst attack on the American military since a terrorist bomb ripped through an Air Force housing complex near Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, in 1996, killing 19 troops.
The White House said Saturday that President Clinton will join Defense Secretary William Cohen at a memorial service Wednesday at Norfolk Naval Station, the ship's home port in Virginia.
Clinton, in a letter Saturday to Republican congressional leaders, described the incident and said that more than 100 military personnel, plus two Navy warships, were sent to Yemen to help with security, communications and medical needs. They will stay only as long as needed.
During a political trip Saturday to Denver, Clinton urged Americans to pray for the victims. "Their families need all the support of the American people," he said.
Navy officials said the search-and-rescue effort for 10 sailors missing aboard the crippled ship had turned into a recovery effort, meaning that hope of finding any of them alive had been abandoned.
Adm. Robert Natter, commander of the U.S. Atlantic Fleet, told reporters in Norfolk that a 22-member recovery team with 10 tons of equipment would be sent to the Cole to help locate the 10 bodies, which he said "we know are there" inside the ship.
The bodies of five of the seven sailors confirmed dead were flown to Dover Air Force Base, Del. The two other bodies were still in the ship, visible but stuck in the twisted steel wreckage.
It remained uncertain who had perpetrated the attack, which had every appearance of a terrorist act.
There was nothing extraordinary about the Cole's journey when the 505-foot guided missile destroyer slipped through the Suez Canal on Monday and glided south along the Red Sea, having broken off from the battle group led by the aircraft carrier USS George Washington in the Mediterranean Sea.
The Cole was headed to the Gulf to help police the U.N. embargo against Iraq. It was a mission the Cole had performed once before, in 1998.
The Cole's crew had been at sea since Aug. 8, when the ship left Norfolk for a scheduled six-month deployment. They would have been looking forward to a port visit in Bahrain, the tiny Gulf island that is the headquarters for the U.S. Fifth Fleet, before starting work monitoring the Gulf for embargo busters.
Because the Cole was traveling separately from the George Washington battle group, no U.S. Navy oiler was available to refuel it. So, as other Navy ships had done 12 times over the previous 15 months, the Cole made arrangements through the U.S. Embassy in Yemen to stop at Aden for a routine refueling.
As the ship pulled into a channel leading to Aden's inner harbor, it was about noon, according to Adm. Vern Clark, the chief of naval operations. The Cole and its commanding officer, Cmdr. Kirk S. Lippold, were scheduled to remain in port for a few hours before continuing east toward the Arabian Sea.
The Cole's crew was undertaking what is known in the Navy as a "sea and anchor evolution," well-rehearsed work that must be done to maneuver the 8,600-ton ship into a mooring point.
"You've got people in every location in the ship … to execute this kind of evolution," Clark told reporters.
The timeline on this tragic event may go back a week or more before the attack. Clark said word of the Cole's planned arrival in Aden had been transmitted to the U.S. Embassy in Yemen 10 or 12 days earlier. That time was required, he said, to arrange for the kind of harbor assistance a warship needs to secure itself at the fueling depot, which consists of concrete pilings in the middle of the harbor.
In that span, Clark suspects that such details as the scheduled time of the Cole's arrival could have been obtained by organizers of the attack. It seems likely that the perpetrators used a small craft that was either one of the local harbor workboats or appeared to be one of them.
By participating or appearing to participate in the routine of taking the Cole's mooring lines and tying them to the fueling point, the perpetrators would not have raised any outward suspicions from the security detail aboard the Cole.
According to some reports, two men in the boat stood at attention as they came alongside the Cole and triggered the explosion. The Cole, whose nickname is "Determined Warrior," was flooded and suddenly without power. The stunned crew managed to stabilize the ship and prevent it from sinking.
 Load-Date: October 15, 2000

 

End of Document
