

German tale of intrigue blows up to haunt the mighty
The Associated Press
December 6, 1999, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 824 words
Byline: By TONY CZUCZKA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BERLIN
Body




Few Germans noticed as prosecutors in a Bavarian town chased evidence of alleged bribe-taking by a defense official. Then, there was a break: A witness fingered an arms dealer as a cash conduit for former chancellor Helmut Kohl's revered party.
Now the probe is shaking the top levels of German politics, with Kohl accused of shady party financing or, worse, possible corruption. Some already view the case as a broad alert that Germany's hard-won democracy must gird itself against influence peddling by powerful business interests.
With parliament just starting its own inquiry, charges seem certain to multiply against the longtime leader and the conservative party he ran with an iron grip for 25 years until his election defeat last year.
"A whiff of corruption is wafting across the land," the weekly Die Woche said in a front-page commentary. "The cracks in the Kohl monument are getting bigger day by day."
Lawmakers want the inquiry, launched last week, to examine whether government decisions during Kohl's 1982-98 chancellorship were influenced by illicit payments - a notion he has huffily rejected as "preposterous."
"The accusations and suspicions will collapse," Kohl predicted in an interview Friday on Mitteldeutscher Rundfunk.
In fact, no one has produced a shred of evidence that Kohl took bribes. However, the Bild am Sonntag newspaper reported Sunday that a Bonn prosecutor is reviewing whether to open a criminal investigation against Kohl for misappropriating funds, based on a complaint from an unidentified individual.
Prosecutors in the Bavarian town of Augsburg have suspected for some time that a deputy defense secretary under Kohl, Holger Pfahls, took a $1.9 million kickback to lobby for a 1991 arms sale to Saudi Arabia - a charge Pfahls denies.
While investigating that case, prosecutors discovered another tale of intrigue that kicked the probe dramatically up the ladder and implicated the former chancellor himself.
Last month, prosecutors hauled in an elegant, silver-haired man who once was Kohl's party treasurer and questioned him about a $515,000 campaign contribution handed over in Switzerland in 1991.
Walther Leisler Kiep acknowledged the handover and the deposit into one of the party's secret accounts but said he never told Kohl. He says he split it between himself, the party's tax adviser and another associate. He faces possible charges for tax evasion.
In both cases, the alleged moneyman was Karlheinz Schreiber, a businessman with connections to the political elite and Germany's spy agency. Currently fighting extradition from Canada to Germany on tax evasion charges, he denies all the accusations.
The tangled trail now is leading back to an ongoing French investigation into whether kickbacks flowed for the construction of an oil refinery by France's Elf Aquitaine in eastern Germany.
Germany's parliament is now also looking into the project's financing, and one investigator, Friedhelm Julius Beucher of the Social Democrats, was quoted by Bild am Sonntag newspaper this week as saying that Kohl's administration destroyed files and erased computer data relating to the refinery deal.
Under pressure from his own Christian Democrats to come clean, Kohl admitted last week he had run secret party accounts.
It was a wrenching confession by a man accustomed to holding unchallenged sway over his party and his government. But it only sparked new questions that will now be examined in parliament: Who made the contributions, in what amounts and were they linked to specific favors?
Although many people knew that Kohl ran his party by personally keeping contacts down to the local level - a style dubbed the Kohl System - details of how he pulled the financial strings are being revealed only now that he's out of power.
Even his own party now accuses Kohl, once a reassuring symbol of German dependability, of flouting the rules of democracy and undermining trust in elected officials.
Such conduct leads to "votes for extremist candidates and dwindling confidence in political parties," the Frankfurter Rundschau newspaper said.
Some critics say Kohl's failings are especially grave since laws were tightened after a huge party financing scandal in the 1970s and '80s.
"It creates the impression that the politicians of 1999 simply closed their ears in the last 20 years," Eberhard von Brauchitsch, a former industry manager at the center of the earlier scandal, told the newspaper Die Welt.
"Such a lack of clarity in the financial books is unforgivable."
Under German party financing laws, the Christian Democrats could be slapped with millions in fines if they kept contributions off the books, but Kohl himself faces no sanctions.
Such legal loopholes have prompted suggestions from some politicians on the left to wean political parties off corporate campaign contributions entirely. Leaders of the Christian Democrats as well as Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder's Social Democrats swiftly rejected the idea.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY192-194 sent Dec. 5
 Load-Date: December 7, 1999

 

End of Document
