

GOP ready to match Clinton's State of the Union agenda
The Associated Press
January 28, 1998, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1054 words
Byline: By DAVID ESPO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Politely looking past White House turmoil, Republicans are eager to contrast their own election-year plan for tax cuts with President Clinton's call for more spending to buttress a "smaller government but a stronger nation."
"Big government or families? More taxes or more freedom?" is the choice confronting the country, Senate Majority leader Trent Lott countered Tuesday night in a high-tech GOP response to Clinton's prime time State of the Union address.
Republican proposals - to improve education, day care opportunities and crack down further on crime - are "shaped by our commitment to family, to faith and to freedom," the Mississippi Republican added.
The president carried his message to middle America today. At a rally in Champaign, Ill., he told a college audience, "We need every child in this country to know if he or she works hard… They can all go to college now and we need them there for our future."
Clinton was delighted with the reaction to his State of the Union speech, White House spokesman Mike McCurry said today. "The president was buoyant. He was enormously satisfied with the response he got from Congress," McCurry said.
While they clashed freely over priorities, Clinton and most Republicans found common ground in avoiding mention of the crisis that has gripped the White House for the past week.
Clinton has denied charges that he had sex with a former White House intern and tried to cover it up, and never mentioned the subject as he stood before a House chamber packed with lawmakers, Supreme Court Justices, Cabinet officials and guests.
Lott touched on the explosive subject only in passing, when he warned Iraqi President Saddam Hussein that "despite any current controversy" the GOP-controlled Congress will "vigorously support the president" in defending American interests.
Hillary Rodham Clinton said today that she was thrilled by the reception given her husband's speech, which she called "a triumph … a 100 on a scale of 1 to 10."
"It proved again last night that the people are really pleased by what the president has done the last five years and want him to continue his agenda," she told ABC's "Good Morning America."
Polls taken right after the speech had a bit of good news for the president. An NBC poll showed 77 percent approval for the policies he espoused in the speech; those surveyed were evenly divided about whether the allegations he had an affair with a former White House intern were true, untrue or they weren't sure.
As is customary, the pageantry of a State of the Union address marked the kickoff of a yearlong struggle between the parties.
Clinton and Vice President Al Gore arranged to fly to the nation's heartland today to push their proposals for expanding Medicare, safeguarding Social Security and using an increase in the price of cigarettes to help expand child care, educational opportunities and other programs.
For their part, congressional Republicans scheduled their first hearing of the year on a top priority - legislation to tame the Internal Revenue Service.
Political reaction to the president's remarks fell along predictable lines.
Democrats, heartened by the forceful denials Clinton uttered Monday about the Monica Lewinsky affair, applauded his proposals.
"There is tremendous unity in the Democratic party" around Clinton's agenda, said House Democratic leader Dick Gephardt of Missouri, "making HMOs work for patients, expanding child care to working families and striving to make college as universal as high school."
House Speaker Newt Gingrich, R-Ga., credited Clinton with a "good, workmanlike speech," but took sharp issue with one presidential statement. "One thing I emphatically disagreed with was his statement that the greatest health threat to our young people is tobacco. The greatest threat to our young people is crack cocaine and heroin."
Gingrich said in a brief interview lawmakers will pass tobacco legislation this year, but was vague on what it would contain. He was emphatic, though, in saying Republicans would oppose Clinton's attempts to take any additional revenue and spend it on federal programs.
The competition inherent on State of the Union night was clear even before Clinton began speaking.
Republicans led the applause when Gingrich's wife, Marianne, walked to her seat in the gallery overlooking the chamber. Democrats did likewise a few moments later when Mrs. Clinton made her way to her seat across the way.
Her husband drew bipartisan applause when he renewed his pledge to submit a balanced budget for the fiscal year that begins Oct. 1. "If we hold fast to fiscal discipline we may balance the budget this year," he added.
Plunging into the debate over the use of future surpluses, he said, "I have a simple, four-word answer: save Social Security first."
Clinton's agenda for the congressional election year also includes a minimum wage increase of unspecified size, protections for patients enrolled in HMOs and self-financed eligibility for Medicare for those 55 and older. In addition, he favors a string of domestic program expansions to be paid for out of a $ 1.50-per-pack increase in the cost of tobacco products over the next decade. The increase itself would be part of legislation to ratify a nationwide tobacco settlement of numerous state lawsuits - a measure that faces a perilous course in Congress.
The administration is counting on the tobacco deal to free up $ 65 billion over five years to pay for social spending.
Clinton urged $ 21.7 billion for a child care initiative, doubling to 2 million the number of kids eligible for child care subsidies. "Not a single family should have to choose between a job they need and the child they love," he said.
He proposed $ 7.3 billion to hire 100,000 teachers, with a goal of reducing class sizes in grades one through three. He also urged tax credits to pay interest on nearly $ 22 billion in bonds to finance school construction.
"We have moved past the sterile debate between those who say government is the enemy and those who say government is the answer," he said. "We have a smaller government but a strong nation."
Outlining a long list of priorities likely to strike sparks in Congress, Clinton also called for overhaul of the campaign finance laws, payment of back dues to the United Nations and prompt Senate confirmation of judicial nominations.
 Load-Date: January 28, 1998

 

End of Document
