

GOP pushes for across-the-board spending cut in budget deal
The Associated Press
November 16, 1999, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 870 words
Byline: By ALAN FRAM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Republicans pressed the White House on Tuesday to accept a small across-the-board cut in federal spending as the two sides edged to the brink of a near-$400 billion budget deal.
President Clinton vetoed a 1 percent reduction in agency budgets two weeks ago, and Democrats have accused the GOP of pursuing mindless, excessive cuts ever since. Eager for political cover, Republican negotiators have offered a 0.42 percent reduction, and House Speaker Dennis Hastert, R-Ill., pursued such a cut in a telephone talk with Clinton, who is in Turkey.
"I talked to the president last night, he didn't reject it," Hastert said.
But Tuesday's bargaining session ended after White House budget chief Jack Lew refused to accept an across-the-board cut, GOP negotiators said. Aides said a frustrated Hastert would try reaching Clinton once again, and votes on a compromise package were now not expected until Thursday.
To keep agencies open while talks continue, Republicans planned Wednesday to push through the sixth short-term spending bill since the Oct. 1 start of fiscal 2000. This one would run through Nov. 24.
Resorting to gimmickry, bargainers agreed to delay the scheduled Sept. 30, 2000, pay day for the military and some civilian federal workers to the next day - the first day of fiscal 2001. That plan, described by members of both parties speaking on condition of anonymity, would save the government more than $3 billion on its fiscal 2000 books, even though the same amount of money would be spent.
The hunt for about $6.5 billion in fiscal 2000 savings loomed as the major remaining hurdle to a budget package that would all but finish Congress' work for the year. The savings are aimed at letting Republicans claim they honored their pledge not to spend Social Security surpluses - a contention rejected by Democrats and the Congressional Budget Office.
Another possible problem was a demand by Sen. Robert Byrd, D-W.Va., to let coal mines continue stripping mountaintops and dumping the waste into valleys and streams.
The administration was threatening to veto such a measure on environmental grounds, but offered temporary relief as a compromise. Byrd has proposed letting the practice continue for two years nationwide, according to documents obtained by The Associated Press, prompting protests from environmental groups.
The emerging budget deal would combine five spending bills financing seven Cabinet departments, dozens of agencies and the budgets for the District of Columbia and foreign aid. The other eight measures for fiscal 2000, which began Oct. 1, have already become law.
The White House crowed about winning money for hiring teachers, police officers, land purchases and United Nations dues, as well as GOP retreats on provisions helping the oil, mining and other industries that Clinton considered anti-environmental.
But at the Capitol, many Democrats seemed underwhelmed as lawmakers returned to the Capitol en masse from a Veterans Day break.
"I don't think most members have figured out how they're going to vote on it," House Minority Leader Dick Gephardt, D-Mo., said after a meeting of House Democrats.
He cited "some real victories," but said the year was ending with "a mixed picture" because of no action on gun control, a minimum wage increase or enhanced rights for patients in managed care programs.
House Republican leaders tried to rally their own members to support the package. They boasted about protecting Social Security, boosting defense spending, curtailing Clinton's spending requests, winning more flexibility for states using federal education funds, and administration concessions on abortion activities overseas.
"Our negotiators did as good a job as possible," said House Majority Whip Tom DeLay, R-Texas.
There was some GOP grumbling about plans to combine the five bills into one huge measure, reminiscent of last fall's 4,000-page, eight-bill package that many Republicans disliked. But DeLay said he expected the bill to pass, helped in part by the eagerness of many Republicans to go home for the year.
"Exhaustion is your friend," he said.
Eleven months after the session began in the heat of Clinton's impeachment trial, it was nearing its end amid relatively minor squabbles that bore few of the stark ideological divides of earlier budget battles.
Rather than demanding to eliminate entire agencies and threatening federal shutdowns, Republicans wrote bills that broke budget limits and topped last year's spending by $34 billion. Then, in year-end negotiations, they ceded Clinton another $5.1 billion in foreign aid, education, natural resources and other programs, plus another $500 million both sides wanted for agriculture and Hurricane Floyd relief.
The added $5.1 billion in spending is just 0.9 percent of the roughly $570 billion the 13 annual spending bills control, and 0.3 percent of the near $1.8 trillion overall federal budget.
Looking to nail down votes, DeLay said the bill would be made "as sweet as possible" by adding a popular measure paying hospitals and nursing homes $11 billion to make up for cuts in Medicare payments.
GOP aides said another broadly supported bill would also be attached, extending federal benefits for disabled people who return to work.
 Load-Date: November 17, 1999

 

End of Document
