

Hail, The Hero Comes.
May 31, 1996, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 553 words
Byline: By ED SCHUYLER JR., AP Racing Writer
Dateline: BOSTON
Body




Cigar was applauded Friday at Suffolk Downs just for walking off a horse van.
"He's sure a hero in everybody's eyes," Allen E. Paulson, Cigar's owner, has said, and the 1995 Horse of the Year is being treated as a king, or a sheikh, for his appearance in the Massachusetts Handicap Saturday.
Both Paulson and trainer Bill Mott get requests for pictures of Cigar and stacks of fan mail for the horse, much of it from children.
When Cigar went to the United Arab Emirates for his thrilling victory in the $ 4 million Dubai World Cup March 27, the Makhtoums (Dubai's ruling family) provided a plane so the 6-year-old horse could make a direct flight.
Friday, Cigar, who was vanned up from Belmont Park in New York, was given a police escort from the Massachusetts-Connecticut border. When the van arrived at the Suffolk Downs stable area at 2:38 p.m. EDT, it was preceded by vehicle of the state police K-9 unit, complete with barking dog.
A large group of media and the backstretch populace joined Mott in welcoming the star of what almost everybody expects to be a one-horse show in which Cigar will move to within one of Citation's modern-day North American record of 16 consecutive victories.
Cigar will be a prohibitive favorite to beat five rivals, none of whom will be going into the 1 -mile race off a win. Post time is 4:40 p.m., and ESPN will telecast from 4 p.m. to 5 p.m.
Cigar will carry 130 pounds, the highest of his career, and spot his rivals from 19 to 22 pounds in what is essentially a prep for the June 30 Hollywood Gold Cup at Hollywood Park, where his opposition figures to be much tougher.
The Hollywood Gold Cup also will be the last handicap for Cigar this year, expected to be his last at the races. After that he will compete in weight-for-age stakes, where he won't be penalized by weight.
"I don't think it matters who you bring to Cigar, if he runs his race, he'll beat them," said Jerry Bailey, Cigar's jockey..
Bailey, a Hall of Fame rider, knows however that any horse can lose on a given day and he knows who will be blamed when he happens to Cigar.
"I came to the realization a long ago that if he gets beat, I'll get the lion's share of the blame whether it's due or not," Bailey said. "That's the name of the game, but I welcome the pressure."
Mott wanted a race for Cigar between the Dubai World Cup and the Hollywood Gold Cup and so he picked the MassCap, which most people feel will be only a $ 400,000 personal appearance for the Big Horse.
The winner's share from the $ 250,000 purse is $ 150,000. There also is a $ 250,000 bonus, for which only Cigar is eligible. A victory would boost his career earnings to $ 8,069,815. When Cigar won the 1995 MassCap the bonus was $ 500,000.
"Cigar. The Second Coming," is emblazoned on T-shirts made up by Suffolk Downs management, which is delighted about the star's second appearance at the track as it fights for credibility in the industry. The track in East Boston, once derided as Sufferin' Downs, was closed in 1990-91 before opening Jan. 1, 1992, under new management.
As part of the festivities, Bailey signed autographs at the track Friday.
While he signed, he was asked such questions as, "Is he fun to ride? Is he mean?"
"They usually asked about his personality," Bailey said of the horse who is attaining the celebrity bestowed on human athletes.
 Load-Date: May 31, 1996

 

End of Document
