

Hebron's Settlers See Only the City's Jewish Heritage
September 29, 1996, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 890 words
Byline: By HILARY APPELMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HEBRON, West Bank
Body




A minibus cruises into the center of Hebron, passing Arab shops and spiraling minarets of mosques before delivering its load of tourists to a fortress-like stone temple built by King Herod.
"This is ours," the Israeli guide tells the group. "You can feel safe. This is part of the place Abraham bought 4,000 years ago."
Jews trace their roots in this West Bank city to Abraham's purchase of a cave and field in the valley of Hebron. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and their wives are believed buried here.
The city has been ruled alternately by Jews, Christians and Muslims since its founding. Today it is home to 94,000 Palestinians and 450 Jewish settlers - a demographic reality the settlers do their best to ignore.
The tour is part of the settlers' campaign to fortify their claims to Hebron and stave off Israel's promised - but overdue - troop withdrawal from the city by emphasizing its ancient Jewish heritage.
David Bar-Illan, spokesman for Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, said Sunday that Israel will renegotiate the pullback from Hebron. His remark came after Israel's opening of a tunnel near the Wailing Wall in Jerusalem sparked violence last week that killed 56 Palestinians and 14 Israelis.
Tourists to Hebron, largely American Jews, are offered an opportunity to, as the ads say, "commune with our forefathers and our national roots."
"Down there are our forefathers and nobody can tell us to go out of here," guide Moria Zeira says as she leads the group into the Tomb of the Patriarchs, built by Herod over Abraham's cave. It also is revered by Muslims as the Abraham Mosque.
Palestinians are scarcely mentioned on the tour, even as it passes through neighborhoods and streets crowded with men and women in traditional Arab dress.
"It's just an Arab building, I don't really know," Zeira says when someone asks about a large downtown building. "If I don't tell you it's Jewish, it's Arab."
The few references to Palestinians are relentlessly negative.
"That divides us from the Arabs, so they will not kill us," Zeira says, pointing to a 40-foot fence surrounding an enclave of 17 Jewish families.
"This is the Arab market," she says at another stop. "The Hamas organization - they're here," she adds, referring to the militant Islamic movement linked to attacks on Jews.
The tour puts heavy emphasis on the 1929 massacre of 67 Hebron Jews by Arab rioters. The slaughter ended the Jewish presence in the city until 1967, when Israel captured the West Bank from Jordan during the Six-Day War. Memories of 1929 drive the settlers' conviction that Jews must not be expelled from this holy city again.
The tour stops at the graves of those killed in the massacre, and at a museum and shrine where photographs of the victims and their ransacked homes and synagogues are on display.
"Try to imagine what happened to each one of them - the women, the children," Zeira says.
By contrast, there is almost no mention of Brooklyn-born settler Baruch Goldstein's massacre of 29 Palestinians praying at the Tomb of the Patriarchs on Feb. 25, 1994.
Since then, Jewish and Muslim worshipers at the tomb have been separated by padlocked metal doors and soldiers armed with semi-automatic rifles. Visitors pass through a double set of metal detectors to enter the tomb, which bristles with barricades and guard posts and echoes with the crackle of walkie-talkies.
"For the past two years, Jews have been forbidden to enter this hall," reads a sign on the locked door leading to the Muslim prayer area. It offers no explanation.
Zeira is slightly more forthcoming.
The area has been closed "since Baruch Goldstein," she says. Later, she tells the group that Goldstein killed Palestinians in the hall - site of the tombs of Isaac and Rebecca.
"When are we going to see Goldstein's grave?" asks a man in the group, a retiree from Florida in a broad-brimmed straw hat. He later says Goldstein was a "noble man" who probably had a "motivation" for what he did.
"It's not on the tour," Zeira says quickly. "Not everyone wants to see it."
Zeira does not know where Goldstein's victims are buried. She is surprised to be asked.
"The Arabs?" she says. "I don't know. In their own cemeteries."
At the end of the tour, the group gets the chance to buy key rings and bumper stickers emblazoned with the slogan "Hebron, past, present and forever." Settler leaders sell Hebron medallions - $ 125 for silver-plated medallions and $ 400 for sterling silver - and pass out envelopes for donations.
David Wilder, a spokesman for the Jewish community in Hebron, declines to say how much money has been raised, but says fundraising is an important component of the tours.
The sheer numbers of visitors - both Israelis and foreigners - is also important for shoring up support for the settlers, he said.
The previous Israeli government cut government funds for the settlers and denied them permission to expand. Settlers expect Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's conservative government to give them permission - but not money - to build and are looking to overseas donors to fill the gap.
"We're just waiting for money," Zeira says. "There's a list of 100 families waiting to move in."
At a stop in the Kiryat Arba settlement just outside Hebron, Zeira points out a half-empty apartment complex on the edge of town.
"After the tour," she says, smiling, "if you like it, you can move in."
 Load-Date: September 29, 1996

 

End of Document
