

High School Smooths the Path for New Immigrants
October 20, 1996, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 816 words
Byline: By KAREN MATTHEWS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




As the Taliban religious army sweeps through Afghanistan closing schools for girls, Lourdes Burrows expects a few of these youngsters to end up at her high school.
Burrows is principal of the Newcomers High School and Academy for New Americans, one of a handful of public high schools in the country devoted to the education of recent immigrants.
"We try to keep abreast of whatever is happening overseas," Ms. Burrows said, "because we'll be getting an influx."
At a time when the national mood is turning against immigrants - new legislation will stiffen penalties for illegal immigration and make it harder for even legal immigrants to receive welfare - these schools are run by people who believe in catering to newcomers, not raising the fence.
No questions are asked about Newcomers students' legal status, though many are no doubt undocumented.
"My only charge is to maximize the potential of every student who comes into this building," said Ms. Burrows, an energetic woman who retains the accent of her native Cuba. "What I want to do is teach them to be good Americans."
Now in its second year, the school is doing well, with more than 70 percent of the students who took last year's state Regents exams in math and chemistry passing.
Situated in the gritty, industrial neighborhood of Long Island City, Queens, the Newcomers School has a growing population of 600-odd students who generally have been in the United States less than a year. About half are Spanish-speaking; the rest speak an assortment of tongues including Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, Haitian Creole, Hindi, Portuguese and Urdu.
Some classes are taught in pupils' native languages and others in English. And some instructors use both, as civics teacher Orlando Sarmiento did for a recent lesson about the Constitution.
He wrote on the board: "How does the Constitution provide a blueprint for the American government?"
"Que es blueprint?" Sarmiento asked as hands went up.
"Que es preamble? Una introduccion. The preamble is an introduction. When you write an essay for me you have to include an introduction to let me know what the paper is going to be about."
Haltingly, the students read the words - "insure domestic tranquility, provide for the common defense" - and Sarmiento drew out their meanings.
"What is to 'promote the general welfare?"' he asked. "What is welfare?"
"Bienestar," a girl suggested - well being.
The teacher nodded. "Not to be confused with welfare programs," he said.
Down the hall in Angie Margiotta's English as a Second Language class, students who had been in the United States as little as a week or two struggled with the past tense.
Ms. Margiotta spoke clearly and slowly, her enthusiasm compensating for the classroom's peeling blue paint. "What did you do last night?" she asked. "Did you swim? Did you drive a car?"
She patiently corrected a girl who wrote on the board, "I didn't drived."
The program is similar to one in Los Angeles, where the Newcomers Center operates as a "school within a school" at Belmont High.
The principal of the Los Angeles school, Maria Olmos, said enrollment dipped in 1994 when California voters passed Proposition 187, which would have barred illegal immigrants from public schools.
The measure has been challenged in court, and "the numbers are back to normal last year and this year," Ms. Olmos said.
New York has traditionally been more hospitable to newcomers, and the city's Republican mayor, Rudolph Giuliani, is carving a niche as his party's foremost immigration advocate.
Nevertheless, there is opposition to the Newcomers School.
The New York Civil Rights Coalition, which has also battled ethnic-themed dormitories at Cornell University and an all-girls' New York City public school, filed a complaint with the U.S. Department of Education's Office of Civil Rights when the Newcomers School opened last year.
Michael Meyers, the Civil Rights Coalition's executive director, calls the segregation of immigrants from the general population "an impermissible national origin classification of students" and claims it violates Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
The complaint was dismissed, but Meyers plans to appeal the decision to Education Secretary Richard Riley. He called the ruling a "deceptive, dishonest, outrageous capitulation to political correctness."
Ms. Burrows said Meyers had accepted an invitation to visit the school. "He liked it, but he still filed the complaint," she said.
"Of what relevance are my impressions of the school?" Meyers countered angrily. "It is a philosophy of separatism. It is a philosophy of isolation."
Student Roberto Mata doesn't feel isolated, however, noting instead the new variety in his everyday experience.
The Ecuadoran native, who in one month of school seemed to have acquired a working knowledge of English and a Croatian girlfriend, said he liked "to meet people from another country and know about their culture."
 Load-Date: October 21, 1996

 

End of Document
