

High-level talks resume as U.S. envoy flies to the Middle East
The Associated Press
August 16, 2000, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 758 words
Byline: By KARIN LAUB, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Israel and the Palestinians resumed high-level peace talks Wednesday, three weeks after the collapse of negotiations at Camp David, saying much remains to be done before their leaders can convene another Mideast summit.
The meeting came as Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, speaking during a visit to Indonesia, said he will "reassess" whether to declare an independent Palestinian state unilaterally on Sept. 13. He has promised in the past to make such a declaration if no permanent peace agreement with Israel is achieved by that date, but the United States has warned against the move and some other countries have pushed the Palestinians to continue peace talks instead.
In Jerusalem, the Israeli and Palestinian delegations met for five hours, said Moshe Debi, an aide to Shlomo Ben-Ami, the acting Israeli foreign minister. U.S. envoy Dennis Ross, due in the region Thursday, was expected to present new proposals for bridging the gaps, a Palestinian official said.
At last month's summit, some understandings were reached on the borders of a Palestinian state and the future of Jewish settlements, but gaps remained and nothing was put on paper.
Talks at Camp David, the U.S. presidential retreat in Maryland, broke down because of a dispute over Jerusalem and the fate of Palestinian refugees.
Since that summit, Israel and the Palestinians have made several informal contacts. On Wednesday, both sides dispatched senior officials for the first time.
In a meeting at an undisclosed location, Israel was represented by Ben-Ami and Gilead Sher, a veteran negotiator. The Palestinians sent cabinet minister Saeb Erekat and Mohammed Dahlan, the security chief in Gaza.
Ross was to spend several days with the negotiators to gauge prospects for another summit.
In Washington, a senior U.S. official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said Clinton is prepared to host another session with Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Arafat if they are ready to make decisions on the crucial issues, including Jerusalem.
Arafat's adviser, Nabil Aburdeneh, said Clinton sent a letter on Wednesday to Arafat, who was visiting Indonesia as part of a three-week diplomatic offensive on three continents.
Clinton informed Arafat that Ross is carrying new U.S. proposals on how to bridge the gaps, a Palestinian official said, speaking on condition of anonymity. The president also wrote that he would exert every effort to conclude a peace treaty by the end of the year, the official said.
In Jakarta, Indonesia's capital, Arafat was hedging on his vow to declare a Palestinian state next month.
"We had decided before, but we have to reassess this," he said after talks with Indonesian President Abdurrahman Wahid. "This will be decided through our central council which will be (held) in the beginning of next month."
Although many countries support Palestinian independence, Palestinian officials have said Arab countries, under U.S. pressure, have been urging Arafat to wait to give talks with Israel another chance. Israel has warned that a unilateral declaration would be a grave blow to the peace process, and the United States has said it would cost the Palestinians U.S. aid.
Israeli and Palestinian officials have cautioned that another summit would be convened only when it became clear that both sides were close to an agreement.
"While it is true that progress was made at Camp David, it is forbidden to raise expectations to the sky because the issues are very difficult," Ben-Ami told Israel radio Wednesday.
The hardest issue is Jerusalem. Israel has offered the Palestinians limited control in parts of traditionally Arab east Jerusalem, while Arafat has demanded sovereignty over the entire sector.
Jordan's King Abdullah II told Barak during a meeting Wednesday in the Jordanian capital, Amman, that Jordan did not accept Israeli control of holy places in Jerusalem, considering them Arab territory occupied in the 1967 Arab-Israeli war, Jordanian government television reported. A 1994 Jordanian-Israeli peace treaty accords a "special" role to Jordan in looking after the Muslim shrines in the city's eastern sector.
The U.S. official in Washington said there could be new formulations of last month's positions that might be acceptable to both sides a second time around. In a tour of Arab capitals, Arafat has gained support for any formula that he deems honorable, the official said.
Palestinian negotiator Yasser Abed Rabbo said Israeli and Palestinian officials are now reviewing what happened at Camp David to try to create a basis for future talks.
 Load-Date: August 17, 2000

 

End of Document
