

Hold the lettuce, this order upset us - settlers seek boycott of Burger King
The Associated Press
August 27, 1999, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 646 words
Byline: NATI HARNIK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MAALEH ADUMIM, West Bank
Body




Burger King's decision to allow an Israeli franchise to set up a restaurant in the predominantly Arab West Bank has turned into a whopper of a political dispute.
First Arab-Americans and other Arab groups threatened to boycott the fast food giant if the restaurant, in the Jewish settlement of Maale Adumim, remained open. On Thursday, Burger King announced it was canceling the franchise for "commercial reasons and in the best interests of hundreds of thousands of people" who work for the chain.
Angry Jewish settlers responded Friday with calls for a worldwide boycott of Burger King restaurants and demanded a halt to Israel-Palestinian peace talks over the issue.
"We are calling on Jewish organizations and our friends, Jews and Christians, to boycott Burger King," said Maale Adumim Mayor Benny Kashriel, who denounced the fast food chain's decision as "a shame and an abomination."
Kashriel, who also serves as chairman of the Yesha Council, the body representing Israeli settlers in the West Bank, called on Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak to suspend peace talks with the Palestinians and "bring this up before the Americans … because this is an American company."
Israeli government officials had no immediate comment.
Maale Adumim, located in the desert three miles east of Jerusalem, is the largest Israeli settlement in the West Bank, with about 27,000 residents. A four-lane highway links the city to Jerusalem, where most of its residents work.
The Maale Adumim Burger King remained open Friday; in its statement, Burger King said the restaurant would not have to close but would no longer be allowed to use the company's name.
"This Burger King will be open a long time," vowed Noah Maayan, the manager of the Adumim Mall, after ordering a Whopper.
In its statement, Burger King charged that the Israeli franchise holder, Rikamor, falsely stated that the restaurant, which opened three months ago, would be in Israel.
Rikamor chairman Meshulam Riklis hotly denied that, instructing his officers in a statement to take action by "all legal means available" in Israeli courts.
Burger King's decision hit Maale Adumim residents especially hard - many are moderates who back evacuating further-flung settlements in order to keep Maaleh Adumim within Israel in a final settlement.
Kashriel said Friday his city was not the kind of extremist settlement that necessarily alienates the Arabs.
"Maaleh Adumim, in the final agreement, will be a legal part of Israel," he said as he waited in line at Burger King.
Kashriel said Burger King's decision brought back memories of the Arab boycott against Israel before the state of Israel was created in 1948. The ban was initiated by the Arab world but has been practically canceled in an era of Middle East peace talks.
He warned that if the decision remained unopposed, "this surrender could lead to other steps against Israel on each and every matter. "
Meantime, he said, he would pull out his own big guns.
He appeared to have backing among U.S. Jews: In a letter to the Miami-based food chain, Anti-Defamation League national director Abraham H. Foxman said the decision "represents a blatant capitulation … to American Arab and American Muslim organizations."
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat's government welcomed Burger King's action.
"The Palestinian leadership thanks the Burger King company for closing its restaurant in Maaleh Adumim because this settlement is on Palestinian occupied land," it said in a statement issued by the WAFA Palestinian news service.
Kashriel warned Burger King's decision could backfire and harm Palestinians. He said the settlement was considering blocking some 1,000 Palestinians who work in its industrial zone from coming to work, and would stop providing firefighters and ambulances to neighboring Palestinian areas.
"Connecting hamburgers to international politics is a stupid thing to do," he said.
 Load-Date: August 27, 1999

 

End of Document
