

Hyundai struggles to overcome debt; The Week's Business feature
November 24, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News; Business News
Length: 788 words
Byline: By SANG-HUN CHOE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SEOUL, South Korea
Body




The headquarters of Hyundai, South Korea's biggest business group, overlooks a serene scene: the curved tile roofs and tree-lined pathways of an ancient palace called the Secret Garden. Inside the building, however, the mood of many is grim.
Nine years ago, Chun Hyon-dae was proud to join Hyundai Engineering & Construction, a company that was synonymous with South Korea's full-speed economic growth. These days, his company is in danger of bankruptcy, a case study on the hazards of expansion on borrowed money.
"Being a Hyundai man meant becoming an object of envy among college graduates," said Chun, 35. Now, he said, "The mood is somber in our office. "When we sit down, colleagues talk about what will happen to our company."
For years, Hyundai Engineering was the centerpiece of family-controlled Hyundai. Riding on the construction booms at home and in the Middle East in the 1970s and 1980s, the firm raked in cash to finance Hyundai's fast expansion into a $75 billion-a-year corporate empire with 40 subsidiaries.
Hyundai's presence is ubiquitous. Seven out of 10 cars jamming the streets of Seoul, a metropolis of 10 million people, are made by Hyundai affiliates. People live in Hyundai apartments, buy fuel in Hyundai gas stations and shop in Hyundai department stores.
Now, the popular perception that Hyundai was "too big to fail" has been fading, especially since the bankruptcy last week of Daewoo Motor Co., the nation's third largest automaker.
Hyundai's trouble is an outgrowth of South Korea's efforts to shed old ways of doing business.
In resource-scarce South Korea, former military rulers nurtured Hyundai Engineering and a handful of other family-owned businesses into conglomerates - called chaebol in Korean - through subsidies, cheap loans, tax breaks and a domestic market closed to foreign competitors.
The conglomerates fueled the nation's economic development. Hyundai runs the world's largest shipyard. Samsung is the world's largest producer of computer memory chips. Hyundai cars, LG refrigerators and Samsung TV sets flood low-end global markets.
But the Achilles' heel for these giants was they used borrowed money to fund their expansion.
For two years, President Kim Dae-jung has been urging them to take drastic steps to cut their debt, lower interest payments and become more profitable - a key condition for a $58 billion bailout package from the IMF that pulled South Korea out of the 1997-1998 Asian financial turmoil.
Many did not heed that warning, and critics accused Kim's government of complacency. Some of the conglomerates even got bigger, and some weak affiliates plodded on without paying their huge debts, which were rolled over by government-controlled banks.
Hyundai, for example, gobbled up bankrupt Kia Motor, the nation's No. 2 carmaker, and the semiconductor operation of LG last year.
Hyundai has been trying to get things under control - earlier this week, Hyundai Engineering said it would sell a massive ranch and stakes in other Hyundai affiliates to raise $1.14 billion to cut its total debt to $3.8 billion by year end.
But government-controlled banks said it was a reprieve, not a resolution of the firm's debt crisis. Having already rescued the builder once from bankruptcy this year, they say there would be no further bailout.
It's been a bitter pill to swallow for Hyundai Engineering's 7,000 workers. "We are bewildered and shocked," said Lee Moon-kun, 30.
Meanwhile, banks are still laden with mounds of bad loans, raising doubts about whether South Korea would ever shore up the shaky financial underpinnings of its economy.
"Korean companies still carry far too much debt," U.S. Ambassador Stephen Bosworth warned in a speech to the American Chamber of Commerce earlier this month. "In fact, by some accounts, total corporate debt may actually have increased since the crisis, and a large portion of that debt is not being serviced."
For Hyundai, the trouble was exacerbated by a family feud.
Hyundai Motor chairman Chung Mong-ku lost to his younger brother, Mong-hun, in a struggle for leadership over the conglomerate earlier this year. The ensuing family squabble delayed reforms and sapped investors' confidence in the nation's leading conglomerate.
In a dramatic reverse of roles, the crestfallen Mong-hun asked his estranged elder brother last week for financial support to salvage Hyundai Engineering, the nation's No. 1 builder and Hyundai's oldest subsidiary.
Mong-ku agreed to buy $190 million in assets and stakes Mong-hun could not quickly unload. But he did it only after his younger brother apologized for the feud.
On the Net:
Hyundai Group: http://www.hyundai.co.kr/ 
Hyundai Engineering & Construction: http://en.hdec.co.kr/ 
 
End adv for weekend editions
 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY130
 Load-Date: November 27, 2000

 

End of Document
