

In Central Asia, human rights violations on the rise
The Associated Press
April 11, 1998, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 857 words
Byline: By BIRGIT BRAUER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ALMATY, Kazakstan
Body




They burst into the room in the middle of the night, faces hidden by masks, clubs gripped tight in their fists. The four intruders beat the sleeping man over the head. Then they turned to his screaming wife and hit her.
The attack left Pyotr Svoik, one of Kazakstan's leading opposition politicians, with a concussion and the conviction that his country's leaders are growing increasingly nervous about his activism.
"They don't know what to do with us," Svoik said.
Human rights violations are on the rise across the five former Soviet republics of Central Asia, as rulers increase their powers and try to muffle any opposition. These leaders value stability over democracy, and they are banking on the assumption that citizens of the region do, too.
"For most, democracy is an empty word," said Nurbulat Masanov, a political scientist in Almaty.
It also could be described as a foreign concept in a region that over the centuries never had any experience with democracy. These days, the conqueror Tamerlane is a national hero once more in Uzbekistan, never mind his nasty habit of leaving mountains of skulls behind in the cities he captured in the 14th century.
In Kyrgyzstan, considered the most democratic country in the region, the government has used libel laws against journalists to stifle critical reporting and has filed criminal charges against opposition leaders and demonstrators.
Kazakstan has clamped down on opposition demonstrations and reportedly has jailed, beaten and otherwise intimidated activists.
Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan and Tajikistan hold political prisoners, and some dissenters have disappeared in mysterious circumstances.
Kyrgyzstan's president, Askar Askayev, is the only Central Asian leader to be elected to a second term in a contested election. His counterparts in Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Kazakstan had their terms extended by referendum until 2000 or later.
"These are highly controlled and highly authoritarian regimes that have dispensed with any sort of meaningful electoral process," said Erika Dailey, a Central Asia expert at the New York-based group Human Rights Watch.
The situation is in the greatest flux in Tajikistan, where a nearly 5-year-long civil war ended in June 1997 with an agreement to gradually integrate Islamic rebel leaders into a government dominated by hard-line successors to the country's former communist rulers.
Following the U.N.-mediated peace plan, Tajikistan's government has amnestied some rebels and brought others into the Cabinet. An opposition newspaper that was shut down during the war has reappeared, and several new papers have started along with new political parties.
But there have been several outbreaks of fighting, a rash of hostage-takings and an assassination attempt on President Imomali Rakhmonov since the cease-fire accord. The government has responded by cracking down on all opponents, Human Rights Watch says.
The war in Tajikistan severely frightened the rulers of the other Central Asian republics. The specter of war became an excuse for clamping down on their own opposition.
The Uzbek government has accused its opponents of fomenting instability and, in particular, of spreading an Islamic fundamentalist message.
Over the past several months, it has cracked down on people it considers to be Islamic extremists. Police arbitrarily arrested and ill-treated more than 100 people who appeared to be devout Muslims in Namangan province in December, London-based Amnesty International reported.
Amnesty International also has recorded several disappearances of Muslim clerics unaffiliated with the state-regulated Muslim Spiritual Directorate.
Turkmenistan, a one-party state, has the most stifling atmosphere. According to Human Rights Watch, in 1997 the government was holding at least 11 political prisoners, including a dissident incarcerated in a psychiatric hospital for no apparent reason other than his political views.
In two other cases, a dissident committed to a psychiatric hospital for political reasons died there in October, Amnesty International said, and another political prisoner died in custody in January, Human Rights Watch said.
In Kazakstan, most citizens seem untroubled about human rights abuses, since their greatest concern is feeding their families. President Nursultan Nazarbayev harps on this theme, saying the pursuit of prosperity is more important.
In June, a labor activist was arrested and tried for organizing an unsanctioned demonstration.
And in December, Svoik, head of the largest opposition movement in Kazakstan, was attacked while he slept.
The attack occurred outside the country, in the Kyrgyz capital of Bishkek, where Svoik had traveled to attend a conference on democracy. But Svoik is convinced the assailants were from Kazakstan, where the 2000 presidential campaign is already under way.
His movement, Azamat, had organized a number of unsanctioned demonstrations in Kazakstan to demand political reform, including the free democratic election of regional governors instead of their appointment by the president.
Svoik thinks the assailants were carrying a message not just for him, but for all Kazaks: Keep quiet.
 Load-Date: April 11, 1998

 

End of Document
