

In freeing prisoners, court says Israel cannot break the law
The Associated Press
April 19, 2000, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 802 words
Byline: By KARIN LAUB, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Israel used to argue that as a country under siege, it could not always play by the rules. But the Supreme Court sets a new standard Wednesday, freeing 13 Lebanese detainees who were held without trial.
The decision came despite the tearful pleas of the mother of an Israeli MIA who hoped the detainees might be traded for her son. After a decision last fall to outlaw torture, the order was another milestone in the court's search for a new balance between security concerns and the rule of law.
Chief Justice Aharon Barak himself is perhaps the best example of the change. In 1997, Barak ruled that Israel has the right to keep holding the Lebanese, seized by Israeli commandos over the past 14 years as bargaining chips in future negotiations on the release of missing Israeli navigator Ron Arad.
However, after agreeing to have a larger panel of nine judges rehear the case, Barak changed his mind last week, reportedly after much agonizing.
"The blow to liberty and dignity is so deep and genuine that it cannot be countenanced in a state which honors freedom and dignity," Barak wrote in ordering the detainees released.
As a bus carrying the freed detainees rolled through an army checkpoint in southern Lebanon, it was showered with rice, rosewater and flower petals in a traditional Arab welcome.
The freed men were greeted by a crowd of some 2,000 relatives and supporters who covered them with hugs and kisses.
"It's as if I was born again," Youssef Sourour, 31, one of those freed, told the Associated Press. Sourour said he was 17 when he was captured, and was ready to join the guerrillas to fight Israel again.
On Wednesday, Barak's resolve to free the men was tested by a last-minute plea by Arad's mother, Batya.
Standing before Barak and two other judges, her voice wavering, Mrs. Arad said her son, who was shot down over Lebanon in 1986, has already been held for 4,969 days. "Look into my eyes," she said, staring at the judges. "Look straight into my eyes. What would you do if your son or grandson was in this situation?"
Barak listened respectfully, but upheld the release order. He said he felt Mrs. Arad's pain and assured her the government would do everything in its power to bring her son home, but only within the framework of the law.
In the past, Mrs. Arad's argument probably would have carried the day. One of the tenets of the Israeli army was never to abandon soldiers in the field, and no price was considered too high to bring them home. In 1985, Israel traded hundreds of suspected Palestinian militants for three Israeli POWs.
In the conflict with the Palestinians, house demolitions and detentions without trial were seen as acceptable practices, upheld again and again by the Supreme Court. In 1993, the justices backed the deportation of 415 suspected Islamic militants from the West Bank and Gaza Strip to Lebanon, accepting the government's security arguments and ignoring worldwide criticism.
The watershed came in September.
The high court ruled that the Shin Bet security service can no longer torture Palestinian detainees who, according to human rights groups, had been systematically mistreated to extract confessions of anti-Israeli activity.
"The security threat, which has always been used as a cover for anything not according to the rule of law, was put in its proper place," said human rights lawyer Andre Rosenthal. "The judges decided that the rule of law was more important."
But change has been incremental, Rosenthal said. While the Shin Bet no longer tortures his clients, he said it keeps them incommunicado for longer periods in hopes of getting a confession.
Many in Israel, including Prime Minister Ehud Barak, an ex-commando and army chief, feel the courts have gone too far, complaining that the torture ruling hampers the Shin Bet, and that new ways have to be found to extract information.
The prime minister was equally critical of the high court's decision to free the Lebanese detainees. In an interview published Wednesday in the Yediot Ahronot daily, Barak said the judges have no business second-guessing security professionals.
However, even the high court seems in no hurry to free Israel's remaining trump cards - Mustafa Dirani and Sheik Abdel Karim Obeid, leading figures in the Amal and Hezbollah guerrilla groups that have fought Israeli forces in Lebanon. Obeid was seized by Israel in 1989 and Dirani in 1994.
The chief justice suggested Wednesday that parliament find a solution and pass legislation to create the legal basis for holding Dirani and Obeid. The detainees' lawyer, in the meantime, is trying to get a lower court to free them.
Whatever the outcome, times have changed in Israel. "We are no longer saying we are special," said Rosenthal, the human rights lawyer. "The rules of law apply, even if they are not particularly nice for us."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos XEW-101,XEW-102
 Load-Date: April 20, 2000

 

End of Document
