

In Israel-Palestinian conflict, the battleground shifts
November 24, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 880 words
Byline: By GREG MYRE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GAZA CITY, Gaza Strip
Body




Where have all the stone throwers gone?
Since Israelis and Palestinians began fighting two months ago, rarely a day has passed without fatalities - mostly Palestinian - in this impoverished patch of land along the Mediterranean coast.
Death remains a constant, but the battleground has shifted. The youthful army of Palestinian rock throwers has all but disappeared, no longer darting and dashing around the perimeter of Israeli military positions.
Now, small groups of Palestinian militants are stealthily launching targeted guerrilla attacks with automatic rifles and bombs, firing on Israeli troops and civilians when they leave the relative safety of their fortified compounds and housing settlements.
"During the first weeks, hundreds of kids would come close to our posts to riot, but this was not proving very successful for them," said Maj. Ran Adam, an Israeli military spokesman in Gaza. "Now we are facing terrorists who have bombs that are getting more and more sophisticated."
The now-deserted Erez crossing point between Israel and Gaza illustrates how the deadly confrontations have changed.
For weeks, Palestinian teen-agers arrived in waves at Erez each afternoon after school, pelting the Israeli army post atop a dirt embankment with rocks, firebombs and occasional gunfire, and receiving tear gas, rubber bullets and periodic live fire in return. Some clashes lasted hours. Israel's army called in bulldozers to clear away shrub brush and empty shipping containers from the sandy soil outside the post, stripping the kids of their cover and quickly thinning out their numbers.
Stone-throwing has declined - though it hasn't stopped - elsewhere in Gaza and the West Bank, for several apparent reasons. The Israelis have torn down buildings, uprooted olive groves and generally rearranged the landscape surrounding military posts to keep Palestinian youths at a distance.
Also, the Palestinians have suffered high casualties - more than 200 dead and thousands injured - for what have essentially become routine daily protests. Palestinian parents say they have trouble keeping their kids from the clashes, but their warnings appear to have had some impact.
Today, Israeli troops are perhaps at greatest risk when they leave the confines of their military posts to carry out patrols or to escort settlers.
A roadside bomb exploded as an Israeli military jeep traveled on a road near Erez on Thursday morning, sparking a gunbattle that left one Palestinian dead. In the afternoon, an Israeli soldier repairing a fence damaged by the morning bombing was killed by a Palestinian sniper, the military said.
The attacks come amid a burgeoning sense of frustration among the Palestinians who live here. The Palestinians demand that Israel withdraw from all of the West Bank, Gaza Strip and east Jerusalem, territories it captured in the 1967 Mideast war. A common refrain is that seven years of negotiations were fruitless, and it's time to fight for a Palestinian state despite Israel's overwhelming military advantage.
"In the previous uprising (from 1987-93), Palestinians would say, 'I want to go and fight,"' said Dr. Eyad Sarraj, a Gaza psychiatrist. "Now they are saying, "I want to fight and die."'
Previously, it was mostly Palestinian teen-agers and young men who were prepared to take up arms, Dr. Sarraj said. Now he regularly sees men in their 30s, married with children, who talk about becoming "martyrs."
"They tell me it's better to die once with honor, than to die every day from fear and despair," he said.
At the tiny Israeli settlement of Kfar Darom, where a bomb killed two adults traveling on a school bus this past Monday, Sarah Friedman says she and her neighbors will not be driven out by attacks.
"We are here to stay," said Friedman, an American who moved to Israel three years ago from Miami Beach, Fla. "We don't believe the answer is to leave and to give your home away to a terrorist. The answer is the Jewish control of the land."
Friedman is among 6,500 Jewish settlers in Gaza who live in protected enclaves, compared to more than 1 million Palestinians.
With such a small Israeli presence, it has long been assumed that Israel would have to remove the settlers and withdraw its troops from Gaza as part of an overall peace settlement. But after the bus bombing, more Israeli tanks and armored personnel carriers rumbled into Gaza, kicking up a minor dust storm and seizing control of an east-west road that cut the territory in half.
The latest security clampdown comes on top of an already harsh embargo in Gaza and the West Bank over the past two months.
The Israeli lockdown has prevented Palestinians from traveling to Israel for work and has limited supplies reaching the territories. Gasoline stations began running out of fuel this week in Gaza, and long lines formed at those still open. Gaza also is almost completely out of cement, bringing construction to a standstill.
Palestinian Mohammed Surour said his parents were driven from their home outside Tel Aviv in the first Arab-Israeli war in 1948. Now his elderly parents live in southern Gaza, and he in the north, which has prevented him from visiting them.
"We're not asking for the sun and the moon," Surour said. "We're just asking for the Israelis to leave Gaza and let us live by ourselves."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos AGAZ101-104
 Load-Date: November 25, 2000

 

End of Document
