

In the West Bank's lawless streets, Arafat tries weapons sweep
The Associated Press
October 13, 1999, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 737 words
Byline: By KARIN LAUB, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NABLUS, West Bank
Body




Gun control campaigner Loay Abdo awoke to the staccato of semiautomatic fire, and found the iron door of his home in the crowded market area of Nablus riddled with bullets.
Abdo said the weekend attack was an attempt by armed men ruling the streets of the West Bank's largest city to silence his demands for a weapons cleanup.
Responding to growing public frustration with lawlessness, Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat has taken reluctant steps to restore order, sending in troop reinforcements and ordering more than a dozen arms dealers arrested.
Nablus is a test case, and the campaign against illegal weapons - mandated by the peace agreements with Israel - will eventually spread to other Palestinian cities, Arafat's aides say.
But critics say the crackdown has been halfhearted and ineffective. Fearing more bloodshed, police stayed out of two vigilante strongholds - the Balata refugee camp near Nablus and the Nablus market - and only a few illegal weapons have been seized.
And, some say, the biggest arms suppliers have not been targeted because they have close ties to Arafat's Palestinian Authority.
In Balata, a shantytown of 20,000 people packed into 60 acres of shacks and half-built apartment complexes, dealers have slipped underground for the time being. But the well-connected can still make purchases, according to Jihad Izzat, a leader of Arafat's Fatah movement in the camp.
Only a few months ago, Balata was a supermarket of pistols, semiautomatic rifles and ammunition. Dealers eagerly displayed their wares to strangers and rattled off prices. The 700 members of Arafat's security forces living in the camp either turned a blind eye or, in some cases, helped make the sales.
The cozy arrangement began falling apart on Sept. 15, when two Fatah activists from Balata cruised a wedding hall in Nablus and were accused by the hosts, from the Nablus-based Abu Salhiyeh family, of harassing female guests.
The argument escalated into fist fights and a day later, three Fatah men from Balata, wearing masks and black Ninja costumes, pulled up at a Nablus butcher shop owned by the Abu Salhiyeh clan and sprayed it with bullets. Bashar Abu Salhiyeh, accused by the Balata squad of beating one of them a day earlier, was wounded in the legs.
Enraged, half a dozen of Bashar's relatives, also Fatah activists, took to the central square, shooting in the air and forcing downtown shops to close for several hours.
Arafat, who has ignored Israel's appeals to seize illegal weapons, apparently felt the display of firepower had gone too far.
He ordered troops from other towns to deploy in Nablus and had 17 suspected dealers and vigilantes - Fatah activists or members of his security forces - arrested.
Nablus Gov. Mahmoud Alul told a town hall meeting Monday night that from now on members of the security services and Fatah would not be allowed to take weapons home.
But he acknowledged the campaign was not as far-reaching as some residents had hoped for. Police didn't raid vigilante strongholds to avoid more bloodshed and illegal weapons would only be seized once owners ignored appeals to license them.
Abdo, a senior Fatah figure who spent 10 years in an Israeli jail for a botched 1975 terror attack at Tel Aviv's airport, said security officials weren't really serious about rounding up weapons.
Leaders of rival security forces have been hoarding arms to consolidate power and prepare for a possibly bloody succession battle once Arafat dies or steps aside, he said. "Everyone has a militia, weapons and thugs."
One of the most notorious gunmen in Nablus is Ahmed Tabouk, who roamed the streets during the 1987-1993 uprising against Israel, kneecapping suspected collaborators and settling personal scores with bullets.
After Nablus came under Palestinian rule in 1995, Tabouk dropped out of sight, but eventually came under the protection of West Bank security chief Jibril Rajoub. In the most recent dispute, he initially offered his firepower to the Abu Salhiyeh clan and, when rebuffed, sided with the Balata activists.
At that point, police tried to arrest him. Last weekend, Tabouk turned himself in to Tawfiq Tirawi, the West Bank intelligence chief and a Balata native.
Abdo is leading a grassroots campaign to stop the violence, distributing leaflets demanding a weapons cleanup and organizing a gun control conference.
But so far, there hasn't been much response - except for seven bullets in his front door.
 Load-Date: October 13, 1999

 

End of Document
