

In the end, the economy mattered, Barak's American advisers say
The Associated Press
May 19, 1999, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 811 words
Byline: KARIN LAUB, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TEL AVIV, Israel
Body




It was harder to get Israel's most decorated soldier elected its prime minister than it was to put Bill Clinton into the White House - despite Gennifer Flowers, pot and the draft.
That's one of the conclusions drawn by former Clinton campaign strategists who helped Israeli opposition leader Ehud Barak - branded the underdog only weeks ago - unseat Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu in Israel's first landslide win in two decades.
Their formula: avoiding personal attacks on Netanyahu and persuading voters that the economy does matter, even in security-minded Israel.
Pollster Stanley Greenberg and TV adman Robert Shrum said Wednesday that when they first came to Israel in December to help run the Barak campaign, they encountered a wall of stereotypes and pessimism by Barak's Israeli advisers in the Labor Party.
Along with Clinton strategist James Carville, they were told that Netanyahu was a media magician, unbeatable on television. The conventional wisdom was that security was the only issue that mattered to Israeli voters and that Labor couldn't lure Russian voters and Sephardic Jews, those of Middle Eastern descent, away from Netanyahu.
However, Barak, a former army chief who planned his campaign like a general mobilizing for war, was ready to try a new approach.
"When we talked to him, he said he wanted to run on the economy and on education, and not just security," Shrum said. Greenberg's "data said that that would work, and everybody else said it would never work. And Ehud said, 'Fine, move ahead."'
Barak is not the first Israeli politician to seek campaign help from outside professionals. Netanyahu has twice relied on the elusive Arthur Finkelstein, adviser to Republican politicians including North Carolina Sen. Jesse Helms and former New York senator, Alfonse D'Amato.
However, Barak's astounding victory - 56 percent to Netanyahu's 44 percent, a landslide in Israeli terms - will likely make hiring high-priced American advisers de rigeur for any future contender.
Shrum said that with the right advice, Shimon Peres, who lost to Netanyahu by less than 1 percent in 1996, probably could have won.
Peres should have responded more decisively to his challenger's devastating charges that he was endangering Israel's security with the land-for-peace agreements with the Palestinians, Shrum said.
Asked to compare Clinton's campaign in 1992 and Barak's in 1999, Greenberg said that his Israeli job was tougher, notwithstanding the allegations about infidelity, draft evasion and pot-smoking the Arkansas governor battled seven years ago.
At the time, Clinton had the forces of history - the American voters' desire for generational change - behind him. Barak, on the other hand, was seen as an uncharismatic military man who lacked political experience and faced a deeply divided electorate.
The advisers said that when they started out, few people had faith in them. "A month ago, people would give us this amused look or look down at their shoes" when told Barak might just win this race, Greenberg said.
The low point came early, in mid-February, when Labor presented its candidates for parliament on live TV. One delegate, an Ethiopian immigrant who didn't make the cut, climbed on stage and berated a dumbfounded Barak, saying he was a racist.
"I thought it was the worst day I had ever seen in politics," Greenberg said. "I was sure our numbers were going to plummet."
However, Barak survived and methodically set out to shape the agenda of the campaign. "Ehud had more plans than there were problems. I don't think there was a contingency he hadn't thought of," Shrum said.
Netanyahu, who had won in 1996 by playing up terror attacks by Islamic militants, tried to engage Barak on security, but Barak stuck to his own course.
A key weapon became what Shrum called "the bio," a TV campaign ad repeated almost daily in the three-week period during which candidates were permitted to run such commercials. The clip showed Barak as a war hero who repeatedly risked his life for Israel's security, including in daring hostage rescue missions.
Once the American team had established the candidate as a man who could be trusted with Israel's security, it was possible to move on to education and the economy, consensus issues that have played a minor role in Israeli campaigns until now.
The Americans left nothing to chance. Every day, they tested new ads and ideas on focus groups. The center of activity was the "war room," the third floor of a nondescript Tel Aviv office building where researchers monitored the news around the clock and strategists plotted quick responses to Netanyahu's every move.
Greenberg, who has also advised British Prime Minister Tony Blair, said liberal politicians have been too defensive for too long.
"The most important thing (we learned) from the Clinton campaign was that the left does not have to be patsies," he said.
 Load-Date: May 19, 1999

 

End of Document
