

In West Bank, burying the dead and bracing for new battle
The Associated Press
March 11, 1998, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 815 words
Byline: By LAURA KING, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DURA, West Bank
Body




The funerals of three Palestinian workers shot and killed by Israeli soldiers brought cries for vengeance Wednesday from fellow Palestinians - and grim promises from Israel that force will be met with force.
"Blood leads to blood!" white-scarved Palestinian schoolgirls screamed as they marched through the winding streets of Dura, the hometown of three laborers slain Tuesday night at an Israeli roadblock on their way home from jobs in Israel.
The deaths set off the West Bank's worst day of violence in months, leaving 32 Palestinians and an Israeli border policeman hurt in a series of clashes Wednesday.
More ominously, the chain of events raised fears that the two sides were returning to the kind of confrontations common before the Israeli-Palestinian peace process, which has been stalled for more than a year.
In Dura, where nearly everyone claims kinship or friendship with at least one of the dead workers, every shop and business was shuttered as the entire town mourned.
Thousands of people - little boys holding hands, old men leaning on canes, angry masked youths - marched in a funeral procession or lined the streets to watch it pass.
At the home of Adnan Abu Zneid, one of the slain men, his black-robed widow Rima stood on the steps with village women ululating shrilly at her side. Thirty-four years old, she is a mother of nine children, including a boy born just six days ago.
"The soldiers killed my husband," she wailed. "Why, why?"
The bodies, shrouded in white and draped in the Palestinian flag, were paraded into the town's rocky burying ground after prayers in the eucalyptus-shaded mosque.
Palestinian teacher Fahmi Rayan, 47, gestured bleakly toward the three waiting tombs. "I think peace is going in there too," he said.
The burials, as is customary in Muslim tradition, came less than 24 hours after the men met their violent end at the army roadblock near the village of Tarkoumiah, west of Hebron.
Exactly how it all began is still being argued over. The army said troops opened fire in the belief that the driver had run down a soldier. A Palestinian passenger said the van had simply swerved close to them while trying to avoid being cut off by another vehicle, and the driver lost control after the shots were fired.
How it ended, however, is not in contention. In the hail of gunfire - 20 shots were fired into the van, according to Israeli reports - the three workers, all family men, were killed. Four others were wounded.
Mohammed Sharah, a Dura laborer who knew the slain men and had often taken the same route home, said Palestinians felt it could have happened to any one of them.
"They were just working, trying to care of their families, and this happened," he said. "We are all so, so angry."
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat denounced the slayings as a "big crime" and spurned an offer to meet with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, who called him to express condolences.
Netanyahu said Wednesday he hoped the Palestinians would realize that a calm approach would serve them as well as it would Israel.
Israel promised a speedy investigation, and two soldiers who opened fire on the van were detained for questioning. But the army released the two Wednesday night, saying there was no need to continue holding them, and one Cabinet minister warned the Palestinians that unrest in response to the shootings would not be tolerated.
Agriculture minister Rafael Eitan, a former army chief of staff, told army radio that "force needs to be met with force." The Palestinians, he said, need to understand that "if that's their way to speed the negotiations … it doesn't work that way."
Palestinians said Israel was the one fanning the flames of violence. A spokesman for the radical Islamic group Hamas, Mahmoud Zahar, said Israel was trying to spark more bloodshed - and that, he said, was about to trigger a new Palestinian uprising.
"Actually, the intefadeh is imminent," said Zahar, adding that Hamas would have a part to play in that unrest. "Without resistance, we cannot achieve our goals."
In the West Bank town of Hebron, firebomb-throwing protests flared within hours of the shooting and continued until nightfall Wednesday.
Tactics echoed those of the violent street battles common during the intefadeh: stone throwers changed shirts to avoid being identified and targeted by Israeli snipers, and soldiers charged in with ladders to chase rooftop attackers.
In Hebron, a three-day strike was declared Wednesday to protest the shooting. Israeli soldiers are deployed in downtown Hebron to protect a Jewish enclave of 450 people.
Just north of Ramallah, about 300 Palestinian university students stoned Israeli cars on a highway. One motorist stopped and opened fire, wounding a protester. Israeli border police fired rubber bullets, injuring seven Palestinians.
Clashes also erupted outside Dura, but Palestinian police kept most stone-throwers away from Israelis.
 Load-Date: March 11, 1998

 

End of Document
