

In Yemen, government hopes abstinence starts at the office
The Associated Press
March 16, 2000, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 796 words
Byline: By DONNA ABU-NASR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SANA'A, Yemen
Body




Shrugging off their black cloaks, the women turn on rhythmic Yemeni music and settle down for a party - a weekday afternoon of chewing khat leaves, the mild stimulant from which the president has been striving to wean his nation.
The women sit on the floor, pulling out their bundles of khat, plucking the tender leaves, pushing them against their left cheek and chewing slowly, forming a slimy ball.
After a while, tongues loosened, the women - their left cheeks bulging - get up to dance. Ululation and laughter fill the tiny room.
What about President Ali Abdullah Saleh's appeal last May to follow his example and limit the use of khat to the weekend?
"There's no alternative to khat, and I won't give it up," says Fathiya Hazzaa, 30, who indulged in the stimulant even while pregnant with three of her four children.
"How else can we spend the afternoon? There are no clubs, no outlets, nothing," adds Hazzaa, who attends at least four khat gatherings a week.
The khat plant, known to scientists as catha edulis, is illegal in many countries, including the United States, because it contains an amphetamine-like substance.
But in Yemen, the leaves from the hardy evergreen khat shrub are not considered a drug, and officials even encourage visitors to try it.
"Chewing khat has the same effect as drinking a very heavy cup of tea. It's perfectly legal here," says Motaher Taqy, deputy minister of culture and tourism, who claims he does not chew it.
Taqy says the government's anti-khat campaign was launched last May not because khat is dangerous, but to rid the country of a "social disease" that consumes at least one-third of a family's income - money that would otherwise be spent on food and education, he says.
Most Yemeni men, from government leaders to tribesmen in turbans and calf-length skirts, take khat. Women are increasingly indulging as well.
Beginning in the early afternoon, Yemenis spend up to eight hours a session chewing themselves into what many describe as an ecstatic trance, their cheeks distended with wads of the leaves.
A bundle of six to 10 branches of the stimulant sells from 60 cents to 40 dollars, depending on quality. That's a lot of money in an impoverished nation with an annual per capita income of less than $300.
In addition, according to government figures, khat consumes 75 percent of Yemen's irrigation water, and more than 80 percent of the country's agricultural lands are reserved for planting it.
Officials admit it is difficult to change a habit that has been entrenched in the culture for decades. The government is beginning the anti-khat fight in its institutions in the hope that it will spread to homes.
It has banned khat in government offices, where civil servants hoarded the stimulant in desk drawers, and in the army, where on-duty soldiers munched the leaves.
The government also has increased the six-hour workday by one hour so Yemenis will have less time to chew.
And it supports anti-khat groups, like the Friends Without Khat Association and the Society to Fight the Effects of Khat, which have sprung up recently - most with the assistance of Western aid organizations.
The groups plan to put up more than a million anti-khat posters and speak to teen-agers in about 200 schools around the country.
Still, visitors cannot avoid encountering khat.
Men can be seen heading home in the early afternoon carrying bundles of khat purchased at special souks, or markets. Taxi drivers chew while driving, street vendors chew while selling, entrepreneurs chew while conducting business and students chew while preparing for exams.
In recent years, more and more women have acquired a taste for khat's slightly bitter sap and the rituals of khat chewing.
Before leaving for the afternoon party, the women make sure they look and smell their best. Being chic is de rigeur at such gatherings.
They rub perfume - a black-green, musk-scented paste - into bare backs, arms and necks; they stand for minutes over braziers burning incense to perfume their dresses and undergarments; they brush pink powder over their cheeks, line their eyes with jet-black kohl and fluff up their thick, henna-dyed hair.
At the party, the women have a small meal of sandwiches, salads and cakes. Eating is supposed to enhance the pleasure of khat and the cigarette and water-pipe smoking that accompanies it.
Trays are set on the carpeted floor with bottled water, soft drinks and tea to lubricate dry throats during chewing sessions - a side effect of khat.
"Khat is great. It gives me the energy to do the housework and it pulls me out of sad moods," says Amani Saqqaf, 26.
"Plus, it stirs the senses. I feel more love for my husband. It brings us closer," she adds. "So, where's the harm?"
On the Net: Yemeni government site http://www.al-bab.com/yemen/gov/gov.htm 
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY107
 Load-Date: March 17, 2000

 

End of Document
