

India talked the nuclear talk, now it's walking the walk
The Associated Press
May 12, 1998, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 773 words
Byline: By DONNA BRYSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW DELHI, India
Body




India has long argued it had to keep up with Pakistan and, especially, China. All that was lacking was the resolve to act on its fears of being surrounded by the nuclear weapons of two countries with whom it has fought a total of four wars.
On Monday, the 2-month-old government showed it had that resolve, setting off a thermonuclear explosion and two other nuclear underground tests and then for the first time declaring India was capable of building nuclear weapons.
Abroad and at home, the reaction was shock, as if observers had never believed India's Hindu nationalist-led government's pledge to go down the nuclear path was any more than just talk.
The United States had said it detected no significant shift in India's policy of refusing to either pursue or renounce nuclear weapons technology when Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee's government declared in March it would "induct nuclear weapons."
But on Monday a U.S. State Department spokesman called India's tests a "very, very negative development" that threatened world security.
Jasjit Singh, director of the New Delhi's independent Institute for Defense Studies and Analyses, accused the United States of refusing to take India's fears of China and Pakistan seriously. He cited U.S. willingness to sell nuclear equipment to China. India accuses China of supplying nuclear weapons technology and ballistic missiles to Pakistan even after signing the nuclear nonproliferation treaty in 1992.
Pakistan - which has fought three wars with India and supports rebel groups fighting for independence in Kashmir, India - said it has been pushed into a nuclear arms race and is ready to conduct its first nuclear test explosion.
"We are prepared to match India. We have the capability," said Pakistani Foreign Minister Gohar Ayub.
After a day of silence, China said today the tests were "detrimental to the peace and stability of the South Asia region." The brief Chinese statement said nothing about whether China, the only declared nuclear power in Asia, would resume its own tests.
India says it is going nuclear because of its sense of being ignored and because of an argument heard often here: that the nuclear powers want to keep their military advantage and deny it to others.
"If anyone's watched the debate in India the last 3-4 years, they will have seen that the demands for a test have been increasing," Singh said. "The sense of insecurity exists - we have nuclear weapons to one side, nuclear weapons to the other."
Singh has called on the government to develop its delivery system as part of a credible nuclear defense. He said it could take another 10 years for India to perfect an arsenal of ballistic missiles capable of reaching major targets in China.
China, India's huge neighbor to the northeast, is one of the world's five declared nuclear powers, along with Britain, France, Russia and the United States.
The Institute for Science and International Security, a Washington-based group of defense analysts, estimates Pakistan has enough stockpiled weapons-grade uranium for 25 nuclear bombs. India, according to the ISIS, has enough weapons-grade plutonium for 78.
Even after taking the step of resuming testing after 24 years, India insists it wants nuclear weapons only to defend itself.
Its nuclear landscape is not new, making it unclear why India's government chose now for its test. Earlier, officials had promised a security review before making any move on its nuclear promises, but no public accounting preceded the tests.
"No case has been made for this. I think it's appalling. It's disgusting," said Praful Bidwai, an Indian weapons researcher and proponent of nuclear disarmament.
But Bidwai was very much in the minority. Even Defense Minister George Fernandes, who describes himself as a pacifist, was enthusiastic about the nuclear stance taken by Vajpayee's Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party. Fernandes' socialist Samata is opposed to many of the BJP's more conservative policies, though it is a member of the governing coalition.
Days before the test, Fernandes was stirring up fears about China that most Indian politicians prefer not to discuss publicly, telling an interviewer Beijing had stockpiled nuclear weapons in Tibet, the province bordering India.
With his 19 governing partners increasingly fractious, the popularity gained with the nuclear tests may buy enough time for Prime Minister Vajpayee to consolidate his government, and put off talk of early elections that would be India's third in two years.
"Now, no party will want to risk an election because the BJP will be too strong," said Vinod Mehta, editor of the weekly Outlook magazine.
 Load-Date: May 12, 1998

 

End of Document
