

Iran's young voters hold the key to elections
The Associated Press
February 17, 2000, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 722 words
Byline: By VIJAY JOSHI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TEHRAN, Iran
Body




The electric blue words scrawled on a white sheet at a political rally captured the frustrations of Iran's youth: "20 years of ideological suppression is enough."
As Iran holds parliamentary elections Friday, young people have emerged as kingmakers, vowing to vote for those who will provide them the freedoms denied after the Islamic revolution.
In 1979, young Iranians grabbed at the chance to topple the dictatorial and corrupt regime of the U.S.-backed shah and join the revolution led by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. Today, the sons and daughters of those Iranians are battling what they say is another kind of repression.
The hard-liners have "used Islam as a tool to fortify their power. They think they are messengers of God and can tell us what to do, what to wear. We don't like this," said Mehdi, a chemical engineering student at Tehran University who refused to give his last name. Outspoken students have been jailed in Iran.
Young people complain that 21 years of Islamic rule by Khomeini's followers and successors failed to bear the promised fruit: jobs and prosperity. Instead, youth were barred from mixing freely with the opposite sex, listening to pop and Western music or watching foreign television programs. Women were told to cover themselves from head to toe and the clergy, in its role as the interpreter of God's will, was deemed above criticism.
More than half of Iran's 62 million people are under the age of 25. About 20 million of them are in high schools and universities that have traditionally been the harbingers of change and the barometers of public discontent.
"The young people have needs, but they get nothing. It means they are very angry with everybody," said Saeed Laylaz, a newspaper columnist and political analyst.
A frequent target of youth anger is former President Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani. A former moderate, he has riled many by leaning toward hard-liners in recent weeks.
At the Tehran University rally Wednesday where the handwritten declaration was held aloft, men and women chanted anti-Rafsanjani slogans, interrupting speeches by pro-reform candidates.
Iran's economy, a mix of free-market and socialism, has struggled with high inflation, a bloated public sector and unemployment. Joblessness is officially around 20 percent, but unofficially believed to be higher than 30 percent.
Iranians' hopes were raised by the election of reformist President Mohammad Khatami in May 1997. He has relaxed many strict rules and allowed unprecedented press freedom. But Khatami's hands will remain tied as long as hard-liners control key institutions like the 290-member parliament, or Majlis.
Even if pro-reform candidates win the elections, they have a long way to go. Laws passed by parliament have to be approved by a 12-member Council of Guardians, which is now controlled by hard-liners.
The conservatives also control other pillars of power - the judiciary, the state media and the armed forces. And the supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who is considered a hard-liner, has the final authority on all matters.
Analysts say any change will have to flow from the youth.
In 1953, the students were the main supporters of popular Prime Minister Mohammed Mosaddaq, whose government was overthrown by a CIA-backed coup that reinstalled the shah. Since then Iranian universities have been centers of resistance against the regime.
The 1979 revolution was preceded by almost daily demonstrations by students against the shah, providing the impetus to clergy.
It is clear that the youth are once again frustrated, this time with the hurdles created by hard-liners against Khatami's reforms.
After a reformist newspaper was closed by hard-liners last summer, tens of thousands of Tehran University students flooded the streets for three days. The protests spread across the country, and scores of student leaders were arrested, some later sentenced to lengthy jail terms or even death for their roles in the demonstrations.
Analysts say the students' movement fills the vacuum created by the lack of established political parties, which were allowed only in 1989. Candidates still contest elections as independents.
"Once we have a professional political party system then the role of this movement will also decrease," said Mohsen Mirdamadi, a professor of law and political science at Tehran University.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos TEH101-106; AP Graphics IRANIAN ELECTION and IRAN
 Load-Date: February 18, 2000

 

End of Document
