

Iranians want freedom, but not the overthrow of the clergy
The Associated Press
July 15, 1999, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 635 words
Byline: By ANWAR FARUQI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DUBAI, United Arab Emirates
Body




Nearly a week of student protests in Iran has exposed the democratic aspirations of many Iranians. But the swiftness with which they have subsided indicates that while Iranians want freedom from religious rule, they don't want more violence.
Many of those in the chanting crowds over the last week would like to see the clergy replaced by a more democratic government, one that would relax Islamic restrictions over nearly all aspects of life.
Islamic rules ban Western music, satellite TV antennas, foreign movies and "immodest" dress for men and women. Iranians cannot date, and any Muslim caught drinking is fined and whipped.
Iranians old enough to remember the 1979 Islamic revolution that brought the clergy to power fear the upheaval that could precede another dramatic change.
Many lost loved ones in the violence and the 1980-88 war with Iraq that followed. Their children, too, who have known nothing but life under the mullahs, also seem to hope change will be peaceful.
More than half of Iran's population of 60 million is below 18 - born after the revolution.
The revolution brought millions of Iranians into the streets against the U.S.-backed Shah. By contrast, at their peak, the recent pro-democracy protests drew only 25,000 demonstrators to the grounds of the Tehran University campus, a sign of wariness among most Iranians. Life was normal in other parts of the city throughout the six days of unrest.
Tehran residents reached by telephone from Dubai said most people tried to stay away from the trouble in the city's central districts.
"Iranians generally are not prepared for a violent confrontation and prefer reforms to a violent overthrow," said Reza Alijani, editor-in-chief of Iran'e Farda, a dissident monthly that is barely tolerated by the hard-liners.
"Because there are no alternatives to the present government and no organized leadership against it, any movement to overthrow the ruling establishment is not to the advantage of the people."
No one understands what Iranians want better than President Mohammad Khatami. A moderate cleric who says freedom is a cornerstone of Islam, he has been trying to change things from the inside, urging the powerful hard-line clergy to accept reforms before it is too late.
Young Iranians, women and intellectuals contributed to Khatami's overwhelming election victory in May 1997, which was seen as a rejection of the hard-line clergy.
The hard-liners continue to cling to power and oppose reforms, arguing that Islam and democracy are incompatible. Under their tight rule, Iranians have seen their economic conditions plummet, though the revolution promised prosperity as well as democracy and a clean government.
Most Iranians are poor, though no one is starving. Corruption is widespread, with a large chunk of the nation's wealth held under powerful foundations directly controlled by the mullahs.
Khatami's greatest promise is to institute the rule of law, which hard-liners have manipulated for their own purposes.
Over the past several months, the hard-line controlled judiciary has illegally closed down reformist newspapers to muzzle criticism, but refused to prosecute the Ansar - vigilantes used by the hard-liners to beat up opponents, attack newspapers and break up pro-democracy rallies.
The main demand of the protesters was that the national police chief, Hedayat Lotfian, be sacked. The protesters blame him for a July 8 raid on a Tehran University dormitory in which police and hard-line vigilantes both took part. One person was killed and at least 20 injured in the raid, which fueled the protests.
Another demand was that control of the security forces be transferred from the hard-line supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, to Khatami allies in the Interior Ministry.
Khamenei is an unelected leader who outranks the elected president.
 Load-Date: July 15, 1999

 

End of Document
