

Iranian reform leader: Talks with the United States would not be a sin
The Associated Press
February 22, 2000, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 675 words
Byline: By AFSHIN VALINEJAD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TEHRAN, Iran
Body




An influential reform leader has said that talks with the United States would not be a "sin," a view shared by many reformist candidates set to take control of Iran's next Parliament.
Talks with the United States, a more liberal press and increased personal freedoms are expected to be among the issues discussed in the next Parliament, which resumes in June.
Moderates look set to wrest the legislative body from hard-line control for the first time since Iran's 1979 Islamic Revolution ousted the pro-U.S. shah and brought the Muslim Shiite clergy to power.
U.S. relations with Iran broke off during the revolution, when demonstrators seized the U.S. Embassy and held 52 Americans captive until January 1981.
"Not to talk with any country is not a virtue, and to talk is not a sin," Abdollah Nouri, a former interior minister, told reporters Monday when asked his opinion on opening talks with the United States. Iran has not had relations with the United States in over two decades.
Nouri was impeached by hard-liners in 1998 and jailed in November on charges of religious dissent and advocating better ties with the United States.
He was let out of jail on a four-day furlough on Sunday.
Nouri was considered a consensus candidate among the reformers for the post of Parliament speaker until his incarceration, which was believed to be an attempt by the hard-liners to prevent him from taking part in the elections.
Exceeding even their own expectations, reformists have won more than 70 percent of the votes in Friday's legislative elections.
They garnered 137 of the 191 parliament seats announced as of late Monday. Conservatives have won 44 seats, independents 10, and 69 are to be decided in run-offs. Results from the capital had not yet been officially announced, but reformists candidates were leading in 26 of Tehran's 30 seats. Some 83 percent of Iran's 38.7 million electorate voted.
Many Iranians, who welcome increased ties with the West and more political and social reforms, voted for the reformists in the hopes of ending decades of international isolation and strict Islamic rule.
But the conservative clergy consider the United States Iran's archenemy.
More than half of Iran's population of 62 million are under 25, and many were born after the revolution. The youth, along with women, were the driving force behind President Mohammad Khatami's landslide victory in May 1997 and were also responsible for his allies' parliamentary victory.
In Tehran, more than 55 percent of the electorate voted for Mohammadreza Khatami, the younger brother of the president and head of the Islamic Iran Participation Front, the largest reform group.
The president also has called for people-to-people exchanges with the United States, but stopped short of calling for talks.
One of the top five vote-getters in Tehran is Nouri's younger brother, Alireza, who has said that the issue of ties with the United States should be decided in a national referendum.
Ahmad Borqani, another leading candidate in favor of talks with the United States, said one of the first things the reformist groups will do is form alliances with each other to have increased influence.
Conservatives, shocked by the extent of their defeat, have on the most part refused to comment about the election results.
Two hard-liners, Ali Zadsar and Ahmed Rasouli-Nejad, who were involved in the impeachment of Nouri and in a failed attempt to impeach Culture Minister Ataollah Mohajerani, lost their seats in the towns of Jiroft and Damavand.
Former President Hashemi Rafsanjani, who had been allied with the hard-liners, was falling short of the 25 percent needed to win a seat outright in Tehran but still could qualify for a runoff.
What remains to be seen now is whether the hard-liners will continue to use their key powers to block the reformists.
The Guardian Council, made up of 12 clerics and lawyers, must approve all bills passed by Parliament. And Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran's supreme leader, has the final word. He heads the armed forces, judiciary, and state-run radio and television.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NY115
 Load-Date: February 23, 2000

 

End of Document
