

Iran's press is battleground for the country's future
The Associated Press
December 13, 1998, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 703 words
Byline: By SCHEHEREZADE FARAMARZI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TEHRAN, Iran
Body




Waving old copies of the banned liberal newspaper Tous, Iranian youths at a pro-democracy rally shouted as if they were fans at a soccer match: "Give us back the freedom paper!"
"Freedom, forever!" they yelled, their voices getting louder and angrier.
"Yazdi, resign, resign!" they chanted, referring to Ayatollah Mohammad Yazdi, who as the head of the nation's powerful judiciary is behind the closure of about half a dozen newspapers and the arrests of several journalists.
Iran's newspapers are at the center of the battle between President Mohammad Khatami and the hard-line clerics who oppose his efforts to liberalize government and society.
The newspapers do not just cover the news, they are the news.
Since Iran has no formal political parties, most of Tehran's 37 papers have become stand-in parties - each with its own platform - in what has become the liveliest debate about democracy the country has ever seen.
The moderates claim about a dozen newspapers, the hard-liners at least five including Shalamcheh, which reflects the extremist views of the Ansar-e Hezbollah - a vigilante group that regularly breaks up pro-democracy rallies and attacks dissidents.
The outspoken Tous, closed down in September, has become a symbol of the struggle for a free press. Its editor, Mashallah Shamsolvaezin, says the liberal papers started after Khatami's election are being attacked by hard-liners to undermine the president.
"They were unable to fight him directly, so they attacked his achievements to weaken him," said Shamsolvaezin, whose paper's 300,000 circulation made it the second largest in Iran.
Shamsolvaezin, who was jailed along with three colleagues, said 30 vigilantes stormed his newspaper in September, blindfolded them and made them stand against the wall.
"It was very uncivilized," he said at his Tehran home shortly after his release, a month after he was arrested.
Tous' struggle to survive is typical of how the battle over Iran's future is being fought.
The paper began publishing with the name Jameah after Khatami became president in August 1997. A court order, alleging libel and fabrication of stories, closed it down last June.
It reappeared under two other names - Tous and Aftab-e Emrouz - after being given new licenses to publish by the Ministry of Culture and Guidance, which is under Khatami's control.
Each time it was shut down by the judiciary, which is run by the hard-liners.
The paper was first closed after it reported that the commander of the Revolutionary Guards Corps, Gen. Rahim Safavi, told his troops in a private meeting to "cut out the throats and tongues" of the liberal press.
But Tous had a stormy relationship with the hard-liners from the start, partly because it questioned the absolute powers of Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei.
The paper was closed for good June 16, a day after Khamenei ordered the judiciary to get tough on newspapers he claimed had abused press freedom. Several other publications, including the lively Rah-e Now, also were closed.
Shamsolvaezin has refused to apologize for questioning Khamenei's absolute powers and demands to know the legal reason his paper was shut down.
"The constitution stipulates that the leader is like any other citizen before the law," he said. "What did we do wrong? What did we violate? Give us a constitutional reason why and where we acted against the law."
But even some moderates say Tous went too far in attacking the right-wing clerics.
"Tous marched ahead with a sharp object and plunged it right into their stomach," said Abbas Abdi, editor of the liberal daily Salam.
Some journalists say Tous miffed Khamenei because it ignored an unspoken rule of Iranian newspapers - dedicating the top of the front page and a few inside columns to news about the leader and senior clergymen.
But Ali Movahedi Savoji, a hard-line member of Parliament, says the judiciary acted completely under the law in banning Tous.
"Over the past year, we gave them 114 warnings that they were violating the law," Savoji said. "The press is free, but at the same time laws have to be obeyed."
Shamsolvaezin viewed the situation differently.
"We have freedom of expression in Iran," he said. "But the problem is freedom after expression."
 
 Load-Date: December 13, 1998

 

End of Document
