

Iraq pours hundreds into the streets, stands tough in crisis
The Associated Press
November 24, 1998, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 657 words
Byline: ANTHONY SHADID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAGHDAD, Iraq
Body




The Iraqi government pledged not to relent in its standoff with the United Nations over documents on its weapons programs, pouring hundreds of people into the streets Tuesday to protest U.N. sanctions.
The government's tough words came a day after it acknowledged an assassination attempt on one of its most powerful officials. The assailant was reportedly shot to death in the attack on Izzat Ibrahim, a deputy with the influential Revolutionary Command Council.
Hundreds of Iraqis, many of them elderly women clad in black, arrived by bus for the government-orchestrated demonstration outside the U.N. headquarters to denounce their suffering under the sanctions imposed after Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990.
Some women cried and others beat their chests in anguish.
"There is no God but God, America is the enemy of God!" the crowd shouted. "Down USA!"
A convoy of cars drove along the street carrying wooden coffins meant to symbolize children who have died as a result of the sanctions.
At the heart of Iraq's dispute with the United Nations are the sanctions, which have wrecked an economy that was once one of the Arab world's most prosperous. Iraq claims 5,000 children die every month, and U.N. officials acknowledge one in three suffer from malnutrition.
The U.N. Security Council cannot lift the sanctions until U.N. inspectors verify that Iraq has destroyed its chemical, biological and nuclear weapons, long-range missiles and programs to build them.
Last week, the chief weapons inspector, Richard Butler, asked for more documents - from personal diaries to a log of weapons used in the 1980-88 Iran-Iraq war - as part of that search. But Iraq insists the documents were either irrelevant, have already been destroyed or were already turned over to inspectors.
Failing to cooperate could delay a U.N. review of progress on dismantling the weapons that Iraq hopes will ease the sanctions, and the United States has warned it is still willing to attack if Iraq fails to do everything the U.N. inspectors ask.
"I don't believe Iraq should be in the position of declaring unilaterally that documents are irrelevant to the needs and requests of the (U.N.) inspectors," Defense Secretary William Cohen said Tuesday in Washington.
State Department spokesman James P. Rubin said the Iraqis were clearly trying to "dodge their obligations" to provide the documents. But, he noted, "It's fair to point out that … the monitoring teams continued their activities for the seventh straight day and have not reported any problems."
The aircraft carrier USS Enterprise and five escort ships arrived Tuesday in the Persian Gulf, bringing the number of U.S. warships in the region to 19.
Despite the military buildup, however, Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz declared the Iraqis would not submit to the demands, "regardless of the dangers."
Iraq averted what appeared to be an imminent U.S. and British attack by agreeing on Nov. 14 to allow U.N. inspectors to resume their work. Since then, inspectors have made daily visits to suspected weapons sites, and Iraqi officials have provided full cooperation.
Still, anger remains directed at Butler, who the Iraqi government views as instrumental in prolonging the sanctions. Al-Iraq, an official newspaper, called Butler a "cursed devil and mad bull" on Tuesday.
The assassination attempt on Izzat Ibrahim, Saddam Hussein's deputy on the council, startled Iraqis accustomed to the iron-fist security that reigns in the country.
Official media said an assailant threw two grenades at Ibrahim as he got out of his car Sunday in the Shiite Muslim holy city of Kerbala. He escaped injury but several bodyguards and bystanders were wounded.
The assailant was reportedly shot in the neck and killed.
The assassination attempt was the first known attack on a senior official since 1996, when gunmen shot Saddam's eldest son, Odai, about 10 times in his car in an upscale Baghdad neighborhood. Odai survived with serious injuries.
 Load-Date: November 24, 1998

 

End of Document
