

Is Clinton too distracted to lead the world?
The Associated Press
September 14, 1998, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 810 words
Byline: By LAURA MYERS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Clinton faces some of the most daunting foreign policy challenges of his presidency, and foreign affairs professionals worry that his fight to avoid impeachment is reducing U.S. influence overseas.
Two former national security advisers say it would be dangerous to lose focus on brewing crises - from global economic turmoil and instability in Russia to nuclear and missile proliferation in Asia and fighting in Kosovo. Iraqi President Saddam Hussein is defying U.N. weapons inspectors again, too, despite past threats of U.S. military action.
"I think this is going to be the most difficult fall since the fall of 1993," said Anthony Lake, who as national security adviser helped Clinton manage U.S. policy in Bosnia, Haiti and Somalia when they were volatile.
Today's "extremely difficult problems will become all the more dangerous" if people assume Clinton is weakened by problems caused by his affair with Monica Lewinsky, Lake said.
And President Bush's security adviser, Gen. Brent Scowcroft, had this advice for Clinton: "I would be doing everything I could to try to reassure people that there are no gaps in our attention, that we are able to act, that there is no paralysis."
Scowcroft added: "There's bound to be a significant foreign policy cost to (the Clinton crisis) because the president, after all, is a human being. He can't give the kind of attention to foreign policy that is necessary."
But Secretary of State Madeleine Albright insisted: "We are occupied more than 24 hours a day with absolutely no distractions." She and the rest of Clinton's foreign policy team, including Defense Secretary William Cohen and national security adviser Sandy Berger, met with the president Saturday to talk about world affairs.
Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr, in a report to Congress released Friday, alleged 11 grounds for impeaching Clinton, including perjuring himself and obstructing justice by concealing his affair with Ms. Lewinsky. The White House, in two separate rebuttals, said nothing in Clinton's actions warrants impeachment.
Some members of Congress, mostly Republicans, want a Clinton resignation. On Sunday, Rep. Tom DeLay of Texas, the GOP's third-ranking House Republican, said the president Clinton appears to have cost himself the right to world leadership.
"We as a nation have to look within ourselves and answer the question: 'Has Bill Clinton disqualified himself to lead this country and the world?"' DeLay said on NBC's "Meet the Press."
Even while traveling abroad, Clinton has to field questions about his affair with the former intern, a relationship he initially denied. His first apology for it came during a photo opportunity in Dublin, Ireland.
Rep. David Bonior of Michigan, DeLay's House counterpart with the Democrats, said Sunday on NBC that Americans understand "despite his personal behavior, that the president is the most respected world leader today."
The White House dismisses any talk of lost focus on foreign policy and points to Clinton's triumphant trip to Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic in early September and his speech next Monday to the U.N. General Assembly.
"He has helped set the U.N. agenda regarding arms control, proliferation and terrorism, and we can expect him to sound a similar call for action," said P.J. Crowley, a National Security Council spokesman.
He said the Ireland trip "was just the latest example where, as is always the case, the world looks to the United States and the president for leadership."
Clinton launched missiles against alleged terrorist targets in Afghanistan and Sudan last month in retaliation for the bombings of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania, which killed more than 250 people, including 12 Americans.
Still, signs of political damage are appearing around the globe.
"A weakened presidency, its energy to deal with global issues sapped, is bad news for the world," Singapore's Straits Times newspaper said in an editorial. The Washington correspondent of the Italian daily La Repubblica wrote: "Even if Clinton survives, his presidency is already dead."
People in France are having a hard time taking a political sex scandal seriously, but the daily Le Monde said: "The Clinton affair creates a climate of crisis in the world."
And in the Middle East, Clinton's troubles are feared as another stumbling block to sealing a long-awaited deal for Israel to turn over more West Bank land to Palestinian control. "Instead of making clear policy decisions, … everyone's second-guessing what will happen to Clinton," said former Palestinian Cabinet minister Hanan Ashrawi.
Ex-security adviser Lake said Congress and Clinton are equally obliged to set aside any impeachment battle to concentrate on overseas crises.
"A Washington that is self-absorbed," Lake said, "is a Washington that is less likely to take risks either for peace or against terrorism or despots."
 Load-Date: September 14, 1998

 

End of Document
