

Is life imitating a movie, again? 'Wag the Dog' back in spotlight
The Associated Press
August 21, 1998, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 560 words
Byline: By MICHAEL FLEEMAN, AP Entertainment Writer
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




"Why Albania?" Hollywood producer Dustin Hoffman asks presidential spinmeister Robert De Niro.
"Why not?" De Niro answers.
And so, in the reel world, America launches a fraudulent war against an obscure country to distract the nation from the president's sex scandal.
Eight months following the release of "Wag the Dog" on Christmas Day, the movie is a reference point in the real-world debate over President Clinton's motivations in bombing Sudan and Afghanistan in retaliation for terrorist attacks at U.S. embassies.
Officials are peppered with questions about the movie and politicians say they couldn't help but think about it. Industry analysts say video rentals are up. The moviemakers say everyone's making too big a deal about a movie.
Still, the similarities remain. The missile attacks on Thursday came days after the president admitted to an inappropriate relationship with former White House intern Monica Lewinsky.
From the moment Clinton went on live television to announce the bombings, "Wag the Dog's" producer-director Barry Levinson and producer Jane Rosenthal were inundated with requests for comment.
"The world's media right now are giving the filmmakers far too much credit for being clairvoyant," said their spokesman, Simon Halls. "The filmmakers put together a movie that was entertainment, and it was well received, but that's what it was: entertainment. Anything that is happening in the world today really has nothing to do with the movie."
Massachusetts acting Gov. Paul Cellucci, a Republican and a movie buff, said: "It popped into my mind, but I do hope that that's not the situation and I trust that it isn't."
Similar comparisons were made earlier this year when the Clinton administration threatened action against Iraq not long after the Lewinsky story broke - and shortly after the movie's release.
One of the first questions asked of Defense Secretary William Cohen at a nationally televised Pentagon news conference was how he would respond to people who think the military action "bears a striking resemblance to 'Wag the Dog."'
"The only motivation driving this action today was our absolute obligation to protect the American people from terrorist activities," Cohen said. "That is the sole motivation."
"I don't think any president, regardless of party, would ever take military action to distract from personal problems," Dee Dee Myers, Clinton's former press secretary, said Thursday on "The Tonight Show with Jay Leno." "Most of the Congress, most of the American people I think will say, 'I don't believe that our president regardless of how bad things are would do that."'
The movie's title comes from an old joke, shown in the film's opening credits: "Why does a dog wag its tail? Because a dog is smarter than its tail. If the tail were smarter, the tail would wag the dog."
The modestly budgeted $ 15 million movie went on to gross $ 43 million at the box office, according to industry analyst Paul Dergarabedian. The real-life scandal may have helped the box office, he said.
"It's sort of life imitating art. That sometimes happens when a particular film really hits at exactly the right time, like catching lightning in a bottle," he said.
He said movie rentals may get a bigger boost. "Wag the Dog" generated an impressive $ 20.3 million in rental revenue through last weekend, and is still in the top 10 after seven weeks.
 Load-Date: August 21, 1998

 

End of Document
