

Israelis leave military base in the West Bank
The Associated Press
January 5, 2000, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 591 words
Byline: By KARIN LAUB, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




The handover was quick and unemotional. An Israeli officer shook hands with Palestinian officials and muttered "Bye, folks" before he led a convoy of jeeps out of an Israeli army base in the West Bank on Wednesday.
The Israeli pullback from a small slice of land was one of the last before Israel and the Palestinians draw their final borders in a September peace treaty.
The withdrawal ended a seven-week deadlock between the two sides over a relatively minor issue - whether the Palestinians would have a say in sketching the maps of the partial troop withdrawals. Israeli and Palestinian officials were mum about how the dispute was resolved, but both sides said privately the other gave in.
Palestinians held up a November handover of 5 percent of the West Bank, complaining about the type of land being offered, and demanding more populated land closer to east Jerusalem, their hoped-for capital.
The Palestinians said they were trying to establish the principle that Israel cannot dictate the withdrawal maps. Israel resisted, and now denies reports that it eventually relented and promised the Palestinians some of the desired areas in the next scheduled withdrawal from 6.1 percent of the West Bank on Jan. 20.
Israeli Justice Minister Yossi Beilin, who is believed to be involved in backchannel talks with the Palestinians, said the Palestinians looked a gift horse in the mouth when they held up the withdrawal.
The Palestinians "didn't receive a 'tempting offer' because they don't need a 'tempting offer' to receive territory," Beilin told Israel radio on Wednesday. "There is a limit to absurdity."
Once the partial pullbacks are completed, the Palestinians will have full or partial control over 40 percent of the West Bank.
Wednesday's withdrawal began around midday when several trucks loaded with furniture and mattresses pulled out of the Yosef army base east of the West Bank town of Nablus. Braving driving rain, Israel troops lowered their flag.
An Israeli lieutenant colonel shook hands with Palestinian officials waiting at the gate, and left with a quick "bye, folks." A convoy of Israeli jeeps drove away and the Palestinians rushed in and hoisted their own banner.
In all, the army said it transferred six bases and camps in the northern and southern West Bank, giving 3 percent of the land to Palestinian civil rule and 2 percent to full Palestinian control.
A Palestinian official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said however that the 2 percent, mostly areas north of the town of Ramallah, would only be officially turned over Thursday.
The Israeli and Palestinian negotiators in charge of the withdrawal were meeting Wednesday night.
By Feb. 13, the two sides are to reach agreement on the framework for a final peace treaty, which would include an outline of a future border between Israel and the Palestinian entity. Negotiators have reported some progress, but it was uncertain whether they could meet the self-imposed deadline.
Progress on the Israeli-Palestinian track came at a time when Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak was engaged in intensive peace talks with Syria. The withdrawal appeared to back Barak's claim that it was possible to move ahead on both tracks simultaneously, and that he would not focus on one at the expense of the other.
Also Wednesday, Israeli and Syrian negotiators met in Shepherdstown, W.Va. in their face-to-face talks in nearly four years. Israel is expected to yield all or most of the strategic Golan Heights as the price for peace with the Arab country, with which it has fought three wars.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos XNH101-105
 Load-Date: January 6, 2000

 

End of Document
