

Israel shuts down last channel of regular contact with the Palestinians
November 23, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 783 words
Byline: By KARIN LAUB, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Israel shut down the last channel of regular contact with the Palestinians - 10 liaison offices in the West Bank and Gaza Strip - after two Israeli soldiers were killed on Thursday, including one when Palestinians lobbed a mortar bomb into one of the shared compounds.
In the West Bank, meanwhile, suspected Islamic militant bomb maker Ibrahim Bani Odeh from the Hamas group was killed in an explosion. Palestinians said the explosives were planted in his car by Israel with the help of a collaborator. The Israeli army denied involvement.
The violence came despite a fresh plea by Secretary of State Madeleine Albright that both sides take practical, parallel steps to stop the bloodshed.
Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat hardened their rhetoric, signaling that Albright's efforts were not bearing fruit.
Barak, who is under growing pressure at home to step up retaliation after two Israelis were killed and more than 60 wounded Wednesday in a bus bombing, told the Palestinians that it was no longer enough to just lower the level of confrontation.
"Stop the violence immediately, put down your weapons," Barak said in a speech in Tel Aviv. "It is in your power to do so, and only then will the conditions be created to look into ways to resume negotiations."
As Barak spoke, Palestinian gunmen fired shots at Gilo, a Jewish neighborhood on the outskirts of Jerusalem on West Bank land captured by Israel in the 1967 Mideast war. Israel returned fire at the West Bank town of Beit Jalla.
Arafat accused Israel of unilaterally abandoning peace negotiations and waging an all-out war to reoccupy Palestinian territories. The Palestinian leader also criticized the United States for allowing Israel to use U.S.-made weapons against the Palestinians in nearly two months of clashes that have killed more than 260 people, the vast majority Palestinians.
Arafat was to fly to Moscow on Friday for a meeting with Russian President Vladimir Putin. The Palestinians have accused the United States of favoring Israel and have pushed for a more active Russian mediating role.
In the Gaza Strip, the two Israeli soldiers were killed in Palestinian attacks - apparent retaliation for the shooting deaths of four activists from Arafat's Fatah movement by Israeli soldiers in Gaza the day before. In a leaflet, Fatah said that "the response will be hard and painful."
The first soldier, an officer, died Thursday morning when a mortar bomb was hurled into an Israeli-Palestinian liaison office in southern Gaza. Later in the day, Palestinians ambushed an Israeli army patrol near the Erez crossing between Gaza and Israel. An Israeli soldier died and a second was critically wounded. The Israelis said one of the Palestinian attackers also was killed.
In response, Israel ordered the Palestinians to leave all 10 liaison offices, established in the mid-1990s as a cornerstone of interim peace agreements. In the offices - each with an Israeli section, a Palestinian section and a common area - both sides would meet to work out problems of daily life.
The Palestinians said they would not comply.
The Israeli order is "dangerous because it means cutting the last ties between us and the Israelis," said Ribhi Arafat, a Palestinian liaison officer in the West Bank. The liaison offices were the only remaining channels of regular contact between the two sides.
In the West Bank town of Nablus, Palestinian officials angrily accused Israel of assassinating Bani Odeh, the suspected Hamas bombmaker who was on a furlough from a Palestinian jail.
Bani Odeh was killed when a bomb exploded in the car he was driving in the center of Nablus. Palestinian officials said Bani Odeh was given the car earlier Thursday by a relative who has since disappeared and was suspected of having helped Israel plant the explosives.
Israel has assassinated suspected Palestinian militants in the past - most recently earlier this month, when an Israeli helicopter rocketed a car driven by a regional Palestinian militia leader in the West Bank. In 1996, Israel killed the chief Hamas bombmaker with the help of a mobile phone rigged with an explosive device.
Elsewhere Thursday, Israel's deputy defense minister, Ephraim Sneh, met at the Erez crossing with a senior Palestinian official. Sneh's aides would not name the Palestinian official or say why the meeting was called.
And in Jerusalem, Barak convened his security Cabinet on Thursday for a second session in two days to discuss Israel's retaliation for the bus bombing in the northern Israeli town of Hadera. Media reports said Israel would not order new air strikes because they were seen as ineffective. On Monday, Israel fired dozens of rockets at Gaza.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos JRL101-107, GAZ101-105, AGAZ101-107
 Load-Date: November 24, 2000

 

End of Document
