

Israel says it knows the identities of at least three suicide bombers
September 23, 1997, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 666 words
Byline: By SAMAR ASSAD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ASSIRA, West Bank
Body




Israel announced today that at least three of five suicide bombers who carried out two recent attacks in Jerusalem were residents of this West Bank village, a stronghold of the Islamic militant group Hamas.
The three - ages 22, 23 and 25 -escaped from a Palestinian jail last year and were wanted by Israeli security forces, the announcement said. A fourth person, a 22-year-old, had been identified as a possible bomber.
All four were activists in the Muslim militant group Hamas.
Two bombers carried out a July 30 attack in the Mahane Yehuda vegetable market in Jerusalem and three others blew themselves up in a Sept. 4 attack in the Ben Yehuda outdoor mall. The blasts killed 25 people, including the five assailants.
The assailants' bodies were badly disfigured in the blasts but Israeli security forces established their identities through DNA tests. Two weeks ago, Israeli soldiers took blood samples from the assailants' relatives in Assira.
On Sunday, Israel imposed a blockade on Assira, a village of 7,000, preventing residents from leaving and entering, and arrested dozens of people. On Tuesday, the army tightened the blockade, deploying more soldiers and army jeeps around Assira.
The Israeli announcement was likely to embarrass Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, who has insisted that the bombers came from abroad, and not from areas under Israeli control.
Israel identified the assailants as Moawiya Jarara, 22; Bashar Salawah, 23; and Tawfiq Yassin, 25. The identity of a possible fourth bomber was still being checked.
Relatives of the four men said all of them had surrendered to Palestinian police in nearby Nablus in March 1996, when Arafat was rounding up hundreds of Hamas activists in response to four Hamas suicide bombings in Israel.
The four knew they were wanted by Israel and felt they would be safer in Palestinian custody. They ended up in the same cell in the Nablus jail.
A Palestinian security official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said security was lax and inmates often were allowed to spend several hours a day in town.In September 1996, the four did not return from such an outing, and have been on the run from Palestinian and Israeli security forces since then.
Relatives said that while growing up, the four were supporters of a secular Palestinian group, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.
However, villagers said in recent years they were drawn to Hamas by Mahmoud Abu Hanude, a respected 34-year-old man in the village who schooled them in the ways of militant Islam.
Netanyahu held Arafat's Palestinian Authority partially responsible for the July 30 and Sept. 4 suicide bombings in Jerusalem, saying it had not done enough to prevent them.
Ahmed Tibi, an adviser to Arafat, said if the bombers had come from a West Bank village under Israeli security control, then "they acted and worked under the nose of Benjamin Netanyahu."
"It is his responsibility," Tibi told The Associated Press.
Since the suicide bombings, Israel has arrested about 500 Palestinians and placed approximately 300 of them under detention without trial. In the past two days, soldiers have sealed off villages in the northern West Bank and arrested 30 suspected Hamas members.
In a related development, Israel eased the closure of the West Bank and Gaza Strip that was imposed after the July bombing. The travel ban bars all Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza from entering Jerusalem.
As of today, an additional 8,000 Palestinian workers were allowed to return to jobs in Israel, bringing the total with entry permits to 13,000. About 100,000 Palestinians normally work in Israel.
Elsewhere, Palestinians threw stones today at Israeli motorists driving along a West Bank road north of Jerusalem, and in an Arab neighborhood of Jerusalem.
The windshields of several cars were damaged in the West Bank incident and Israeli border police arrested two suspects. In response to the arrests, Palestinian residents scuffled with the troops, who fired warning shots in the air.
 Load-Date: September 23, 1997

 

End of Document
