

Israelis debate whether to privatize the arms industry
December 7, 1997, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 822 words
Byline: By NICOLAS B. TATRO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RAMAT HASHARON, Israel
Body




Sitting on prime real estate north of Tel Aviv, Israel's state-owned arms industry stretches for four miles on either side of a major highway.
Except for the electronic fences, the sprawling headquarters of TAAS-Israel Military Industries Ltd. looks like a kibbutz communal farm.
The somewhat shabby, single-story workshops produce much of IMI's awesome array of military hardware: aerial cluster bombs, Uzi and Galil rifles, upgraded gun barrels for U.S.- and Russian-made tanks, armor-piercing shells, bomb-sniffing robots and rocket engines.
Israel's big three defense contractors - IMI, Israel Aircraft Industries and Rafael - have accounted for much of the technological edge that Israel has over its Arab neighbors. They also produce $ 2 billion in exports.
In recent years, however, the arms makers have lost money and relied on government subsidies to survive.
Now, after cutbacks and downsizing of plants, they appear to be turning the corner. IMI and IAI are making a profit, and Rafael has trimmed its losses significantly. The debate now is how to lock in the profits for the long haul.
"There is a solid core of professional and technical capabilities, but the industry is bloated. It needs to get leaner and meaner," said Gerald Steinberg, a Bar-Ilan University expert who has written a book on the industry.
Steinberg and other critics said profit has taken a back seat to politically potent unions which keep salaries and benefits well beyond what the industry can afford.
At IMI, the unions blocked plans to move the company to the Negev Desert in southern Israel, where it would be cheaper and safer to operate, he said, adding that IMI "is now sitting on land worth far more than the company."
Reuven Pedatzur, a military expert at Tel Aviv University, estimates the government has paid out $ 300 million annually for the last five years to keep the arms makers afloat.
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's government has strongly advocated privatization of state-owned companies.
Natan Sharansky, the industry and trade minister, told The Associated Press "it is essential that big parts of the arms industry have to go through privatization" as well.
And a Ministry of Defense commission headed by retired Gen. Moshe Peled in October recommended that the way to save money in the long run was to privatize some parts of the industry and merge the rest.
The ministry took a tentative step towards merging competing arms projects in late November with draft agreements between the state-owned Israel Aircraft Industries and private companies.
Industry officials said that overall the government has done little to lessen its involvement in the defense sector. To get things moving, they say, the government would have to negotiate a deal with unions representing more than 20,000 workers.
Shlomo Milo, the president of IMI, was cautious about privatization, suggesting there was room for limited efforts such as spinning off some arms projects and letting them form alliances with foreign firms. He opposes putting all three companies under one roof.
Israel's defense firms suffered from a global decline in weapons procurement after the collapse of communism, but the $ 40 billion global market is again growing at the rate of about 10 percent a year.
Israel is getting a piece of the action, earning a reputation for upgrading tanks and planes.
Milo of IMI said that after plant closings and layoffs his company made a $ 23 million profit in the first half of 1997. The strategy for the future is to up the percentage of air force-oriented products from 20 percent to 50 percent of output.
Israel Aircraft Industries, the largest defense company with $ 1.6 billion in sales, also reported a small profit in the first half of 1997 - $ 7 million - after years of losses.
Rafael, which is part of the Ministry of Defense, would cut its losses in 1997 to $ 50 million on sales of $ 510 million - about half the losses it had in 1995, spokesman Noah Shachar said.
Rafael, which produces the "popeye" air-to-ground missile for the U.S. Air Force, was scheduled to become a state company like Israel Aircraft and IMI. But the plans are stalled, and Rafael has not downsized as many hoped.
Milo blamed recent years' losses in part on an attempt by IMI and other arms firms to branch out into the civilian market - in IMI's case by selling such items as security locks and water heaters.
"We failed, and it cost us a lot of money," he told reporters on a recent tour. Now IMI will pursue "a clear strategy. We stick to our core business, which means defense."
Politics also makes the arms market a volatile business.
IMI - which has marketing offices in London, Bogota and Miami - ran into political problems in the United States recently with the freezing of a $ 7 million dollar deal to sell 10,000 Galil and Uzi assault weapons. After protests the Uzi was being used by gang members and criminals, President Clinton halted the imports Nov. 14.
 Load-Date: December 7, 1997

 

End of Document
