

Israeli Vote Could Shape The Country For Years To Come
May 25, 1996, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 951 words
Byline: By DAN PERRY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TEL AVIV, Israel
Body




For tense Israelis, their votes in Wednesday's elections could shape their country and the Middle East for years to come.
They have a stark choice between Prime Minister Shimon Peres and shouldering the risks of peace with the Arabs, or Benjamin Netanyahu, who takes a tough stance on ceding land and may turn away from peacemaking.
Adding to the voters' uneasiness is the knowledge that the outcome of a tight race could depend more on Islamic fundamentalist militants opposed to peace than on the candidates or the issues. There is widespread worry about a terrorist attack just before or on election day.
Israel's shopping centers, parking garages, bus stops and borders swarm with nervous soldiers and security men, but the campaign has been sedate - dulled by the numbing memory of Yitzhak Rabin's assassination and the candidates' efforts to tone down their rhetoric to win over key swing voters.
Still, the two candidates present two opposing visions about the future of Israel and its role in the region.
"Our primary aim in the next four years is to achieve a comprehensive peace in the Middle East," Peres says.
The likely price tag will be a Palestinian state in most of the West Bank and Gaza, some form of Arab self-rule in Jerusalem and a return of the Golan Heights to Syria. But with negotiations still ahead, Peres is vague about the exact terms he has in mind.
Netanyahu believes Peres' vision of Arab-Israeli harmony is a mirage. He grudgingly agrees to continue talks with the PLO - but there may be little to discuss with Palestinians who insist on an independent state with the Arab sector of Jerusalem as its capital.
The Likud Party leader thinks it dangerously naive to give any more territory or authority to Yasser Arafat, a former terrorist who might turn on Israel, or to entrust a dictator like Syria's Hafez Assad with a strategic platform like the Golan Heights.
"A Palestinian state is an existential threat to Israel. We will ensure a Palestinian state will not be established," says Netanyahu. Instead, he promises a renewed Jewish settlement drive in the West Bank and Gaza, where Palestinians now control only 27 percent of the land.
Peres argues such a policy would, ultimately, finish off Israel as a Jewish state because the disputed areas have more than 2 million Palestinians. That's more than Israel can absorb and still be a Jewish state, he argues.
Although the differences are as deep as exist in any democratic country in the world, the candidates are straining to gloss them over.
Thus Peres, seen by many Israelis as too soft on the Arabs and lacking the security credentials of his slain predecessor, ex-army chief Yitzhak Rabin, fosters a tough image with a campaign revolving around the slogan "Israel is strong with Peres."
Netanyahu, mindful that a majority of Israelis support the peace process in principle, promises a vague "secure peace." He has muzzled rightist allies like ex-defense minister Ariel Sharon, architect of Israel's costly 1982 invasion of Lebanon.
Netanyahu has also focused his campaign on the charge that Peres, for all his strenuous denials, will eventually give in to the Palestinians' demands for control over east Jerusalem, which is holy to Jews, Muslims and Christians.
The candidates differ little on other issues like the economy - with both promising privatization of state-held companies, for example.
But whereas Peres says continuing the peacemaking is the only way to maintain the past years' unprecedented economic boom, Netanyahu believes the peace factor is exaggerated.
The race is close, with Peres holding a slight lead according to most polls. But "a terrorist attack could turn the situation around completely," according to political analyst Menachem Shalev.
A series of suicide bombings by the Hamas and Islamic Jihad groups that killed 59 victims in February and March reduced what had been a comfortable Peres lead in the polls to about five points. And Peres and top security lieutenants say the militants, backed by Iran, plan more attacks just before or even on election day.
The election has "stood in the shadow of the threat of a terrorist attack like a sword above our heads, like a cloud of heavy fear," said the Yediot Ahronot daily.
With the shock of Rabin's Nov. 4 assassination by a Jewish nationalist still fresh, neither side wants to be seen as provoking violence - especially Netanyahu, whose fierce anti-government rhetoric was blamed for inflaming the hatreds that led to the slaying.
So instead of the heated street encounters of past campaigns - Likud crowds once pelted Peres with tomatoes - this contest has been played out mostly through slick TV ads that elegantly sling mud.
Netanyahu's ads, for example, ridicule Peres' statement, made after the 1994 peace treaty with Jordan, that Israel might one day join the Arab League. "If it wasn't our prime minister, we'd have to laugh," the announcer remarks grimly.
Peres, whose political career spans five decades, hammers away at the message that his 46-year-old challenger, whose top job has been deputy foreign minister, is an untested opportunist unfit to lead Israel.
Because of electoral reform, the May 29 balloting will nonetheless produce a clear victor for the first time in years.
Past elections yielded a kaleidoscope of parties and splinter groups that made any parliament majority unstable at best.
This year, Israelis for the first time cast a second ballot for prime minister. With only two candidates running, that amounts to something akin to an American presidential election - with a winner and loser at the end of the day.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Dan Perry, the AP correspondent in Tel Aviv, has covered eastern Europe and the Mideast since 1990.
 Load-Date: May 25, 1996

 

End of Document
