

Israeli officer: Israel, Palestinians declare cease-fire on the ground
The Associated Press
October 3, 2000, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 996 words
Byline: By RON KAMPEAS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




A midlevel Israeli officer commanding forces in the West Bank said Tuesday that a cease-fire had brought peace to the area after five days of bloodshed, but political leaders said any such agreement was informal and diplomatic efforts to end the fighting continued.
Col. Marcel Aviv, a commander of the Etzion brigade in the West Bank, told Army radio that quiet has prevailed in the West Bank since the pre-dawn hours, when the sides agreed to stop shooting.
"We received an order for a cease-fire," he said. "We won't open fire under any circumstances unless fire is opened against us first. In my opinion, in the coming hours the quiet will continue but I hope the Palestinians will continue to keep the quiet as they promised."
Aviv was speaking in the early morning; fighting usually does not begin until midday, and while it was quiet when Aviv made his remarks, it would not be apparent until later in the day whether the cease-fire had taken effect.
Acting Foreign Minister Shlomo Ben-Ami said that if there was a cease-fire, it was an informal one, worked out by officers on the ground.
"I don't know any such thing on the political level," he said. "There are attempts to control the order but there is a vacuum."
Ben-Ami said that a formal cease-fire order could only come from Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, and that he knew of no such order.
He said he was optimistic that a U.S.-initiated summit between the Israeli and Palestinian leaders, to take place on Wednesday, would lead to an end to violence and revive the peace process.
"The summit is aimed at renewing the talks, not just the cessation of firing here," he said.
Palestinian officials were unavailable for comment.
In the bloodiest day yet Monday, the spiraling violence left 20 more dead - including an Israeli civilian and eight Israeli Arabs - bringing the total to at least 51 killed and more than 1,000 injured, nearly all Palestinians.
The violence also has spread with unprecedented fury among Israel's Arabs, bringing Palestinian unrest home to Israelis in a way they haven't seen since the establishment of the state.
The rioting in the Israeli Arab sector - in towns and neighborhoods where resentment against discrimination, poverty and unemployment has long festered - has taken at least nine lives. Late Monday night, Prime Minister Ehud Barak announced the establishment of a special Cabinet-level committee to examine problems in the Arab sector.
The epicenter of the violence, however, has been in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, where Palestinians took to the streets last week after Ariel Sharon, the leader of the hard-line Likud opposition party, visited a Jerusalem shrine holy to Muslims and Jews.
Palestinian gunmen opened fire on Israeli positions throughout the disputed areas. Israelis responded with heavy fire, and in some cases used helicopters to disperse Palestinian assailants. Israeli tanks rolled within yards of Palestinian neighborhoods.
In an urgent bid to restore calm, U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright set up a meeting for Wednesday in Paris with Barak and Arafat.
The two sides "must find a way … to end the current psychology of confrontation and begin to restore the psychology of peacemaking," Albright said in a statement Tuesday.
The sides had broken new ground in peace talks in recent months, but the negotiations had foundered over the Al-Aqsa mosque compound in Jerusalem, the third holiest site in Islam, built atop the ruins of the ancient Jewish temples.
Sharon was seeking to protest Barak's proposals to share sovereignty over the site when he visited last Thursday, accompanied by thousands of police. Palestinians said his visit was aimed at consolidating Israeli hegemony over the site.
Even as pleas for restraint poured in from around the world, the climbing casualty count fueled Palestinian fury and spurred revenge attacks against Israeli civilians, particularly Jewish settlers.
On the road to the Jewish settlement of Ariel in the West Bank, a 24-year-old Israeli was shot and killed - reportedly when he stopped to change a tire. A school bus on its way to the Jewish settlement of Shiloh came under fire, but no one was injured.
Police and Arab rioters fought a three-hour battle in the alleyways of the Israeli town of Akko. Rioters trashed shops in the Israeli Arab town of Nazareth, Jesus' boyhood home. In the coastal city of Haifa - often cited as a model of harmonious coexistence of Jews and Muslims - Israeli Arabs staged a general strike in sympathy with Palestinian brethren.
The Palestinian lands, though, remained the epicenter of violence, with a shifting battlefront that hopscotched from north to south and back again. In the West Bank and Gaza, Israeli soldiers fought dozens of running battles - many with live ammunition - with Palestinian youths wielding stones and firebombs.
Near the West Bank town of Tulkarem, rioters set ablaze eight Israeli-owned factories Monday night, including two making insect spray. The fire sent clouds of noxious fumes over the northern West Bank, and Israeli police said Palestinian gunfire prevented firefighters from reaching the area.
In much of the refugee camp of Rafah in southern Gaza, electricity was cut when Israelis fired an anti-tank missile at a small power plant.
The detritus of conflict could be seen everywhere. Jagged rocks, spent shells, and broken glass littered roadways. Black smoke from piles of burning tires mixed with a white haze of acrid tear gas.
Israeli civilians were forbidden to travel the main thoroughfares in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. At the isolated Gaza settlement of Netzarim, the army sent a helicopter to retrieve Israelis who had been visiting for the Jewish New Year holiday. Army convoys escorted others out.
The growing use of heavy combat weapons by Israel contributed to the phenomenon of mass casualties from a single incident. Near Netzarim, the firing of one anti-tank missile into a building injured 35 Palestinians, hospital officials said.
 Load-Date: October 4, 2000

 

End of Document
