

Joy and anger mix in the streets of Hebron
January 18, 1997, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 638 words
Byline: By NASSER SHIYOUKHI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HEBRON, West Bank
Body




Hundreds of Palestinian schoolchildren waving flags and posters of Yasser Arafat marched through Hebron today to celebrate the start of self-rule. Jewish settlers asserted their presence by dancing in the streets.
The beat of drums and cymbals accompanied the students as they marched in bright sunshine. Some wore the uniform of the newly arrive Palestinian police - including a group of teenage girls with green police berets perched atop their traditional white headscarves.
"It was a dream and now we are realizing some of our hopes," said a smiling Fathi Jarradat as he watched the parade go by. "What you see here is the foundation of a Palestinian state. I hope now my children will have a better chance than I ever did."
Jarradat said he had spent four years in Israeli prisons for his involvement in the 1987-1993 Palestinian uprising.
"What I did, I did for my children, and I think it was worth it," he said.
After the parade, several thousand Palestinians gathered in a schoolyard to hear speeches from Palestinian officials, political leaders and the mayor of Hebron.
"Today we are celebrating the liberation of most of Hebron," said Transportation Minister Ali Qawasmi, who is from Hebron. "But another part is still under occupation. So we will struggle - both the government and the people - in order to liberate the rest of Hebron."
Jibril Rajoub, head of Palestinian preventive security, accused the 500 Jewish settlers who live amid Hebron's 130,000 Palestinians of fomenting "hate and violence and terror."
"They are big stones on our chest - so we have to take them off!" he said to wild cheers and applause from the crowd. "They have to understand the new facts and stop harassing our people. Because we are here to protect the people of Hebron."
A festive atmosphere reigned through most of Hebron. Streets were festooned with streamers of Palestinian flags and posters of Arafat, and one man decorated his car with red, green, black and white ribbons in the shape of a Palestinian flag.
"It is a beautiful day - we are free," said one woman.
But the atmosphere was very different in the 20 percent of the West Bank town still under Israeli control, where hundreds of Israeli soldiers and police patrolled the streets, spot-checking the identification cards of Palestinians passing through the marketplace.
Israeli troops stopped about 40 Palestinian schoolgirls carrying flags and shouting slogans for the "liberation of all Hebron" from marching past a group of settlers.
The downtown sector was closed to Palestinian traffic, creating huge traffic jams throughout the city.
More than 15,000 Palestinians live in that area, along with 500 settlers. In all, about 130,000 Palestinians live in Hebron.
In a show of assertiveness, dozens of settlers - some in white prayer shawls - formed a large circle and danced in the street near the Tomb of the Patriarchs, watched by Palestinian shopkeepers.
The Tomb, where the biblical patriarchs Abraham, Isaac and Jacob are reputedly buried, is holy to both Jews and Muslim and is the focus of much of the tension in the city.
A settler was arrested after hitting a Palestinian cameraman with the butt of his M-16 automatic rifle, the cameraman, Mazen Daana, said. Israeli police did not return telephone calls from The Associated Press seeking details.
Hebron is the last of the eight Palestinian cities in the West Bank to gain autonomy. Agreement was held up by Israeli concerns for the security of the settlers, who live in a handful of enclaves in the center of the city, surrounded by Palestinian neighborhoods.
But after months of arduous negotiations, the handover of control over 80 percent of the city took place quickly and quietly early Friday. Within hours, Palestinian police were on the streets directing traffic.
Arafat is expected to visit Hebron sometime this week.
 Load-Date: January 18, 1997

 

End of Document
