

KANDAHAR: the negotiations
The Associated Press
December 29, 1999, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 745 words
Body




"The Indian negotiators are talking to the hijackers about releasing some prisoners," one of the diplomats told The AP.
But so far the hijackers are refusing to budge saying they want all 36 men freed from Indian prisons, he said.
On Wednesday, Afghanistan's ruling militia brokered the first breakthrough in talks convincing the hijackers to drop their demand for a $200 million ransom and the body of a militant Kashmiri killed earlier this year.
The Taliban Foreign Minister Wakil Ahmed Muttawakil said the hijackers, who have not been identified, were told that demanding a ransom and exhuming a body are against Islamic teachings.
"In fact, the Taliban see the whole process of hijacking and holding people for ransom as against Islam," Muttawakil told reporters at the Kandahar airport on Wednesday.
Indian negotiators resumed their talks Thursday with the hijackers by radio from the control tower at the Kandahar airport where the Indian Airlines Airbus A300 is parked.
The latest moves are seen a signs of progress as the Indian government works to save the hostages. One hostage has already been killed, and the hijackers threatened two days ago to begin executing passengers unless their demands were met.
The International Red Cross and United Nations have erected emergency medical tents near the aircraft to be ready when the ordeal ends.
On Wednesday, Wakil Ahmed Muttawakil, foreign minister of Afghanistan's ruling Taliban militia, said the Taliban's patience with the standoff is wearing thin.
"If the two sides are unable to solve their problems soon the Taliban will force the hijackers to leave Afghanistan," Muttawakil said. He did not say how the Taliban would make them leave or when.
The Taliban interceded at the request of the Indian negotiators, Muttawakil told reporters at the airport.
Indian negotiators opened talks with the hijackers late Monday, four days into the hijacking, after the hijackers threatened to start killing people. Negotiations are being conducted by radio, with the Indian negotiators inside the control tower airport and the hijackers inside the aircraft along with their hostages.
Conditions have improved slightly aboard the plane. Taliban soldiers who boarded the aircraft Tuesday to clean it reported that passengers were relaxed, seen playing cards, chess and board games. The toilets were cleaned and heaps of garbage removed, said one Taliban soldier who asked not to be identified by name.
Muttawakil said the Taliban have appealed to the hijackers for the release of women, children and sick people, but they have refused. Two passengers who are doctors have received medicine, including painkillers and heart medication, from the Red Cross.
The standoff is related to ongoing unrest in Kashmir, a Himalayan region divided between India and Pakistan. Muslim militants have been waging an insurgency in Indian-held Kashmir, demanding either independence for the Muslim-majority region or union with Pakistan.
India has come under heavy pressure from relatives and supporters of the hostages to bring an end to the crisis. Most of the hostages are Indian.
One Canadian is among the passengers, and Canadian Foreign Affairs Minister Lloyd Axworthy said Tuesday that negotiators should agree to the hijackers' demands if necessary.
"You hate to give in to terrorism because they are using intimidation tactics to gain their ends for political reasons and for monetary reasons," Axworthy said in Ottawa. "But ultimately, the bottom line has to be the safety and security of people."
Indian officials have said there are five hijackers. Armed with grenades, pistols and knives, they seized Flight 814 some 40 minutes after it took off from Katmandu, Nepal, on a scheduled flight to New Delhi on Friday. It made stops in India, Pakistan and the United Arab Emirates before landing in Afghanistan on Saturday.
Passengers who have been released said the hijackers stabbed passenger Rippan Katyal after he disobeyed orders not to look at them. The captors freed 27 hostages and unloaded Katyal's body during a stopover in the Emirates. One more passenger, a diabetic Indian identified as Anil Khurana, was released Sunday.
The plane was carrying 178 passengers and 11 crew members when it took off Friday. The passengers included 150 Indians, eight Nepalese, one Canadian, one American, four Swiss, four Spaniards, one Belgian, one Japanese, one Australian, two French citizens and one Italian. Four passengers were not listed by nationality.
 Load-Date: December 30, 1999

 

End of Document
