

Last of the gold miners tackle hard work, danger and red tape
January 5, 1997, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1008 words
Byline: By MARTHA IRVINE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SCOTT BAR, Calif.
Body




Tom Payne looks the part of the miner with his white beard, faded blue jeans and that gleam in his eye when he talks about gold.
"It's the only job I know where you can wake up the next day and be a millionaire," Payne says.
Payne's great-grandfather, Sigmund Simon, walked 275 miles from San Francisco to Scott Bar, once a booming Northern California mining town. He arrived in September 1850 - one month before California became a state.
These days, the 61-year-old Payne has a few things his forefathers never had: a degree in electronics engineering, a souped-up metal detector and years of experience running his own businesses in Iran and Los Angeles.
"You gotta know the old-time stuff, but it sure helps to know your chemistry, physics and business - your mechanics too," Payne says. "That's probably what put me ahead."
As he's speaking, Payne is grinding up chunks of gold-laden rock that he and his partner, a heavy machinery operator named Raymond Ward, have gleaned from a secret claim in the Klamath Mountains.
Their success has made Payne one of a very few small-time Northern California miners who still make a living at mining.
"There's no one like Tom," says Harry Frey, a lands and minerals officer with the U.S. Forest Service based in nearby Yreka. "He's very business smart, as well as mining smart."
Most people who mine for gold these days are retirees who drive their campers to Northern California for the summer, dredge for gold using the equivalent of waterproof vacuum cleaners, and leave with maybe a few hundred dollars worth of gold in their pockets.
Most of the gold that's left is tough to reach, and the work is just plain dangerous. Miners face everything from mudslides to swift river currents.
And then there's the matter of luck.
"I tell people, 'You never know if you're an inch away from a million dollars or a million inches away from a dollar,' " says Frey, who's worked with miners for many years in the Klamath National Forest. "I'm sure there were people who came here in the 1800s and worked their hearts out and went home broke.
"That's still the case today."
Payne considers Frey an ally, but the biggest gripe he and other serious miners have is the amount of paperwork they're required to file with federal, state and county agencies.
"It just hurts so bad to see what the government's doing to everybody," Payne says.
He claims he has to deal with as many as 40 different federal, state and county agencies every time he digs a new hole.
A former executive officer for the Western Mining Council, Payne has watched the council's ranks dwindle from 2,000 to 3,000 miners to 200 to 300 members in the past decade. The council, based in Los Angeles, has members in California, Oregon, Nevada, Colorado and several other Western states.
"We're basically in a constant battle to keep this going. We just get one fire out and another one starts," says Steve Cassidy, a former deep-sea diver from Spokane, Wash.
Cassidy has been mining full time for gold in the Klamath River with a suction dredge since 1984. He and his wife live in Seiad Valley, just down the road from the Paynes.
"I'll tell you one thing," Cassidy says. "My typing skills have increased exponentially."
The difficulties have kept Scott Bar a sleepy place - a few homes, an old one-room schoolhouse and a tiny post office-library. Gone are the dance halls, the brothels and characters such as Grizzly Tom and King Cole, who - as the story goes - sat on a box of dynamite and blew himself up to escape some sort of dreadful illness.
The only signs left of the old Scott Bar are root cellars, overgrown with blackberries and Chinese lotus trees, probably planted by the many Chinese immigrants brought in to work in the mines.
And the estimated 3,000 people who once flocked here in search of the California dream have been replaced by five or six families, including the Paynes, who returned six years ago from Los Angeles to pick up where they left off.
"My next move's to the cemetery," Payne's wife, Sandi, is fond of saying as she points across the field to the small graveyard that holds the Payne family plot. "I'm not going anywhere else."
In its heyday, Scott Bar produced some of the largest amounts of gold and quartz in the state. In fact, on May 30, 1851, the Alta newspaper of San Francisco reported that "more gold was being taken out of this bar (Scott Bar) than any other mining district in California. The gold on this vein is very large but it requires a great deal of labor to obtain it."
To hear Payne's father, Earle, tell it, it wasn't so great.
"There was just a little piece here and a little piece there," says Earle Payne, now 85. "But, I'll tell you, it gets monotonous.
"Sometimes I want to forget about it."
After Franklin Roosevelt shut down gold mining during World War II, Earle Payne quit and began a 32-year career as a heavy equipment operator for the California Department of Transportation.
But not before he struck it big.
His claim to fame came in 1941 in the form of a tunnel 410 feet long, dug using a hammer and chisel and the occasional stick of dynamite to bore beneath the Klamath Mountains. In it, he and his father, Maitland Payne, hit a vein of gold worth $ 10,000 in those days, $ 400,000 today.
Asked if the big find makes his father his idol, Payne grins and says, "I'm just trying to outdo him."
But it appears that the family tradition will end with Tom Payne, since his 11-year-old son, John Scott, is more interested in becoming a car designer.
"Why take the risk?" says a shrugging John Scott, who was named for the first person to find gold in this bend of the Scott River in July 1850.
His son's lack of interest saddens Payne.
"But you can't blame him," he adds.
Even he says he'll probably quit mining in a year because of the paperwork. But that seems hard to believe as he walks down to a stretch of riverbank that he's been eyeing from his front porch for quite some time.
"Every miner has a dream," he says, pointing along the bank. "My dream is to work this 200 yards of river.
"I think about it all the time."
 Load-Date: January 5, 1997

 

End of Document
