

Libyan suspects reach the Netherlands for bombing trial
The Associated Press
April 5, 1999, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 726 words
Byline: MIKE CORDER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: THE HAGUE, Netherlands
Body




Clearing the way for a trial after years of defiance, Libya today handed over two suspects in the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am jet over Lockerbie, Scotland. Their arrival in the Netherlands triggered suspension of sanctions that isolated Libya from the West.
The surrender of alleged former intelligence agents Abdel Basset Ali al-Megrahi and Lamen Khalifa Fhimah means the two men can be tried - under a complicated deal worked out in years of talks - in the Netherlands under Scottish law on charges of planting the suitcase bomb that blew up Pan Am Flight 103.
The Dec. 21, 1988, bombing killed 270 people - 189 of them Americans - and prompted the United Nations to impose sanctions on Libya in 1992 and 1993.
The sanctions, including bans on international air travel and sales of weapons and oil industry equipment, were suspended today after U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan sent a letter to the Security Council saying the suspects had arrived in the Netherlands.
"This development marks a vital step forward in what has been a long ordeal for all involved, especially for the families of the victims, who have suffered an irreparable loss," Annan said.
The suspects surrendered after intense lobbying by South African President Nelson Mandela and Saudi Arabian and U.N. officials. Libya promised last month to turn over the men by Tuesday.
Accompanied by U.N. legal chief Hans Corell, who witnessed the handover in the Libyan capital, Tripoli, the pair arrived at the Valkenburg military airport near The Hague.
The two Libyans were swiftly extradited to British custody in the Netherlands, and were to be held tonight at Camp Zeist, a deserted U.S. air base 30 miles southeast of Amsterdam, Dutch Justice Ministry spokesman Victor Holtus said.
The Libyans' trial will be held at Camp Zeist. The base was under heavy security today, with more than 100 Scottish police patrolling the grounds, some with attack dogs.
The suspects will be arraigned this week on charges of murder, conspiracy to commit murder and violations of international aviation laws.
Under Scottish law, their trial should start 110 days after their extradition and arraignment. It is expected to last up to two years.
The trial will make international legal history after a decade of doubt that anyone would ever be tried for the bombing that killed 259 people in the air and 11 people on the ground.
President Clinton said in a statement that he was "gratified" to hear the suspects had arrived in the Netherlands.
"But most important, today is a day to remember the men and women who lost their lives on Pan Am 103. I know their loved ones have suffered greatly," Clinton said. "They, too, have labored hard to bring justice."
Some relatives of those killed in the bombing expressed concern that the trial of the two Libyans would fail to point to the person they believe is responsible for the crash - Moammar Gadhafi.
"If trying these two is the ultimate goal of this trial, then it's a travesty," said George Williams, president of Victims of Pan Am Flight 103, which represents 160 American families who lost relatives in the crash.
"We look for the truth wherever it may lead and we firmly believe that this will go all the way to the top of the Libyan government - Moammar Gadhafi," he said by telephone from his home in Joppa, Md.
Before leaving Tripoli, the two suspects said they hoped to return to their families after being found innocent. They said they were leaving Libya of their own accord because they were sure of their innocence.
"We are confident in ourselves," said al-Megrahi, 46. "The days will prove that what we are saying is true." Fhimah, 42, flashed the victory sign and told Arab diplomats: "We hope to see you upon our return."
In a statement from the Foreign Ministry read on Libyan television, Libya expressed "the hope that a negative phase in international relations has been resolved."
It will be the first time a Scottish court has convened in another country and tried a major crime without a jury. Under a treaty with the Dutch, part of the base will be considered Scottish soil for the duration of the trial.
The case also marks the first time the Security Council has imposed sanctions on a sovereign state to force it to surrender two of its citizens for trial abroad. Tripoli had long argued the suspects could not get a fair trial in Britain or the United States.
 Load-Date: April 5, 1999

 

End of Document
