

Light that led wise men to Bethlehem: comet, nova, planets aligned?  --- "There came wise men from the East. … The star, which they saw in the east, went before them till it came and stopped over where the young child was." - Matthew 2:9 ---
December 12, 1997, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 663 words
Byline: By LAURA KING, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BETHLEHEM, West Bank
Body




The brilliant beacon that plays a starring role in the biblical Christmas story could have been a real astronomical event as well as a poetic symbol, scholars say.
The book of Matthew describes a brightly shining star that guided wise men bearing gifts on a long journey that ended in Bethlehem, the birthplace of Jesus.
Biblical scholars and astronomers say there are a variety of possible scientific explanations for such a sustained and glowing light in the heavens, including a comet, a nova, or the close alignment of certain planets as viewed from Earth.
"Some would be inclined to see it as the providential timing of natural phenomena - and this would apply to many of the miracles described in the Bible," said Jim Fleming, head of the Jerusalem Center for Biblical Studies, a research institute and pilgrimage center.
Bethlehem, now a Palestinian town of 50,000 people, bears scant resemblance to the hilltop stone village it was in biblical times, or to its tranquil depiction on Christmas cards today.
Refugee camps on the town's outskirts are the scene of frequent stone-throwing clashes by Palestinian demonstrators and Israeli troops, and the environs of Manger Square, the site where tradition places Christ's birth, are clogged with tour buses and pocked by construction sites.
But once away from Bethlehem's blaring center, a quality of timelessness prevails: stony hills, olive groves, herds of wandering sheep - and the cold, star-sprinkled night sky.
Efforts to match up the biblical account of the star of Bethlehem with astronomical events documented elsewhere are complicated by questions about the precise date of Jesus' birth.
The gospels of Luke and Matthew both put the birth sometime during the reign of King Herod, between 37 and 4 B.C., Fleming said. With that as a time frame, several possibilities emerge, according to astronomers.
Halley's comet, which returns every 75 or 76 years, would have been visible in the night skies around 10 B.C., with a trailing tail that could have appeared to point in the direction of Bethlehem.
The comet theory is bolstered by a reference in Matthew to the wise men seeing the star twice, Fleming says. Halley's comet is visible for several weeks, then passes behind the sun and reappears.
Professor Moshe Guelman, director of the Space Research Institute at the Technion, Israel's version of MIT, said of all the possible astronomical events, a comet would be likeliest to cause a long-lasting, highly visible glow.
Given less credence is the possibility of a nova, or a new star, which would appear initially brilliant and then fade within a few months. One was documented by Chinese astronomers around 5 B.C.
Other astronomical occurrences during the reign of King Herod merit attention, scholars say. Astronomers found that in 7 B.C., Jupiter and Saturn would have appeared very close together, casting a bright combined glow similar to that of a single large star. The following year, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn were also closely aligned.
A similar alignment of Jupiter and Saturn occurred in October of 1991, affording modern-day stargazers with a biblical bent a chance to imagine how the journey could have unfolded.
Fleming, originally of Portland, Ore., said he used the occasion to retrace the path of the wise men, who stopped in Jerusalem before going on to Bethlehem. Because of the way the modern-day road rises, then takes a turn just outside town, the light actually appeared to stop moving over Bethlehem, he said.
For most believers, scientific theories about the star may be interesting, but don't really affect the Christmas story's significance.
"From a symbolic point of view, the story of the wise men and the star is a link to a long chain of prophecies in the Old Testament," said Father Jerome Murphy O'Connor, a Roman Catholic biblical scholar in Jerusalem. "Every aspect of it is evocative."
Besides, he said, "we can all identify with a message of hope, and the successful end to a difficult journey."
 Load-Date: December 12, 1997

 

End of Document
