

Lockerbie trial begins before special Scottish court in the Netherlands
The Associated Press
May 3, 2000, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 849 words
Byline: By JEROME SOCOLOVSKY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAMP ZEIST, Netherlands
Body




Two alleged Libyan intelligence agents pleaded innocent at the opening of their trial today for blowing up Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988, claiming Palestinian terrorists were responsible.
In a statement read by the clerk of the Scottish court, the defense alleged that other terrorist organizations, including a Syrian-based Palestinian group, planted the bomb that killed 270 people in the world's worst act of air terrorism.
The plea came within minutes after Scottish High Court judge, Lord Ranald Sutherland, opened the proceedings against defendants Abdel Basset Ali al-Megrahi and Lamen Khalifa Fhimah, who surrendered for trial last year following nearly a decade of sanctions against Libya.
If convicted of murder or endangering the safety of a commercial aircraft, al-Megrahi and Fhimah face a mandatory life sentence in a Scottish prison.
Members of the court rose as the judges, wearing white wigs and dressed in flowing ivory robes with embroidered red crosses, were led into the chamber by a sentry bearing a silver mace, the ceremonial staff symbolizing authority in Scottish courts.
"It is time for justice. We want to hold the government responsible, not these guys," said Bruce Smith, an American whose British wife, Ingrid, was killed in the crash. "I am convinced that they have a good case against the Libyan government. This should be the start, not the end."
The sleek, state-of-the-art courtroom, built over the past year at a cost of $18 million to British taxpayers, provides computer monitors for all judges, lawyers, defendants, and clerks to view exhibits and follow the court transcript in real time.
Wireless headphones receiving signals from infrared transmitters were available for the defendants so that they could listen to the proceedings via simultaneous translation in Arabic.
For more than 11 years, investigators pursued a trail of evidence across Europe and the Mediterranean to the defendants.
The proceedings, expected to last about a year, follow the largest international murder probe on record, with investigators interviewing 15,000 witnesses in more than 20 countries and sifting through 180,000 pieces of evidence since the blast.
All 259 passengers and crew members - including 189 Americans heading home - were killed along with 11 residents of Lockerbie 38 minutes after the New York-bound jumbo jet took off from London's Heathrow airport at 6:25 p.m. on Dec. 21, 1988.
Camp Zeist, an old U.S. air base 40 miles southeast of Amsterdam, has been declared Scottish sovereign territory for the duration of the trial.
It was chosen as the venue in a U.N.-brokered compromise following years of sanctions aimed at forcing Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi to hand over the suspects, who were indicted in November 1991.
More than 30 American victims' relatives received front-row seats in the public gallery, separated from the court by bulletproof glass. Many other family members could watch via closed-circuit television linkups to sites in Washington, New York, London and Dumfries, Scotland.
For the relatives, the long-awaited start of the trial elicited mixed emotions. It marked a milestone in their crusade for justice for the deaths of their loved ones. But it also raised doubts whether those truly responsible for the crime will be punished.
"I feel a sense of relief and a sense of accomplishment that we pursued it long enough and hard enough," said Maddy Shapiro, of Stamford, Conn., whose daughter Amy was on Flight 103.
Nevertheless, she expressed concern that even if the men are found guilty, "whatever higher-ups gave the orders" won't be pursued.
Relatives believe the bombing plot involved senior figures in the Libyan government as well as other terrorist organizations.
In an interview broadcast today, Gadhafi said he and his government had no role in the attack.
"The court is sitting to judge (the defendants), not whether they are belonging to Libyan agents" or a Libyan agency, Gadhafi said in an interview with Sky News, a British satellite broadcaster.
Gadhafi laughed when the reporter asked whether he had personally ordered the bombing. "It is an absurd question. It should not have been asked," he said.
Relatives have also voiced concern over reports that the prosecution case suffered setbacks as a result of contradictory witness statements and inconsistencies in the evidence against the Libyans.
Prosecutors allege that the defendants planted the suitcase rigged with a plastic explosive onto a flight from the Mediterranean island of Malta to Frankfurt, where it was transferred as unaccompanied luggage onto a feeder flight connecting with Pan Am 103 at Heathrow.
According to Scottish legal experts, the prosecution has no eyewitness who can establish incontrovertibly that the defendants planted a suitcase bomb aboard the doomed airliner. The rigorous standards of proof in Scottish law require that every incriminating fact be backed up by more than one source.
Prosecutors have indicated they will call up to 1,000 witnesses - including investigators, eyewitnesses, and CIA and other covert agents - to testify.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos ZEI102, AMS102, AP Graphic LOCKERBIE OVERVIEW
 Load-Date: May 4, 2000

 

End of Document
