

Military remains behind the scenes in Turkish elections
The Associated Press
April 16, 1999, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 531 words
Byline: LOUIS MEIXLER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ANKARA, Turkey
Body




Turkey's military forced an Islamic government from power, paraded tanks through a town that favored a religious party and has told soldiers not to eat cookies baked by a company believed to favor political Islam.
Turks vote Sunday for a new parliament, but any government will rule in the shadow of the military, which regards itself as the guardian of the nation's secular principles.
Some analysts say the election campaign has been relatively low key in part because Turks believe the politicians have little power.
"The people think nothing will change after the elections because the army is the main power in Turkey," said Oral Calislar, a columnist with the Cumhuriyet newspaper.
The military's influence in Turkish society is enormous.
Generals are briefed by political leaders the last Friday of every month, and the officers' recommendations almost always are accepted by the government.
With little input from elected officials, the military has fought a war in the southeast against Kurdish guerrillas since 1984.
The military has staged three coups since 1960, and it pressured Turkey's first Islamic-led government from power in 1997.
The military's opinions are expected to be taken into account Sunday when the nation votes.
Public euphoria over the mid-February capture of Kurdish guerrilla leader Abdullah Ocalan by Turkish commandos has helped boost the popularity of Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit, a staunch secularist favored by the military and one of the few major Turkish politicians untainted by corruption scandals.
The Islamic Virtue Party is expected to lose some of its support, in part due to the military's unyielding campaign to discredit the group.
Analysts have said they expect the military to vigilantly monitor the party's actions if it emerges from the elections in a position of power.
Most Turks, however, don't mind the military's role overseeing politics.
Polls show that military officers are among the most trusted members of society and that politicians are generally regarded as corrupt and ineffective.
"Because of the failure of the politicians, the people believe in the military," Calislar said.
Bulent Aliriza, an analyst at the Washington-based Center for Strategic and International Studies, said "if the people did not want the army to intervene … there would have been a reaction."
The deep respect for the military stems from the founding of the Turkish republic, when officers led by Mustafa Kemal Ataturk forged the new state after the collapse of the Ottoman Empire.
Generals have said that it is their eternal role to guard that state.
To this day, graduating cadets pledge that their "swords will be ready and sharp against those who try to undermine secularism, democracy and independence."
It is a vow the generals take seriously.
In their drive to undermine the power and support of pro-Islamic politicians, the army in 1997 paraded tanks down the streets of a town dominated by supporters of the Islamic party then in power.
It has purged hundreds of officers from its ranks for violating secular principles, and has also ordered soldiers to boycott any goods from businesses thought to support the Islamic movement, even cookies and biscuits.
 Load-Date: April 16, 1999

 

End of Document
