

Minister: Iraq accuses the United States of fabricating a crisis
The Associated Press
January 28, 1998, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 913 words
Byline: By LEON BARKHO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BAGHDAD, Iraq
Body




Iraq's foreign minister accused the United States Wednesday of fabricating a crisis as a pretext to attack Iraq, and joined with France to criticize recent comments by the chief U.N. weapons inspector.
Foreign Minister Mohammed Saeed al-Sahhaf excoriated Richard Butler, the chief U.N. weapons inspector, for telling The New York Times that Iraq's biological weapons program could "blow away Tel Aviv."
"Those statements and interviews emphasized again that Mr. Butler is not a neutral expert," al-Sahhaf said. "He is biased and blindly committing mistakes, deadly mistakes."
Al-Sahhaf said Iraq had asked U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan to "punish" Butler for his remarks.
The Iraqi foreign minister spoke at a news conference shortly after an envoy dispatched by Russian President Boris Yeltsin met with Iraqi President Saddam Hussein in Baghdad to try to defuse the crisis over U.N. weapons inspections.
Al-Sahhaf said the envoy, Viktor Posuvalyuk, handed Saddam a letter from Yeltsin. He did not disclose details but said "the letter deals with the current tense situation created by the American military threats against Iraq."
The official Iraqi News Agency said Saddam thanked Yeltsin for efforts toward finding a solution "in a manner achieving justice in applying U.N. Security Council resolutions and meeting Iraq's legitimate demands."
Posuvalyuk arrived Tuesday to try to find a political solution to the crisis sparked by Iraq's refusal to grant U.N. weapons inspectors access to self-styled "sensitive sites" such as presidential compounds. He left late Wednesday for Jordan.
The inspectors repeatedly have said they suspect that Iraq is hiding material from its banned weapons programs at the sites. Iraq has said it will never allow the inspectors to enter those locations.
The United States has threatened a military attack to force Iraq to comply with U.N. resolutions, and several American officials are to begin trips this week to consult with American allies about a strike.
U.N. inspectors must certify that Iraq has destroyed its weapons of mass destruction before punishing trade sanctions imposed after Iraq's 1990 invasion of Kuwait can be lifted.
In Washington, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright said the United States would attack Iraq alone if diplomacy failed to reverse Iraq's defiance of U.N. weapons inspectors.
"I am not going anywhere to seek support," she said. "I am going to explain our position."
She added, however, that the "diplomatic string" has not yet run out. Albright was to fly to Europe and then the Persian Gulf for consultations. Defense Secretary William Cohen also was considering a visit to the Gulf, where the United States has two aircraft carriers and thousands of troops.
In Baghdad, jittery Iraqis rushed to stores to buy candles and kerosene lamps, fearing U.S. strikes on power plants similar to those in the 1991 Persian Gulf war.
In recent days, the price of a reliable lantern in Baghdad has risen to $ 20 from $ 16. Candles have doubled in price to 6 cents.
In his news conference, al-Sahhaf alluded to the sex scandal surrounding President Clinton, saying Washington was "trying to cover their miserable situation inside by diverting attention to a fabricated crisis."
Al-Sahhaf said Iraq was cooperating fully with the U.N. Security Council. He noted that Iraq has asked that discussion of the sensitive sites be put off until after international teams evaluate the work of the U.N. inspectors to date.
He accused the United States of "pretexts, false pretexts … to falsely justify a unilateral sheer use of force against Iraq."
Al-Sahhaf declared that Iraq was considering taking the issue to the International Court of Justice in The Hague, Netherlands. Also known as the World Court, it is main judicial body of the United Nations, but it has no enforcement powers.
"We are considering suggestions we received from different friends that we should go to the International Court of Justice in order to complain against the American military threats and seek the arbitration and the advice of this international body," al-Sahhaf said.
For a case to be heard by the court, the parties must agree to submit to its jurisdiction.
In New York, Iraq's ambassador to the United Nations, Nizar Hamdoon, delivered a letter to the Security Council president, France's Alain Dejammet, protesting Butler's comments.
The letter complained that Butler had "violated his own mandate" by making the comments to reporters and editors of The New York Times.
An official in Butler's office, Gustavo Zlauvinen, said he hadn't seen the letter and couldn't comment. Annan, the U.N. chief, also had no comment, said spokesman Fred Eckhard.
In Paris, Yves Doutriaux, the French Foreign Ministry's deputy spokesman, also criticized Butler, saying the information he revealed to the Times had not been given to the U.N. Security Council. "Mr. Butler is not within his role when he expresses such opinions," he said.
Also in the French capital, Russian Foreign Minister Yevgeny Primakov and his French counterpart, Hubert Vedrine, renewed their governments' commitment to finding a diplomatic solution to Iraq's standoff with the United Nations.
"We hope the Iraqis will have sufficient good sense to find a way out of the situation," Primakov told reporters after meeting with Vedrine. "France and Russia are two countries committed to diplomatic solutions."
Vedrine said resorting to force was "undesirable" and added it "wouldn't necessarily solve the problem."
 Load-Date: January 28, 1998

 

End of Document
