

Muslims may share gatekeeper role at Church of the Holy Sepulcher
The Associated Press
June 21, 1999, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 575 words
Byline: By DINA KRAFT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




More than 800 years since they were entrusted with the only key to one of Christendom's holiest sites, two Muslim families will lose their role as sole gatekeepers to the Church of the Holy Sepulcher.
Rival Christian sects, who have spent centuries jealously safeguarding their corners of the shrine where tradition says Jesus was buried and resurrected, have come to an agreement on opening another door - a breakthrough decision on one of the Holy Land's thorniest millennial conundrums.
Tourism Ministry spokeswoman Orly Doron said the church's denominational leaders will decide by the end of June exactly where in the dark cavernous church an exit door will be placed in an effort to ensure the safe passage of the millions of pilgrims expected to visit in 2000.
The keys to the new door will be in the hands of church leaders, and not the Nuseibeh and Joudeh families who hold the key for the existing entrance, Doron said.
The Muslim families were entrusted with guardianship over the door by the Arab conquerer Saladin in the 12th century who sought a way to end fighting among Christians over which denomination should keep the key.
Wajeeh Nuseibeh, 48, took over from his father as the doorkeeper at the church 20 years ago. Every night at 8:00 p.m. sharp he swings shut the massive wooden church doors and locks them with a 10-inch-long metal key, which is kept in the hands of the neighboring Joudeh family. In the morning Nuseibeh comes back to reopen the shrine at dawn.
He seemed skeptical Sunday as to whether the church leaders would be able to reach agreement on a new door and indifferent to sharing the honor that his family has held for centuries.
"I don't pay attention, it's all talk," Nuseibeh said. "We are a neutral people, we are the people who are the bridge to peace."
Currently, the 900-year-old church tucked inside Jerusalem's walled Old City has only one door, which serves as the sole entrance and exit for visitors.
Israel has been pushing for a new exit door as a matter of public safety, warning grimly that without a second passage, the church could become a scene of turmoil for the 4 million pilgrims expected to visit for the millennium.
In 1840, several dozen people were trampled to death when a fire broke out in the church.
Church officials, who have a history of squabbling among themselves over structural changes and repairs within the shrine, claim they don't want to be rushed into saying where the exit door will be or who will hold the keys.
"It's not a question of the key only," said Father Claudio Baratto, a Franciscan monk who represents the Roman Catholic church. "It a whole complex range of things," he told The Associated Press. A location for the door was expected soon however, he said.
Doron said the exit could be through the Ethiopian monastery on the church roof.
Greek Orthodox, Roman Catholic and Armenian Orthodox groups share main control of the church. But the Ethiopian, Egyptian Copt and Syrian churches also maintain a presence there.
The division was codified in the early 1850s, when the ruling Ottoman Turks issued the "Status Quo" document that set down rules for guardianship of holy sites, including the Holy Sepulcher. The Ottomans' rejection of Russian claims to holy site rights provoked the 1853-56 Crimean War.
An exasperated Baratto dismissed the key issue as irrelevant until a final site for a door is chosen.
"We don't have the key because we don't have the door yet," he said.
 Load-Date: June 21, 1999

 

End of Document
