

Names In The Game Adubato, Van Chancellor, SOCOG.
The Associated Press
June 5, 2000, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 733 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




MEXICO CITY (AP) - A strong candidate for Mexico's Olympic cycling team was killed by a hit-and-run driver while practicing with about 50 other cyclists on a city freeway.
Witnesses said a car veered into the pack of riders about 9 a.m. Sunday and hit Fernando Avila, who died at the scene.
Avila, 25, was considered a near-certainty for the Olympics in September. He leaves a wife and two children.
Avila participated in the Pan American Games last year and had taken part in seven World Cup races.
Officials often allow top cyclists to practice in the slow lane of the Periferico freeway in relatively light Sunday traffic. Police on Monday were still trying to locate the driver of the car that hit Avila.
---
HOBART, Australia (AP) - Former Australian batsman Dean Jones said he risked being killed if he revealed the name of an Indian cricketer who tried to coerce him to throw a cricket match.
Speaking Monday in Hobart, Jones said he'd been offered $50,000 to throw a match against Sri Lanka in '92 after being introduced to an illegal bookmaker by the cricketer.
He said he would only reveal the name of the cricketer who brokered the offer if he was forced to by a court of law, adding that he feared the player had links with organized crime.
Jones said he informed the Australian Cricket Board after he was approached, but administrators took no action.
"All the players thought that it was a bit funny," he said. "It's not funny now."
Cricket has been in turmoil since the admission in April by South African captain Hanse Cronje that he had accepted money from an Indian bookmaker in exchange for match information.
Cronje was fired as national skipper and his admission sparked an emergency meeting of the International Cricket Council and a wave of other allegations of bribery and cheating within the sport.
Former Pakistan skipper Salim Malik and player Atta-ur Rehman were found guilty last month of match-fixing and were banned for life from cricket following a 12-month judicial investigation in Pakistan.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Longtime Madison Square Garden photographer George Kalinsky is the winner of the Photo Imaging Manufacturers and Distributors Association 2001 professional photographer award.
The award is presented annually to a photographer whose work is internationally recognized for meaningful and historical images. Photographers who have won the award include Gordon Parks, Eddie Adams and Alfred Eisenstadt.
Kalinsky has been the Garden's official photographer for 34 years.
---
NEW ROCHELLE, N.Y. (AP) - Smith Sirisakorn of Los Angeles is the recipient of the fifth annual Peter A. Bonanni Scholarship, given by Golf Magazine in conjunction with the LPGA and the Japan Airlines Big Apple Classic.
The $2,500 annual scholarship, renewable for up to four years and a maximum of $10,000 is open to junior golfers who are pursuing a post-high school education and are active in the LPGA Urban Youth Golf Program.
Smith, 18, has already been accepted to Massachusetts Institute of Technology, UCLA, University of California at San Diego and University of Southern California.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Richie Adubato of the New York Liberty and Van Chancellor of the Houston Comets will coach the Eastern and Western Conference teams in the WNBA All-Star game set for July 17 at Phoenix.
Chancellor led the Comets to a 26-6 record and their third straight WNBA championship last season. He also coached the West to a 79-61 victory over the East in last year's inaugural WNBA All-Star game.
The Liberty won the Eastern Conference title last year but lost the best-of-three championship.
The All-Star teams will be announced June 7.
---
SYDNEY, Australia (AP) - Olympics organizers have fired three staffers in the media department in a cost-cutting move.
Milton Cockburn, the Sydney Olympic Organizing Committee's general manager for media, said the staff cuts were made as it becomes more integrated with the Olympic Coordination Authority.
SOCOG surrendered management of Olympic venues to the government-run OCA earlier this year as a tradeoff for a financial bailout package from the New South Wales state government, which is underwriting the games.
"The two organizations are now effectively integrated in a whole range of operational areas, and the media is now part of that as well," Cockburn said.
Nine executives have either quit the organizing committee or have been fired in the last four months.
 Load-Date: June 6, 2000

 

End of Document
