

Names In The Game
The Associated Press
August 21, 1999, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Sports News
Length: 774 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: AMES, Iowa
Body




Former Iowa State basketball star Fred Hoiberg said it is unlikely that he will spend a fifth season as a reserve with the Indiana Pacers.
"The chances of me being back there are not really high," Hoiberg said. "I am at the point in my career that I need to get some minutes. I just don't see a lot of playing time with Indiana. It might be time to move on."
Hoiberg - given the nickname of the Mayor because of his popularity in his hometown of Ames - was drafted with the 52nd pick of the 1995 draft after starring at Iowa State, where he is the school's third-leading scorer with 1,993 points.
Hoiberg said he and his agent have spoken "with a number of teams" who have shown interest in signing the 6-foot-4 guard.
Hoiberg is a free agent after signing a one-year deal prior to the lockout-shortened 1999 season.
He struggled last season, averaging 1.6 points per game in only 12 games. Of the Pacers' 63 combined regular season and playoff games, Hoiberg played in only 29.
---
AMMAN, Jordan (AP) - The Arab Games will be halted for three hours as a mark of respect for Prince Faisal bin Fahd, the Saudi king's son, who died Saturday, a top Jordanian official said.
Faisal was the equivalent of the sports minister of Saudi Arabia and also headed the Arab Sports Federation, which organizes the Arab Games for the 22 members of the Arab League.
"The Arab Games will go on. The tournament will go on," games director Bassam Haroun said.
However, "all events will stop for three hours" on Sunday from 11 a.m. to 2 p.m., Haroun said.
Haroun said the Arab Games' official flag will be flown at half mast for three days and a one-minute silence will be observed before every event.
Earlier, Jordanian deputy Prime Minister Ayman Majali said he met with the head of the Saudi delegation at the games to offer condolences.
The Saudi official said he would like the team to continue its participation in the games and not return home, said Majali, who is also the acting sports minister.
"He told me that if the prince was still amongst us he would not have accepted to see the games being suspended even temporarily," Majali said.
The news about the prince's death came as Saudi Arabia's handball team was playing its first-round match against Iraq in Amman.
Nasr Hilal, the director of the team, said he heard the news at the end of the first half. "It is a huge loss. I can't say any more," said Hilal, looking pale and shaken.
Saudi Arabia won the match 32-27 but the players did not celebrate the victory.
Prince Faisal had been admitted to hospital earlier Saturday for heart problems.
---
ST. PETERSBURG, Fla. (AP) - Florida Gov. Jeb Bush declared Sunday "Wade Boggs Day" in a State of Florida proclamation.
The Tampa Bay Devil Rays held a tribute to Boggs joining baseball's 3,000-hit club.
Boggs, the Devil Rays' third baseman, homered off Cleveland's Chris Haney on Aug. 7 for the milestone hit.
---
HOUSTON (AP) - Tommy LaMance, team manager for A.J. Foyt's Indy Racing League operation, said Saturday reports of a Foyt entry in NASCAR's Winston Cup series in 2000 are premature.
LaMance said Foyt has talked to several groups about the possibility of getting into Winston Cup next season, but that nothing is close to being finalized.
He said the four-time Indianapolis 500 winner and owner of the defending IRL champion Foyt Racing team isn't even sure if he wants to start a new team or buy into an existing team. LaMance also said no sponsor has been lined up yet.
---
DOVER, England (AP) - A retired swimming coach from El Cajon completed her swim across the English Channel after battling sea sickness and cold, choppy water for more than 12 hours.
Carol Sing, 57, did a victory dance Friday as she climbed to shore at Cap Griz Nez, France, while her coach and supporters cheered from a guide boat just off shore.
Sing completed the 21 -mile swim in 12 hours, 32 minutes.
"I'm never going to do that again," she said. "That was hard."
Shivering and covered in jellyfish stings, Sing then turned around and got right back in the water to swim the 200 yards back to her escort boat. She slept during the three-hour trip back to Dover.
Sing was a swimming instructor and coach during the 1960s and 1970s at schools and private clubs in San Diego County.
She took up marathon swimming about seven years ago after her 25-year marriage ended in divorce and her three daughters left home for college.
She was one of six people who set off Friday to cross the channel. One of the other swimmers, a 41-year-old Mexican woman, ran into difficulties and drowned about eight miles from Dover. A lifeguard boat reached her in 20 minutes but paramedics were unable to revive her.
 
 Load-Date: August 21, 1999

 

End of Document
