

Names in the News
The Associated Press
June 2, 1998, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 866 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Stone Temple Pilots lead singer Scott Weiland was arrested as he left a New York City housing project with about $ 100 worth of heroin, police said.
Weiland, 30, was charged with trespassing and drug possession Monday and that night's show at the Irving Plaza club was canceled. He has been touring to support a solo album he released this year, "12 Bar Blues."
The singer was arrested in May 1995 in Pasadena, Calif., when police found cocaine in his car and heroin in his wallet. In April 1996, a judge ordered him to spend four to six months at a drug treatment center, which put Stone Temple Pilots' U.S. summer tour on hold.
The group won a Grammy for their song "Plush" in 1994.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - The British "goth-rock" quartet Bauhaus will give it another go, 15 years after their farewell concert in London.
The four original members will reunite next month for three shows at the Hollywood Palladium. The shows, dubbed "Resurrection," will be recorded.
"We feel that it is very relevant today," ex-member Daniel Ash said in a statement Monday from Red Ant Entertainment.
Former member Peter Murphy has been living in Turkey and has released five solo albums. Ash, David J and Kevin Haskins stayed together as Love And Rockets, and plan to release their sixth album, "Lift," in October.
---
SPOTSYLVANIA, Va. (AP) - Hey, kids! Bored on that road trip with the folks? Insist on seeing the arm.
The National Park Service plans to turn the burial site of Confederate Gen. Thomas J. "Stonewall" Jackson's arm into a tourist attraction.
Jackson's shattered arm had to be amputated on May 3, 1863, hours after his own troops accidentally fired two bullets into it during the Battle of Chancellorsville. Seven days later, Jackson died.
While the rest of his remains are buried in a tomb in Lexington, the right-handed general's left arm is buried in a small cemetery on the grounds of Ellwood, a farm 15 miles west of Fredericksburg.
Civil War enthusiasts for years have made pilgrimages to the site, traveling down an unmarked gravel road, past fields of corn.
The park service estimates 1,400 tourists visit the site each year, but the number is expected to grow because roadside signs are being added and better access for cars.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - When Time magazine editors put together their list of the 20 most influential artists and entertainers of the century, they picked Elvis Presley over Frank Sinatra.
Then "60 Minutes" reporter Mike Wallace stepped in on behalf of Ol' Blue Eyes, calling up to lobby Walter Isaacson, Time's managing editor.
Wallace was working with Isaacson on this Thursday's CBS special about the list. After the newsman's haranguing, Time switched to Sinatra, succumbing to the argument that the crooner had a greater influence on personal style.
And then Sinatra's death, less than two weeks before the list came out, put his music in the spotlight again.
"I took such joy when I was able to call him and say, 'Walter, don't you see that I saved" you, Wallace said.
Isaacson begrudgingly admitted Wallace was right, though he said the death elevated Sinatra's status.
---
SPACE CENTER, Houston (AP) - John Glenn's got this space stuff down cold.
The 76-year-old U.S. senator donned rappelling gear and an orange flight suit Monday to practice exiting the space shuttle in the event of emergency. Though there's never been a need for one, every shuttle crew prepares just in case. Glenn completed the exercise without a hitch.
The Ohio Democrat will become the oldest man in space when he flies on a nine-day mission this fall to help NASA learn more about aging in space.
Glenn and his six fellow crew members took turns popping out the hatch of a life-size shuttle mockup and lowering themselves down the side of the spacecraft. The exercise simulates how the astronauts would exit the shuttle if there were an emergency while the vehicle was on the ground.
Glenn called the training a challenge, but said preparing to become the first American to orbit the Earth in the early '60s was no cakewalk.
"Back then, we were just trying to find out, 'Could you do this?"' Glenn said. "People were predicting eyeballs would change shape and you'd have uncontrollable vertigo and nausea and all that. Now it's gotten to where this is a science machine."
---
DETROIT (AP) - Civil rights pioneer Rosa Parks has been released from the hospital, two days after falling at her home.
Mrs. Parks, 85, was released Monday from Harper Hospital, where she underwent tests after Saturday's fall in her apartment. Tests found no evidence that she suffered a heart attack or stroke, her family said.
Hospital officials declined to release any information.
Mrs. Parks, who was found lying on her apartment's floor by live-in aide Elaine Steele, told relatives the last thing she recalled was getting up in the middle of the night and walking around.
"The next thing she remembers is just waking up," Cheryl McCauley, a niece of Mrs. Parks, said in today's Detroit News. "She doesn't know what happened. She's doing better now."
Mrs. Parks is best known for refusing to give up her seat on a Montgomery, Ala., bus in 1955 to a white man, touching off the city's bus boycott. She has lived in Detroit since 1957.
 Load-Date: June 2, 1998

 

End of Document
