

Names in the news
The Associated Press
January 29, 1998, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 836 words
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




Woody Harrelson's latest role: husband.
The "Natural Born Killers" star has married his former assistant, Laura Louie, in a private ceremony in Costa Rica, Harrelson spokesman Simon Hall said Wednesday.
It was the first marriage for both. The couple have two daughters, Deni Montana and Zoe Giordano.
Harrelson, 36, met Ms. Louie in 1987 when she was hired as his assistant. They became romantically involved three years later and tied the knot on Jan. 11.
Asked if she would take her husband's last name, the 32-year-old bride said, "Actually, now you can call me Woody Louie."
Harrelson, who appears in the new movie "Wag the Dog," became popular as the simple, straight-man bartender on the sitcom "Cheers."
---
LEESBURG, Va. (AP) - Stormin' Norman has stepped into a fray over a proposed school for Muslim children in suburban Washington.
The Saudi government wants to build an Islamic school for 3,500 youngsters near Dulles International Airport. Loudoun County officials would have to approve zoning for the school.
Some residents want the school, but others strongly object. An anonymous handbill warned that the Islamic school could be a security risk and a terrorism threat, and that thousands of "Middle Eastern strangers would be roaming our streets while we work."
Those allegations and others prompted a response from retired Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf, who as the former Gulf coalition commander earned the nickname "Stormin' Norman."
"We Americans always practice freedom of religion and to block a school because of their religious beliefs would be directly contrary to what we were fighting for in the Gulf War," Schwarzkopf wrote in a letter to county officials this week.
Schwarzkopf, who lives in Florida, noted that Saudis accommodated the religious traditions of U.S. soldiers who were there during the 1991 war with Iraq.
---
NORWALK, Conn. (AP) - No longer a no-show, Kirk Douglas' youngest son went to court for a hearing related to a 1996 disturbance at a psychiatric hospital where he was a patient.
Eric Douglas, 38, faces several charges for alleged incidents involving a girl at Silver Hill Hospital in New Canaan. In court Wednesday, several counts were dismissed but one was added - for failing to show up in court last month.
The case remains sealed because of the girl's age. Authorities have said only that Douglas annoyed another patient at the hospital in August 1996.
Douglas was arrested in February and is charged with one count of risk of injury to a minor, two counts of disorderly conduct, and failure to appear in court. He has pleaded innocent.
His run-in with the law in Connecticut came two days after he was charged in Long Beach, Calif., with driving under the influence of drugs and alcohol.
His lawyer, Francis DiScala Jr., called the current charges "groundless." Prosecutor Richard Colangelo Jr. did not return calls Wednesday.
---
HENDERSONVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - Johnny Cash is selling off much of his family's property.
Cash, 65, was diagnosed last year with Shy-Drager syndrome - a progressive disorder of the nervous system - and has been spending much of his time at a Jamaica home. The singer is expected to keep his home at Old Hickory Lake here, the Nashville Banner reported Wednesday.
The asking prices are $ 75,000 for an old railroad depot that houses his wife's antiques, $ 250,000 for the acre lot that houses both buildings and $ 1.8 million for the two 7-acre-plus lots adjoining the property and owned by the couple's son.
One group is looking at buying the House of Cash museum-studio building and converting it back into a dinner theater - which is what it was before Cash bought it about 20 years ago, said Charles Harris of Harris Realtors Inc. in Goodlettsville. The asking price is $ 1.2 million.
Cash's hits include "A Boy Named Sue" and "I Walk the Line."
---
GRAND RAPIDS, Mich. (AP) - Joe Perry and Steven Tyler of Aerosmith will turn the tables on a pair of radio disc jockeys.
The rockers are scheduled to trade places with announcers for WLAV-FM, picking songs and talking with about 150 audience members at a club, the station said Wednesday.
There's a bonus for listeners next Tuesday: Perry and Tyler will give away two pairs of tickets for their Feb. 4 concert at VanAndel Arena. Aerosmith's hits include "Walk This Way," "Sweet Emotion" and "Back in the Saddle."
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Nagano-bound speed skater Chris Witty shrugs off the comparisons between her and one of the sport's all-time greats, Bonnie Blair.
Witty, 22, of West Allis, Wis., is one of the favorites to bring home a gold medal for the United States, and the winter Olympic Games in Nagano, Japan may make hers a household name.
She has beaten Blair's best time in the 1,000-meter sprint - and has a chance to earn a medal in the 500 and 1,500 meters, Olympics historian Bud Greenspan writes in the Feb. 1 issue of Parade.
Witty isn't making too much of the comparisons to Blair, a star of the Lillehammer Games.
"Let me be the first to tell you, there is only one Bonnie Blair," Witty said with a laugh.
 Load-Date: January 29, 1998

 

End of Document
