

Names in the news
February 5, 1997, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 724 words
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




The King of Pop reportedly wants a prince to be his right-hand man.
Michael Jackson has fired his longtime personal managers and put his career in the hands of Saudi Arabian Prince Alwaleed Bin Talal, Daily Variety reported Tuesday.
Sandy Gallin-Jim Morey Associates, which has managed all phases of Jackson's business since 1991, was notified that it will be replaced by Alwaleed, who met Jackson in 1994 at Euro Disney, the trade paper said.
Jackson and the prince formed Kingdom Entertainment last year to develop films, TV shows, concerts, theme parks, hotels and restaurants.
Gallin and Morey and Jackson's publicist did not immediately return telephone calls for comment.
---
NEW YORK (AP) - Michael J. Fox said sorry to the real mayor, just in case "Spin City" offended him with its bumbling fictional mayor and an out-of-control City Hall.
"I apologize for anything the show has maybe done that doesn't meet your approval," Fox told Mayor Rudolph Giuliani at City Hall on Tuesday.
But he quickly deadpanned: "We'll keep doing it."
The mayor said he takes it all in stride.
"It's a really fun show, a good show," said Giuliani, who's watched "Spin City" once or twice. "If you ever tried to capture this place realistically, it probably would depress people."
Fox, who plays the deputy mayor of New York on the ABC show, visited City Hall to help Giuliani publicize statistics showing an increase in spending on film and TV production in the city.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Robert Wagner, who used to play a Hart on television, helped the Postal Service introduce its 1997 "Love Stamp."
The stamp features two swans staring into each other's eyes as their necks form a heart. It was unveiled Tuesday in a ceremony beside the Hotel Bel-Air's own Swan Lake, a pond in the garden.
"What a wonderful setting to launch the Valentine's Day love stamp. This hotel is the epitome of romance," said Wagner, star of the old "Hart to Hart" TV series.
It's the first time since the stamp series began in 1975 that the word "love" isn't used in the design.
The Postal Service started the series with the "Love Boat" stamp featuring the cast of the popular TV series standing on the deck of the cruise ship.
---
PITTSBURGH (AP) - For Lily Tomlin, playing precocious 6-year-old Edith Ann is about telling the "truth."
The comedian, who is bringing back Edith Ann to raise money for an award-winning day-care center, says she loves the freedom of playing a candid character.
"Actors hang on that ability to play," she said. "I love to pretend to be Edith Ann and say all the things she can say."
Edith Ann ends her observations about life with the phrase, "And that's the truth."
The Saturday night concert will benefit Pittsburgh's Shady Lane School, which has been praised as having one of the nation's best early childhood programs.
"I'm interested in anything regarding the development of kids and giving them an even break," Tomlin said.
---
WILLIAMSBURG, Va. (AP) - Ken Burns' documentary about Thomas Jefferson is a sort of prequel to his popular series "The Civil War" - and a look at "the man of the millennium."
Long before "The Civil War" aired on public TV in 1990, Burns wanted to do a piece on Jefferson, he said Tuesday in Colonial Williamsburg.
The contradictions in Jefferson's life and times - about race, the role of government and the meaning of freedom - helped create the "fault lines" of the country that brought on the Civil War, Burns said.
"As a filmmaker, I cannot help but be drawn to Thomas Jefferson," he said. "He is the center of our national life. He is without a doubt the man of the millennium."
The three-hour biography, "Thomas Jefferson," will air on PBS in two parts Feb. 18 and 19.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - A judge dismissed claims that a cameraman's civil rights were violated when rocker Tommy Lee threw him to the ground outside a nightclub.
But Judge Frances Rothschild did let stand the lawsuit's other claims of assault, battery and negligence.
Henry Trappler of Paparazzi TV, a supplier of celebrity videotape, is suing the Motley Crue drummer for unspecified damages.
Trappler, who was videotaping Lee and his wife, Pamela Anderson Lee, says he suffered a fractured rib and broken pelvis in the altercation last September, which was caught on tape.
In the criminal case, Lee pleaded innocent to a misdemeanor battery charge and faces a trial March 4.
 Load-Date: February 5, 1997

 

End of Document
