

Names in the News
The Associated Press
May 9, 2000, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 878 words
Dateline: EUREKA, Ill.
Body




Eighteen years ago, former President Ronald Reagan chose his alma mater to deliver a speech that indicated a shift in U.S. arms control policy and helped ease tensions during the Cold War.
Eureka College today was commemorating the May 9, 1982, address by dedicating the Ronald Reagan Peace Garden. The campus garden features a bronze bust of the 1932 graduate along with a 5-by-4-foot piece of the Berlin Wall, a gift from the German government.
Reagan, 89, announced six years ago that he is suffering from Alzheimer's disease. He has not been seen in public for more than a year.
His daughter, Maureen Reagan, was expected to represent the Reagan family at this afternoon's dedication.
A piece of the toppled Berlin Wall weighs more than a ton and is covered with graffiti on what was the West German side. A plaque bears the former president's 1987 declaration to the Soviet Leader Mikhail Gorbachev: "Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this wall."
In his 1982 address, Reagan announced the START Initiative, calling for the Soviet Union to engage the United States in talks. The Reagan administration went on to conclude a treaty with Russia to ban intermediate-range nuclear missiles, and also launch negotiations with the Soviet Union that evolved into the START I treaty signed in 1991.
"What he did in the speech was really give a new direction to U.S. arms control policy," said Junius Rodriguez, an associate history professor at Eureka. "Rather than simply limiting the continued growth of nuclear weapons, President Reagan put forth the idea that we must reduce our nuclear arsenals."
The bronze bust was sculpted by Lonnie Stewart, who said Reagan's wife, Nancy, approved sketches of the artwork.
---
KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) - Retired Army Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf praised President Truman for his leadership in receiving the Harry S. Truman Good Neighbor Award.
"I can think of no one who is the epitome of leadership more than Harry S. Truman," Schwarzkopf said Monday. "I tell people that leadership is a combination of two things- it is competence and character."
The annual award was begun in 1973 to honor a public figure who has improved the community and the country through citizenship, patriotism, self-reliance and service. Past recipients include President Ford, U.S. Chief Justice Earl Warren, FBI Director Clarence Kelley and Dr. Jonas Salk, who developed the vaccine for polio.
Schwarzkopf, 65, was the commander of U.S. and allied troops in Operations Desert Storm and Desert Shield against Iraq.
Schwarzkopf is a graduate of the U.S. Military Academy and has been awarded the Congressional Gold Medal and the Presidential Medal of Freedom.
Outside the luncheon, about 20 protesters stood with signs opposing economic sanctions and airstrikes on Iraq. Inside, Schwarzkopf addressed the concerns about sanctions.
"The problem with the sanctions are very simple," he said. "The minute the sanctions are lifted, Saddam Hussein is going to use his oil revenues to replenish his military force and he will be a threat to the rest of the world."
---
NASHVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - Harry Belafonte couldn't resist.
"Daaay-oh!" he sang to the cheers of 165 graduates and their families and friends attending commencement exercises Monday at Fisk University.
The man best known for his "Banana Boat Song" was given an honorary degree from the predominantly black, private school for his work as a fund raiser for Martin Luther King Jr. and as a goodwill ambassador for UNICEF.
Belafonte said his involvement in social causes was one reason he became a singer and actor.
"Use your voice to articulate on behalf of those who cannot articulate on behalf of themselves," he told the students.
He lamented the high crime rate among blacks and said more prisons are being built than schools. He also said too many blacks are not familiar with their African heritage.
"As I look upon this class of 2000, I understand that the generation before - my generation - has not delivered the world that we fantasized about," he said.
Belafonte urged the graduates to help those who are suffering, including children orphaned by the AIDS epidemic in Africa and the civil war in Sudan.
"It is enough just to be who you are and to be that way with honor, dignity and integrity - and with a commitment to the cause of freedom and justice," he said.
---
RADNOR, Pa. (AP) - The sparks between two characters on "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" aren't going away anytime soon.
Alyson Hannigan's sexually ambiguous character, Willow, proclaimed her love for fellow witch Tara (Amber Benson) in last week's episode. The two will continue to enchant each other, series creator Joss Whedon tells TV Guide Online.
Whedon initially had Willow and Tara cast a spell in a February episode in a ceremony featuring candles, hand-holding and moaning which she described as "sensual and physical, but by necessity, tasteful." In last week's episode the screen went blank just as the two were about to kiss.
"On a (bigger) network, you don't have an opportunity with a same-sex relationship to show the kind of graphic coupling that you do with, say, Buffy and (boyfriend) Riley," Whedon said. "It forces you to come up with something that is a little more primal and I think much sexier than if we were allowed to do anything we wanted."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY14, Schwarzkopf and Belafonte
 Load-Date: May 10, 2000

 

End of Document
