

Names In The Game
December 6, 1997, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 636 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: LAUSANNE, Switzerland
Body




Anita DeFrantz, an American who is the highest-ranking woman in the Olympic movement, will represent the IOC at the second Islamic Women's Games in Iran.
DeFrantz, a vice president of the International Olympic Committee, said Friday she will travel to Tehran next week for the opening ceremony of the Dec. 12-20 competition.
DeFrantz's trip will represent a rare visit to Iran by an American official. The United States and Iran do not have diplomatic relations.
DeFrantz said she obtained her visa through the Iranian embassy in Geneva.
"I'm traveling as an IOC member but I am an American, too," she said.
DeFrantz, a champion of women's rights in sports, became the first woman to hold the post of IOC vice president when she was elected in September.
In February 1993, Iran organized the first women-only Islamic Games in Tehran, drawing teams from Syria, Libya, Pakistan and three former Soviet republics. Men, even referees and coaches, were banned from all events except the opening ceremonies.
"I'm the first to say sports belongs to everyone," DeFrantz said. "We know there are some barriers (in Iran). There will be only women coaches and women referees. But it's important for women to have the opportunity to compete."
"Women of the Islamic faith have competed in the Olympic Games," DeFrantz said, noting that a woman was Iran's flag-bearer at the opening ceremony in Atlanta last year. "That's the mode we prefer, but this is another opportunity."
---
VANCOUVER, British Columbia (AP) - Trevor Linden could return to the Vancouver Canucks lineup soon after missing more than two weeks with a groin injury.
Linden skated with the Canucks in practice Friday and hopes to take a regular shift Tuesday in Detroit against the Red Wings.
The Canucks play Saturday in Colorado and Monday at St. Louis.
"I'd like to skate with the team a few times in practice first," Linden said. "We've gone at this (treatment) aggressively … I feel much better."
Linden injured himself in a team workout just two games after Mike Keenan took over as head coach following the dismissal of Tom Renney.
The 10-year veteran was chosen to the Canadian Olympic team this week despite a sub-par season. Linden has five goals and 12 points in 21 games.
---
LOS ANGELES (AP) - Southern California president Steven B. Sample said the school will build a 10,000-seat on-campus arena at some point.
"We're going to do it, but I can't tell you when and I can't give you a location," Sample was quoted as saying in Friday's editions of the Los Angeles Times. "The university needs an on-campus facility where students and staff can see their teams compete as well as major entertainment events."
Sample said the arena plan has been undergoing "a lot of serious thought, analysis and planning" for the last few months.
USC basketball games in the 15,000-seat Los Angeles Sports Arena, which is a short distance from the campus, have generally been poorly attended for many years.
---
OGDEN, Utah (AP) - Cal State Sacramento coach Debby Colberg has been chosen the Big Sky Conference women's volleyball Coach of the Year.
Colberg led the Hornets to a 21-8 overall record and 13-3 conference mark, a share of the Big Sky Conference regular-season title, the conference tournament title and its first-ever NCAA tournament berth.
It was only the team's second season as a member of the conference and the first league title for Cal State Sacramento since 1985, and the first since moving to the Division I level in 1991.
The Hornets will play University of Pacific in the first round of the NCAA Tournament on Saturday in Seattle.
Colberg is a four-time Northwest Region Coach of the Year and was Division II Coach of the Year in 1989. She has posted a 585-195 record in 22 years coaching at Cal State Sacramento, making her one of the winningest active coaches in the NCAA.
 Load-Date: December 6, 1997

 

End of Document
