

On the Afghan plains, faith propels another generation into war
September 14, 1997, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 1000 words
Byline: By ANTHONY SHADID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BANDI KHANA, Afghanistan
Body




Long before dawn, lightning streaks and shimmers over the Hindu Kush mountains, illuminating faint figures washing their hands and feet before they pray.
As the minutes pass, the young fighters of the Taliban religious army come together on the soiled, ratty mats that serve as their prayer rugs. Their clothes are tattered and their flowing turbans are askew.
Slowed by sleepiness, they cast their eyes down, bow, then kneel before God, a ritual required five times a day. Artillery thunders in the distance, the echoes rolling over the lonely camp.
"This is the life I want," says Mullah Merza Khan, a Taliban disciple of 22.
Khan is a soldier more devoted to his faith than his family, a man who thinks nothing of dying in a war for which many see no end. He left home without telling his parents, walked to the front with nothing more than a blanket and wishes only to return to the religious school that he left to fight for the Taliban.
At this camp in Bandi Khana, about 20 miles north of Kabul, Khan's story sheds light on the devotion that inspires the generation filling the ranks of the Taliban. It is an army that poured out of the religious schools in 1994 to conquer nearly two-thirds of war-shattered Afghanistan, imposing its strict vision of Islam.
Days at Bandi Khana are infused with religion and war.
Even before the first rays of sun sneak over the mountains, Khan climbs up a sun-baked mud hut, opens a green, wooden artillery box and gingerly pulls out yellowed, well-worn copies of the Koran, the Muslim holy book. He kisses each copy as he hands it out.
For another hour, he and his 20 comrades read what they consider the word of God, their voices like the murmur of an audience.
"You will not live forever; one day everyone has to die," Khan says afterward. "But there is another world, a permanent world, and in that world there is a large gate. One path through it takes you to heaven, and the other one takes you to hell."
It is a line heard often in the morally charged rhetoric of the Taliban, a thought repeated in the mosques on Friday, by their leaders in government offices and by fighters in the field. Life is temporary, they say, what comes next is what really matters.
For Khan and the other men who gather in the camp's cramped mud hut after a breakfast of tea and nan, the ubiquitous Afghan bread, that thinking justifies any sacrifice they may have to make.
Khan's friends joke that he, in fact, wants to die, that he wants to become a martyr, someone who gives his life for God.
"If I become a martyr, it's the will of God. If the fighting ends, it's the will of God, too," says Khan, his green turban covering short-cropped black hair. "If I live or if I die, it's up to God, because I know I am already on the right path."
In 1996, Khan left his religious school in the Pakistani town of Mardan to join the Taliban on a front just north of Jalalabad, a strategic eastern city near the Pakistani border.
He recalls the head of the religious school telling him: "Whoever wants to become close to God should fight in the jihad."
Jihad, or holy war, is the term many Afghan factions - even those on opposing sides - choose to describe a conflict that began in 1979 when Soviet troops invaded to prop up a Marxist government against Islamic opponents.
In Jalalabad, Khan's training went no further than a few minutes of instruction in how to use a Kalashnikov rifle. He fought there for five months, losing his younger brother. He returned to his family in Kabul for eight months, then grew bored with the business of trading wheat and flour and eager to begin fighting again.
"It was tough to spend night after night in the house," says Khan, running his fingers through his still-thin beard as his smiling comrades listen. "One morning, I woke up early to pray and just decided to go. I got my blanket and came here."
His parents have no idea where he is. He has given his address to his fellow soldiers so they know where to take his body if he dies.
"I'm happier here than with my family," he says.
A little after noon, after a lunch of bread, a stew of okra and potatoes, rice and a yogurt drink, a lone soldier stands outside, again giving the call to prayer. It begins with "God is great," a phrase repeated three times. Men walk off into the desert with pitchers of water to perform the ritual washing before they pray.
Another fighter sweeps dust off the mats. The men then line up, again praying in unison in a moment of purpose.
To the side of the praying Khan is his Kalashnikov rifle, a white-and-pink paper flower tied at its end. The flower, a symbol of peace, is an odd sight in Afghanistan, where neither Khan nor any of his friends, all in their 20s, can remember anything but war.
Khan says even here, the flower is a symbol of peace, but in an Afghan way. "Peace will only come through war," he says.
In the past few weeks, Khan has not fired his rifle all that much.
The front north of Kabul, one of four in the country, has stayed relatively quiet. Often, the men do nothing more than roam about the camp, the dirt packed as hard as pavement, waiting for something to happen. At these times, they share a camaraderie - there is no rank among the Taliban, only a commander and the fighters.
Before sunset, the men sit on the mats, sharing snuff, chatting or waving at the passing Taliban cars flying the white flag that is meant to symbolize the army's religious purity.
The idleness does not bother Khan.
"Even if we're killed in the bus on the way to fighting, we're going to heaven," he says. "And if we live, we're heroes."
At night, Khan stands up, his voice carrying the call to prayer.
The thunder of shells mixes with his words. A flash of lightning brightens the horizon, and more thunder rolls across the plain. The men gather again for prayer.
That same scene will be repeated in camps like Khan's tomorrow and perhaps for months and years to come. For how long is a question Khan insists never crosses his mind.
"That's a question for God, not for us," he says.
 Load-Date: September 14, 1997

 

End of Document
