

Pakistani Prime Minister bows to the Supreme Court
October 31, 1997, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 506 words
Byline: By KATHY GANNON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan
Body




Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif bowed to the Supreme Court on Friday, ending a bitter power struggle that had paralyzed the government and sent the stock market plummeting.
After a day of speculation that sent the stock market plunging 50 points early Friday, Sharif conceded that Pakistan's chief justice had the right to appoint judges to the Supreme Court, resolving a dispute that began nearly three months earlier.
The disagreement came to a climax earlier this week when Chief Justice Sajjad Ali Shah sought the president's intervention and threatened to slap a contempt of court charge on Sharif.
"I cannot become a partner in the chaos and anarchy in the country and in the greater interest of the country and the future of the country I have decided to accept the recommendations of the chief justice to appoint five judges to the Supreme Court," Sharif said in a televised speech to the nation from the National Assembly.
The confrontation with the Supreme Court has been Sharif's most serious political challenge since he took power in February in general elections called nearly two years early.
Sharif succeeded Benazir Bhutto, who was dismissed from power on a number of charges, one of which was a similar dispute with the judiciary.
Ms. Bhutto was the first to lock horns with the chief justice over who had the right to appoint judges. Ms. Bhutto argued that it was Parliament's job, while the chief justice said it was the role of the Supreme Court.
Sharif steered clear of the dispute until August when the chief justice announced five appointments to the Supreme Court. Sharif resisted and the chief justice launched a suit against him.
In his speech to the nation, Sharif conceded the judicial appointments but warned the Supreme Court against intervening in Parliament.
"Without Parliament, there is no democracy. … All other institutions should play an advisory and supportive role," he said.
Throughout the week, the dispute between the judiciary and Sharif raged, sending the stock market nose diving from 2000 points to 1700 points at midweek.
The week of turbulent trading ended Friday and the Karachi Stock Exchange showed some healthy gains, ending the day 65 points ahead of Thursday's close.
Despite Sharif's concession to the Supreme Court, there are still some unresolved issues.
For example, the Supreme Court on Wednesday suspended sections of a constitutional amendment, passed in July, that forced legislators to vote along party lines.
By suspending the amendment, Shah paved the way for members of Sharif's ruling Pakistan Muslim League to vote against the prime minister in the parliament.
In a special session held Wednesday, the National Assembly passed a resolution condemning the court's suspension of the amendment as unconstitutional. The vote's result had been expected because Sharif's party has more than two-thirds of the seats in the 217-seat lawmaking body.
Meanwhile, Shah also has moved to resurrect corruption allegations filed against Sharif, who could be disqualified as prime minister if convicted.
 Load-Date: October 31, 1997

 

End of Document
