

Pakistani leader calls for reduction of troops on the Indian border.
The Associated Press
October 17, 1999, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 732 words
Byline: KATHY GANNON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan
Body




The head of Pakistan's new military regime announced Sunday a unilateral reduction of troops on the Indian border, the establishment of a military-technocrat ruling council and an eventual return to civilian rule.
In a speech to the nation, Gen. Pervaiz Musharraf announced the formation of a six-member National Security Council of army officers and experts in legal, foreign and national affairs to govern the country. The council would be assisted by "a think tank of experts."
The speech was Musharraf's first public appearance since he went on national television to announce the ouster of the civilian government last Tuesday.
"This is not martial law," said Musharraf, but rather "another path toward democracy."
The constitution was not scrapped - only temporarily suspended, he said. He gave no indication when civilian rule would be restored, but said "the armed forces have no intention to stay in charge longer than necessary."
Musharraf said he would welcome a resumption of "result-oriented" talks with nuclear rival India, which has fought three wars with Pakistan since both countries won their independence from Britain in 1947. Pakistan is overwhelmingly Muslim, while India is predominantly Hindu.
But Musharraf made it clear that Pakistan will continue to support Kashmiri militants with moral, political and diplomatic backing. The militants are seeking independence from India in Kashmir, the country's only Muslim-majority state.
The announcement of a thinning of troops on the Indian border was unexpected. Musharraf said it was intended as a gesture to rebuild confidence with New Delhi.
India reacted cautiously to the announcement, saying the proposed pullback was not from the volatile cease-fire line in Kashmir, where tensions between the two nations are the highest.
"They say they will pull back from the international border… . Tension was not on the international border. It was on the Line of Control," India's National Security Adviser Brajesh Mishra said on the private STAR Television network.
The Line of Control is a 1972 cease-fire line that divides the Himalayan territory of Kashmir between the two nations and where firing across the border is routine.
Musharraf was the army commander who ordered Pakistani troops and Kashmiri irregulars to seize mountain heights in Indian Kashmir last summer, leading to the worst fighting in three decades. His seizure of power was seen with great suspicion in New Delhi, which ordered its troops on high alert immediately after the coup.
"I take this opportunity to announce a unilateral military deescalation on our international borders with India and initiate the return of all our forces moved to the borders in the recent past," Musharraf said.
Musharraf promised a "policy of nuclear and missile restraint."
Pakistan and India exploded nuclear devices last year, declaring themselves nuclear weapons powers and raising international fears of an arms race on the volatile South Asian subcontinent.
The army chief said he wanted good relations with the United States but that relations with the Muslim world would be the cornerstone of Pakistan's foreign policy.
Musharraf spent most of his speech addressing Pakistan's economic and domestic problems, and justifying his takeover of the government.
He listed seven objectives of his administration: rebuild national confidence, ease tensions between the provinces, revive the economy and restore investor confidence, strengthen law and order, remove politics from state institutions, give more power to the people, and ensure quick recovery of illicit wealth.
In an apparent offer of amnesty, he urged loan defaulters to pay their loans and taxes "before the hand of law forces them to do so." He set a four-week deadline.
The army chief affirmed his support for press freedoms, and urged sectarian harmony at home in the wake of relentless religiously motivated killings between militant Sunni and Shiite Muslims.
Musharraf told Islamic clerics to rein in their followers who "are exploiting religion for vested interests and bringing a bad name to our faith."
Maleeha Lodhi, Pakistan's former ambassador to the United States, said Musharraf's call for religious tolerance was particularly significant.
"Clearly he was saying that the army will not permit these people to resort to violence in the name of religion," Lodhi said. "That is a very important message to the country."
 Load-Date: October 17, 1999

 

End of Document
