

Palestinian, Israeli troops on the same side in Hebron
January 30, 1997, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 697 words
Byline: By HILARY APPELMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HEBRON, West Bank
Body




The two Palestinian officers newly assigned to one of Hebron's hottest trouble spots know their Israeli counterpart well.
He used to be their jailer.
On Thursday, the three men smoked and drank coffee under a photograph of Yasser Arafat, laughing over the quirk of fate that brought them together again under such changed circumstances.
"We've been at war with the Israelis for 30 years," said Lt. Ahmed Abu Kharon, who spent seven years in prison for fighting the Israeli occupation. "Now it's ended. We have to start a new era of peace."
Like it or not, Palestinian and Israeli troops are working together to keep the peace in Hebron, where many feel an explosion is inevitable.
"If we have troubles, both of us will work to solve them," said Lt. Hatem Arkawi. "Neither side wants to be blamed for the failure of the peace."
Israeli soldiers pulled out of most of Hebron - the last West Bank city under Israeli control - on Jan. 17. But they remain in the 20 percent of the city where 500 Jewish settlers live, surrounded by thousands of Palestinians.
"Attention! You are now entering an area under Israeli control!" red-and-white signs on the boundary of the Israeli sector announce in Arabic and Hebrew. Signs facing the other way signal the beginning of the Palestinian-controlled area.
It is impossible to keep the two peoples apart in Hebron, because more than 15,000 of the city's 130,000 Palestinians live in the Israeli-controlled sector. Still, great efforts are being made to keep the settlers, who include militant ultra-nationalists, from clashing with the newly arrived Palestinian police.
Fifteen Palestinian checkpoints are posted along the edge of a buffer zone between the Israeli- and Palestinian-controlled areas, known in military jargon as "Triple-A" - or "Agreed Adjacent Area."
Col. Gadi Shamny, the Israeli army commander in Hebron, said the checkpoints are supposed to prevent the kind of clashes between Israelis and the Palestinians that left 79 people dead in the West Bank and Gaza Strip last September.
On the map, the checkpoints are marked by neat red circles.
On the ground, those actually in place consist of three Palestinian police in plastic chairs, keeping a watchful eye on the border as they huddle over cans of burning wood to ward off the winter chill.
"Our job is to stop violations on both sides," Lt. Yasser Hasayan said Thursday, raising his voice to be heard over the clamor of car horns.
But, Hasayan added, "there is nothing from the Palestinian side. We are afraid from the Jewish settlers."
So far, it has been quiet on all fronts in Hebron, and officials on both sides have only praise for the coordination and cooperation between the two forces.
Shamny and the new Palestinian commander in Hebron, Abdel Fattah Jaehdi, meet almost every day, and are in constant telephone contact.
"Both sides are taking measures in order to prevent any negative friction." said Shamny. "Both sides have a strong interest in keeping the city quiet."
The two sides have set up a joint office at one of Hebron's worst trouble spots - downtown Bab Izawiya square, where Palestinian youngsters and Israeli soldiers used to clash almost daily.
Israeli Maj. Fareis, the former prison commander who declined to give his first name, sat with the two Palestinian officers and another Israeli officer in the unmarked office Thursday. In their thick green winter jackets, the men were almost indistinguishable. In their daily meetings, the former jailer and prisoners have - to their surprise - become friends.
"I see him more than I see my wife!" said Abu Kharon, who spent seven years in Israeli prisons for throwing firebombs and being a member of the Palestine Liberation Organization. Arkawi was jailed for four years for his PLO activities.
Fareis insisted their friendship was not remarkable.
"We have two options," he said. "One is for everybody to make a war, and the other is for everything to be OK. I know there are some who don't want peace - but they are some of the people, not all of the people."
Arkawi said the three of them were a good example for residents.
"When the people see us talking and walking around, it's a good way to implement the peace," he said.
 Load-Date: January 30, 1997

 

End of Document
