

PEACE TALKS NOTEBOOK: Small town folk feed the hordes, watch the choppers
The Associated Press
January 3, 2000, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 533 words
Dateline: SHEPHERDSTOWN, W.Va.
Body




Elca Frye cooked for a crowd Monday as regulars at Betty's Restaurant were joined by some of those on hand for the peace talks between Israel and Syria.
Serving up breakfast, Frye said she went through 10 dozen eggs, twice the normal amount. She was unflappable after 40 years behind the smoky diner's counter.
"I'm just my natural self," she said. "If the president would come in, I'd treat him just like I'd treat you."
Her extra customers were mostly journalists.
Food planning was a challenge for Erwin Asam, co-owner of the Clarion Hotel and Conference Center, the semi-secluded site chosen to host the peace talks.
Asam said kosher fare for the Israeli delegation and Syrian foods were being brought in by caterers from the Washington area, 70 miles away. He sent some chefs from his other establishment, the Bavarian Inn and Lodge, to the Clarion to help with food preparation.
In town at the Old Pharmacy Cafe, co-owner Margaret Shifflet said she would feature hummus and pita bread, a regular menu selection with a Middle Eastern flavor.
The first talks of the day began not at the Clarion but at the nearby National Conservation Training Center run by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
President Clinton met with Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Syrian Foreign Minister Farouk al-Sharaa, then walked with them across a 200-foot-long wood and metal pedestrian bridge spanning a 25-foot deep wooded gully.
About two-thirds of the way across, Clinton stopped to point toward the Potomac River, which runs parallel to the bridge. The three chatted, then continued their stroll.
About 70 townspeople gathered on Robert Keller's front lawn to watch President Clinton's arrival by helicopter at the Shepherd College baseball field across the road.
"Everybody just kind of showed up," Keller said. "It's OK. We're a friendly town."
Social studies teacher Joy Lewis brought 2-year-old daughter Macaline and 3-year-old son Chandler to see Clinton.
"I'm so glad my children get to experience this and that my town was selected for this. We are so blessed," she said.
Most downtown businesses displayed window posters with the word "peace" in English, Hebrew and Arabic.
The Herb Lady, a card, candle and potpourri boutique, carried the message further with a window display of peace-themed greeting cards.
"I'm excited. I think it's great," manager Donna Wallace said. "There are a lot of really enlightened people in this area. We have all kind of been pulling together to pray for peace."
Ouch!
Before the presidential entourage departed the White House for Shepherdstown, a Secret Service agent assigned to President Clinton's detail got two fingers of his right hand caught in the driver's door of the black Chevrolet Suburban that trails Clinton's limousine.
The agent collapsed in pain on the White House driveway and a pair of medics rushed across the South Lawn with a stretcher. But the man recovered quickly enough to walk back into the White House with the help of two fellow officers.
Secret Service spokesman Jim Mackin, who declined to identify the agent, said the agent's fingers did not appear to be broken but he planned to see a doctor. The agent was expected to return to work soon, Mackin said.
 Load-Date: January 4, 2000

 

End of Document
