

Pentagon says Iraq strike successful and U.S. forces will remain in the Gulf
The Associated Press
December 21, 1998, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 984 words
Byline: By JOHN DIAMOND, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The United States will maintain continuous presence in the Persian Gulf to protect its interests in the region, said Marine Corps Gen. Anthony Zinni today.
Zinni, commander of Central Command, which oversees U.S. military operations in the Middle East, also said the U.S. and British coalition forces hit 85 percent of their targets, 74 percent of them successfully, in their four-day strike against Iraq.
In a briefing two days after the end of Operation desert Fox, Zinni said the battle damage assessment from the series of cruise missile and bombing attacks is still ongoing and will probably take a few more days.
But he said the United States' vital interests require continuous presence in the Persian Gulf. "I think U.S. forces in the Persian Gulf, based on all those leaders I speak to there, are a force of stability in the region," Zinni said.
He said Iraqi President Saddam Hussein remains a threat. "I think those in the region view him as a threat, and those in the region appreciate us being there providing a counter and a deterrence to that threat."
Secretary of Defense William Cohen said at the briefing the strike has delayed Iraq's development of ballistic missiles by at least a year and has diminished its overall ability to attack its neighbors.
Cohen also reiterated his warning to Iraq that the United States is prepared to act should Saddam Hussein pose a threat to his neighbors.
Zinni said the Operation desert Fox involved over 30,000 troops and 10,000 more who provided support from bases around the world.
In addition, the forces flew over 600 sorties in four days and more than 300 of them were night strikes. Over 300 aircraft were involved in the operation and in support roles.
Zinni said over 600 pieces of ordinance were used and more than 40 ships performed strike and support roles.
Zinni showed pictures of damage inflicted to Iraq's ministry of defense in Baghdad, the Baath Party headquarters and a jamming station in Tikrik.
In London, Prime Minister Tony Blair's office said the attacks left the Iraqi air defense system "in ruins" and Saddam weakened.
The prime minister's spokesman, speaking on condition of anonymity, said 100 sites were targeted during the four-day bombardment that ended Saturday.
Meanwhile, Hans von Sponeck, the U.N. humanitarian coordinator in Iraq, said today the strikes have disrupted the distribution of supplies under the U.N.-approved oil-for-food program.
The program allows Iraq to get around U.N. economic sanctions by selling limited quantities of oil to buy food and other humanitarian goods. The distribution of food is monitored by U.N. workers, who were evacuated to Amman, Jordan during the strikes.
U.N. officials said the aid workers, more than 100 in all, would leave Amman early Tuesday for Baghdad.
Pentagon officials have cautioned that the bomb-damage assessment could take months, that the pictures are often deceiving and that Iraq may have to be attacked again. Although troop reinforcements were expected to be ordered back to their U.S. bases today, the "containment" force in the Persian Gulf region remains some 20,000 strong, with no plans for relaxing the guard over Iraq.
The administration, meanwhile, is shifting the direction of its policy on Iraq toward toppling Saddam from power.
"We've tried to be very accurate in our damage assessment, not to inflate it or overstate it," Cohen said Sunday on CBS' "Face the Nation." "We had very specific military objectives. Those objectives, in our judgment, have been met."
Appearing later on ABC's "This Week," Cohen said that if Iraq, as expected, tries to restore its capability to produce chemical and biological weapons of mass destruction, "We're prepared to take it down again."
The Defense Department revamped its format for describing bomb damage. During the airstrikes, Pentagon figures indicated that only one target in five was destroyed or severely damaged. Now the statistics list simply "confirmed damage" that may include light to moderate damage. On that basis, 73 out of 96 targets sustained some damage.
"We consider this a very successful attack at this point," said Army Gen. Henry H. Shelton, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. "Our success goes up almost daily as we have a chance to make a more complete assessment."
In his first public comment since Clinton ordered an end to the strikes Saturday, just after the start of the Muslim holy month of Ramadan, Saddam declared victory over the "enemies of God." Cohen dismissed the rhetoric as propaganda.
But Saddam's continued hold on power is clearly a major irritant for U.S. policymakers, especially now that Iraq says it will no longer tolerate U.N. weapons inspections.
"We would like to see a different regime," Secretary of State Madeleine Albright said on NBC's "Meet the Press." "That is what we are going to be working towards by more active support of the various (Iraqi) opposition groups."
U.S. intelligence officials and outside experts have said in recent months that Iraqi opposition groups are in no position to challenge Saddam's heavily armed and entrenched government and military. And while U.S. warplanes dropped leaflets onto Iraqi forces in southern Iraq suggesting they oppose Saddam, there was no evidence that any did.
Overthrowing Saddam from within will require a long-term U.S. commitment, White House national security adviser Sandy Berger said on CNN's "Late Edition."
"I'm under no illusions that is achievable quickly or easily," Berger said. "But we are determined to pursue that objective in a very steady, deliberate, sustained way."
Nizar Hamdoon, Iraq's ambassador to the United Nations, said on CNN that it was highly unlikely U.N. weapons inspections could resume. Iraq's Vice President, Taha Yassin Ramadan, declared that the U.N. inspection "mission is over."
It was Iraq's refusal to cooperate fully with the inspectors that led the United States and Britain to attack.
 Load-Date: December 21, 1998

 

End of Document
