

People in the News
November 23, 2000, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1323 words
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




She was a coal miner's daughter who grew up to become a country music legend, but somewhere along the line, Loretta Lynn also ended up with basketball player's knee.
"Performing on stage night after night is a lot harder, physically, than most people realize," Lynn said. "I guess after 40 years of that, this old knee just felt like complaining a bit."
It complained so much that Lynn recently underwent arthroscopic knee surgery, publicist Sandy Brokaw said Wednesday.
Lynn, however, didn't miss a booking on her recent tour to promote "Still Country," her first new solo album in years.
The entertainer, who spent Thanksgiving at her ranch in Hurricane Mills, Tenn., is also working on a sequel to her autobiography, "Coal Miner's Daughter."
EDINBURGH, Scotland (AP) - Author J.K. Rowling received an honorary degree in the city in which she wrote her smash Harry Potter series about a young boy wizard.
Rowling smiled on Thursday as she received the Doctor of Letters from Edinburgh's Napier University, but made no remarks.
A single mother, she wrote some of the first Potter book in Edinburgh cafes while trying to stay warm.
"By the time she came to live in Edinburgh in 1993, she had a suitcase full of stories, a young daughter, and no money," said Patricia Peattie, Napier's assistant principal.
Peattie noted that Rowling lived on benefits and a small grant from the Scottish Arts Council, "all the time writing, writing, writing - and giving life to Harry Potter and all his adventures."
NEWCOMERSTOWN, Ohio (AP) - Get-well cards sent by two young boys to the president of the United Arab Emirates paid off in a big way.
Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan was so touched by the cards sent by Bobby McKim, 11, and his 9-year-old brother, Billy, that he donated $30,000 to the boys' school, West Elementary. The sheik recommended the money be used to buy furniture, computers, books and tables.
The 82-year-old sheik is listed by Forbes magazine as the sixth richest man in the world.
The McKim brothers were visiting their grandmother at the Cleveland Clinic in Cleveland earlier this month when they ran across the sheik's entourage. The sheik was recuperating from a kidney transplant that was complicated by a broken hip.
When the boys returned home, they sent get-well cards to the sheik. Soon after, Sheikh Zayed asked some of the boys' teachers to go to the clinic to receive a donation to the school. In addition to the money, the teachers received 50 color Game Boys, which were to be presented to students.
The Newcomerstown Board of Education officially accepted the gifts this week.
"The act of kindness humbled you and your act of kindness to the children of our district humbles me," Superintendent David Branch said in a letter he wrote to sheik.
UNIONTOWN, Pa. (AP) - For the second time in two months, Fabian Forte, the teen singing idol of the '50s, has been sued by someone accusing him of not paying his bills.
Contractor Roy D. Dewitt Jr. on Tuesday filed a lawsuit saying he hasn't been paid for work done on the new home of Forte and his wife, Andrea Patrick Forte.
DeWitt says he's owed $17,000 from the agreed-upon price of $320,000. Additionally, he says, he was never paid $35,000 extra for a finished basement.
A countersuit filed Wednesday alleges that the walls are crooked and that repairs will cost $50,000.
"There was never any refusal to pay him," said Joseph M. George Sr., the Fortes' attorney. "We asked him to fix things in accordance with the builder's contract and he refused to do it. He actually owes us money."
The contractor contends he gave the Fortes a better deal because he wanted to be able to say he built a house for a famous person. Now 57, Fabian, as he was known professionally, had such hit singles as "Turn Me Loose" and "Tiger."
"I guess that's why they're filing a countersuit, because they don't want to pay their bills. I really want to go to court because I want to get paid - that's all I want," DeWitt said.
The Fortes were sued last month by the posh Nemacolin Woodlands Resort and Spa, which said the couple still owes more than $5,000 on the $24,000 tab from their 1998 wedding. The couple said they were overcharged for alcohol and don't owe anything.
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) - A Dominican magistrate has sentenced merengue singer Tono Rosario to two years in prison for failing to pay child support, Listin Diario newspaper reported.
The singer, who is known for his hit "Alegria," did not attend the hearing Tuesday in northern Santiago.
The magistrate ordered Rosario to pay $3,368 to cover the eight months of unpaid child support.
Rosario is a former member of the group Hermanos Rosario. His latest album, "Yo soy Tono," came out this month.
AUGUSTA, Ga. (AP) - James Brown delivered more than just the blues - he threw in a few turkeys and some unconditional blessings.
Hundreds showed up Wednesday for the Godfather of Soul's sixth annual turkey giveaway.
"The more we give, the more we receive," said Brown, clad in suede insulated gloves as he doled out frozen birds.
About 800 turkeys were provided by Brown and several other donors.
Despite public debates concerning the city's lack of support for Brown's effort and whether the civic center should be named after the music legend, Brown said his commitment to feeding the community at Thanksgiving will be unfettered by controversy.
"People need to eat first," Brown said. "It's God's temple, and we need to keep it in good shape.
RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (AP) - Bono says it's guilt that keeps him working on behalf of the poor.
"One thing I'm very sure about is that I am a spoiled rock star; I am overpaid, overnourished and overdressed," the U2 singer said Wednesday. "And I'm sure the work that I do at Jubilee 2000 and the work the band has done for Amnesty International is some kind of Catholic guilt, but it's working, so we'll continue with it."
Bono has spent the last several years lobbying world governments to pardon the poorest nations' debts as part of a campaign by Jubilee 2000, a coalition of religious organizations.
U2 is in Brazil for a four-day visit to promote their new album, "All That You Can't Leave Behind" and film a new video clip.
DANVERS, Mass. (AP) - Warren Buffett has offered to help buy uniforms for a high school marching band after one of his companies closed the plant where the band's outfits were being made.
The billionaire investment guru said he'll pay the extra costs of getting the uniforms from a new company in time for the Danvers High School band to appear in the Rose Parade on New Year's Day.
"We were wrong," Buffett said this week. "It shouldn't have happened that way, but mistakes happen and the important thing is to fix it."
Buffett learned about the band's quandary from a shareholder in one of his companies, who sent him a newspaper clipping about the closure of the Fechheimer Band Uniform Co.'s San Antonio plant.
Band director Ron Parsons said the plant's closure forced him to scramble to find a new company to make the 66 uniforms in time for the band's participation in the parade in Pasadena, Calif.
DeMoulin Brothers of Greenville, Ill., offered to quickly make the uniforms, but the quick work and speedy delivery would cost about $2,500 more than the original agreement with the San Antonio plant.
"People told me, if we could get through to Mr. Buffett, he would take care of the situation because he's that kind of guy," Parsons said.
LONDON (AP) - Drew Barrymore and Lucy Liu say they are now Prince Charles' agents.
The two "Charlie's Angels" announced Wednesday at the film's British premiere that they have agreed to become ambassadors of the Prince of Wales' Trust.
"I would be honored. I want to work hard for it," Barrymore said of the charity work.
The two were entertained Tuesday night by Prince Charles at St. James's Palace. The prince also attended the opening of the movie, a big screen version of the popular 1970s TV show.
Cameron Diaz did not attend.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY44 of Lynn, Rowling, Brown and Bono
 Load-Date: November 24, 2000

 

End of Document
