

Persian rugs legal, but their future in the U.S. still knotty
The Associated Press
March 22, 2000, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 716 words
Byline: By TOM RACHMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Hundreds of exquisite Oriental rugs line the walls of Sol Kalati's dim Manhattan warehouse. Rolled and upright, the thick trunks of these masterpieces - likely the only art made to be trod on - burst with ivory arabesques and crimson medallions.
Kalati peers through the thick of his rug forest and shrugs. The United States is allowing Persian rugs to be imported for the first time in 13 years but, he asks, what does it matter now?
"Generations have changed," says Kalati, in his Antique Rug Mall warehouse. "There were people who bought these things as an investment. That generation is dead. For the new generation, they don't know Persian rugs, they haven't seen Persian rugs."
U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright announced the end of the import ban on Persian carpets, caviar and pistachios on Friday. But carpet dealers in the United States say Iran will have to fight to regain its place in the U.S. market because Indian, Pakistani and Chinese factories filled the gap during the ban, even adopting traditional Iranian motifs and colors.
Before the Islamic revolution in 1979, Iran had about 80 percent of the U.S. market in Oriental rugs, said Ron O'Callaghan, a dealer in New Hampton, N.H., and publisher of the online magazine www.rugreview.com. 
"When they dropped out, the other makers said: What do you want? What size? What color?" said O'Callaghan. "I don't see the Iranians ever recapturing the market share that they enjoyed as recently as 25, 30 years ago."
The rug trade in the United States - conducted in darkened showrooms in midtown Manhattan, in top-flight department stores and increasingly on the Internet - is a $1.25 billion business, O'Callaghan said.
Shahriar Afshar, president of the San Diego-based Iranian Trade Association, which lobbied for lifting the sanctions, pointed out that Persian rugs are Iran's biggest export after oil.
Iran still gets 85 percent of its foreign exchange earnings from oil so the U.S. move is largely symbolic - but it's a gesture that will resonate among Iranians who value their nation's artistic tradition.
"Iranians are very proud of their carpets," Afshar said. "It's kind of like - if the U.S. can imagine - exporting the Mustang or apple pie. It's the very best that Iran has to offer.'
The attraction of Oriental carpets for the West goes back to the days when Marco Polo judged that Asia Minor produced "the best and handsomest carpets in the World."
The precise origins of Oriental rugs are debated, but it's certain that tribes in Central Asia have been producing them for centuries, generating and passing on techniques for the lush carpets, which started out to warm the floors of tents. Over time, tribes developed stylized motifs, preferred dyes, knot-types - all of which the keen collector can use to pinpoint origin.
The carpet trade with the West took off in the 16th century when Iran's shahs elevated tribal rug-weaving to an art and an industry. European kings and courtiers soon began demanding carpets from Persia.
Even during the ban, Iran's trade in rugs with the West has by no means ended. The country exported millions of dollars worth each year to Europe, and antique Persians still are regarded as among the finest rugs.
But it's telling that the term "Persian carpet" to mean all Oriental rugs has largely disappeared in the United States. "Oriental rug" has become the generic phrase - partly for accuracy but also because "Persian" no longer describes the product.
Soon after the embargo, carpet makers from India, China and Pakistan reacted to demand: If you want Persian carpets, that's what we'll make, they said. And traditional motifs and colors, which long served like a fingerprint, became jumbled.
Sadly, today's Oriental rug market has obliterated many neat distinctions between one village's style and that of the next. In the globalized economy, a deficit of Persian rugs in the United States has meant that "Persia" became Pakistan or China or India.
However, it's the recognition of the carpet as an integral part of Iran's culture that makes lifting the U.S. import ban important, said Hooshang Amirahmadi, who heads the American-Iranian Council that arranged the conference where Albright made her announcement.
"More than caviar or pistachios," he said, "the carpet is part of Iran's identity."
 Graphic



 
AP Photo NYR103
 Load-Date: March 23, 2000

 

End of Document
