

Political Worries Mar the Idyll on a Peaceful Border
October 15, 1996, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 724 words
Byline: By MARCUS ELIASON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GESHER, Israel
Body




A thrill ran through the Israeli tour bus as it crept across a rickety bridge and a Jordanian soldier climbed aboard for a perfunctory inspection, chatting in fluent Hebrew.
The 40 kibbutzniks had just crossed into sovereign Jordan - a through-the-looking-glass adventure into a world where a soldier who was once their enemy now welcomed them with smiles.
But the greeting couldn't obscure a deeper fear among the Sabbath day-trippers that the idyll was in jeopardy.
After the Israeli-Palestinian clashes that killed more than 70 people in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, Jordan's King Hussein dismayed Israelis by warning in unusually blunt language a week ago that Israel's policies were leading to war.
Hussein was quoted as saying that unless Benjamin Netanyahu changed course, Israel's prime minister would have to keep a gas mask ready - a reference to Iraq's missile attacks on Israel in the Gulf War.
"Those words were like a bayonet through my heart," said Sarah Jacobson, who lives near the Jordan border and calls herself a great admirer of Hussein.
Her worries are shared by officials in Jerusalem, who were relieved this week when Hussein talked to Netanyahu on the phone and offered to help move peace forward. It did a lot to calm the atmosphere, an Israeli official said.
The king is esteemed here for the full and heartfelt peace he signed with Israel in 1994, and nobody wants to lose the security, trade and open borders that have grown out of the treaty.
Israeli tourists have poured into Jordan and 392 truckloads of goods worth $ 2.85 million crossed the river in July and August, more than in the whole preceding six months.
The fruits of peace are evident at Kibbutz Gesher, a collective settlement 10 minutes' drive south of the Sea of Galilee.
Gesher was heavily damaged in the 1948 Arab-Israeli war, and again in the late 1960s by rockets and artillery fire from Jordan. In the 1990s, a shady acacia tree in Gesher's riverside heritage park became the venue of talks that preceded the peace treaty.
Nirit Bagron, a Gesher woman, said that when the first Jordanians came across, they asked to see her - "the blonde we used to wave to from the other side of the river."
The euphoria of peace gave rise to grand visions of joint tourism projects and a drive to clean up the polluted Jordan River. These have yet to materialize, but Gesher is already making a tidy living from peace.
It has just exported its first truckload of gypsum to Jordan, and this year more than 50,000 tourists have visited its park.
Gesher handles up to 20 busloads of day-trippers a day, at $ 4 a head, to a manmade phenomenon known as "the island."
It's a 250-acre wedge of avocado groves and wheatfields created in the 1920s when the Jordan River was split in two for a hydro-electric power station.
Jordan gained sovereignty over the "island" in negotiations to demarcate the peace border, then leased it back to the Israelis. Gesher and two neighboring kibbutzim continue to farm there under Jordanian military guard and flag.
The bus that went to the island crossed the Jordan, a sluggish stream in summer, then chugged through landscape resembling trampled spongecake, littered with the remnants of a world that died in the 1948 war: the disused power station, once the pride of the Middle East; a railroad station built by the Turks, its tracks long ago uprooted.
"This is so exciting," said Raya Ben-Zvi as the bus pulled up beside a Jordanian watchtower with an armored car parked at its foot.
"It's a wonderful feeling, hard even to put into words, of something coming true that I never thought was possible. Just seeing and being next to a Jordanian soldier and not being afraid. … It gives a lot of hope."
Eli Ben-Naim said: "This is the first time I could cross a border and feel at home and not in a hostile country."
Israelis living on the border know how fragile the peace is. They echo the fear of many political analysts that while Hussein may be at peace with Israel, his people - especially Islamic fundamentalists - aren't.
As if to reinforce that fear, scores of activists, political parties and trade unions called Saturday for a boycott of "the Zionist enemy."
The latest developments "have raised our alertness a bit, said Omri Shalmon, who runs the tours to the "island."
"But the Jordanians haven't given us the feeling that we are not wanted."
 Load-Date: October 15, 1996

 

End of Document
