

Politicians pin their hopes on the Ten Commandments
The Associated Press
June 28, 1999, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Lifestyle
Length: 628 words
Byline: By RICHARD N. OSTLING, AP Religion Writer
Body




Since the Littleton school shootings, politicians and parents alike have pondered what to do about youth violence. A majority of the U.S. House of Representatives has an idea:
Allow public schools to post the Ten Commandments. No matter that the U.S. Supreme Court already said such "establishment of religion" is unconstitutional.
But it might be hard for the high court to say no to such displays in other public places, since its own chamber decor depicts Moses and the Decalogue.
Like Judaism and Christianity, Islam teaches that God gave Moses the tablets of the law (Quran 7:143-147). Though the Quran does not contain the Bible's list of 10, Muslim law agrees with the substance except for observing the Saturday Sabbath (moved by Christians to Sunday).
The biblical 10 are not merely absolute moral standards for an anxious era. They also codify a religious creed, insisting upon exclusive worship of the one God ("you shall have no other gods before me"), forbidding idolatry ("no graven image") and declaring guilt for those who use God's name "in vain."
Some Americans believe differently. And even if everyone were to accept the basic contents, there's no agreement on the wording or the numbering order of the Judeo-Christian commandments.
The Bible itself contains two versions of the Decalogue, the more familiar Exodus 20:1-17 and Moses' restatement of the law in Deuteronomy 5:6-21. The main difference is the reason given for keeping the Sabbath. Exodus enshrines the seventh day because God created the cosmos in six days and rested on the seventh. But in Deuteronomy it's a reminder that God rescued Israel from slavery.
Why two biblical renditions? According to one rabbinic tradition, Moses smashed the tablets (see Exodus 32:19) and the other biblical version was the replacement. Another theory is that one version was for use in rituals and the other for education. Others say the explanations are add-ons, not part of the commandments as such.
Whichever biblical text is followed, another problem is that people use slightly different English translations of the Hebrew. For instance, many Bibles say "you shall not kill," but the Jewish Publication Society uses "murder," expressing the usual interpretation that God outlaws unjust killing rather than all killing.
Finally, the biblical text itself does not divide the commandments, so religious denominations do not agree how to number them and include different words in the first and last commandments. The three main systems: the traditional Jewish, the Catholic (followed by Lutherans) and the Eastern Orthodox (followed by other Protestants).
Judaism separates "I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt ..." as No. 1, underscoring the Exodus. Some Christians combine that with "no other gods" as No. 1, and others add the "graven image" ban, which the Eastern Orthodox lists separately.
Though they use different numbers, the faiths unite on how to divide the middle seven commandments: God's name, Sabbath-keeping, honoring one's father and mother, and against killing, adultery, stealing and lying (bearing "false witness against your neighbor").
Finally, Jews and many Christians treat the entire "thou shalt not covet" passage as No. 10. But Catholics and Lutherans split this into two commandments, against improper desire of the neighbor's wife and of the neighbor's property. Since there's a separate tenet against adultery, that means two of the Ten Commandments address sexual morality.
Such are the scriptural perplexities for the school board or city council that wishes to post the Ten Commandments. But the recent rush to enshrine these words from thousands of years ago reflects the Decalogue's unique status as a symbol of western law, morality and civilization.
 Load-Date: June 28, 1999

 

End of Document
