

Pope touches Jews' holy Western Wall and, rabbi says, the Wall touches back
The Associated Press
March 26, 2000, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 698 words
Byline: By MORT ROSENBLUM, AP Special Correspondent
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




As an aged, ailing Roman Catholic pope inched painfully to the Jews' beloved Western Wall - the Wailing Wall - a stout old man in black fingered his prayer tassels and muttered into a gray beard: "Blasphemy."
Moments before, as Pope John Paul II rose to offer contrite words of peace in the name of Abraham, a young man in black shouted, "Yehudim! Yehudim! (Jews! Jews!)," before police wrestled him from a barrier and led him away.
Through it all, a small band of men in skullcaps and shawls, each with small leather boxes strapped to his forehead and one arm, rocked in oblivious prayer at the ancient stones as they have all their lives, pope or no pope.
If Jews were divided in their opinion of the pontiff's gesture in the final hours of his weeklong Holy Land pilgrimage, none missed its significance. No shrine is holier to Judaism or to Israel's sense of identity.
"This was the most important moment of the visit," Rabbi Michael Melchior said later, after welcoming the pope with words of religious brotherhood. "I believe he felt the meaning to us. When he touched the Wall, it touched him back."
Melchior, a Cabinet minister, said the Wall has not only linked Jews to their spiritual roots but also was a symbol of their deliverance from slavery.
The massive rocks, Jews believe, still contain a divine presence of the Second Temple, which the Romans destroyed. They are the base of a retaining wall built by Herod the Great around 20 B.C.
Under Turkish Ottoman rule, Jews came to the Wall to lament past losses. In 1948, Jordan took the Old City, cutting off Jewish access for 19 years.
During the 1967 Mideast war, Israeli troops fought their way straight to the Wall. Bulldozers razed Arab houses and shops to make a broad esplanade for the faithful and the curious.
The timeworn stones, with scraggly bushes growing from upper seams, form the western face of Temple Mount - known to Muslims as Haram as-Sharif - which is topped by splendid Islamic sites, including the Dome of the Rock.
Before coming to the Wall, John Paul stopped at Al Aqsa Mosque on the site, the third holiest shrine in Islam, as a similar gesture to Muslims.
Only a small crowd watched the pope at the Wall, although guards admitted all comers after a security search. A temporary partition separated the ceremony from men praying, but the pope was visible to anyone who wanted to look.
"This (wall) is the never-ending bond between the Creator and the Jewish people," Melchior told the pope.
John Paul, in his habitual white robes, prayed briefly and made a sign of the cross. Stooped and moving slowly, he was helped to the Wall, where he spent a moment in silence. Hands trembling, he touched the old stones.
Before leaving, the pope produced a text he had delivered earlier in Rome:
"God of our fathers, you chose Abraham and his descendants to bring your Name to the Nations: We are deeply saddened by the behavior of those who in the course of history have caused these children of yours to suffer and, asking your forgiveness, we wish to commit ourselves to genuine brotherhood with the people of the Covenant."
Then, like so many Jews who leave prayers and laments stuck between cracks in the surface, John Paul placed his message in a crevice.
Even if the papal gesture did not specifically apologize for silence from the Vatican during the Holocaust, Mechior said, this was an important move.
"We cannot expect more from him, but that doesn't mean more won't be done by those who follow," Melchior said. "I pray that these are the first courageous steps, and we are on the right path."
Among those who preferred not to watch, Ami Hay expressed outrage. Wearing a long black coat and black beaver hat, with a bushy beard, he alternately kissed the Wall and talked on a cellular phone.
"This is a humiliation to Jews after all they have suffered at the hands of Christians," he said. "Every child knows what Christians did to Jewish people. We can't bring back the dead, but he should apologize."
The stout old man who muttered, "Blasphemy," identified himself only as Yacov. After the pope left, he leaned his head on his cane and wept.
"This is no great event," he said. "That will only be when the Messiah comes."
 Graphic



 
AP Photos JRL102,104,107
 Load-Date: March 27, 2000

 

End of Document
