

Prepositioning Key to U.S. Defense Strategy in the Gulf
September 21, 1996, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 755 words
Byline: By JOHN DIAMOND, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The 3,500 Army tank crewmen deploying from Fort Hood, Texas, to Kuwait walked aboard chartered jets with just their own rifles and knapsacks.
Where was the heavy armor? Already in Kuwait as part of a massive U.S. supply strategy known as "prepositioning."
Pentagon doctrine dictates that volatile regions such as the Persian Gulf cannot remain undefended for the 26 days it would take to ship tanks nearly 9,000 miles to the battlefield. Moreover, despite an impressive looking fleet of cargo aircraft, the military lacks the capacity to fly sufficient U.S.-based forces into battle.
Instead, the United States has convinced allies such as Kuwait and Qatar to permit storage of substantial heavy supplies - tanks, armored personnel carriers, howitzers, ammunition and fuel.
"This military presence provides the deterrence that spares this region from another Gulf War," Defense Secretary William Perry said recently. "I believe that prepositioning is a key to our defense strategy in the Gulf."
Prepositioning means the military can, in a matter of days, dispatch troops by air to distant regions to "marry up" with their heavy equipment and get into battle quickly. It harkens to the dictum of the Confederate cavalry Gen. Nathan Bedford Forrest of "getting there firstest with the mostest."
"The general concept behind having prepositioned equipment is so that our people can do exactly what we did this week - deploy to the theater without having to take 26 days to get stuff there by sea," said Air Force Lt. Col. Nino Fabiano, spokesman for the U.S. Central Command, the military headquarters responsible for the Gulf region. "We just simply couldn't do it by air."
Army deployment plans envision putting a battalion task force of 60 tanks into the field in 24 hours. The lead division would be in place within 12 days of a crisis breaking out, with two more following 18 days later.
This force, of course, is far short of the 500,000-man Army the Persian Gulf War coalition launched against Iraq. It represents what Andrew Krepinevich of the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments calls a "trip-wire" force.
"It indicates to a prospective adversary that if they commit aggression, American blood is likely to be spilled and in that case the prospect for American intervention in the war is far higher," Krepinevich said.
The military has been prepositioning equipment in Europe and Korea for decades, dating back to the Cold War strategy of moving "10 divisions in 10 days" into fighting position in Europe, according to the Army's Center for Military History.
Since the end of the Cold War, the reduction in the size of the active-duty force created a huge surplus of weapons, some of which have now become part of the supply base for prepositioning, Krepinevich said.
The practice is not without its downside.
Prepositioning depends on the permission of host nations, and, as the Pentagon discovered in the most recent scrape with Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein, that permission is not always forthcoming.
As adversaries improve their missile accuracy, the huge military supply dumps may become vulnerable targets.
"There is going to be, over time, a substantially growing risk to this approach to using prepositioned equipment as a deterrent," Krepinevich said.
Nor is prepositioning enough.
"You need the triad of airlift, sealift and prepo," Army Gen. Binford Peay III, chief of Central Command, told lawmakers last year. As the military found in the Gulf War, cargo planes and ships are in short supply. "We need a lot of support and we need it quickly."
The military uses prepositioned resources worldwide, not just in the Persian Gulf. The Sava River pontoon bridge built so laboriously this year into Bosnia came from prepositioned equipment in Europe where the Army maintains vehicles and gear for three combat brigades - about 15,000 soldiers. The Army stores one brigade's worth of equipment "afloat" on ships stationed at the Indian Ocean island of Diego Garcia, and is completing one brigade set in Korea.
In the Mideast, the Army has equipment for a brigade-plus in Kuwait, consisting of 120 M1-A1 tanks, 116 Bradley fighting vehicles, 330 other tracked vehicles and 850 wheeled vehicles, according to Army Lt. Col. Mike DeMayo of the Army's strategy and plans directorate.
Another "brigade set" is stationed in the Gulf nation of Qatar and a third is planned for an undisclosed Gulf nation, according to the Central Command.
The Marines have equipment for a Marine Expeditionary Force of 17,500 aboard five ships at Diego Garcia.
 Load-Date: September 21, 1996

 

End of Document
