

Ramsey, riots and resignations: Boulder under the magnifying lens
June 16, 1997, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 778 words
Byline: By AARON J. LOPEZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOULDER, Colo.
Body




It has nothing to do with JonBenet. It has everything to do with JonBenet.
This college town at the foot of the Rockies, long known for a certain flakiness and its live-and-let-live tolerance, appears to be coming apart at its tie-dyed seams.
In the 5 months since 6-year-old JonBenet Ramsey was found strangled in her family's basement, the city has been beset - by political resignation, student rioting, rebellious police and, always, the bewildering lack of progress in the Ramsey murder investigation.
Then, five weeks ago, in the city's first homicide since JonBenet's death, a professor retrieving belongings from his home was shot dead, allegedly by his estranged wife, as police stood nearby.
"We're not dying of boredom," Mayor Leslie Durgin dryly informed a reporter last week.
While few of the subsequent events are directly related to the Ramsey case, virtually all of the turbulence involves Boulder's beleaguered police force, whose reputation for competence and efficiency has steadily unraveled with passing months and no arrests in the child's murder.
Similarly, few of the events would previously have provoked attention beyond the state line, but all are now receiving national scrutiny because of intense news coverage given the murder. In addition, legions of restless reporters have been camped out since March in Denver, just 25 miles away, to cover the Oklahoma City bombing trial.
"People know the name and say, 'Ah, it's happening in Boulder again,"' Durgin said.
In the last six weeks:
-The night after rowdy University of Colorado students lit a bonfire in the street and tossed bottles at police, Chief Tom Koby sent his officers back to the scene in riot gear. The idea was to head off further violence, but the plan backfired; students rioted and smashed shop windows. Over three days, police arrested 46 people.
-Not long after, the police officers' union issued a 2-to-1 vote of no-confidence in Koby. Union spokesmen denied the vote stemmed from Koby's handling of the Ramsey investigation, citing instead morale problems and safety concerns from the university rioting.
-Koby later exacerbated tensions by publicly saying his officers would have been justified in shooting the unruly students.
-Koby's supervisor, and one of his biggest supporters, City Manager Tim Honey, resigned his post of six years after failing to resolve differences with the City Council. One disagreement concerned Honey's avid support for spending $ 800,000 to assemble a hand-carved teahouse from Dushanbe, Boulder's sister city in Tajikistan.
-John Eller, the lead detective in the Ramsey investigation, is shopping his resume around to other police departments. Meantime, he is about to be sued by patrol Sgt. Larry Mason, who was taken off the murder case and alleges Eller falsely accused him of leaking inside information.
-A hacker invaded the computer that stores information from the Ramsey case. The computer is in the "war room" at the district attorney's office that police share with prosecution investigators. No information was lost, because detectives keep paper backup copies, but Eller says he can't yet tell whether anything was copied.
Now, the police woes have come full circle, with officers being accused of contributing to the city's first murder since JonBenet's on Christmas night.
According to the victim's attorney, police were asked to be present while Rudy Jakob-Chien, an engineering professor at the University of Colorado-Denver, retrieved some belongings at the home he once shared with his estranged wife, Cynthia.
An officer at the scene did not accompany Jakob-Chien as he went upstairs where he was shot, allegedly by his wife. The attorney suggested police should not have let the couple alone.
Locals snort that the significance attached to all of this is overblown because of reporters' obsession with the JonBenet murder.
Only 1 percent of Boulder residents responding to a recent county survey listed the child's unsolved killing as their primary concern. Their leading worry was runaway growth.
"I think people would be pleased for a boring week," said city spokeswoman Leslie Aaholm, who says she still handles at least 100 calls from reporters each week.
"Without the Ramsey investigation," she doubts "that most people in Florida or New York or Los Angeles … would necessarily care that our city manager is moving on," Aaholm said.
"We're going through a tough time," Durgin concurred. "But does it touch the daily lives of every person in the community? No.
" You want to talk about a tough time, look at what happened in North Dakota," she said, referring to the disastrous flooding in the Red River Valley. "That's a tough time."
 Load-Date: June 16, 1997

 

End of Document
