

Round-the-world balloonists cross China, head to the Pacific
The Associated Press
December 23, 1998, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 536 words
Byline: JOHN LEICESTER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BEIJING
Body




British entrepreneur Richard Branson and his teammates floated over ancient sites in northern China, then swept across the Yellow Sea on Wednesday after China bowed to British appeals to let the balloon pass through prohibited airspace.
After two days of diplomatic tensions over the balloon's path, the craft finally cleared Chinese airspace late Wednesday and passed over Japan early Thursday on its way to the United States in a bid to make the first nonstop balloon voyage around the world.
One Chinese air traffic controller grumbled that planes flying between Xi'an, site of China's famed terra cotta warriors, and the capital of Beijing were having to adjust their flight paths because of the balloon.
"People don't like uninvited guests," said the controller at Xianyang Airport, near Xi'an. He refused to give his name.
The 160-foot high ICO Global hot air-and-helium balloon carrying Branson, American millionaire Steve Fossett and Per Lindstrand of Sweden, was moving about 45 mph when it left China and sped up to 84 mph over the Yellow Sea.
Project director Mike Kendrick said he expected the balloon to move even faster - possibly reaching 160 mph shortly.
Early Thursday, the balloonists floated over Japan and out to the Pacific Ocean for what could be the most hazardous phase of the journey.
"The ocean is so big that the rescue services do not operate that far out," Kendrick told Sky TV.
"The frequency of shipping is not good. If they ditch in the Pacific it is very difficult and the chances of survival are not good, though we have to make sure everything is right."
Branson, speaking to BBC Radio as he flew over China, said he hoped to cross the Pacific "and be just coming in over the American border for Christmas Day."
He expected to enter U.S. airspace somewhere over Washington state. Since the pilots navigate by changing the lift of the balloon to ascend or descend into different wind systems, they cannot plan their courses and speeds precisely.
Beijing had said the balloonists could cross China below 26 degrees north latitude. But the trio drifted further north on Monday, after navigating around Mediterranean storms and closed airspace over Iraq, Iran and Russia. After diplomatic communications between Britain and China - including a personal appeal from British Prime Minister Tony Blair - the balloonists were allowed to continue flying if they left China as quickly as possible.
"We're pleased and relieved and grateful that the Chinese finally let us through," Branson said.
The balloon took off Dec. 18 from a Moroccan air force base outside Marrakech for a trip that is expected to last up to nearly three weeks. The balloonists hope to touch down somewhere in Western Europe at the end of a 24,000-mile flight.
The trio reported Wednesday that they already accomplished two firsts on this trip: the first balloon flight over the Himalayas and first balloon trip over the Asian continent.
Up until this flight, Branson and Fossett had been rivals in the race to be the first around the world in a balloon. Both hold several ballooning records.
The team had secured permission from 97 countries for overflights and initially had only four refusals - Iran, Iraq, Russia and North Korea.
 
 Load-Date: December 24, 1998

 

End of Document
