

Snapshots of the lives lost aboard Swissair Flight 111
The Associated Press
September 4, 1998, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 2060 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Sleiman and Suada Aboutaam, Bloomfield Township, Mich.
Neighbors said the couple and their three adult children had lived in the neighborhood for more than 14 years.
----
Ingrid Acevedo, 32, New York.
Director of public relations for the U.S. Committee for UNICEF.
 
 Else and Torkild Albertsen, Tenafly, N.J.
Natives of Denmark, the couple were heading to Geneva to visit a daughter before continuing to Turkey.
Albertsen ran Tower Brokerage, a fruit and vegetable importing business. Mrs. Albertsen formerly worked in the personnel department of CPC International, now known as Bestfoods, in Englewood Cliffs.
 
 Joachim Bilger, Geneva.
German native, was head of office of internal oversight and productivity of World Intellectual Property Organization, the United Nations copyright and patent agency.
 
 Catherine Calvet-Mazy, 35, Hyeres, France.
Senior social welfare officer for U.N. High Commissioner of Refugees. A French social worker and therapist who had counseled refugees in Bosnia, Mali and Rwanda. In Geneva, she counseled UNCHR staff on dealing with stress stemming from their work.
 
 Yves de Roussan, 41.
A Canadian, worked with abandoned or troubled teen-agers, de Roussan was UNICEF regional adviser for Central and Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States.
 
 Mike Ditchkus, Teaneck, N.J.
An architect who was going on vacation with his wife, Lori Moran.
 
 Patricia E. Ezell, 38, Irvington, Ala.
A native of Baar, Switzerland, Mrs. Ezell worked as a project assistant for a German chemical company that had a plant near Mobile, Ala. She was on Flight 111 to visit relatives.
"My sister woke me up at 12 o'clock at night," said her husband, Danny Ezell. "She just told me that her plane went down and we started watching the news. We knew her flight number - there was no mistake about it."
 
 Pierce Gerety, 56, Fairfield, Ct.
Director of African Great Lakes operations, including Rwanda, for the United Nations High Commissioner of Refugees. An American lawyer, Gerety was a veteran of refugee operations in Sudan, Philippines, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Somalia and the Great Lakes area around Rwanda, Congo and Burundi.
 
 Paul and Joan Hammond, Edmonds, Wash.
A former member of the research faculty at the University of Cincinnati Medical School, where he specialized in veterinary toxicology. He followed his wife to Washington after retiring.
Mrs. Hammond, 65, worked for former Ohio Gov. Richard Celeste and directed the state's job-training program. After moving to the Seattle area, she became chief deputy Snohomish County auditor.
"Joan knew no strangers," said county Clerk Pam Daniels. "Always there was a hug. Always there was a smile."
The couple boarded the flight to visit Hammond's family in Switzerland.
 
 Cherie Hastie, 59, Marietta, Ga.
Mrs. Hastie was traveling to Europe with her friend, Caroline Smith, to visit her daughter, Elizabeth, who was to graduate from college in Switzerland in December.
"She was just a very sweet lady. She's my friend and the person I share things with," said Mrs. Hastie's husband, Sandy. "I guess it's another example - you have to make sure your walk with the Lord is right."
She is survived by another daughter, Cameron.
 
 Tom Hausman, 33, New York
Hausman lived with his wife Lanita and was head of Continental Grain Co.'s Latin American division. The couple did not have any children but were working on adopting a baby, family members said.
Hausman grew up on his parents' farm 15 miles south of Champaign, Ill., but returned home to visit family and friends.
"Tom was still the same caring guy, despite his success," said Roger Kleiss, a close friend of Hausman since kindergarten. "I know this sounds like a cliche, but he really had a zest for life."
 
 Gabriel Hoche, 62, Richmond, Va.
Vice president for international sales with Infilco Degremont Inc. in Richmond. The company makes water and wastewater treatment equipment.
 
 Lawrence and Pauline Hopcraft Gates Mills, Ohio.
Hopcraft, 55, was a vice-president at Parker Hannifan Corp. Mrs. Hopcraft was the first employee hired at Walt Disney World in Orlando, Fla., when it opened. She worked in hospitality but sometimes was recruited to dress as Goofy for parades.
The Hopcrafts were going to France for two months on business.
 
 Jay Jasan, 40, Basking Ridge, N.J.
Worked for pharmaceutical giant Merck & Co. and was traveling to a business-related meeting in Geneva. Jasan was in the company's clinical development studies program, testing drugs' effects on people.
"The people he worked with are very, very upset," Merck spokesman John Doorley said Thursday. "They feel it's a tremendous loss."
Jasan had a masters' degree in virology from Fairleigh Dickinson University and a veterinary degree at the University of Pennsylvania.
 
 Maryline Junod, 42.
Swiss national and a manager at International Flavors & Fragrances, a New Jersey-based company. She worked in the company's New York City office.
She had left her office Wednesday in a rush for the airport, said Bill Dalton, IFF's vice president of global public affairs.
"She was running late and was concerned she would miss the plane," he said.
Junod was headed to Europe to visit family and friends.
 
 James T. Kassel Jr., 34, Medford Lakes, N.J.
A senior manager of corporate meeting planning services for Bristol-Myers Squibb and was on his way to a business meeting, said company spokeswoman Jane Kramer.
Kassel left behind his wife, Stephanie, and a 4-year-old son, Christian, said a family friend who answered the Kassel's phone Thursday night.
"People are devastated," said friend John Sederat, 39. "Jim was one of the happiest, most outgoing people. He had a great sense of humor."
 
 Klaus Kinder-Geiger, 36, Long Island, N.Y.
A top physicist at the Nuclear Theory Group at the Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton, N.Y. A native of Germany, Kinder-Geiger was working on a computerized model of large nuclei at high energies. He was to give a speech in Trento, Italy, and return to Geneva to work at CERN, a major laboratory for high-energy research.
He was remembered for both his brilliance and a refreshing quirkiness. Besides playing electric guitar, he was a painter and caricaturist.
 
 Denis Maillet and wife, Karen, Baton Rouge, La., and their 14-month-old son, Robert.
The 37-year-old engineers planned a two-week vacation to introduce their son to his French grandparents.
"The Maillets were very excited about going home to visit Denis' parents," said the Rev. Gerald Burns of St. Aloysius Church in Baton Rouge.
Maillet, a native of Lyons, met his wife through their work as engineers, said Jayne Thibodaux, a family friend.
He spoke no English and she no French, but they quickly learned each others' languages and fell in love, she said.
Jonathan Mann and Mary-Lou Clements-Mann, Columbia, Md.
Mann, 51, a renowned AIDS researcher, former director of the World Health Organization's AIDS Program and dean of the School of Public Health at Allegheny School of Health Sciences.
After leaving WHO eight years ago in a dispute with the then-director-general, Mann was planning his first visit back to the Geneva-based group's headquarters to try and reconcile.
Mrs. Clements-Mann, 51, a noted AIDS researcher who taught at Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health. Was working on developing AIDS vaccines.
"Their passing leaves a large void in the ranks of those working to control this global pandemic," said Seth Berkley, president of the International AIDS Vaccine Initiative.
 
 Robert Milne, 67, and wife Alma, 66, Fairview Park, Ohio.
He retired in 1995 as president of Duff & Phelps Investment Co., where he worked his entire 42-year career.
A neighbor, Kay Blossom, said the Milnes were quiet neighbors who had a big family reunion last month. Were headed to vacation home in Switzerlandl.
 
 Tara Nelson, Mystic, Conn.
Naturopathic physician, was en route to France to meet boyfriend and help her sister with the birth of her baby.
"Everybody has their own Princess Diana. She was our Princess Diana," said Nelson's aunt, Laurie Michel, of Tenafly, N.J. "This is monstrous."
 
 Lori Moran, Teaneck, N.J.,
Professional figure skater and had run skating programs in Manhattan and New Jersey.
Tom Garcia, manager of the Ice House skating rink in Hackensack where Moran gave skating lessons, said Moran "was going on a well-earned vacation" with her husband.
 
 John Mortimer, 75, and wife, Hilda, 69, Stamford, Conn.
Rretired senior vice president for personnel and labor relations at The New York Times for more than 25 years. The couple was traveling on their annual European vacation and feared flying, relatives said.
 
 Jean-Max Mozes, 51, Haworth, N.J.
Native of Pairs, chief financial officer of Czarnikow-Rionda Sugar Trading Inc. in New York, left behind his wife, Annie, son, Nathan, 14, and daughter, Julie, 16.
"I can't believe it," Mrs. Mozes said. "We were just talking about how, in two years, we would celebrate our 20th anniversary."
 
 Glen Plumleigh, 56, and wife, Charlotte, 56, Lakewood, Colo.
He was considered a pioneer in Colorado television journalism who began his TV career at KREX in Grand Junction in 1959.
Plumleigh joined KWGN in Denver in 1963 as a news photographer and later became assistant news director. Was chief photographer in 1970 when KWGN was the first in Denver to win a National Press Photographer's Award.
Left the station in 1981 to work for Golden-based Coors Brewing Co.'s video department. In 1993, started his own company, Video Production Associates.
Charlotte was a homemaker. "They were very kind, very down-to-earth," family friend Amy Tekansik said.
 
 Donald and Diane Scheer, Norfolk, Mass.
Scheer was 49.
 
 Norman Scoular, 46, England.
Scottish-born Scoular was a director and chief operating officer of the Canton, Mass.-based lighting maker SLI Inc.
In Massachusetts for meetings Wednesday and had hurried to make a shuttle from Boston to New York to catch Flight 111, said SLI finance officer Ronald Goldstein.
"He felt lucky he'd made the short trip to New York. It's an unfortunate thing," he said. "The singular impression he left with me was that he was a gentleman and someone who was skilled with language. When he spoke, it was lyrical."
 
 Stephanie Shuster, 32, Union County, N.J.
President of Global Connections, a corporate events company she founded.
 
 Caroline Smith, Augusta, Ga.
Was traveling to Europe for a vacation with her friend, Cherie Hastie, who she met years ago when they studied Bible together in Marietta.
Mrs. Smith leaves her husband, Wilson, and a daughter, Renee, of Peoria, Ill.
 
 Per Spanne, 53, New York.
Swedish-born Spanne was working for the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility in Grenoble, France, and commuted between that campus and the Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton, N.Y. He was a physicist experimenting with ways to use radiation to treat brain cancer.
Wife Vibeke Arnmark said despite Spanne's hectic work schedule, he had dropped off their daughters at college last month. He wanted to make sure their computers were installed and that they were comfortable.
"That was really typical of him," said Ms. Arnmark, an artist. "I'm hanging on because I have two kids that I need to give all my strength to."
 
 Tom Sperber and wife, Julie, San Juan Capistrano, Calif.,
Supplied hotel chains with goods including sheets and bedspreads. Julie, was a pharmaceutical representative, said neighbor Jim Bochniarz.
The newlyweds often rode their bikes along the harbor in the well-to-do seaside community, and remodeled their new home immediately after they bought it.
"They really were an ideal couple," Bochniarz said. "We all commented that they bought a rather large house for two, and they always said they planned on having kids."
 
 Dr. Roger R. Williams, 54, Salt Lake City.
A recognized expert in the field of cardiovascular genetics. A professor of internal medicine at the University of Utah School of Medicine, Williams was flying to Geneva to chair a meeting on one of his projects at the World Health Organization.
Williams had developed an elaborate family tracking system to help identify people who were genetically predisposed to a variety of cardiovascular diseases.
Was also the founder and director of the University of Utah Cardiovascular Genetics Research Clinic.
A native of Ogden, Utah, Williams graduated from Weber State University in 1968 and earned his medical degree from the University of Utah in 1971.
 
 Load-Date: September 4, 1998

 

End of Document
