

Some wonder: What gives America the right to strike?
The Associated Press
February 19, 1998, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 747 words
Byline: By ROBERT BURNS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




After dramatizing the threat it sees in Saddam Hussein's defiance of U.N. weapons inspectors, the Clinton administration faces a basic question: What gives it the right to bomb Iraq without the United Nations' blessing?
The answer, in a nutshell, is that aside from the matter of morality, President Clinton sees the United States as the world's "indispensable nation," as he often puts it, and is willing to flex its muscle to keep it that way.
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright made just that point Thursday.
"If we have to use force, it is because we are America," she said. "We stand tall. We see further into the future."
In a legal sense, Clinton might fall back on the U.N. Charter, which says the Security Council may use force of arms if necessary "to restore or maintain international peace and security." The council has passed several resolutions since the 1991 Persian Gulf War demanding Iraq's unconditional disarmament.
But in the flurry of diplomatic maneuvering for a peaceful end to the crisis, there is so far no prospect of the Security Council passing a resolution granting the United States explicit authority to punish Iraq militarily.
In the minds of many Americans, however, the question is not one of legalities. Some simply wonder about U.S. military action against Iraq in a situation in which some traditional American allies oppose it or are ambivalent.
These doubts burst into the open Wednesday at an extraordinary town meeting at Ohio State University in which Clinton's top three national security aides made their best pitch for confronting Iraq and then took questions.
First question, from a professor:
"The American administration has the might and the means to attack the Iraqi state. But does it have the moral right to attack the Iraqi nation?"
In replying, Defense Secretary William Cohen first turned the question on its head.
"The question is also does Saddam Hussein have the moral right to use weapons of mass destruction - chemicals and biologicals - against his own people?" Cohen asked, referring to Iraq's gas attack on a Kurdish village in northern Iraq during the eight-year Iran-Iraq war of the 1980s, in which Iranian soldiers also were gassed.
"The United Nations has determined that he should not possess chemical or biological or nuclear weapons, and what we have is the obligation to carry out the U.N. declaration," Cohen said. He did not say why it must fall to the United States to undertake this obligation on its own.
Later in the session, which was broadcast live by CNN and periodically interrupted by jeers from protesters in the arena audience, a questioner noted that none of Iraq's neighbors has indicated it feels threatened by Saddam.
"If nobody is asking us for their help, how can you justify further U.S. aggression in the region?" the questioner asked.
This time it fell to Secretary of State Madeleine Albright to respond. She insisted that countries in the Gulf that are friendly to the United States "are concerned" about Saddam, and President Clinton wants to help them.
She did not mention that Saudi Arabia, the most important U.S. ally in the region, has not publicly endorsed military action against Iraq and has denied the Pentagon permission to launch air strikes from bases on its territory. Bahrain, too, announced this week it would not host attacking U.S. planes. Turkey, an Iraqi neighbor and U.S. NATO ally, also opposes military action.
Rather than explain the justification for a U.S. attack, Albright settled for placing the blame for this foreign policy dilemma squarely on Saddam.
"I think we have to understand the following thing," she said: "The United States did not create this problem. Saddam Hussein created the problem."
Sandy Berger, Clinton's national security adviser, cast the problem in broader terms. He said Saddam's defiance of the U.N.-imposed cease-fire resolutions is a test of the international will and a challenge to U.S. steadfastness.
"Once the United States says that it is intimidated by someone who has the brutality of killing his own people to protect his own misdeeds, then we … have rendered ourselves absolutely helpless as a nation," Berger said.
Still another questioner, noting that the United States tolerates other dictators who mistreat their own citizens, asked simply, "Why bomb Iraq?"
Because Saddam, by virtue of his record of producing and using chemical weapons in the past, is "different from every brutal dictator that has appeared recently," Albright replied.
 Load-Date: February 19, 1998

 

End of Document
