

Take me out to the ballgame - but bring a translator
June 19, 1997, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Sports News
Length: 569 words
Byline: By TIM WHITMIRE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Diplomatic neutrality fell by the wayside when U.N. Security Council members found themselves in the midst of a civil war that would try any peacemaker's patience: the Yankees vs. Mets Subway Series.
A multinational group of about a dozen observers donned Mets and Yankees caps to watch Game 3 of the city showdown Wednesday at Yankee Stadium.
The diplomats, who dined on hot dogs, peanuts, Cracker Jacks and beer, clearly preferred their third-base box seats to their morning activity - debating sanctions against Iraq.
"The game here is more interesting than the game in the Security Council," said Chinese Ambassador to the United Nations Wang Xue Xian during the game won 3-2 by the Yankees in 10 innings.
Wang was one of the few members of the U.N. contingent not wearing a team hat.
"I'm neutral. I don't want to take sides," he said.
"This is the best way to show off the U.S. and the city," said the host of the gathering, U.S. Ambassador Bill Richardson. The former New Mexico congressman was drafted by the then-Kansas City Athletics in 1967, but traded baseball for politics after injuring his arm.
Whether listening to a large, shirtless man bellow the name of each Yankee batter - as one nearby fan was doing - is good public relations remains open for debate.
But Richardson's office did its best to put at ease those ambassadors not fully familiar with the American national pastime. A packet on the game prepared for the diplomats included such basics as: "The object of baseball is to score runs. … The game is played on a diamond-shaped field with the four bases located at each corner of the diamond. … The pitcher stands in the center of the diamond and throws the ball for the batters to try to hit."
One ambassador who needed no explanations was Hisashi Owada of Japan, a diehard fan of the Tokyo Giants of Japan's Central League. Owada said he went to Shea Stadium in Queens last year to see Japanese star Hideo Nomo pitch for the Los Angeles Dodgers against the Mets, but Wednesday was his first trip to Yankee Stadium.
He anticipates returning once the Yankees bring up their latest acquisition, Japanese pitcher Hideki Irabu, who is preparing in the minors for his major league debut.
"I'm looking forward to his pitching," Owada said.
A late arrival to the game was the ambassador from the United Kingdom, Sir John Weston. Improbably, he wore a Yankees cap that would have been considered treasonous 220 years ago.
"This is a fashion item," he explained, somewhat apologetically, then reasserted his nation's superiority over its former colony by adding, "This is the only game the British didn't invent."
Richardson, most recently seen on the diamond in congressional softball games, played briefly in the Cape Cod League, a summer league for college players, before giving up baseball.
He said the field trip was important, given recent tensions between the United Nations and the city over diplomatic parking tickets.
"I think we want to show a stronger relationship between the U.N. and the city," he said. "This initiative is a small but symbolic step in that direction."
Russian Federation Ambassador Sergey Lavrov, whose country has been involved in the dustup between City Hall and the Russian and Belarusian U.N. missions over unpaid parking fines, sat next to Richardson, intently following the action at home plate.
"No shop talk," he said, when asked about the parking controversy. "No shop talk."
 Load-Date: June 19, 1997

 

End of Document
