

Terrorists on the run have fewer places to hide
June 20, 1997, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 764 words
Byline: By CALVIN WOODWARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Not so long ago, terrorists did not need to flee to shadowed hinterlands or into the arms of avowed enemies of the West. Paris, for example, might do.
Now there are fewer places to hide.
Distant lands where the United States has no official right to operate are not the havens they used to be. The passing of the Cold War and a decade of nurturing international cooperation have seen to that.
U.S. officials are emboldened by the capture of a man accused of killing two CIA employees and the prospect of getting valuable information from a terrorist suspect - extradited here by Canada - in the bombing that killed 19 U.S. airmen in Saudi Arabia last year.
The United States, says President Clinton, "will not relent in the pursuit of terrorists … no matter how long it takes, no matter where they hide."
It is the kind of headiness that can be thrown off by one or two acts. Terrorism is, by nature, that kind of tinderbox.
But few doubt the arm of the law is getting longer in reaching out for international terrorists.
Most countries once saw terrorism as a political issue to be condemned but not systematically fought on behalf of another country, recalls William Webster, director of the FBI and then the CIA through the 1980s.
"We're well beyond that kind of circumstance today," he said. Many countries are "looking for ways to help and not ways to get the tar baby somewhere else."
The United Nations and leaders of the industrialized nations made anti-terrorism coordination a priority during a decade of painfully broad experience.
Victoria Toensing, a top anti-terror official under President Bush, said agreements that really count may be the unspoken ones - the winks and nods from foreign governments or whoever is locally in control when a fugitive is being tracked down.
In the 1980s, she said, "We had fewer places to go that would be helpful. Now we have more opportunities."
Mir Aimal Kansi, back in Virginia to face trial in the 1993 spray of gunfire outside CIA headquarters, was pursued like a terrorist although his motives are unknown and he has not been linked to any organization.
U.S. lawmen snatched him from a hideout the Americans say was near the Pakistani-Afghan border.
Few acts among friendly nations are as sensitive as one country's extraterritorial enforcement of its laws - an affront to if not a violation of national sovereignty.
"Our government will never tell us who cooperated and who didn't," Toensing said of the Kansi case. As far as she is concerned, "We shouldn't ask."
A presidential directive publicized this year makes clear the U.S. willingness to act alone at times.
"If we do not receive adequate cooperation from a state that harbors a terrorist whose extradition we are seeking, we shall take appropriate measures to induce cooperation," the directive states. "Return of suspects by force may be effected without the cooperation of the host government."
Signed in 1995, the order was either declassified by mistake or leaked to convey U.S. policy unofficially.
Webster points to the long saga of the 1985 Achille Lauro cruise ship hijacking as an example of an incident that might be handled differently today.
U.S. fighters intercepted an Egyptian aircraft flying hijackers of the Italian ship to Tunisia and escorted the plane to a NATO air base in Sicily. The Americans lost custody to Italian police in a near shootout.
The Italians wanted the hijackers but had little interest at the time in Mohammed Abbas, who was with them and was wanted on the spot by Washington as the ringleader. Italians eventually put him on a plane to Yugoslavia and he remains at large.
Today, Webster said, "Italy would be on board" and so would many other countries with a stake in order.
Authorities have yet to bring to trial men wanted in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland. Libya has refused to turn over the men in the Pan Am case for trial in the United States or Britain.
The bombing of the Oklahoma City federal building brought the nation face to face with domestic terrorism of a virulence rarely known.
U.S. officials also face growing networks that raise money in the United States for terrorists abroad. The PKK, a Kurdish separatist group identified as the world's deadliest terrorist organization, is thought to have raised $ 500 million from U.S. heroin sales.
Officials say international terrorism often comes now at the hands of groups operating without the support of rogue nations.
"I see them proliferating and becoming a more serious threat than state-sponsored terrorism," FBI Director Louis Freeh told a Senate committee.
 Load-Date: June 20, 1997

 

End of Document
