

THE 20TH CENTURY; Centenarians' firsthand view of revolutions great and small
The Associated Press
November 7, 1999, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 2846 words
Byline: By JERRY SCHWARTZ, AP National Writer
Dateline: HUNTSVILLE, Ala.
Body




Ann Drake reached back - to a time before airplanes traversed the skies or automobiles crowded the roads, to a time before penicillin or communism or plastic toys.
Sometimes, it was a struggle to remember. She had had what she called "a little stroke" a few months before, and sometimes when she tried to retrieve a memory it wasn't there.
She was 103 ("and a half," she noted), and the granddaughter of slaves. She remembered the milestones of the 20th century - the triumphs and the fiascoes, the great and grotesque men and women who made history.
But she also remembered Miss Lottie Brooks, who taught her the ABCs about the same time the Wright brothers were learning to fly. The first cars, and how they bewildered the horses. And a day when the century was not 10 years old, and she wanted to go skating.
Her family lived in Orangeburg, S.C. Her father was a Methodist minister and there was little money, so her skates were borrowed and worn.
"These little white girls were laughing at me, talking about it," she recalled. "I just thought this was so ridiculous. I couldn't do anything about it. I just said, 'Leave me alone.' I just gave it up."
Ninety years later, the memory still burned.
There are, today, more than 135,000 people like Mrs. Drake - people who have lived through the days of this remarkable century, capable of offering an eyewitness tour of the decades.
In 1905, at the end of the Russo-Japanese War, recalled 99-year-old Fuki Kushida, "There were parades and street cars decorated with fake flowers. People were so happy Japan won the war.
"But I was crying because the five young soldiers who stayed with our family never came back.
Ahmed Darwish is 112; for the first half of his life he lived in the village of Kakaun, in Palestine. He remembered the first time he saw an airplane, when a Turkish military plane crashed during World War I at the neighboring town of Bala.
"People were excited," he recalled. "We said, 'Bala is the airport."'
Mrs. Drake remembered the Spanish flu epidemic of 1918, which killed an estimated 20 million people around the world - including her boyfriend. One Sunday afternoon soon after, she said, he appeared before her.
"He said, 'Annie, I came by to tell you goodbye. I've gone.' Just like that … ," she recalled. "I guess I must have been sleeping. Maybe I was dreaming. But I saw him … and heard his voice."
---
Guo Jingtong lives in a brick house with a tile roof, down a narrow lane in Beijing. His house is near Hou Hai, or Back Lake, one of a string of lakes through the center of the city.
This was once a pleasure ground for the imperial court. And though you would not know it to look at him - his face is smooth and round, his complexion pink - Guo remembers the days of the empire. He was born Nov. 14, 1891, in the twilight of the Qing dynasty.
"Whatever the emperor said went," he said. "Those who didn't listen got their heads chopped off."
Guo was 8 at the time of the Boxer Rebellion, when Chinese fighters rose against foreigners. He held his hands a foot apart; their knives, he said, were this long.
He remembered the cruelties of another time. Girls' feet were bound at age 5 or younger, and "it hurt so much they cried."
In his 107 years, he has seen the death of the empire, invasion by Japan, the rise of communism, the Cultural Revolution, the creation of a new, post-Mao China.
"The old society was extremely bitter," he said. "The new society is incomparably better."
Georgy Lugovoi also was present when an old order passed. In his 98 years, he has seen Russia become the Soviet Union and then Russia again. He has seen his native St. Petersburg become Petrograd, then Leningrad, then St. Petersburg once more.
As a child he would pass the palace and see the czar's children at the windows. Alexei, the hemophiliac heir of the doomed Romanovs, "was always carried around by a big sailor," he said.
The last czar, Nicholas, "was too kind," he said. "He should have seized Russia and held her firmly in his hands."
Instead, there was revolution. "All the workers went out into the street because they were hungry - we had a daily allowance of 400 grams (less than one pound) of bread," he said.
"My father and I were in his shop on Nevsky (the main street) and saw it all through the window. . . . People were shouting, "Bread, bread, bread."
When the Bolsheviks took power, "It was a terrifying time. There were no rules." The police shot down on the street, from the roofs. "I spent all day on the streets," Lugovoi recalled.
But it was so dangerous, a visitor suggested.
"I was silly," he said. "I was 17."
---
The first tragedy of Lee Owens' life occurred when he was 2 years old, in 1898. In a single week, his father and his 9-year-old sister died.
His mother moved Lee and his three brothers to southern Missouri. He started school there, but quit to pull weeds at farms for 25 cents a day: "I just got as far in the first reader as the ants was laying in food for the winter."
There was no running water, no telephone, no electricity. Power would not make its way to the farm until the 1930s.
People today "don't have any idea of how hard it was," he said. "We didn't buy a great lot out at the store. You raised it, and you put it up."
In the first 21 years of his life, he traveled not 100 miles from his birthplace. Suddenly, all that changed.
"It was 1918, February the 25th. I'll never forget that," he said. "Yeah, I was drafted."
He crossed the Atlantic, and reached the front in June, with the 340th Artillery. Six horses pulled each French gun, and Owens drove the middle team. "I was a farmer. … I knew how to handle horses."
Eighty years later, Owens was hard of hearing and bent by osteoporosis, living in Kansas City, Kan., with his daughter Patricia. But World War I was vivid in his mind.
"We had one battle. … We fired everything we had from machine guns down and the other side did too. The firing of all them guns, them big guns, the whole earth felt like it was shaking.
"One Sunday, there was a little Mexican boy. He was carrying ammunition across the field, to the guns, and a big shell hit him and just blowed him all to pieces. You'd find his head here and his arm over there. It's not a pretty sight to see these dead people." …
There were pleasant memories, of course: Pitching his pup tent next to a vineyard in Bordeaux and pinching grapes each night; the German girl he met after the armistice ("I had her picture.")
But then, there was the time he encountered a train filled with men. "The Germans used this mustard gas on them," he said. "Their face and their eyes … it was awful."
This was supposed to be the War to End All Wars. It wasn't.
---
Strea Liachev remembered a gracious life in the Bulgarian city of Russe, along the Danube River. She was born April 16, 1898, into a wealthy Jewish family; each year, the Jewish community came to her family's large house to celebrate the festival of Purim.
"People set up tables outside with sweets, and a horse and carriage would take us for rides around the city for 10 cents. We dressed in carnival costumes and non-Jewish Bulgarians came to watch us celebrate."
Anti-Semitism, she said, was not a problem there. But Bulgaria was allied with Nazi Germany, and in 1941 and '42 it passed laws, mirroring Germany's, that rid schools of Jews and forced every Jew to wear the yellow star.
"I remember how it began - with the yellow stars and how my Bulgarian friends helped us," Mrs. Liachev said. "On the night that we thought we might be deported (a friend) said to come with her. She had arranged a safe house for us."
They were not deported - in fact, Bulgaria staved off deportations to the concentration camps - but like 25,000 other Jews in the city of Sofia, she, her husband and their son were forced to move to the provinces.
"My husband ran a stocking factory and when they took everything from us, my husband's (non-Jewish) friend took it over and sent us money every month," she said.
Eighteen hundred miles away, in Leningrad, Georgy Lugovoi - by now a photographer for news agencies - took a train to the countryside, to his family's dacha. It was a Sunday, June 20, 1941; his wife and her mother ran to him when he arrived.
"What's happened?" he asked.
"War has begun, and Hitler has attacked us," they said.
"I was shocked. It was so unexpected," Lugovoi said. "We went home and suddenly heard a German plane. It was bombing near us."
His family moved to Siberia for the duration of the war, but Lugovoi and his mother remained. Working for a magazine, Lugovoi dodged bullets to take pictures.
People got about a quarter-pound of bread a day, and had to line up all day for that.
"My mother cut the bread into three pieces and we had a piece each for breakfast, lunch and dinner with tea," Lugovoi said. "This saved us. People who ate their bread at one go died much quicker."
In the evenings he and his mother sat in the dark. His mother wept; she feared for her daughter and daughter-in-law.
Eventually, hungry and sick, she passed away, like so many others in the second Great War. Lee Owens' son, Gene, fell in France, where his father had fought a generation before. One of Strea Liachev's brothers was killed fleeing Bulgaria for Italy. Dora Binns McMaster, who has lived in South Africa for 99 of her 103 years, lost her son Harold in 1942.
He was an air force pilot in North Africa. "He was 25 years old," she said. "You can't do anything about it. If he wants to go, he'll go."
The Axis was turned back - in Africa, in Europe, and finally in the Pacific. Fuki Kushida remembers the terror of the war's last days: "Every night, when U.S. military planes flew over us, I thought I was going to die today." Then the atomic bomb struck Hiroshima.
"I was scolded when I said 'I am relieved it was in Hiroshima, not in Tokyo.' They said it could have been Tokyo."
On Aug. 15, 1945, she heard the emperor surrender. "I couldn't hear him well. We were on the roof of the office building and some were crying.
"But I was not sad. I was relieved the war was over, because my friend Shigeji Tsuboi (a famous poet) had been saying this was a war of aggression and we'd better lose this one."
---
After the war, the Liachevs' factory was returned to them, but Mrs. Liachev's son, Harry, joined a Zionist youth movement and emigrated to Israel. She could not bear life without him, and in 1949 she found a job as a cook on a boat to Israel.
Penniless, she joined her son at a kibbutz near Petach Tikva. Her husband came a year later. Eventually, they moved on to Tel Aviv and then to Jerusalem.
"Life was not so quiet here (in Israel), but I remember opening the door and seeing my son standing in uniform. I wasn't just happy to see him, but I was proud to see him - to have a soldier for a son. Israel felt like home, and I came here with all my heart."
But by the time she arrived, Ahmed Darwish had already called this same land his home for 63 years. Long ago, he was a farmer, with citrus trees and seven cows. He remembers when Omar Abdel Latif left the village to visit Jaffa, and came back with amazing tales of something called the telephone.
"Some people did not believe him, some thought he was crazy," he said.
The languages he speaks - Turkish, English and Hebrew - are a legacy of the peoples who have ruled the Holy Land in his lifetime.
"Turks were good with the people but once you tried to revolt they were harsh and very cruel. We would hear that they took people who revolted against them and chopped up their bodies and threw them to the fish. The English were cruel because they would kill a person only on suspicion. The Jews were the cruelest … .
"In 1947, the Jews kicked us out of the village and destroyed it. At 10 that morning the villagers were in the field and a lot of soldiers came in with jeeps attached with cannons and machine guns. They first attacked a base where 45 Iraqi soldiers were. … They killed them all.
"They then asked the villagers through the loud speakers to immediately leave the village. They spoke in Hebrew and said, 'You must leave this land - it is our land.' There were about 1,000 people in the village.
"My wife and I were in the fields, and the soldiers would not allow us to go home to pack. As we left they picked out some 70 young men and shot them in front of the villagers."
(Did these things happen? Historians note that Iraqis did not get to the village until later; they say the truth about reports of brutalities is hard to establish, because Israelis have often suppressed it and Palestinians have often exaggerated it.)
In 1950, the United Nations began to build refugee camps. Darwish and his 65-year-old third wife live in a spare, two-room apartment at the Askar camp; from there, they have seen a series of wars, and the promise of peace, and a Palestinian homeland.
"I can't wait," Darwish said. "I will be so happy to get rid of tear gas that chokes me when it is fired in the camp."
Mrs. Liachev insisted that "what is our land is ours." But she also yearns for peace - especially when she thinks of one of her 12 great-grandchildren, an Israeli paratrooper.
"We need some quiet here," she said.
---
When Leah Mahlangu was young, she lived in a round house with a floor made of mud and cow dung. She was born in 1899, a black infant in white-ruled South Africa; her parents worked for food and a place to live on a white-owned farm north of Pretoria.
"We would fight among us, the cattle herders. We had fights over who the strongest herders were. I was beating the others most of the time."
She does not remember the year she was married, but, "My husband paid lobola (bride price) of 16 cows. I was worth it at the time."
She does remember a long life of hard work, and beatings at the hands of whites.
"They hurt me so much I don't want to talk about them," she said.
Her strength and her weakness was her feisty spirit. She would go work at a farm and would rebel and would be fired.
"When I worked for a white lady, I worked doing her washing. I scrubbed and scrubbed. And the lady complained. I felt I had done my best. And I went to strangle her, I put my hands around her throat," she said, her hands performing a pantomime.
"So I lost my job and had to go to the next farm."
Her employers would send her along with a letter. She never learned to read, so she did not know that "in that letter was the message to the next farmer to beat me up."
"They would take a stick and soak it in salt water and beat me over the hands, between my fingers, very hard," she said.
A world away, Ann Drake was never lashed. But she, too, felt the sting of racism.
A teacher of languages with a master's degree from Cornell, she married Joseph F. Drake, who became president of Alabama A&M University at Normal. In 1931 - 40 miles away, in Scottsboro - nine young blacks were unjustly charged with raping two white women.
"These girls were hoboing on the freight train and when they were discovered they pretended that these boys had raped them," Mrs. Drake recalled.
Joseph Drake "went to see them and talk with the boys," his wife said, but his protests and those of others around the country did no good: Eight were convicted, and five served long terms.
Thirty years later, the civil rights movement was blooming, and students at A&M, a black school, joined the protests.
"The governor and the folks didn't like it, and to be sure to stop this thing they decided that they would do a very mean and ugly thing," Mrs. Drake said. They fired President Drake.
"After 35 years, he was kicked out," she said, her voice shaking.
Four decades later, "There's still a whole lot of meanness and prejudice," she said. And yet, she lived to see her son become the first black doctor at Huntsville Hospital. And she said she never felt handicapped by the color of her skin.
"I never let it stop me … ," she said. "I think I've accomplished most of the things I've tried."
---
The days - 36,525 in the course of 100 years - take their toll.
Guo Jingtong finds it hard to get around. Ahmed Darwish still prays at the mosque daily, but then he goes home to sleep.
Strea Liachev gives weekly painting lessons to her great-grandchildren, though she can barely see. And at 99, Fuki Kushida heads the Federation of Japanese Women's Organizations, with 900,000 members.
"Every time I try to hand my letter of resignation, they refuse and do the sit-in at my house," she said.
But Lee Owens and Ann Drake - who saw the dawn of the 20th century - will not see the birth of the 21st.
Owens died on March 31; Mrs. Drake died on Oct. 14.
Mrs. Drake had been blind for nearly two decades, and yet she could see the future clearly. The 21st century, she said in an interview late last year, would be full of marvels, and she recalled a line from Robert Browning, the 19th century poet who died just six years before she was born:
"Grow old along with me!" she said. "The best is yet to be."
---
EDITOR'S NOTE - Reporting for this story was provided by Mohammed Daraghmeh in Nablus and Dina Kraft in Jerusalem; Renee Schoof in Beijing; Chisaki Watanabe in Tokyo; Pat Reber in Johannesburg; and Alice Lagnado in St. Petersburg.
End Adv for release anytime
 
 Graphic



 
With AP Photos NY331-342 of Jan. 11, Graphics CENTURY CHRONO,
 Load-Date: November 8, 1999

 

End of Document
