

The world will be tying up loose ends in millennium's final year
The Associated Press
December 27, 1998, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 2846 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body




It will be a 365-day march to a December midnight and the next millennium. But along the way, the world in 1999 will try to tie up some loose ends.
Israelis and Palestinians face a May deadline for finding a way to live together permanently in peace. Northern Ireland is to convene its "unity" assembly after decades of strife. And the Panama Canal, a wonder of the early 20th century, will be handed over to Panama in time for the 21st.
In Europe, a new continental currency and an expanded NATO will debut. On a calendar full of election days, two stand out: Indonesia and Nigeria, giants struggling to shake off long spells of authoritarianism.
And 250 miles above it all, astronauts will be piecing together the International Space Station, readying it for its first live-in crew in January 2000.
The Associated Press asked correspondents around the world to assess the prospects for 1999. Here are their reports:
---
 
 Mideast
 
 By NICOLAS B. TATRO
Mideast
 
 By NICOLAS B. TATRO
JERUSALEM - A crisis is looming between Israel and the Palestinians over Yasser Arafat's plan to declare an independent state in May with or without Israel's approval.
The issue is likely to dominate Middle East politics and set the agenda for the Israeli election in the early part of the year.
Incumbent Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has vowed to annex Jewish settlements and West Bank land needed to maintain Israel's security if Arafat chooses to sidestep the negotiating process.
The crisis will come to a head on May 4, when Arafat contends the Israel-Palestinian peace accords expire, and he has the right to realize his dream.
It will take an all-out mediation effort by the United States to prevent a showdown and get the two sides to negotiate the most sensitive issues: the fate of Jerusalem, Jewish settlements, borders and the disposition of Palestinian refugees.
After the round of airstrikes on Iraq, U.S. diplomacy will be tested in trying to maintain a united front in the long-running faceoff with Saddam Hussein over U.N. inspections of military facilities and economic sanctions.
Support within the Middle East for Washington's hard line on Iraq was already weakening even before the latest attacks, in large measure because of the erosion of faith in the Israel-Palestinian peace process.
In Iran, the attempts at social and political reforms by President Mohammad Khatami remain under attack from hardliners supported by the judiciary and clergy aligned with Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. At year's end, a mysterious string of slayings was aimed at Iranian dissidents and intellectuals.
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak's government appears to have contained Islamic militants after a six-year campaign, but the gap between rich and poor still holds the seeds of danger for his country.
---
 
 Europe
 
 By JEFFREY ULBRICH
BRUSSELS, Belgium - Eleven of the 15 European Union countries leap into the new year with a new single currency, trading in their marks, francs and lire for the euro.
Euro currency won't start circulating until 2002, so the currency at first will be an accounting factor in financial market, banking and business transactions.
Despite some initial uncertainty, some people see the new monetary system as the biggest step toward European unity since the creation of the Common Market.
A decade after the fall of the Berlin Wall, East is slowly joining West. NATO will accept Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic into the fold and the EU continues negotiations to bring in up to a dozen new members.
On the dark side of the ledger, the Balkans worry both East and West.
An upsure in violence is threatening the cease-fire in Kosovo. On one side are the Serbs, who see Kosovo as an integral part of their republic, and on the other the province's majority Albanians who lost their autonomy 10 years ago and now are demanding independence.
The West is sending in 2,000 civilian observers in an effort to preserve the truce. NATO missiles and bombers remain poised, keeping pressure on Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic to behave.
Bosnia, another Balkan tinderbox, is making slow progress, but there is no indication the 32,000 NATO-led peacekeepers there will be leaving anytime soon.
Many nations, now considered "outs," will spend 1999 trying to show the world why they should be counted among the "ins."
Countries like Slovenia, Romania, Macedonia, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania ache to join the European mainstream. Already members of organizations like the Council of Europe and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the countries are eager for the big time - NATO and the EU.
---
 
 Latin America
By MICHELLE RAY ORTIZ
MEXICO CITY - Weak oil prices and natural disasters put many Latin American nations in a tough position heading into 1999.
Honduras and Nicaragua both must rebuild from the devastation of Hurricane Mitch, and are seeking forgiveness of their total of $ 11 billion in foreign debts. Mitch killed more than 9,000 people across Central America, destroyed roads and bridges and left thousands homeless.
Peru, meanwhile, intends to spend $ 600 million on reconstruction from storms caused by the El Nino weather phenomenom earlier in 1998.
With oil prices at a 25-year-low, leaders in Mexico, Venezuela and Ecuador are preaching austerity and bracing for recessions in the face of plummeting export revenues.
Brazil, struggling with a huge public deficit, will try to restore investor confidence by slashing $ 23 billion from its government budget.
Panama, meanwhile, looks forward to taking possession of the Panama Canal from the United States on Dec. 31, 1999. But not before presidential elections in May; Martin Torrijos, the son of former Panamanian strongman Omar Torrijos, leads in early opinion polls.
El Salvador, Argentina and Chile also will elect new presidents.
The future of Mexico's Institutional Revolutionary Party, which has ruled since 1929, will be reshaped as presidential aspirants jostle in the party's first open primary.
The atmosphere will be friendlier when Mexico welcomes Pope John Paul II for a 3 -day visit in January.
A judge will determine whether two members of Argentina's former military junta will face trial on charges of adopting children taken from dissidents during its 1976-83 "dirty war," and Chile awaits the outcome of Spain's extradition request for former dictator Augusto Pinochet.
Colombia's new president, Andres Pastrana, is trying to engage leftist guerrillas in peace talks to end a 34-year conflict - and to attract foreign aid for programs to give farmers alternatives to growing drugs.
---
 
 Asia
 
 By YURI KAGEYAMA
TOKYO - Asian nations are struggling to turn around their crippled economies with hopes of curtailing the growing unemployment, poverty and, in Indonesia, stirring social unrest.
But many hope to turn the corner toward recovery. Key to that would be fixing the financial systems throughout Asia that are still in shambles.
The Japanese economy, which could potentially serve as an engine for regional growth, is likely to continue to shrink, wallowing in its worst recession in a half century.
Voter impatience with Japan's governing party is likely to come to the fore if parliamentary elections are held during 1999, as some expect.
More serious is the turmoil in Indonesia that threatens to explode ahead of general elections in June and the choosing of a new president that follows. Instability is sure to keep foreign investors away from the once booming nation and keep its economy spiraling downward.
Unemployment will likely persist in many spots, including Indonesia, Singapore, Hong Kong, South Korea and mainland China.
In Taiwan, which has escaped the worst of the economic crisis, parties will choose candidates for the presidential election in March 2000. Rhetoric in recent campaigns questioning whether the island should reunite with China at some point has kept Taiwan's relations with Beijing tense.
Next December, Macau will revert to Chinese rule after nearly 450 years under Portuguese administration. Although Macau will retain its political and economic system, tackling the Chinese gangs entrenched in the enclave is a sensitive issue.
The major challenge in South Korea is to clean up, under a new president, the bloated, debt-ridden business conglomerates that thrived on cozy relations with past military governments.
---
 
 Africa
 
 By ANDREW SELSKY
JOHANNESBURG, South Africa - Primal issues - securing life and liberty - will dominate affairs in Africa, with efforts to forge an "African renaissance" undermined by dictatorships, wars and corruption.
Two elections hold promise for building and consolidating democracy in two of Africa's giants: Nigeria and South Africa.
Nigeria, ruled by military dictatorships during 20 of its 38 years of independence, holds presidential elections in February. Gen. Abdulsalami Abubakar, who took power in June following the death of Gen. Sani Abacha, has vowed to step down and hand power to a civilian government in May.
South Africa will hold its second-ever all-race election around mid-year. Deputy President Thabo Mbeki, leader of the ruling African National Congress, is expected to succeed President Nelson Mandela. He will have the challenge of dismantling economic apartheid, a legacy of white rule that left most of the nation's wealth in the hands of whites.
Wars continue to fester and sap the continent's resources.
Efforts will continue to end fighting in Congo that has destabilized central Africa and involves troops from at least seven countries. Uganda and Rwanda back rebels seeking President Laurent Kabila's overthrow. Troops from Zimbabwe, Namibia, Angola and Chad are helping Kabila.
Patching up Angola's peace process will be even more difficult after government and rebel forces resumed fighting in December, using artillery and warplanes. The renwed fighting ended a four-year peace pact.
In northern Africa, Ethiopia and Eritrea are poised to resume clashes that killed hundreds in 1998.
And no end is in sight to the civil war in Sudan, which enters its 16th year and is Africa's longest. An estimated 1.5 million people have died in the war between the government in the Arab and Islamic north and rebels of the Christian and animist south.
---
 
 Russia and CIS
 
 By BARRY RENFREW
MOSCOW - Just as it started to look like things were getting better after years of decline, Russia is gripped by its worst economic crisis since the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Hopes of an economic turnaround have evaporated since the country was hit by the global crisis in developing markets. With much of the nation already resembling a disaster zone after decades of stagnation, the government has no real strategy for dealing with the country's problems.
Millions of people will continue to go without pay or pensions; those who do get paid will be able to buy less and less as the ruble plummets and inflation soars. While fears of famine appear unjustified, life is likely to get even grimmer in a country where many now live in poverty.
Among the few bits of good news, a majority of Russians continue to back democracy. And after decades of decline and disaster, many Russians are hardy survivalists who greeted the latest crisis by resolving to get through it.
One of the few certainties will be the failing health of President Boris Yeltsin, who is likely to spend more and more time out of sight. But Yeltsin has been largely written off in Russia, and if he steps down early or dies he almost certainly will be replaced by an elected successor.
There is no clear successor to Yeltsin. The Communists should do well in parliamentary voting next December, but are not likely to win the presidency, which will be up for grabs in 2000 if Yeltsin serves out his full term.
Things look bleak across the rest of the former Soviet Union as economies buckle. Autocratic leaders are entrenching their rule in Belarus and Central Asia. Ukraine will hold a presidential election in 1999 that is expected to be a bitter contest.
---
 
 Australia and Pacific
 
 By PETER JAMES SPIELMANN
SYDNEY, Australia - Australians face two momentous changes in 1999 - one affecting their national psyche, the other their pocketbooks.
Late in the year, they are holding a referendum on whether to cut their last colonial link by dumping Britain's Queen Elizabeth II as head of state, making the nation - founded in 1901 - a republic.
Meanwhile, Prime Minister John Howard, who was re-elected in October by promising to cut income taxes by imposing a 10 percent goods-and-services tax, will battle to get that plan through the Senate, where his party is not in the majority.
New Zealand heads to a national election of its own some time before November, with conservative Prime Minister Jenny Shipley of the National Party trailing in opinion polls behind the Labor Party's Helen Clark.
The smaller South Pacific nations, represented by the Pacific Forum, will step up their lobbying to urge major coal-burning nations like India and China to reduce greenhouse gas emissions before some island states are lost under rising sea levels.
The Federated States of Micronesia are worried about renegotiating their semi-independent status with the United States under a compact that expires in 2001. They fear Washington will be less generous with aid than during the Cold War, when the islands were considered strategic assets.
All the smaller Pacific island nations will be preoccupied in 1999 with the need to reform, restructure and reduce their governments and civil service as well as privatize state enterprises. After years of giving lip service to the idea, they now see it as the only way to salvage their economies, and also realize foreign donors are making reform a condition for further aid.
Countries close to the International Date Line will spend the year squabbling over which island is the best vantage point for watching the first sunrise of the new millennium. Most hotel rooms on Fiji, Tonga, Kirabati and Samoa are already booked.
---
 
 Caribbean
 
 By MICHELLE FAUL
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico - Decolonization, drug-related crime and a trade dispute with Washington are preoccupying the Caribbean nations.
Puerto Rico's Gov. Pedro Rossello also vows to pursue his crusade to make the U.S. colony the 51st state, despite losing a December referendum. Rossello has friends in Washington who say Congress is weary of supporting the Spanish-speaking island at a cost of $ 10 billion a year for which Puerto Ricans pay no federal taxes.
Former British colonies led by Trinidad and Jamaica plan to scrap London's Privy Council as their highest court of appeal and set up a Caribbean supreme court in 1999 - part of moves to overcome international opposition to the death sentence that leaders want to use to fight increasing drug-related crimes.
Barbados wants a referendum to end the British monarch being the ceremonial head of state, a move that could encourage similar actions by other former British colonies.
Grenada and Trinidad plan elections a year early amid allegations of government corruption and, in Trinidad, growing racial tension between those of East Indian descent and blacks who had dominated politics until the 1995 election of the first Indo-Trinidadian leader. Similar black-Indo rivalries could explode into renewed violence in Guyana, on the shoulder of South America.
Haiti enters 1999 mired in a power struggle that has left the hemisphere's poorest country without a functioning government since June 1997.
Several islands will lobby to retain their protected and vital banana trade with Europe, in a dispute that could take over trade talks between the European Union and the United States in March. Washington imposed sanctions Dec. 21 to go into effect in February or March against selected European goods, charging the EU hinders banana imports from U.S.-owned producers in Central America.
---
 
 United Nations
 
 By EDITH M. LEDERER
UNITED NATIONS - The United Nations enters the new year facing a double challenge - the global financial crisis and conflicts and crises from Africa to Afghanistan, with Iraq again at the top of the list.
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan paints a grim picture of the world at the start of 1999: More wars in Africa, neighboring nations embroiled in conflicts in Congo and Afghanistan, failed peace efforts in Angola, political chaos in Haiti and famine and civil war in Sudan.
The U.N. chief warns that unless efforts to find peaceful solutions are redoubled in hotspots, "we have every reason to fear the worst in 1999."
And unless the underlying distortions and imbalances in the global economy are tackled, "we must expect more conflicts and even more intractable ones," he adds.
As Annan knows well, every global problem ends up at the United Nations and he laments that crises are all-consuming and leave little time for the organization's critical work in trying to alleviate poverty.
But the results of U.N. peacemaking efforts are often disappointing, partly because the world body is perennially short of resources, and must serve the interests of its members who are often at odds.
 Load-Date: December 27, 1998

 

End of Document
