

The U.S.-Iraq battle - in words and images on TV
The Associated Press
February 24, 1998, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 595 words
Byline: By LAURA MYERS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




No missiles were fired, no bombs dropped, but the United States and Iraq went to battle all the same - on television. And in the war of images and words, both claimed success.
After President Clinton cautiously accepted a U.N.-brokered deal easing the latest standoff over Iraq's weapons, Iraqi television showed images of Saddam Hussein celebrating his "victory" over the United States. Before the agreement, state TV had been showing pictures of dead women and children from the 1991 Persian Gulf War.
At the White House, Clinton told reporters that the Iraqi president had capitulated but that the United States was still ready to launch an air attack if Saddam went back on the agreement.
"He has admitted that he has to honor commitments he made back in '91," Clinton said from the Oval Office. "You know, I think that our tough response was essential to getting him to admit that."
Some call it the CNN factor of policy-making, with leaders and other officials using television to make their points or having to react to events carried instantly around the world.
"Once wall-to-wall coverage starts, policy-makers have to respond to public opinion very quickly," said Robert Lichter, co-director of the Center for Media and Public Affairs.
Andrew Winner, who was an analyst in the State Department's political and military affairs bureau during the Gulf War, says TV images heighten the political drama and "affect the timing of certain decisions." But he adds, "I don't think it fundamentally changes the nature of the choices."
Before the U.N.-Iraq agreement, Clinton's foreign policy team had taken to the airwaves - on Sunday talk shows, morning news programs and for a tumultuous Ohio town hall meeting - to make the case for bombing Iraq if free U.N. inspections were not allowed.
At the Ohio forum, Defense Secretary William Cohen flashed a picture carried on CNN - which the White House noted Saddam watches - of a dead mother and child. Cohen said the victims were killed by chemical weapons Iraq used against the Kurds in 1988. "Madonna and child, Saddam Hussein style," he said to the audience.
When Clinton rallied troops at the Pentagon the day before the Ohio forum, his words were carried live on the major networks.
Then Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz, a fixture on TV just like Clinton's Cabinet and the president himself these days, was interviewed live to respond to Clinton.
Kofi Annan, the U.N. secretary-general, played to the TV cameras and public opinion to pressure the two sides. At one point last weekend in Baghdad, he reminded Iraqi diplomats that journalists the world over were waiting to hear whether they were making progress.
On his way home, before Annan had officially presented the deal to the United Nations and the United States for approval, he declared conflict had been averted, making it more difficult for either side to walk away. "I think everyone is relieved now that we have been able to defuse the crisis and that the use of force will not be necessary," he said.
When the fighting is real, too - as in 1991 - government officials may tailor their public responses and private military planning in part with TV images in mind.
Gen. Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff during the Gulf War, said he urged President Bush to end the war in part because of TV coverage of American fliers strafing the fleeing enemy and civilians on the "Highway of Death" from Kuwait to Iraqi.
"The television coverage . . . was starting to make it look as if we were engaged in slaughter for slaughter's sake," recalled Powell.
 Load-Date: February 24, 1998

 

End of Document
