

The Spoils of War for Afghans: Ruins and Refugees
March 18, 1996, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 851 words
Byline: By IAN STEWART, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KABUL, Afghanistan
Body




To the victors will go the spoils of war: a capital razed by rocket fire, a nation of impoverished refugees and a crippled economy whose development has been set back 35 years.
Even if Afghanistan's civil war finally ends - and no immediate end is in sight - the nation will be haunted for decades by a legacy of devastation.
"If we had a billion dollars right now to spend on rebuilding the country, we could only bring it back to the level it was at in 1960," says Famidullah Tarzi, economic affairs minister in Afghanistan's nominal government.
Warplanes, rockets and mortars have thrashed Kabul, its people and its industry.
Heaps of concrete slabs and twisted reinforcement rods clutter the sides of the capital's Jaday Maiwand Avenue. The debris is all that is left of the street's once fashionable shops and a popular movie theater.
Once a bustling Central Asian trade hub, Kabul has no formal industry and only the scant remnants of infrastructure.
Huddled around fires burning in old oil drums, the few merchants try to ward off the cold of Afghanistan's unforgiving winter. Heating fuel is scarce and the city's electricity has been off more than two years
The little trade that does go on slows to a trickle during the winter when supply routes are cut off by snow and the usual fighting.
Ten years ago, Afghanistan was the conduit for more than $ 1.7 billion in annual regional trade through the mountain passes that separate Central Asia from the Indian subcontinent.
A million deaths later, Afghanistan's trade partners are gone. The country is a pariah in the international business community.
"The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund won't even consider long-term loans to us," Tarzi said. "They say we lack the political stability. I say, 'How are we supposed to get political stability until we get economic stability?' "
Afghans must rely on the few viable exports they have - including opium. A recent United Nations survey estimated Afghanistan produced about 2,400 tons of opium last year, the revenue divided among the country's many warlords and the government.
Other than opium, Afghanistan's farmers and traders are left with cotton, foodstuffs and handicrafts. Although Afghanistan is rich in natural resources, it does not have the means to extract or transport them to markets outside the country.
Before Soviet troops invaded Afghanistan in 1979, Kabul used to export more than $ 160 million a year worth of natural gas to the Central Asian republics of the Soviet Union.
"The first thing we need is peace," said Mohammed Moshani, a senior economic analyst in Kabul. "From there we must focus on rebuilding so the people have hope."
But the country's economic indicators - or those that are still recorded - leave the Afghans with little to go on.
According to figures from the World Bank and Afghanistan's Ministry of Commerce, the country's decline began in the late 1980s when a Marxist regime began to crumble from a long rebellion. The economy plummeted after the communists lost and rival rebel groups began fighting each other in the early 1990s.
In 1985, at the height of the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan, the country exported $ 670.5 million worth of goods. Six years later, with the communist regime nearing collapse, exports had dropped to $ 236 million.
Today, after three years of warfare in and around Kabul, exports have all but vanished.
"We don't even keep an exact measure anymore," Tarzi said. "It's a trickle, under a hundred million dollars a year."
Annual imports, however, still hover around $ 1 billion, he said.
For the government, the heavy tariffs imposed on imports are an important source of revenue to pay the day-to-day bills, including salaries.
"The World Trade Organization asks us to reduce tariffs, but they don't realize these aren't punitive, they are how we make money," said Tarzi.
Cottage industry - a farmer selling surplus crops from a stall or a young boy hawking a shoeshine - is about the only work in Kabul, where more than 200 small- and midsize factories have been either leveled by fighting, abandoned or looted.
More than 20,000 jobs linked to the city's factories have been lost in less than three years, Moshani said.
The few remaining skilled laborers in Kabul - those who have not been killed, recruited for fighting or fled - rely on the city's open markets for a livelihood.
The cluttered stalls that line the dusty roads are the closest thing Afghanistan has to an organized economy, Moshani says.
Crammed inside a shack that doubles as both home and office for a makeshift auto dealership, three men remember when the lot out front was filled with Mercedes, BMWs and Saabs. It was a long time ago, they agree.
Now the best the dealership's owner, Mohammed Zia, can muster is a few decaying Russian-made Ladas.
Of the four cars parked in his lot, two have been cannibalized for spare parts and a third has no doors. The fourth is his own, but he cannot afford the price of fuel to keep it running.
"We used to sell four, five, six cars a week," said Abdul Salim, Zia's colleague. "Now we're just happy to have people stop by to visit."
 Load-Date: March 18, 1996

 

End of Document
