

The United States: A friend that Arabs love to hate?
The Associated Press
October 13, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 649 words
Byline: By HAMZA HENDAWI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BEIRUT, Lebanon
Body




Despite good relations with many Arab leaders, the United States remains the target of rage among many Arab people who see it as biased in favor of Israel.
The violent Palestinian-Israeli clashes of the past two weeks have stoked such sentiments to feverish levels. From Morocco to Iraq and Syria to Sudan, hardly a day has gone by since the clashes began Sept. 28 without an anti-American slogan shouted, an American flag set ablaze or a U.S. embassy pelted with stones somewhere in the Arab world.
The violence has left Arab leaders with close links to Washington scrambling to explain their relationship and may have inspired a suspected terrorist attack on Thursday that killed six American sailors on a U.S. destroyer in the Yemeni port of Aden.
Even in Kuwait, which was rid of Iraqi occupation by a U.S.-led forces in 1991, students shouted "Death to America" and burned a U.S. flag.
"Arab leaders have for long allied themselves with the West, especially the United States," said Jordanian political analyst Labib Kamhawi. "But the masses have for long seen the United States as biased toward Israel and this has become more evident recently, threatening those regimes themselves."
Much has changed in Lebanon since 1983, when 241 U.S. servicemen were killed in one of the deadliest anti-American terrorist attacks since the end of the Vietnam war. The site is now part of Beirut's new airport.
But the antipathy has not. Anti-American sentiments on the streets and in segments of the Arab media also have been fed by what is widely seen in the region as U.S. insistence on keeping Iraq under U.N. sanctions that have impoverished ordinary Iraqis. The sanctions were imposed to punish Baghdad for invading Kuwait in 1990 and the United States insists they remain in place until Iraq surrenders weapons of mass destruction.
"There is that perception that the unfettered power of the United States allows it to ride over international norms and conventions," said Philip Robins, who lectures on Middle Eastern affairs at Britain's Oxford University.
For all the anger, Arabs know their future is closely tied to the United States, nearly 10 years after the liberation of Kuwait and following two decades of high-profile U.S. mediation in the Arab-Israeli conflict.
"For one, there can be no settlement in the Middle East without the United States," said political science professor Jihad Aouda of Egypt's Helwan University. "The United States does do favors for the Arabs and is no longer 100 percent biased toward Israel."
Washington's involvement in the Middle East peace process, the most pressing issue in the volatile region, dates back to the 1978 Camp David accords between Egypt and Israel that a year later produced the first peace treaty between an Arab state and Israel.
Jordan signed a peace with Israel in 1994. The primary concern of the United States now is to get the Israelis and the Palestinians to stop the bloodshed in the West Bank and Gaza Strip and resume their peace negotiations.
While playing peacemaker, Washington has also poured billions of dollars into the region in economic and military assistance to such close Arab allies as Egypt, Jordan and Morocco. Israel also is a major recipient of U.S. foreign aid.
Since the 1991 Gulf War, the United States has signed defense pacts with every Gulf Arab state. It routinely holds joint war games with allied Arab nations.
"Both the Israelis and the Arabs are in the American camp," said Aouda of Egypt's Helwan University. "The Arabs are no longer outsiders and every Arab realizes that America is important."
Kuwaiti newspaper columnist Fouad al-Hashem has a warning against reading too much into the recent displays of anti-American sentiments, describing them as "soap bubbles."
And to the Kuwaiti students who shouted "Death to America," he had this to say: "If America dies, they'll become prey in the mouth of the Iraqi fox."
 Load-Date: October 14, 2000

 

End of Document
