

The Cricket Dilemma That Went All The Way To The United Nations
February 13, 1996, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 710 words
Byline: By DILIP GANGULY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CALCUTTA, India
Body




The message to U.N. headquarters in New York was most extraordinary: Could some observers scoot down to war-scarred Sri Lanka, review security and decide if it was safe to play cricket there?
International cricket administrators were facing what they considered a serious threat - a bitter dispute that was threatening the upcoming World Cup, and the very gentlemanly demeanor of cricket itself.
Twelve national teams from four continents have assembled to compete for the World Cup, cricket's World Series. Hosted by Sri Lanka, India and Pakistan, it begins Wednesday.
After a Jan. 31 bomb attack killed 83 people and wounded 1,400 in the worst terrorist attack of Sri Lanka's civil war, the Australian team refused to play in the country's capital of Colombo because it feared similar attacks. The West Indies followed suit.
Many Sri Lankans and Indians were dumbfounded at the promise of boycott from two teams widely considered the best in the sport.
"What a pity," wrote M.J. Akbar, editor of Asian Age, an Indian newspaper. "Australia was known for the quality of its courage, its determination to fight. It is now becoming more famous for the color of their liver."
Never before has the tournament, in its sixth year, been embroiled in disputes that have sparked such name-calling, dirty politics and mudslinging.
"This has become a very sensitive issue, a very serious one," said David Richards, secretary of the International Cricket Council, the game's governing body. "One loose word can spoil everything."
Cricket is a passion of people on the Indian subcontinent and in former British colonies elsewhere. In lanes and back alleys across India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka, children use makeshift equipment, hitting a leather ball with a wooden bat.
Like baseball in America, cricket is big business - the highest-paying, most commercialized sport in the region, with international corporations such as Coca-Cola sponsoring many tournaments.
When the Australian and West Indian teams arrived in Calcutta for the inauguration of the tournament last week, the issue hit the top of the agenda for the International Cricket Committee, cricket's governing body, and the front pages of many newspapers.
Many cricket fans and some officials believe Australia is using the bombing in Colombo as an excuse to stay away. Sri Lanka's recent tour of Australia generated much acrimony - including charges and counter-charges of cheating - and Australia would have faced a hostile crowd in Colombo.
To reduce Australian anger, the Sri Lankan government offered to give the team security befitting heads of state.
The organizing committee also asked the United Nations to send observers to Sri Lanka.
"We thought that if the U.N. certifies that it is safe to play in Colombo, the Australians would change their position," said Jagmohan Dalmia, top administrator of the Sixth World Cup.
But the committee never received a response.
Unable to persuade the Australians to reconsider, the International Cricket Committee met in Calcutta on Saturday. But five hours of discussions that produced a couple of proposed concessions proved futile.
The Sri Lankan foreign minister sent his Australian counterpart flowers and asked for his help, but no breakthrough was reported.
One pleasant side effect, though, has been a burst of solidarity between India and Pakistan, tense regional rivals.
On Tuesday, for the first time ever, they put players on the same team so they could challenge Sri Lanka in a one-day exhibition match to show the world that it is safe to play in Colombo.
Sri Lankans threw an elaborate security blanket around the stadium and guarded it with commandos, mounted policemen and sniffer dogs.
"We wanted to prove to the world and cricket-playing countries that it is safe to be here as far as sports is concerned," said Indian captain Mohammad Azharuddin, who led the team of five Indians and six Pakistanis.
The countries have been enemies since Britain partitioned colonial India in 1947. They have fought three wars, and their animosity has often extended onto the cricket grounds.
But their cooperation Tuesday was cause for optimism.
"It is history being made here," said Intikhab Alam, the Pakistan manager.
The two nations worked well together: They beat Sri Lanka handily.
 Load-Date: February 13, 1996

 

End of Document
