

Two villages: Two versions of the truth, two aspirations for the EU
The Associated Press
April 3, 2000, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 380 words
Byline: By JEFFREY ULBRICH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PERISTERONA, Cyprus
Body




Andreas Hadjikallis stared out the dirt-streaked window of a smoky cafe toward the U.N. buffer zone 400 yards away and reflected on the tranquil days before the Turkish Cypriot residents of this village fled north.
This was a mixed community with about 600 Greeks and 550 Turks before 1974, he said. There were no ghettos. Turkish and Greek houses were intermingled.
"There were no problems between the two communities," said Hadjikallis, a retired civil servant. He pointed out the Orthodox church and Muslim mosque virtually side-by-side in the center of the village.
About two miles away, in the village of Zumrutkoy, where many of Peristerona's former Turkish Cypriot residents now live, Erol Bakkaloglu laughed.
If things were so great, why did the Greek Cypriots drive the Turks out, he said.
"Ask them why we had to leave our lands in the first place," huffed Bakkaloglu, a retired teacher sitting with a group of men outside a cafe.
The folks in Peristerona blame Turkish Cypriot President Rauf Denktash.
"Their leader doesn't want them to come back," Hadjikallis said over a cup of thick, black coffee. "If they were allowed to return, most of them would. The land is good here. They had good land."
Bakkaloglu only shook his head. These tales told by the Greek Cypriots of Peristerona are part of an effort to rewrite history, he said.
"This is how they are fooling Europe," Bakkaloglu said.
In other villages, it was the Greek Cypriots who fled, about 200,000 of them, according to the government, leaving behind homes and property now occupied by settlers brought in from Turkey.
The Greek Cypriot villagers are looking forward to Cyprus' entry into the European Union, believing it will get them better prices for their oranges, lemons and potatoes.
"They also believe EU membership will get rid of the Turkish occupation and peace will follow," said Hadjikallis, referring to the 30,000 Turkish soldiers on the other side of the buffer zone.
The Turkish Cypriots in Zumrutkoy think EU membership would be good, too, as long as it was not under Greek Cypriot administration.
"The fault of the EU is to accept the Greek Cypriots as the government of all of Cyprus," Bakkaloglu said. "They should come here. Do they see any Greek Cypriot administration here?"
End Adv for Sunday, April 9
 Graphic



 
AP Photos NY319-320 of April 3
 Load-Date: April 10, 2000

 

End of Document
