

Two detained in the bombing of Cole also linked to hotel bombings
The Associated Press
October 31, 2000, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 677 words
Byline: By DONNA ABU-NASR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LAHEJ, Yemen
Body




Two Yemenis detained in the bombing of the USS Cole are believed to have taken part in attacks on Yemeni hotels in 1993 blamed on Islamic militants, sources close to the investigation said Tuesday.
The Yemenis were among nine men detained last week for questioning in connection with the Oct. 12 attack on the U.S. destroyer in Aden harbor that killed 17 U.S. sailors and injured 39 others.
The sources said the two were believed to have taken part in bombing attacks in December 1993 on Aden's two main hotels that killed an Austrian and a local janitor.
At that time, officials and diplomats said Muslim fundamentalists angered by Yemen's support for the U.S.-led relief operation in Somalia were behind the attacks. About 100 U.S. servicemen were in Aden then as part of the relief operation.
The investigation, the sources said, was increasingly centering on Lahej, an area 20 miles north of Aden and a stronghold of veterans of the war in Afganistan against the Soviets. It said all the nine detained men were from Lahej.
The sources - who spoke on condition they not be named - also said the investigation is focusing on four men believed to be the main plotters in the attack on the Cole. None of the four has been seen since the blast. Paperwork relating to four identification cards issued between 1996 and 1997 has disappeared from government files, the sources said.
At least one of the cards is fake and was issued in Lahej. The card was used to register at least three houses and locations the bombers are believed to have used as well as a small boat used in the attack.
The suspects received money transfers from Gulf nations, including the United Arab Emirate. The sources did not have details on how much money the men had received.
The sources said investigators believe preparations for the blast began in March. They said a man went to the naval police base around that time to register a white boat using the fake identification card.
When the man was asked to produce the boat for inspection, he said it was undergoing repairs and led police to a shack the suspects had used to weld linings into the boat to slip the explosives into, according to the sources.
The disclosures came as the United States pressed Yemeni authorities to allow U.S. agents a greater role in the investigation into the attack on the destroyer as it was refueling in Aden's harbor.
Yemeni officials have insisted they are leading the probe and said they did not want the United States to have the kind of high-profile role it had in the investigation in Kenya and Tanzania following the 1998 bombings of U.S. embassies there that killed 224 people. The United States has blamed those bombings on Saudi terrorist Osama Bin Laden.
President Clinton on Monday appealed to Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh for direct access to witnesses, suspects and evidence, saying the two countries should have "a genuine, joint investigation" as the United States had with Kenya and Tanzania.
Yemeni officials said the questioning of sources and detainees was being conducted by Yemenis with no FBI agents present. The officials said transcripts of the interrogations are sent to U.S. investigators who pose questions to Yemenis, then follow up.
Meanwhile, the Cole has been loaded onto a heavy-lift ship, the Blue Marlin, which will carry the warship back to the United States, Frederik Steenbuch, manager of Offshore Heavy Transport in Oslo, Norway, said Tuesday.
Steenbuch said crews working off Yemen's coast were finishing securing the vessel and would leave soon, though no definite date was available. The trip is expected to take about five weeks.
Once it is ready to go, the Blue Marlin will travel around the southern tip of Africa to avoid the Suez Canal, U.S. defense officials said.
In Washington, senior U.S. defense officials said Navy ships have stopped using the Suez Canal out of concern for terrorist threats. U.S. officials said American troops in Saudi Arabia and Kuwait have been placed on the highest state of alert, following intelligence indications of terrorist threats.
 Load-Date: November 1, 2000

 

End of Document
