

U.S. paratroopers fly around the world to make historic jump
September 15, 1997, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: International News
Length: 710 words
Byline: By JIM DRINKARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SHYMKENT, Kazakhstan
Body




Against a clear blue sky and the backdrop of the 6,000-foot Tien Shen mountains, 620 airborne troops from the United States and five other nations parachuted to earth today in the first joint peacekeeping exercise involving the former Cold War enemies.
The paratroopers, most from the 82nd Airborne Division at Fort Bragg, N.C., floated to earth after a 19-hour, 7,700-mile flight from the United States. The airborne deployment, the longest ever attempted by the U.S. military, required three in-flight refuelings.
"The message I would leave is that there is no nation on the face of the earth that we cannot get to," said Gen. John J. Sheehan, commander of U.S. Atlantic forces, who was the first paratrooper to jump.
The jump was the kickoff for a six-day training mission involving 1,400 troops from a dozen nations, aimed at creating a new peacekeeping and humanitarian force in Central Asia.
Three former Soviet republics - Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan - form the 500-member Central Asian Battalion; 40 members of that unit jumped with the Americans.
The exercise was observed by the defense ministers of the three countries, together with U.S. ambassador to Kazakhstan, Elizabeth Jones, and other dignitaries who sat on a stage atop an earthen mound decked with the flags of the United States, Turkey, Russia and the three Central Asian countries.
A region once traversed by silk traders and Ghengis Kahn, Central Asia is struggling to create economic prosperity and recover from decades of Soviet domination.
Today's training mission was a strong show of interest by the United States in the region, which is rich with oil, natural gas and mineral deposits but also surrounded by potential hot spots, including China, Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan and Kashmir.
"It's a dramatic demonstration of U.S. interests in the region," said Catherine Kelleher, deputy assistant secretary of defense for the region.
For the three Central Asian nations, the exercise was aimed at creating a home-grown capability for dealing with potential ethnic conflict. Col. Alexey Riskin of the Kazak military cited separatist strife in other former Soviet republics since the breakup up the Soviet Union six years ago.
"Similar situations and conflicts can arise in every region," he told reporters, speaking through an interpreter.
The battalion, he said, is an effort to create a "ready force … against aggressors. It will allow us to liquidate any conflict situation in its very beginning, and not allow it to grow into a major conflict."
He said the force also could be used in any part of the world where the United Nations seeks peacekeeping help from its members.
For the United States and Russia, their joint participation in Centrazbat '97 was a rare example of direct military cooperation, which U.S. officials said arose out of a common interest in regional stability.
The exercise had a personal side, as well, breaking down Cold War mistrust in face-to-face work between former adversaries.
When U.S. special forces trainers came a year ago for their first sessions with the Central Asians, "it was kind of tense," said Capt. Bill Medina of the First Special Forces Group from Fort Lewis, Wash.
"For many of them, it was their first contact with the other side. But the tension was broken by soldiers talking about things soldiers talk about: shooting guns, what they've done in the field. That's common everywhere," Medina said.
Soon they were swapping addresses and showing off family pictures, he said.
Today's exercise involved a scenario in which the United Nations brokers a cease-fire between two fictional countries in conflict, and calls for help in quelling renegade elements on both sides. Follow-up training was taking place in neighboring Uzbekistan.
The Pentagon also was using the exercise to practice its pool arrangement with the news media, under which reporters, still photographers and television camera crews are deployed along with U.S. forces for coverage of military operations.
The national media pool concept was developed after U.S. forces invaded Grenada in 1983 without news coverage. The military agreed to form a pool made up of news organizations that could deploy in secret and provide joint dispatches of the earliest hours of a combat operation.
 Load-Date: September 15, 1997

 

End of Document
