

U.S. envoy resumes mediation efforts after bloody day in the West Bank
The Associated Press
May 16, 2000, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 753 words
Byline: By SAMAR ASSAD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RAMALLAH, West Bank
Body




A U.S. envoy resumed mediation in Israeli-Palestinian peace talks today, even as clashes continued and Israeli troops fired rubber bullets and tear gas to disperse hundreds of Palestinian stone-throwers in several West Bank towns.
The violence was less intense than Monday, when three Palestinians were killed and at least 320 Palestinians and 15 Israeli soldiers injured in the worst bloodshed in two years.
One of today's confrontations took place on the outskirts of the West Bank town of Ramallah as Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat held talks with U.S. mediator Dennis Ross only a mile away. Black smoke from burning tires rose into the air and about 200 Palestinians hurled stones and empty bottles at Israeli troops. Palestinian police sporadically tried to push back the crowd, with little success.
Ross, who sat in on secret peace talks in Stockholm, Sweden, this week, returned to the Mideast on Monday evening to consult with Israeli and Palestinian leaders. He was to meet with Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak later today.
The American envoy said negotiations can only move ahead if calm is restored.
"I am quite certain after my consultations with the chairman (Arafat) that his purpose and focus are very much geared to seeing that the negotiations with the Israelis succeed," Ross said.
Arafat adviser Nabil Abourdeneh said gaps between the two sides remained wide.
In several West Bank towns, Palestinians threw stones at Israeli soldiers today. Palestinian police officers tried to push back the small crowds.
At an Israeli enclave in Palestinian-run Bethlehem, Palestinian police formed a cordon to force back the stone throwers. "Down, down with the olive branch, long live the rifle," the protesters chanted as they withdrew.
Tensions have been running high in the Palestinian areas for several days, with Palestinians frustrated by Israel's refusal to release more Palestinian security prisoners at this time.
On Monday, thousands of Palestinian marchers marked "Al Naqba" - the Arabic word for catastrophe, used by Palestinians to describe their displacement as a result of Israel's founding 52 years ago.
In one clash late Monday, hundreds of Palestinians, some shooting live rounds, surrounded Joseph's Tomb, a tiny Israeli enclave in the West Bank town of Nablus. The gate of the compound was forced open and two Palestinians burst in, wounding an Israeli border policeman in the leg, said Maj. Gen. Moshe Yaalon, the commander of Israeli forces in the West Bank. Other border policemen returned fire, killing one of the intruders, and closed the gate, Yaalon said.
"Today's clashes are for the prisoners and for the martyrs who were shot by the Israelis yesterday," George Kanawati, 21, a student at Bethlehem University, said today as he took a break from throwing stones. "We are struggling to win recognition of our rights."
Israel's deputy defense minister, Ephraim Sneh, said Arafat may have encouraged Monday's protests, but that Israeli officials believed he "didn't give permission for the opening of fire."
However, the Palestinian leadership signaled full support for the violence. The PLO Executive Committee said it felt "great pride in the great popular awakening that swept all areas of our nation and refugee camps on the occasion of the Naqba."
Meanwhile, Israeli Public Security Minister Shlomo Ben-Ami, who participated in the Stockholm talks, said negotiators had little time left to agree on an outline for a final treaty. The treaty itself - a full agreement on borders of a Palestinian state and the future status of Jerusalem, Palestinian refugees and Jewish settlements - is due in September.
"The timetable of this agreement is the timetable of the effectiveness of (President) Clinton's government," Ben-Ami told Israel army radio. "Everyone understands that this is more or less two months."
The negotiator said the fate of Jerusalem was not discussed in the most recent round of talks. The Palestinians want to establish a future capital in east Jerusalem, the sector captured from Israel in the 1967 Mideast war. Israel says it will not give up control over all of the city.
On Monday, Israel's Cabinet and parliament approved plans by Barak to transfer three West Bank villages near the city to Palestinian rule in a goodwill gesture. One of the suburbs - Abu Dis - has been cited as a possible future Palestinian capital, though the Palestinians have rejected the proposal.
Barak has told Arafat that the transfer of the villages would take place only after the violence abates.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo JRL103-104,107-108;AP Graphic WEST BANK VIOLENCE
 Load-Date: May 17, 2000

 

End of Document
