

U.S. foresaw possible coup, but missed the timing
The Associated Press
October 13, 1999, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 847 words
Byline: By ROBERT BURNS, AP Military Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Clinton administration had sensed the potential for an overthrow of Pakistan's civilian rulers but did not see it coming this week, officials said Wednesday.
President Clinton, meanwhile, urged "a prompt return to civilian rule" in Pakistan and sent the U.S. ambassador back to Islamabad "to underscore my view directly to the military authorities and to hear their intentions."
"I will also be consulting closely with all concerned nations about maintaining peace and stability in South Asia," Clinton said.
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright said the coup created a "new level of uncertainty" in the tense region.
"What we hope very much is there is a return to a constitutional system in Pakistan and that we are able to continue the work that we have been doing to deflect the conflict, to get India and Pakistan to talk again about solving the Kashmir problem peacefully," Albright said at the University of Maine.
India and Pakistan have fought three wars, two of them over the Kashmir region, in the past 50 years. Both tested nuclear weapons for the first time in 1998.
A senior government official, discussing the Pakistan matter on condition of anonymity, said U.S. intelligence had warned for several months of the possibility of a military takeover. "It was not a surprise at all that it happened," although the timing of Tuesday's takeover was not known, the official said.
Seeing a potential for a military attempt to subvert the democratic process, the administration three weeks ago quietly called on Pakistani military leaders to remain in their barracks, officials said.
Just hours after the coup, Pentagon spokesman Kenneth Bacon told reporters that although there had been many media reports that there might be a coup, "I know we had no premonition that it was going to happen" when it did.
Another administration official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said Wednesday there was little immediate concern about a Pakistani military move on Kashmir, the divided Himalayan territory. Nor does India appear to be overly alarmed by the coup, despite putting its armed forces on heightened alert, the official said.
While the United States wants to see a return to civilian government and elections, it is not pushing for Sharif's return, said yet another administration official speaking on condition of anonymity.
The official said the U.S. view of Sharif was that he was unpopular among his own people and a target of corruption charges. Sharif's management of Pakistan's economy, his crackdowns on the press and his intimidation of opposition leaders also were concerns to U.S. officials.
At the Pentagon, a senior defense official said Defense Secretary William Cohen, on a previously scheduled trip to the Middle East next week, will ask the leaders of Saudi Arabia and other Muslim countries in the region "what conversations they may have had with the Pakistanis" that could shed light on the situation.
Clinton discussed the situation Wednesday with British Prime Minister Tony Blair in an hourlong telephone call. The two leaders expressed hope for the restoration of civilian government, National Security Council spokesman David Leavy said.
On Capitol Hill, Sen. Sam Brownback, R-Kan., announced that the Senate Foreign Relations subcommittee on Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs will hold a hearing on Pakistan on Thursday.
Albright said U.S. officials have been in contact with military leaders in Pakistan in hopes of persuading them to return the country swiftly to a democratic government. "A military takeover of this kind … does make it difficult to continue business as usual," she said.
Gen. Pervaiz Musharraf, the head of the armed forces, deposed Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif on Tuesday.
The Pakistani military had been outraged by Sharif's handling of the Kashmir conflict. A rift between Sharif and the military hierarchy widened after the prime minister's July 4 visit to Washington and his promise to Clinton to withdraw Islamic insurgents from Indian-held Kashmir.
Albright said U.S. Ambassador William Milam, who was in the United States at the time of the coup, would return to Islamabad, the Pakistani capital, to reinforce the message that the United States expects democracy to be restored. She said the administration was considering what other steps it might take.
"A serious outbreak of hostilities there could create great instability," she said.
Clinton has been searching for two years for an appropriate time to visit India and Pakistan but unexpected political developments have prevented him from going. A 1998 trip to the region was scrapped because of the nuclear tests.
Analysts said the administration could not afford an obvious tilt toward India in the wake of the coup because Washington must maintain the credibility of both sides as it endeavors to keep nuclear tensions in check on the subcontinent.
Amnesty International, an international human rights group, said it feared for Sharif's safety and urged Milam to seek assurances from coup leaders that Sharif, his family and other government officials will not be harmed.
 Load-Date: October 13, 1999

 

End of Document
