

Understanding the genesis and the consequences of Iraq's crisis
The Associated Press
November 11, 1998, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 701 words
Byline: By VIJAY JOSHI, Associated Press Writer
Body




The threat of U.S. military strikes on Iraq looms large as President Saddam Hussein dares the world's most powerful military in another clash of wills. Here are some of the issues involved:
 
 Q: What led to the current crisis?
A: On Oct. 31, Iraq halted all work by the United Nations Special Commission, or UNSCOM, which is responsible for dismantling Iraq's chemical and biological weapons and long-range missiles. The U.N. Security Council declared this a flagrant violation of resolutions passed after the 1991 Persian Gulf War that require Iraq to eliminate its weapons of mass destruction.
Q: What does the United States hope to achieve by military strikes?
A: To significantly reduce Saddam's military strength and to prevent development of chemical, biological and nuclear capabilities.
Q: Is the United States still pursuing a diplomatic option?
A: The message coming out of Washington is that diplomacy has its limits and that Iraq must not be allowed to defy world opinion this time. State Department spokesman James Rubin said: "What is not needed, and there is no plan for it, is negotiations with Saddam Hussein."
Q: Does the United States have the support of Arab and Persian Gulf allies?
A: It doesn't appear so. Although U.S. officials say they have the backing of the region's governments, Gulf officials have clearly indicated that they oppose a military strike.
Q: What is the extent of U.S. military might in the Gulf?
A: There are 23,500 U.S. troops in the Gulf region at present besides 173 aircraft and 23 ships, including an aircraft carrier. Eight ships carry long-range Tomahawk cruise missiles. Another aircraft carrier, USS Enterprise, and a Marine task force are on its way.
Q: In seven years of searches, what have the weapons inspectors achieved?
A: They have accounted for the vast majority of Iraq's nonconventional warheads, which can carry chemical and biological weapons. The dismantling of the nuclear program was also on the verge of completion.
Q: What remains to be done?
A: UNSCOM says Iraq has not provided an account of destruction of conventional warheads or of missile propellant. It awaits an expert accounting of 155 mm mustard-filled shells to back up Iraqi claims that the shells were lost. UNSCOM also wants documentation that Iraq disposed of R-400 aerial bombs equipped for chemical and biological agents and equipment to manufacture chemical weapons.
UNSCOM also hasn't verified destruction of Iraq's biological warfare program.
Q: What does Iraq say about this?
A: It maintains it has fulfilled the requirements of U.N. resolutions and demands the United Nations lift sanctions imposed after its 1990 invasion of Kuwait. It says its biological program was a short-lived failure.
Q: What do the sanctions prohibit?
A: The free sale of oil, Iraq's main source of revenue. Also, no country is allowed to trade with Iraq or have other business links. Flights to Iraq are banned. Iraq can also purchase food and medicines under U.N. supervision. After complaints that the sanctions were mainly hurting regular people, the United Nations has allowed limited sales of oil since December 1996 to enable Iraq to buy humanitarian goods, under what is called the oil-for-food program.
Q: What have the effects of the sanctions been?
A: Iraq's oil-based economy has been devastated. The U.S. administration estimates the sanctions cost Iraq $ 120 billion so far. Although food is available in the markets, most people are too poor to buy much. The oil-for-food program gives people monthly rations. But medicines remain scarce because of frequent delays in obtaining mandatory approvals from the United Nations.
Q: Amid all these hardships, how does Saddam manage to command support?
A: Saddam has extracted support during his 30-year-rule with a combination of terror, rewards and nationalistic sentiments. The omnipresent security and intelligence agencies have created such an aura of fear that virtually no public opposition to his regime remains. Saddam also wins loyalty by providing jobs and other benefits to the estimated 1 million members and supporters of the ruling Baath Party. Genuine anger against U.N. sanctions has translated into support for Saddam's anti-U.S. propaganda.
 Load-Date: November 11, 1998

 

End of Document
