

Volunteers to celebrate the New Year at archaeological dig
The Associated Press
November 16, 1998, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Travel
Length: 615 words
Dateline: EIN GEDI, Israel
Body




Amateur archaeologists are invited to bring in the New Year at a major archaeological dig in the sunny desert oasis of Ein Gedi on the shore of the Dead Sea.
The dig will take place from Dec. 27 to Jan. 29, 1999 under the leadership of Dr. Yizhar Hirschfeld and jointly sponsored by the Hebrew University of Jerusalem and the University of Hartford in Connecticut.
Ein Gedi, 50 miles southeast of Jerusalem and 12 miles north of Masada, is set in a lush and exotic oasis in the Negev Desert with high rocky cliffs, a pounding waterfall, tropical flora in and around a nature reserve, and a kibbutz-like garden village. It was here that young David hid from the wrath of King Saul some 3,000 years ago.
When excavations began at Ein Gedi about 26 years ago, a series of sixth-century synagogues was discovered, exposing one zodiac mosaic floor. Volunteers recently uncovered an entire ssection of this isolated ancient community - a street, the entjrance to the village, multistoried homes. shops, a ritual bath and many artifacts.
Plan to work if you join the dig. The volunteers dig, pick, sift, wash and sort from early morning to early afternoon five days a week.
Minimum stay is one week. A room and full board costs $ 180-$ 300 a week, depending on the type of accommodations.
The deadline for registration is Dec. 15. For more information call the Israel Ministry of Tourism InfoCenter at 1-88-77-ISRAEL, or e-mail info goisrael.com.
 
 ---
 
 National Parks are becoming year-round travel destinations
PHILADELPHIA (AP) - The number of people viewing the Liberty Bell increased significantly this year and the National Park Service credits aging baby boomers.
Even though there was a slump in summer attendance, the park service counted 30,000 more visitors the first 10 months of the year as compared with last year.
The park service attributes the growth to a national trend: The children of the baby boom generation are growing up, freeing their parents to travel during months when school is in session.
"It's really becoming more of a year-round destination," said Phil Sheridan, a spokesman for the Independence National Historic Park.
Edie Shean-Hammond, a spokeswoman for the northeast region of the National Park Service, said the national parks are seeing more visitors showing up during what used to be the slow season, from April to early June and from September to early November.
In the 1980s, these months were so quiet at the Cape Cod National Seashore in Massachusetts that the park service didn't even bother to keep the visitors' center open.
That changed in the early 1990s, Ms. Shean-Hammond said.
"Try getting a weekend at a desirable spot on the Cape in September," she said. "You can't; it's booked."
 
 ---
 
 Iditarod committee auctioning opportunities to ride
WASILLA, Alaska (AP) - Adventurers who would like to ride a sled in the Iditarod Trail Sled Race, yelling "mush" behind 16 Alaska huskies, have a chance if they have the money.
The Iditarod Trail Committee is auctioning off opportunities to ride along for the first 11 miles of the race and meet Iditarod champions Martin Buser, Jeff King, Doug Swingley and Rick Swenson.
The Idita-Rider telephone auction began Nov. 2 and will continue to Jan. 29, 1999. Information about the auction is available by calling 1-800-IDITAROD. To make a bid or check on the status of the bids, call 1-800-566-SLED.
Begun in 1973, the Iditarod begins in Anchorage, Alaska, and ends 1,049 miles northwest in Nome. The Iditarod Trail, a historic mail route originally blazed in 1910, is one of the most rugged race courses in the world, crossing two mountain ranges, running through rural villages and following the ice-packed Norton Sound.
 
 ---
 Load-Date: November 16, 1998

 

End of Document
