

WASHINGTON TODAY: For Holbrooke, now the hard part
The Associated Press
August 25, 1999, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 803 words
Byline: TOM RAUM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Richard Holbrooke is beginning his job as U.S. ambassador to the United Nations by doing what he's always done energetically: a burst of on-the-go diplomacy. But when he settles in, he may find his past globe-trotting negotiations were the easy part.
The celebrated diplomatic troubleshooter must make peace with the U.N. bureaucracy, explain why the United States remains over $ 1 billion in arrears with its U.N. payments, help end a Security Council standoff on Iraq and assert authority on peacekeeping in Kosovo.
Confirmed by the Senate 81-16 on Aug. 5, Holbrooke was sworn in today in a low-key ceremony at the U.S. mission in New York. A more elaborate one at U.N. headquarters, where he will formally present his credentials to Secretary-General Kofi Annan, is planned for after Labor Day.
"It feels good," Holbrooke said before a courtesy call on the deputy U.N. secretary-general, Louise Frechette. Was it worth the wait? "I think so, I hope so," he said.
He told reporters his top priority is U.N. reform.
"In addition, the U.N. is going to be tested in Kosovo in a way it's never been tested before," he said.
After two days of "getting to know the building," as one Holbrooke associate put it, he'll leave Friday for a whirlwind tour of Kosovo, Bosnia, Albania and Macedonia.
The Balkans kickoff holds much symbolism for the diplomat who engineered the 1995 Bosnia peace accord and later served as President Clinton's special envoy to Yugoslavia on Kosovo.
Holbrooke and Secretary or State Madeleine Albright both believe "that Kosovo and peace implementation in Kosovo and throughout the Balkans … is a major test case for the United Nations," said State Department spokesman James Foley.
While Holbrooke may be laying down his mark as a traveling U.N. ambassador, he's still got a lot of fences to mend in New York. The U.S. seat has been vacant for nearly a year.
Resentment toward the United Nations and its policies by conservatives in Congress has grown; and some of it has been returned.
Adding to the tensions: recent criticism of the slow U.N. start in assuming civil administration responsibilities in Kosovo from NATO. And it hasn't just come from congressional Republicans.
Such criticism also was expressed last month by Defense Secretary William Cohen and Gen. Henry Shelton, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, in congressional testimony, although Albright -during a trip to Kosovo late last month - said she was satisfied with the pace.
Holbrooke will also have to deal with criticism from Russia and France on the Security Council over the continued U.S. airstrikes against Iraq. And the issue of U.S. back payments continues to fester.
Congressional conservatives have long held up the back payments, which have swollen to over $ 1.2 billion by U.S. tally and to a whopping $ 1.6 billion by U.N. count.
Even though arch U.N.-critic Sen. Jesse Helms, R-N.C., cut a deal with the administration for repaying the bulk of the arrearage, the funds are far from in the bank.
The Senate passed a State Department spending bill in June providing for $ 926 million in arrears, but the House version passed in July provides no arrearages money at all.
That will put the burden for coming up with the funds on Helms and other Senate negotiators in September when the two sides meet to produce a compromise bill.
And Rep. Christopher Smith, R-N.J., is threatening to attach unrelated anti-abortion language. Such a move, if successful, could draw another Clinton veto like the one that torpedoed funds for the United Nations two years ago.
As part of his tortured confirmation process, Holbrooke agreed to support a Senate demand that the U.S. share of the regular U.N. budget be reduced from the present 25 percent to 20 percent; and that its share of peacekeeping operations be reduced from 31 percent to 25 percent.
"Budgetary discipline will be my watchword," Holbrooke told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, also supporting other cost-cutting changes.
These words could come back to haunt him.
Other U.N. members are likely to scoff at the U.S. budget "cuts," since any reduction in U.S. payments would have to be approved by the U.N. General Assembly.
And unless the United States pays at least $ 350 million of its arrears by Dec. 31, it could be in the embarrassing position of losing its General Assembly seat - although its Security Council slot is secure.
It all adds up to a lot of negotiating for the Clinton administration's most celebrated negotiator.
To satisfy the administration, Congress and the United Nations, Holbrooke "will have to thread the eye of the needle, and it won't be easy," said Chris Madison, a spokesman for Sen. Joseph Biden, D-Del., senior Democrat on the Foreign Relations Committee.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE - Tom Raum covers national and international affairs for The Associated Press.
 Load-Date: August 25, 1999

 

End of Document
