

WASHINGTON TODAY: The Golden Rule - Washington Version
May 6, 1996, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 773 words
Byline: By DONALD M. ROTHBERG, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Hey, it's an election year. So even the Golden Rule comes out a little tarnished by the tension between a Republican Congress and a Democratic president.
"Do unto others whatever they once did unto you." That's a political rephrasing of the biblical advice to treat others as you would want them to treat you.
Elephants have long memories, and Republicans have especially long ones. They remember Watergate and Iran-Contra and perhaps most bitterly, the October Surprise. For 40 years, Democrats controlled one or both chambers of Congress and used the power to probe to make life miserable for Republican presidents.
Now it's payback time. When the Republicans took control of Congress in January 1995, they moved quickly to give the Clinton administration the same kind of scrutiny Democrats gave the GOP.
They've looked at the Whitewater land dealings of President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, and the firing of White House travel office employees. Every week seems to bring new demands for records of the travels of Cabinet secretaries or the performance of agencies large and small.
A House subcommittee announced an investigation Friday into the U.S. trade embargo enforcement agency, and the panel's chairman said the administration was refusing to turn over relevant documents.
Rep. Spencer Bachus, R-Ala., said that "at worst, it can be construed as an effort on the part of the Treasury Department to obstruct the constitutional right of Congress to oversee the operations of an executive branch agency."
"We have provided everything that we have been able to provide to date and are work to accommodate the rest of their request," Treasury Department spokesman Chris Peacock replied.
Later this week, House Republicans will use their majority to create a select subcommittee to investigate the circumstances under which the administration winked and allowed Iran to supply arms to the Bosnian Muslims.
Democrats will cry foul. With all the indignation that can muster, they will accuse the GOP of playing politics, of trying to give Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole ammunition for his presidential campaign.
"This is an outrage. It is frankly shocking," said Rep. Sam Gejdenson, D-Conn., denouncing the proposal during a hearing by the House Oversight Committee, which approved $ 995,000 for the six-month probe.
Democrats might even want to describe the investigation as "an excursion into political paranoia."
Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., used those words four years ago in an emotional speech opposing a Democratic proposal for an election-year investigation of allegations that in 1980, GOP vice presidential nominee George Bush made a secret trip to Paris to meet with Iranians.
It was alleged that Bush asked the Iranians to delay release of U.S. Embassy hostages until after the election in which Ronald Reagan sought, successfully, to unseat President Carter.
The allegation was dubbed the October Surprise, so called because the Republicans were said to fear that Carter would win the hostages' freedom late in the campaign and thus boost his re-election prospects.
"I perceive this as a payback for October Surprise," Rep. Steny Hoyer, D-Md., said during the Oversight Committee hearing.
"An improper characterization," countered Rep. Benjamin Gilman, R-N.Y., chairman of the House International Relations Committee. He pointed out that Democrats spent $ 4.5 million and seven months trying to link Bush to the Iranians.
Midway through that investigation, a special House panel declared that "all credible evidence leads to the conclusion that President Bush was in the United States" on the dates the allegations said he was in Paris.
But the panel was unwilling to end its investigation there. "The conclusion that Mr. Bush was not in Paris in October 1980 does not resolve all of the many other allegations," it said.
Already designated chairman of the select committee on the involvement of Iran in Bosnia, Hyde displayed none of the skepticism he had about the October Surprise probe.
"Was the Congress deceived, not told, misled? Those are questions that are unanswered," he said. "We ought to know what other options were available. Was Iran the only option?"
The Illinois Republican concluded his appeal by saying that "I think it's important. It's going to be fair."
It's all in the eye of the beholder.
The Bosnia investigation will be "a circus," said Gejdenson, who was one of Bush's principal tormentors when the Democrats were in the majority. "And this circus is an outrageous expense for purely political purposes."
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE: Donald M. Rothberg has covered Congress, politics and foreign affairs for The Associated Press.
 Load-Date: May 6, 1996

 

End of Document
