

WASHINGTON TODAY: Is It Enough to Just Crawl Into the Bunker?
July 15, 1996, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 688 words
Byline: By DONALD M. ROTHBERG, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Terrorism is redefining the context in which U.S. forces are deployed in the world's trouble spots. Whether it is Somalia, Bosnia or Saudi Arabia, the primary mission is becoming zero casualties and a clear exit strategy.
The phrase brought to the forefront by the tragedy in Saudi Arabia is force protection. Congress is demanding to know whether enough was done to guard against the terrorist attack that killed 19 U.S. airmen at a housing complex June 25.
Why wasn't the defensive perimeter farther from Khobar Towers? Was enough attention paid to suspicious incidents in the weeks before the bombing? Why didn't the United States press the Saudi government to allow the FBI to question four men convicted of a terrorist bombing in Riyadh seven months ago?
Those questions dominated a Senate hearing last week at which Defense Secretary William Perry and Gen. John Shalikashvili, the nation's top uniformed military officer, were grilled about the bombing.
The questions demand answers. Congress and the public at large have a right to know if neglect played a part in allowing the terrorists to set off a truck bomb that close to the housing area.
But whatever answers come forth, the reality is that there is no way of assuring that U.S. officials and troops are totally safe from terrorist attacks.
"It's quite counterproductive to have American forces when they go overseas to just immediately crawl into their bunkers and hang on," said Eliot Cohen, a professor of strategic studies at Johns Hopkins University who directed a Pentagon study of the Persian Gulf air war.
"If we're going to be a global power we're going to periodically get hit," said Cohen.
"You cannot ever throw an impenetrable curtain around the incredible multiplicity of American facilities and officials either in this country or serving abroad," said former CIA Director Robert Gates.
"The fact is, U.S. counterterrorism operations are far more effective, far more aggressive and far better than most Americans know," he said.
In light of the impossibility of creating that impenetrable curtain, Sen. Sam Nunn, D-Ga., the Senate's most respected authority on defense questions, saw danger in allowing self protection to become the primary mission of U.S. forces.
"I hope we don't come out of this hearing with a mentality that the only thing that a commander does in the field protecting our national interest is to protect the force," Nunn said.
"Because if that is the whole mission, then we will have a bunker mentality, and we will not be able to protect America's national interests, and the largest superpower in the world will find itself immobilized," he continued.
"I hope we don't come to a conclusion that zero casualties is possible in the military, or really for that matter in any kind of risky endeavor."
According to Pentagon figures, 1,054 military personnel died during the fiscal year that ended Sept. 30, 1995. Six of those were in terrorist attacks. More than half the total were the result of accidents. The Pentagon could not supply a breakdown of how many of the accidental deaths occurred during military activities such as training exercises or plane crashes.
The threat of casualties and the possibility of being bogged down for an indefinite time were major issues during the debate over whether the United States should contribute 20,000 troops to the NATO peacekeeping force in Bosnia.
So far, that mission has been remarkably free of combat casualties.
The pullout of U.S. forces from Bosnia will begin soon and should be nearly complete by early November. Under the plan set forth when the troops were committed, they would stay for not more than one year, a deadline that expires at the beginning of December.
But what if Bosnia has not been transformed into a multi-ethnic democracy by then? What if the prospects are that fighting will resume when the NATO force withdraws?
Will the Americans stay to complete the mission of giving the Bosnians the opportunity to create a stable democracy? Or will the primary mission prove to be getting out?
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE: Donald M. Rothberg covers national security issues for The Associated Press.
 Load-Date: July 15, 1996

 

End of Document
