

WASHINGTON TODAY: Lake the Latest to Enter CIA's Revolving Door
December 9, 1996, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 652 words
Byline: By DONALD M. ROTHBERG, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Five directors in less than 10 years is a troubling track record for a spy agency with a jaded past and a problematic future. Anthony Lake is the latest choice to try his hand at bringing some order to the government's sprawling intelligence bureaucracy.
John Deutch will leave office after serving as head of the CIA for 20 months. Of his immediate predecessors, James Woolsey held the job a month short of two years and Robert Gates had it for 15 months.
By any standard, that is not enough time to bring about the change a lot of people think is necessary if the CIA is to improve the quality of its product and overcome its legacy of scandal.
"It would be far more desirable if somebody was there for a period of time - certainly a two-, three-, four-year period," said former Republican Sen. Warren Rudman. He was co-chairman of a presidential commission that examined the intelligence community and issued a report earlier this year recommending several structural changes.
"All this turnover is not good for the agency," said Rudman. "But I don't know how you solve that without creating problems that are probably worse than the problem you're trying to eliminate."
The former New Hampshire senator said he and other commission members felt strongly that CIA directors should serve at the pleasure of the president rather than have fixed terms.
Deutch incurred President Clinton's displeasure when he told a Senate committee during the fall political campaign that the U.S. military strike against Iraq earlier this year had left Saddam Hussein stronger than ever.
So much for Deutch's chances of becoming secretary of defense, the job he wanted, or even of remaining as head of the CIA.
Roy Godson, coordinator of the private Consortium for the Study of Intelligence, said length of time in the office is less important than whether the director of central intelligence "knows anything when he gets in or does he have to start with a learning curve."
Godson said neither Woolsey or Deutch "knew the business much" when they took office.
As Clinton's national security adviser, Lake is a major user of intelligence material and "knows the priorities" the president has when turning to the intelligence community, said Godson.
"But he doesn't know the clandestine aspects of the business and the details of the technical systems."
Certainly the human side of intelligence is what has caused the CIA problems in recent years and historically.
Just as the furor over discovery that CIA counterintelligence officer Aldrich Ames was selling secrets to the Russians was dying out, another agency official was charged with working for Moscow.
Harold J. Nicholson, a 16-year CIA veteran, pleaded innocent two weeks ago to charges that over the past two years he sold Russia highly sensitive national security secrets, including the names and assignment plans for many new CIA officers.
Woolsey, who never had Clinton's full confidence, lost his credibility with Congress as well when he was seen as issuing relatively mild punishments to officials seen as lax in the Ames case.
The CIA is not the only intelligence organization coming in for another round of change at the top. By coincidence rather than design, the Senate and House committees that monitor the agency also are getting new leadership.
Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., was forced to step down as chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee because of the rule against serving longer than six years on the panel. Rep. Larry Combest, R-Texas, gave up chairmanship of the House Intelligence Committee in order to take the leadership of a House Agriculture subcommittee of far more importance to his rural district.
The betting is that Sen. Richard Shelby, R-Ala., will succeed Specter, and Rep. Porter Goss, R-Fla., will become chairman of the House committee. Goss spent 10 years in the CIA.
 
 EDITOR'S NOTE: Donald M. Rothberg covers intelligence for The Associated Press.
 Load-Date: December 9, 1996

 

End of Document
