

Weaker UN inspections may be the price for peaceful solution
The Associated Press
February 16, 1998, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 577 words
Byline: By ROBERT H. REID, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




The price of a diplomatic way out of the Iraq crisis could be the steady erosion of the integrity and independence of the U.N. commission that performs weapons inspections.
Whatever success diplomats have in cobbling together something all sides can declare a "success" will depend on how far President Clinton is willing to go in accepting a weakened U.N. Special Commission, known as UNSCOM.
Iraqi President Saddam Hussein could still surprise the world and cave in to U.S. demands that he grant the commission full and unrestricted access to all sites it wishes to inspect.
But such an outcome appears less likely as time goes on. In fact, the pendulum is swinging the other way - toward a formula that would limit the discretion and independence of the commission and, by extension, the entire inspection program.
Working under U.N. Security Council resolutions passed at the end of the 1991 Gulf War, the inspectors are responsible for overseeing the elimination of Iraq's long-range missiles and weapons of mass destruction. Iraqi compliance is needed for U.N. economic sanctions to be lifted.
The United Nations and the United States have insisted that the inspectors be permitted to search any place they want. Iraq has refused, citing national sovereignty.
Publicly, U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan and others claim the goal of diplomacy is to get Iraq to comply with demands to grant UNSCOM unlimited access to all sites as stated in Security Council resolution 687 enacted in 1991.
In fact, diplomacy is now focusing on getting Washington to back down on the role and integrity of UNSCOM.
A proposal circulated by the Russians calls for Annan to name a new group of inspectors, headed by an "eminent political figure," to survey eight presidential sites that Iraq has placed off-limits to the commission.
Richard Butler, the head of the commission, would be named deputy chief of the new group, which would include diplomats and "experts" named by the 21 countries belonging to the current commission. The plan calls for the new group to complete its work in 60 days.
French and Arab proposals are, in essence, refinements of the Russian formula.
On the surface, the Russian plan has merit. It does not rule out including members of the commission on the new team, and it would give the United Nations the opportunity to enter sites.
For nearly seven years, however, the United Nations has maintained that Iraq has no business dictating terms of the inspections.
Iraq has steadily pursued a diplomatic campaign aimed at whittling away the authority of the commission, which Washington claims has gained experience and expertise that cannot be replicated.
But Washington's insistence on maintaining the integrity of UNSCOM is not shared by all 15 Security Council members.
"What we face now is to find a way to conduct inspections of a limited number of sites in Iraq so the work of UNSCOM, the inspection work, can be fully implemented," China's deputy U.N. ambassador, Cui Tian Kai said.
U.S. and British diplomats fear that Iraq and its sympathizers are more concerned with ending the inspections and lifting sanctions than in finding all of Iraq's weapons.
Iraq has pursued its policy by systematically setting limits on the inspectors, then maneuvering diplomatically to have a divided Security Council accept the limitations. Once those limits are in place, the Iraqis up the ante.
---
EDITOR'S NOTE: Robert H. Reid has been the AP's U.N. correspondent since 1995.
 
 Load-Date: February 16, 1998

 

End of Document
