

White House taking case for U.S. military against Iraq to the public
The Associated Press
February 16, 1998, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 1137 words
Byline: By RON FOURNIER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Creeping closer to conflict with Iraq, White House advisers met Monday to plan a series of public events designed to brace the American public for risky military strikes against Saddam Hussein.
At the same time, the Pentagon made plans to send up to 6,000 additional ground troops to Kuwait, bringing the number to about 10,000.
President Clinton, returning from a Presidents Day respite at Camp David, begins a week of chest pounding by addressing American military leaders and personnel Tuesday at the Pentagon. The next day, the president's foreign policy team will conduct a town hall meeting in Columbus, Ohio.
"We will be increasing the pace of the dialogue both with the American people and the international community so they will understand our determination to see that Iraq complies with United Nations Security Council resolutions," spokesman P.J. Crowley said.
Clinton was not expected to break new ground in Tuesday's address, but aides said it offered him the best opportunity yet to fully explain the objectives and risks of military action. Advisers have privately complained that the media has paid little attention to the potential conflict, focusing instead on allegations that Clinton had an affair with a White House intern and tried to cover it up.
Aides said the president's speech would highlight:
-The global danger posed by Saddam's suspected production of biological, chemical and nuclear weapons.
-Clinton's resolve to "diminish and reduce" Saddam's arsenal through air strikes, if necessary. He has previously vowed to eliminate the weapons, a goal advisers say cannot be achieved by air.
-His foremost desire to solve the matter diplomatically and put U.N weapons inspectors back on the job of ferreting out Saddam's weapons.
-The risks to U.S. military personnel and Iraqi civilians in the event of air strikes. Military leaders have said in recent days that U.S. casualties should be expected. Clinton is expected to echo the words of National Security Adviser Sandy Berger: "There is no cost-free, risk-free option."
In hopes of preparing Americans for conflict, aides have discussed a number of options, including a prime-time address. Such a high-profile presidential statement is not expected this week, if at all, aides said.
Berger, who will join Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and Defense Secretary William Cohen in Ohio, also plans to address Middle East and European citizens by satellite. Clinton has been unable to match the international coalition that went to war against Saddam in 1991.
Albright, known for her ability to discuss foreign policy in laymen's terms, is expected to visit several other U.S. cities while Washington and Baghdad edge toward military blows.
The administration has its work cut out. In a CNN-USA Today-Gallup poll released Monday, 54 percent of Americans surveyed said they favor more diplomatic action, up from 46 percent Feb. 1. Sixty-four percent said the goal should be to remove Saddam from power, while 31 percent said air strikes should be used to "substantially reduce" Iraq's capacity to development mass weapons.
The poll, which had a margin of error of plus or minus 3 to 5 percentage points, depending on the question, surveyed 1,014 adults Friday through Sunday.
Meanwhile, the U.S. military continued to prepare for an attack. About 3,000 infantry soldiers based at Fort Stewart, Ga., got their orders Monday to deploy to Kuwait to help defend against a possible Iraqi counterattack. They join more than 25,000 U.S. troops in the Persian Gulf, 320 aircraft and two U.S. carriers.
In addition, Cohen said he signed orders that will send 5,000 to 6,000 more troops from armor and helicopter units to the Kuwait region, bringing U.S. ground forces there to about 10,000. He said the deployment was "for purely defensive purposes" to deter Iraq from moving against Kuwait or Saudi Arabia.
The Air Force also is testing 2,000-pound bombs designed to penetrate underground bunkers - like those in Iraq - and destroy chemical bomb-making equipment and nerve gas agents. On Jan. 29, the Air Force conducted its most realistic test yet of the warhead at White Sands Missile Range, N.M., "Defense Week" reported in its latest issue. The bomb penetrated the bunker 40 feet below ground, but military officials refused to say whether the simulated chemical agents were dispersed by the bombing, according to the report.
At the White House, presidential advisers monitored developments outside Washington for any sign of a peaceful resolution Monday.
But at the United Nations, Secretary-General Kofi Annan was unable to win agreement among the five permanent Security Council members to endorse a personal mission to Baghdad to negotiate an end to the Iraq crisis. Annan said after an hour-long meeting that the permanent members told him they "need a little more time to arrive at a conclusion."
Diplomatic sources said Annan was looking for a sign from the United States that it was ready for him to negotiate an agreement with the Iraqis. But after the meeting, U.S. Ambassador Bill Richardson held firm to the American position that Iraq must grant the U.N. weapons inspection team full and unfettered access to all sites.
Defense Secretary Cohen, appearing later on CNN's "Larry King Live," said "Kofi Annan, of course, is free to go to Baghdad, but I would hope and … expect that he would go there for the sole purpose of indicating to Saddam Hussein that he must comply with the existing U.N. resolutions fully - without qualificiation, without restriction, without seeking to undermine their effectiveness."
Iraqi Vice President Taha Yassin Ramadan was quoted in a state-run newspaper as saying Iraq is "serious and earnest" in its pursuit of peace.
French President Jacques Chirac said a solution was technically close at hand. "We must now make a decisive effort," he said.
Clinton was expected to call lawmakers early this week to build support for a resolution in support of military action. Congress left for recess last week without agreeing on language that satisfied both lawmakers who think the administration is going too far and those who feel Clinton is not doing enough.
Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., urged Clinton on Monday to delay military action until Congress can consider a resolution authorizing the use of force. "Bomber and missile strikes constitute acts of war," he said in a letter. "Only Congress has the constitutional prerogative to authorize war."
Specter said his constituents are "uneasy about air and missile strikes."
Sen. Bob Smith, R-N.H., who is trying to build support for a 2000 presidential campaign, said in Iowa on Monday that the president has lost "moral authority" to order military action. Citing the Monica Lewinsky scandal, Smith said: "If he can't tell me the truth about this, is he telling the truth about Iraq?"
 
 Load-Date: February 17, 1998

 

End of Document
