

Who sneaked into the Millennium Summit class photo? picture; Pickup 18h graf pvs, 'Then, there...'
The Associated Press
September 8, 2000, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 776 words
Byline: By EDITH M. LEDERER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body




The big mystery around the United Nations was who sneaked into the Millennium Summit class photo that will commemorate the biggest ever gathering of world leaders.
The suggestion of possible interlopers first surfaced at a press conference Thursday when summit spokeswoman Therese Gastaut was asked if anyone had sneaked into the picture.
"Maybe, indeed, two or three did," she replied.
But being that this is the United Nations, where diplomacy is the password, the identities of the culprits were kept secret.
Gastaut did, however, offer a few clues.
"The rules of the game were one person per country - and that person had to be the head of a delegation," she said.
There were three exceptions: Finland and Nambia, which are co-chairing the summit, were each allowed an extra person to represent their country, and San Marino, which constitutionally has two heads of state, was allowed to have both in the picture, Gastaut said.
The photo was snapped Wednesday after Secretary-General Kofi Annan hosted a lavish luncheon for about 150 leaders attending the largest gathering of heads of state and government in history. And the United Nations released a caption afterward identifying everyone in it.
That was the most important clue - because right in the front row were two countries with two representatives that weren't on the "approved" list: Jordan and Norway.
Jordan's King Abdullah II and Prime Minister Ali Abul Ragheb and Norway's King Harald V and Prime Minister Jens Stoltenberg were in the photo.
Gastaut admitted the evidence was in the caption.
How could it happen?
"We tried to do it in the best order. We are also very gentle and these things can happen. It's OK," Gastaut said. "We are a very open house, very gentle."
There are no plans to reshoot the photo, she said.
There wasn't any immediate comment from Jordan's U.N. Mission. But Jan Erik Larsen, spokesman for Norway's prime minister, had an explanation.
"The prime minister escorted the king to the photo session and when they arrived there, the U.N. protocol insisted on including the prime minister in the photo session as well, and he accepted," Larsen said.
"It was a nice picture," he added.
It turns out there was a third interloper as well.
After the photo was taken, the U.N. Department of Public Information checked with every delegation on the identity of their representative. In the back corner spot where Sri Lanka's Foreign Minister Lakshman Kadirgamar was supposed to stand, they discovered a real mystery man.
The department enlarged his photo, circulated it to U.N. security officials and the U.S. Secret Service, and U.N. staff, without success, said Salim Lone, director of the department's news and media division.
But an eight-hour search ended in success when a member of the U.N. protocol office recognized him as Count Carlo Marullo di Condojanni, grand chancellor of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta, a Roman Catholic military and religious order founded during the Crusades to care for the sick and protect pilgrims.
"He is an official participant in the summit," Lone said, "but he was not supposed to be in that picture which is only for heads of state, government, or their representatives."
Prime Minister Edward Fenech Adami of the Republic of Malta - which has no relationship with the order - was in the photo.
Then, there was the mystery of President Clinton's absence from any of the closed-door, roundtable discussions for world leaders, a new U.N. innovation designed to promote more informal exchanges.
The leaders of Russia, China, Britain and France, which share permanent seats with the United States on the Security Council, all signed up for the second of four roundtables held Thursday morning.
Its chairman, Polish Prime Minister Aleksander Kwasniewski, was asked at a news conference afterward why Clinton wasn't taking part.
"I understand the United States decided not to participate in the roundtables because it would be difficult to choose one," he said.
Clinton, who considers himself a policy wonk, apparently missed some good fodder.
"It was one of the most interesting debates, discussions, that I remember in my long political life," Kwasniewski said.
Then, there was the mystery of the arriving and departing guests at the gala reception Clinton hosted Thursday night in the Temple of Dendur at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
There were 170 motorcades carrying VIPs - each spaced to arrive at one-minute intervals. This meant when the last guests were arriving, nearly three hours after the party began, many early arrivals had already gone.
"It was all impeccably timed," said Mary Ellen Glynn, spokeswoman for U.S. Ambassador Richard Holbrooke.
 Graphic



 
AP Photo XUN180 of Sept. 6
 Load-Date: September 9, 2000

 

End of Document
