

World leaders express sorrow at the death of Assad
The Associated Press
June 11, 2000, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 2000 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 794 words
Byline: By AUDREY WOODS, Associated Press Writer
Body




Paying tribute to late Syrian President Hafez Assad, Arab and world leaders hailed him as a champion of Arab nationalism who steered his country away from war and toward an unrealized peace with Israel.
Israel, which had faced Assad's uncompromising negotiators across the table for so many painful years, said it sympathizes with the Syrian people in the wake of the 69-year-old president's death Saturday. Assad had suffered from heart problems.
"The Israeli government understands the sorrow of the Syrian people over the passing of President Hafez Assad," said a statement from the office of Prime Minister Ehud Barak. "Israel worked in the past to achieve peace and will continue to do so in the future."
Despite his disagreements with Assad, President Clinton said the Arab leader was "open and straightforward" and desired a lasting peace in the Middle East.
"We had our differences, but I always respected him," Clinton said.
White House spokesman Joe Lockhart announced that Secretary of State Madeleine Albright would represent the United States at Assad's funeral, scheduled for Tuesday. Lockhart confirmed that neither Clinton nor Vice President Al Gore would attend the service.
"I think the president believes that Secretary Albright is the appropriate person to attend," he said. He declined to say whether Clinton had been advised not to make the trip.
At the U.N. General Assembly, representatives of more than three dozen nations began their speeches at the closing of a weeklong special session Saturday with condolences to the Syrian government and people. Responding to the tributes, Syria's U.N. Ambassador Mikhail Wehbe expressed "heartfelt thanks" and asked the delegates to pray that Assad "be blessed with God's mercy."
Tributes poured in from elsewhere around the world. In Britain, Prime Minister Tony Blair called Assad "a figure of stability in the Middle East."
Japanese Prime Minister Yoshiro Mori said Assad's death was "more regrettable" because there was strong expectation of a Syria-Israel peace. In Russia, President Vladimir Putin called Assad "a friend of our country" and "one of the most outstanding figures of our time."
Assad, credited with bringing political stability to his country during three decades in power, dreamed of becoming the unchallenged leader of the Arab world. His attempts to rally other Arab leaders to present a unified front against Israel gained little ground, and Syria began talks with the Jewish state in October 1991. The on-again-off-again negotiations came to a halt in 1996 and then were resumed last year.
But the peace talks broke down again in January over the strategic Golan Heights, which Israel captured from Syria during the 1967 war, and a sliver of land by the Sea of Galilee.
During the 1990-91 Gulf crisis, Syria had put aside its enmity with the United States, Israel's major supporter, to join the U.S.-led coalition against his longtime rival Iraq.
Albright, who had met Wednesday with Syria's foreign minister, expressed her condolences and said that "in all our talks (Assad) remained committed" to peace with Israel.
In a statement, the Chinese Foreign Ministry expressed condolences and mourned the loss of a "respected friend." It praised Assad as an "outstanding leader."
In Lebanon, where Syria has been the unquestioned power since its soldiers moved in during the 1975-90 civil war, Assad's loss was described by Prime Minister Salim Hoss as a "tragedy that struck Lebanon in the heart."
Syria and Iran were the chief backers of the Hezbollah guerrillas who led the effort to oust Israel from southern Lebanon. Israeli forces withdrew last month after 18 years of occupation.
Iranian radio carried condolences from Supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who called Assad "a great leader, and he had undeniable important role in the recent victories in Lebanon."
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat declared three days of mourning in Palestinian areas. He sent a telegram to the Damascus government saying his people "will stand with their brothers, the Syrian people, to overcome this difficult moment."
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan paid warm tribute to Assad in a statement issued by his spokesman.
"He will be remembered as a statesman of great authority and as a person of firm and consistent principle, who led his country over decades through a period of much change and turbulence in the area," the statement said.
French President Jacques Chirac said France supported Assad's vision for stability, security and prosperity and would "spare no effort to help (future) leaders fulfill this strong and generous ambition."
"A statesman who was attached to the grandeur of his country and the destiny of the Arab world, President Assad has marked history for three decades," Chirac said.
 Graphic



 
AP Photos
 Load-Date: June 12, 2000

 

End of Document
