

'Back from the dead' canoe couple sentenced to prison terms for fraud
Associated Press International
July 23, 2008 Wednesday 11:57 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 725 words
Byline: BY JILL LAWLESS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON 
Body




Anne and John Darwin got away with their scam for five years. They were tantalizingly close to a debt-free new life in the tropics until they pushed their luck too far.
The British couple were sent to prison Wednesday, convicted of fraud for faking John Darwin's death in a canoeing accident. The scam was meant to collect on 250,000 pounds (US$500,000) in insurance and pension payments.
A judge sentenced Anne Darwin, 56, to six and a half years in jail after a jury convicted her of fraud and money laundering. John Darwin, 57, was jailed for six years, three months for fraud and deception a lesser sentence because he had pleaded guilty.
Judge Alan Wilkie said that while the sum the couple embezzled was not enormous, he was imposing a severe sentence because of the duration and complexity of the offense, "and in particular the grief inflicted over the years to those who in truth were the real victims, your own sons, whose lives you crushed."
The couple's sons Mark, 32, and Anthony, 29, were in court to see their parents sentenced. They testified during their mother's trial that they believed their father had died in 2002 while canoeing in the North Sea. Mark Darwin said news of his father's disappearance had "crushed my world."
Prosecutors and police said the Darwins were a couple with a modest income and expensive tastes who hatched an audacious con to escape mounting financial difficulties. They took home just over 2,000 pounds (US$4,000) a month from her job as a receptionist and his as a prison officer, but had 6,700 pounds (US$14,400) in monthly outgoings, which included servicing the debt on 13 credit cards.
In March 2002, John Darwin went paddling in the North Sea near his home in northeast England. His wife reported him missing later that day. A huge air and sea search found no trace of him, and the next year he was officially declared dead.
By that time he had grown a beard and obtained a passport as John Jones a name he took from the gravestone of a baby who died in 1950. With his new identity, he began traveling abroad, setting up a new life for the couple.
The couple used the embezzled insurance and pension money to buy an apartment in Panama, as well as land in the Central American country on which they hoped to build an eco-tourism and canoeing center.
Prosecutors said for some of the time he was missing, John Darwin lived in a secret room in an apartment next door to the family home in Seaton Carew, 260 miles (420 kilometers) north of London.
The plot began to unravel in December when John Darwin walked into a London police station and said "I think I'm a missing person." He claimed to have amnesia and said he could remember nothing since 2000.
Soon after, a newspaper published a photograph of the smiling couple together in Panama in 2006, four years after John Darwin's alleged death.
Anne Darwin acknowledged in court that she had helped her husband stage his death, but insisted she had been coerced. She told the jury she felt "frightened" and "trapped" by her husband's scheme.
But prosecutors her defense of marital coercion was undermined when the court was shown affectionate, flirtatious e-mails she had exchanged with her "dead" husband.
Judge Wilkie said that while John Darwin was "the driving force behind this deceit," Anne had "contributed to its success and played your part efficiently."
"In my judgment, you operated as a team, each contributing to the joint venture," the judge said.
Detective Inspector Andy Greenwood, who led the police investigation, said outside court that Anne Darwin was a "compulsive liar."
"To put somebody's sons though that turmoil, together with the friends and the family, is absolutely appalling and I'm just pleased that the truth, as it's been unfolding, has come out," he said.
Police said they would use the Proceeds of Crime Act to seize the couple's assets in Panama, which they estimated at close to 500,000 pounds (US$1 million).
It remains unclear why John Darwin reappeared. E-mails between the couple suggest he was worried he would not be able to get a Panamanian visa under his assumed name, and hoped police would believe the amnesia story, allowing him to become John Darwin once again.
"I don't think we have really got to the bottom of everything here today," Greenwood said outside court. "I'm sure there will be more stories that come to light."
 Load-Date: July 24, 2008

 

End of Document
