

500 years ago, Renaissance cartographer put 'America' on the map
Associated Press International
April 25, 2007 Wednesday 12:10 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 717 words
Byline: By BRADLEY S. KLAPPER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GENEVA 
Body




Centuries before it became a continent or country synonymous with wealth, power, freedom or democracy, "America" was coined by a Renaissance cartographer as the catchall designation for a world that Europeans had yet to name or explore.
The name stuck despite its humble history and unsure start at a backwater French court. It celebrates the 500th anniversary of its baptism in the remote town of St. Die on Wednesday, exactly a half-millennium after its first use on a world map.
The murky origins are causing problems in winning recognition for the source. A resolution citing cartographer Martin Waldseemueller and the conference organized by Rene II, the Duke of Lorraine, for their unique contribution to American history has yet to make headway in the U.S. Congress.
"It is under review by the committee, but it hasn't advanced yet," said Lynne Weil, a spokeswoman for U.S. Rep. Tom Lantos, chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee.
Weil said the bill proposed by U.S. Reps. Alcee Hastings and Carolyn Maloney was introduced just before Congress' Easter break and there has not been enough time to fully study it before Wednesday's commemoration date.
Sometimes called America's birth certificate, the map and accompanying 103-page "Cosmographiae Introductio" caused the hemisphere to be named for explorer Amerigo Vespucci instead of Christopher Columbus.
"AMERICA," in capital letters, appears on a part of the map showing what is now Brazil. The first map to depict a separate Western Hemisphere and a separate Pacific Ocean, it also included an inset of both North and South America, and a portrait of "Amerigi Vespucci," whom Waldseemueller honored for being the first to identify the New World as a new land mass.
Columbus believed to his death in 1506 that his four voyages had all been to Asia. Vespucci, an Italian who came to the New World soon after Columbus, sailed along South America's north and east coast.
"Europe and Asia have received names of women," Waldseemueller wrote in the book first released to the public on April 25, 1507. "I see no reason why we should not call this other part 'Amerige,' that is to say the land of Americus, or America, after the sagacious discoverer."
The full title for the 12-panel map covering 36 square feet was "a drawing of the whole earth following the tradition of Ptolemy and the travels of Amerigo Vespucci and others." It has been housed since 2003 in the Library of Congress, which paid $10 million for it, making the map the most expensive single item it had ever acquired.
"It is remarkable that the entire Western Hemisphere was named for a living person; Vespucci did not die until 1512," wrote John R. Hebert, the library's chief of the geography and map division.
But Hebert said America was not universally accepted after its baptism. Waldseemueller, perhaps in an indication of second thoughts, removed America from later geographical works in the next decade, substituting "terra incognita" (unknown land) for both continents, or "terra nova" (new world) for South America and "Cuba" for North America.
Printers, however, reinserted America after Waldseemueller's death. The name was later used by other cartographers, earning widespread acceptance for both continents by the late 1530s.
"It was appropriate," wrote Daniel Boorstin, the late historian and former librarian of Congress, "that the name America should be affixed on the New World in a manner casual and accidental, since the European encounter with this new world had been so unintentional."
While congressional recognition of America's birth lags, France seems to be abuzz with celebrations linked to U.S. history. Later this year, ceremonies will be held in Metz to celebrate the 250th birthday of the Marquis de Lafayette, celebrated in the United States for fighting alongside George Washington in the Revolutionary War.
Lafayette launched his campaign to help the Americans as an 18-year-old living in the Lorraine city, according to Andy Sundberg, an American resident of Geneva involved in both those and St. Die's commemorations.
The program for America's birth deep in France's Vosges forest includes a historical reenactment, scholarly seminars and even the debut of a new musical work.
The symphony by French composer Pierre Thilloy is appropriately named "America."
 Load-Date: April 26, 2007

 

End of Document
