

A country-by-country look at progress on Venezuela's preferential oil deal for the Caribbean
Associated Press International
July 3, 2006 Monday 4:03 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 638 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Information about the state of Venezuela's Petrocaribe oil supply deal with 14 Caribbean countries:
Antigua and Barbuda: Has not received shipments. Authorities recently announced that the country will store oil for other Eastern Caribbean nations, using a facility owned by the West Indies Oil Company.
Bahamas: Has not received shipments.
Belize: Has received one shipment of 14,000 barrels of diesel. Can receive up to 4,000 barrels a day under the deal. The government formed a joint venture company with Venezuela to help the country improve infrastructure. Officials say the savings from Petrocaribe will go to projects to fight poverty. Fuel prices have risen since the deal was signed as the world market has surged.
Cuba: Cuba buys about 90,000 barrels of oil under an earlier deal that has folded into Petrocaribe. The shipments have been an economic boon to the communist country, while it has sent thousands of Cuban doctors to treat the poor in Venezuela.
Dominica: Has not received shipments. Venezuela sent a storage tank to the island, which has sat in pieces on the docks because the government for a time had not found a proper place to put it. Officials now say they have identified an appropriate site, and the tank will be installed soon. Dominica signed an agreement with Venezuela's state oil company in late June to form a joint company to oversee fuel shipments. The island is to receive fuel including diesel and liquefied petroleum gas. Under the deal, Venezuela already shipped 1,200 barrels of asphalt in June to the island to pave its major roads. Dominica is to receive such shipments regularly.
Dominican Republic: Has received between 40,000 and 45,000 barrels a day since September. Gasoline shortages remain frequent in the country, and prices have continued to rise with the tight world market.
Grenada: Has not received shipments. Venezuela's state oil company signed a supply agreement with Grenada in late June to sell 340,000 barrels a year, including gasoline, fuel oil and diesel. The countries are discussing how the bill can be paid. Venezuela is considering allowing part to be paid in agricultural products like bananas and nutmeg. A joint company will oversee construction of infrastructure so that Grenada can handle oil shipments.
Guyana: Has not received shipments and continues to buy from nearby Trinidad and Tobago. It is to receive up to 10,000 barrels per day from Venezuela.
Haiti: Joined Petrocaribe after the installation of a new government this year. The last country in the region to join the pact. Has received 100,000 barrels from its first shipment under the pact and is to receive up to 7,000 barrels per day.
Jamaica: Has received some 21,000 barrels of crude oil daily since July 2005 and is getting help from Venezuela in upgrading an aging refinery. The Jamaican government says the deal has helped moderate fuel price increases to consumers.
St. Lucia: Has not received shipments.
St. Kitts and Nevis: Has not received shipments.
St. Vincent and the Grenadines: Has received five shipments of liquefied petroleum gas, which is used for cooking. The government says the LPG cylinders from Venezuela are sold cheaper than from the other local suppliers. Their deal also provides for help with the installation of an LPG plant and a fuel storage facility.
Suriname: Has not received shipments because officials are still setting up a Surinamese-Venezuelan company to handle the fuel. The government intends to purchase 5,500 barrels a day to help generate electricity and says it will use the savings to finance development projects.
The plan also is to provide for a special Caribbean-wide US$50 million (euro39 million) fund to support health and education programs in the region, similar to those Chavez has started at home with rising oil profits.
Source: Caribbean governments.
 Load-Date: July 4, 2006

 

End of Document
