

A glance at the main issues influencing Spain's Sunday election
Associated Press International
March 7, 2008 Friday 1:03 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 297 words
Dateline: MADRID Spain
Body




A glance at the main issues dominating the campaign for Spain's national election on Sunday:
ECONOMY After booming for more than a decade, Spain's economy is cooling fast because of the international financial crisis and a slump in its overheated construction sector. The ruling Socialists of Prime Minster Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero say Spain is strong enough to cope with the downturn. The conservative opposition claims Spaniards are worse off than in 2004, and that the government has done nothing to strengthen the economy.
TERRORISM An effort by Spain's Socialists to negotiate with the armed Basque separatist group ETA failed when the militant group broke a cease-fire with a massive bombing at Madrid's Barajas airport on Dec. 30, 2006. Spain's conservatives have hammered the ruling party with claims that they continued to negotiate with ETA even after the blast.
IMMMIGRATION As Spain's economy has boomed, the immigrant population has soared over the past decade from 500,000 to 4.5 million, or 10 percent of the population. There have been no notable outbursts of racial violence, but surveys show immigration is among Spaniards' main concerns. The Socialists argue for more integration, while the conservatives advocate a tighter policy to stem the flow of those coming to Spain from Eastern Europe, South America and North Africa.
TERRITORIAL DISPUTES The Socialists and conservative Popular Party disagree over giving new powers to Spain's 17 semiautonomous regions, particularly in the independence-minded Basque Country and Catalonia. A new charter backed by the Socialist government granting greater self-rule to Catalonia deeply divided the country, while plans for a referendum on the Basque region's future relationship with the rest of Spain is proving polemical.
 Load-Date: March 7, 2008

 

End of Document
