

A look at famous excommunication cases over the centuries
Associated Press International
May 4, 2006 Thursday 5:29 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 546 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: VATICAN CITY 
Body




The Vatican said Thursday that under church law two bishops who were ordained by China's state-approved Catholic church without papal consent and the ones who ordained them were automatically excommunicated.
Here is a look at some of the more notable excommunication cases in Church history.
 Roman Emperor Frederick II was excommunicated twice, in 1227 and 1239, because his growing empire threatened the independence of the papal states.
 In 1521, Martin Luther, the founder of the 16th century Reformation and of Protestantism, was excommunicated by Pope Leo X. In 1517, he had complained about the church practice of selling indulgences in exchange for a reduction in the penalty for sin. He widened his criticism, attacking papal authority.
 Britain's King Henry VIII tried to persuade the Vatican to grant him annulment between 1527-33. The church did not budge, Henry founded the Anglican Church and he was promptly excommunicated by Pope Clement VII.
 In 1949, excommunication was applied to communist voters in Italy under the militantly anti-communist Pope Pius XII, an action aimed at the Italian Communist Party. In recent years, however, the church has dropped all mention of communists' or their supporters' being excommunicated.
 Juan Peron, president of Argentina from 1946-55 and 1973-74, was excommunicated in 1955 after launching an anti-clerical campaign. It was lifted after he repented, according to Vatican sources.
 Clemente Dominguez was ordained a priest in 1976 by a renegade archbishop in Spain, and just days later elevated to bishop himself. He was immediately excommunicated by the Roman Catholic Church. In 1978 Dominguez proclaimed himself pope, saying the Virgin Mary had appeared and told him to do so.
 In 1988, French Archbishop Marcel Lefebvre was expelled for defying the liberal reforms of the 1962-65 Vatican Council. The Vatican excommunicated Lefebvre after he consecrated four bishops without Rome's consent. The four bishops were excommunicated as well.
 In Washington in 1990, the Rev. George A. Stallings Jr. and his breakaway African-American Catholic Congregation, which encouraged the ordination of women and the use of birth control and abortion, were excommunicated for breaking ties with the Vatican.
 In 1997, the Congregation for the Doctrine of Faith excommunicated a Sri Lankan theologian, the Rev. Tissa Balasuriya, whom the Vatican said had challenged the pope's authority and church teaching on baptism, original sin and the virginity of Mary. Balasuriya called his excommunication arbitrary and complained he was given no chance to defend himself.
 In 1999, the Rev. James Callan, a Roman Catholic priest in the United States who performed wedding ceremonies for gays and allowed women a prominent role on the altar, was excommunicated for starting his own church.
 In 2002, the Vatican excommunicated seven women including the wife of a former governor of the U.S. state of Ohio, as well as women from Austria and Germany who had participated in an ordination ceremony aboard a boat traveling Europe's Danube River and called themselves priests. The case was among those handled by Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger, who was the head of the Vatican's Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith before becoming Pope Benedict XVI in 2005.
 Load-Date: May 5, 2006

 

End of Document
