

A look at the 4 suspects in the JFK airport plot
Associated Press International
June 5, 2007 Tuesday 6:50 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 440 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Key figures in the alleged plot to blow up New York's John F. Kennedy International Airport:
 RUSSELL DEFREITAS: Accused of masterminding the alleged plot, Defreitas, 63, is a retired air cargo employee at John F. Kennedy International Airport. A U.S. citizen born in Guyana, he immigrated to the U.S. more than 30 years ago, but he told a federal informant that his feelings of disgust toward his adopted homeland had lingered for years.
Authorities said that Defreitas made four reconnaissance missions to the New York airport with a federal informant, each of which was recorded on audio and video by federal agents. Investigators said Defreitas and suspect Kareem Ibrahim visited a compound belonging to the Jamaat al Muslimeen, a radical Muslim group based in Trinidad.
 ABDUL KADIR: An opposition legislator in Guyana's Parliament until last year, Kadir is a Shiite Muslim who also served as mayor of Linden, a small city south of Guyana's capital of Georgetown. The 55-year-old also worked for years as a civil engineer in Guyana's state-owned bauxite company before leaving to set up his own building contractor business.
Guyanese authorities said that Kadir, who is a cleric, studied Islam in Iran in the 1990s. He was a friend of an Iranian cleric, Muhammad Hassan Abrahemi, who was abducted, shot to death and left in a sand pit east of Georgetown in 2004. Kadir's wife said her husband was traveling to Venezuela to pick up a visa to attend a religious conference in Iran when he was arrested.
 ABDEL NUR: A Guyanese Muslim originally named Compton Eversley, Nur met with the leader of the Jamaat al Muslimeen to seek support for the alleged plot, authorities said. Nur said Yasin Abu Bakr, Jamaat al Muslimeen's leader, suggested during a meeting in Trinidad that he return with others involved "to discuss the plan in detail," according to court documents.
Nur, who is in his late 50s, worked at odd jobs for a foreign exchange office, according to an employee of a rooming house where Nur lived in a low-income area of the Guyanese capital. He was deported from the United States in the late 1980s and often called Americans "oppressors," acquaintances said.
 KAREEM IBRAHIM: The 56-year-old Trinidadian was identified by the Trinidad Express newspaper as an Islamic cleric at a Shia mosque. Ibrahim was arrested on June 1 in a cane farming town about 30 kilometers (20 miles) from Trinidad's capital, Port-of-Spain. He and Kadir are fighting extradition to the United States.
Ibrahim, also known as "Amir Kareem," and Defreitas together visited a compound belonging to the Jamaat al Muslimeen in Trinidad, according to investigators.
 Load-Date: June 6, 2007

 

End of Document
