

A look at the threat to supplies in key oil- and gas-producing regions
Associated Press International
May 5, 2006 Friday 10:41 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 443 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




The nuclear standoff with Iran and insurgencies in Iraq and Africa have rattled world energy markets. But the threat to supply extends far beyond these hotspots.
Risky suppliers also include:
 Russia, whose brief energy conflict with neighboring Ukraine last winter severely hit the European Union. Moscow, which is flexing its energy muscle for geopolitical leverage, accounts for more than 10 percent of the world's daily oil output and a fifth of its natural gas. President Vladimir Putin's drive to reassert state influence over the nation's oil and gas sectors has spooked consumer nations.
 Saudi Arabia, the world's No. 1 oil producer and a key U.S. supplier. It has been singled out as a target by Osama bin Laden, and the country remains on alert after foiling an al-Qaida-linked attack on its vast Abqaiq oil processing plant in February. That attack prompted Kuwait to express concern about the security of its own oil facilities. An additional threat to oil installations is the potential for insurgency fomented by Tehran among the Saudi Shiite minority and those in neighboring oil-producing nations.
 Venezuela and Bolivia, where moves by populist leaders to impose more state control over the gas or oil sectors gives them growing leverage to use energy as a political tool. Bolivia, which recently called out the army to enforce its claims, has South America's second-largest natural gas reserves after Venezuela. Venezuela, whose President Hugo Chavez has threatened to blow up his country's oil fields in case of U.S. attack, is the fourth-largest supplier of crude to the United States for now. Chavez is increasingly selling to China and Cuba, and his oil minister has threatened to stop supplying America.
 The Caspian Sea region, which has estimated oil reserves between 17 billion and 44 billion barrels and is potentially a key transit point for oil to the West. But it is riven by ethnic conflicts in Chechnya, Georgia and the autonomous enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh. Energy nationalism is also a factor with Turkmenistan recently declaring its on-land gas and oil fields off-limits to foreign companies. The Shanghai Cooperation Organization, a regional alliance led by China and Russia, last year called on the United States to set a date for withdrawing forces from the region.
 The East China Sea, where conflicting claims to rich underwater gas reserves have added to historical rivalries between Japan and China. In the first three months of this year, the Japanese military said it had scrambled fighter jets 107 times to intercept suspected Chinese spy planes most of them over the East China Sea compared to 13 times in all of 2005.
 Load-Date: May 6, 2006

 

End of Document
