

A look-ahead at the Euro 2008 groups
Associated Press International
December 2, 2007 Sunday 7:46 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 487 words
Byline: By NESHA STARCEVIC, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: LUCERNE Switzerland
Body




A look-ahead at how the groups at the 2008 European Championship might pan out:
Group A
Switzerland, one of the co-hosts, didn't concede a goal at last year's World Cup and exited in the round of 16 after losing to Ukraine on penalty kicks. The Czech Republic has a talented group of players around tall striker Jan Koller and a wise, experienced coach in Karel Bruckner. Portugal has one of Europe's top players in Cristiano Ronaldo and Felipe Scolari is used to winning titles as coach.
Adding the European title to the World Cup championship he won with Brazil would complete Scolari's collection.
Switzerland and Turkey will need to avoid a repeat of the ugly scenes from their World Cup qualifying encounter that resulted in heavy fines and multi-game suspensions on both sides, plus a ban on Turkish home matches.
Group B
Germany, a three-time champion, had been hoping to get the group with Austria, considered the weakest team in the 16-nation tournament. But playing the host nation can always be tricky. The Germans have never lost to Poland, but needed a very late goal to win at the World Cup. And the Germans still remember the quarterfinal 3-0 loss to Croatia at the 1998 World Cup.
Croatia knocked out England in qualifying for next year's tournament and can potentially beat any team.
Amazingly, Germany is winless in the last two European championships. It has not won a game at the tournament since the "golden goal" victory over the Czech Republic in the 1996 final.
Group C
About as tough as it gets, with World Cup champion Italy and runner-up France and the Netherlands, another former European champion.
Both Italy and France struggled early in qualifying but Italy has a record of coming through when it matters. France is still looking for a successor to Zinedine Zidane, while Italy's team has not changed much since it beat France to win the World Cup.
France will get an early look at Romania, a team which it will face in qualifying for the 2010 World Cup.
The Netherlands always has talented players, who tend to underachieve at major tournaments. If coach Marco van Basten can preserve the often fragile team unity, the Netherlands can go a long way.
Romania may be overlooked in the group, but it finished ahead of the Netherlands in qualifying.
Group D
Defending champion Greece will get some familiar opposition in Spain and Russia, the only two teams it did not beat when it sensationally won the title in 2004 in Portugal. It drew with Spain and lost to Russia.
Spain is also another famous underachiever, but it does have one European title in 1964. Watch out for Bojan Krkic breaking through.
Russia also seems to fall apart on big occasions but the experience of Dutch coach Guus Hiddink may be the team's biggest asset this time.
Unpredictable Sweden can come in and win or lose all games.
Quarterfinal projections
Portugal vs. Croatia, Germany vs. Czech Republic, Italy vs. Greece, Spain vs. Netherlands.
 Load-Date: December 3, 2007

 

End of Document
