

A look at the International Criminal Court, the world's first permanent war crimes tribunal
Associated Press International
January 29, 2007 Monday 12:12 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 343 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




The International Criminal Court (ICC) is the world's first permanent war crimes tribunal, headquartered in The Hague, Netherlands. It is an independent body, not a U.N. court.
ESTABLISHMENT The Rome Statute creating the ICC was adopted in Italy on July 17, 1998. It came into being in July 2002 after the treaty was ratified by 60 countries. To date, 104 countries have endorsed the treaty.
JURISDICTION It is a court of last resort that will act only when countries are "unwilling or unable" to dispense justice themselves. It may prosecute individuals responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes committed after its creation. A fourth crime, aggression, has yet to be defined.
CASES Alleged Congolese warlord Thomas Lubanga is the only suspect in ICC custody. Prosecutors also have issued arrest warrants against five alleged commanders of the Lord's Resistance Army in Uganda, one of whom was killed last year. Prosecutors also are investigating the ongoing conflict in the Sudanese region of Darfur and have been asked by the government of the Central African Republic to open an investigation into possible war crimes in that country.
COMPOSITION The court has 18 judges elected for terms of three to nine years. The lead prosecutor is Luis Moreno-Ocampo from Argentina. The president is Judge Philippe Kirsch from Canada.
U.S. POSITION The United States was one of seven countries that voted against the Rome treaty in 1998. But then-President Bill Clinton signed it on Dec. 31, 2000. President George W. Bush, citing fears Americans would be unfairly prosecuted for political reasons, renounced the signature and initiated bilateral immunity deals with dozens of countries, barring them from handing U.S. citizens to the court's jurisdiction. However, the Bush administration has since relaxed sanctions on countries that refused to sign such agreements.
BUDGET The court has requested a budget for 2007 of just under euro93.5 million ($119US million), paid by the countries in the ICC's governing body, the Assembly of States Parties.
 Load-Date: January 29, 2007

 

End of Document
