

A package of news briefs from the Caribbean
Associated Press International
May 6, 2007 Sunday 12:25 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 1067 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




CARIBBEAN: Coast Guard asked to suspend search for migrants; 36 dead, 40 missing
SOUTH DOCK, Turks and Caicos Islands (AP) The U.S. Coast Guard suspended its search Saturday for more than 40 missing Haitian migrants after local authorities said it was no longer needed as hopes faded of finding more survivors.
Several boats and helicopters belonging to the Turks and Caicos, near where the boat sank Friday, continued to search the turquoise Caribbean waters. But police Inspector Sharon Whitaker said the island may also suspend its search early Sunday if no more survivors or bodies are found.
Roughly 160 Haitian migrants were packed aboard a 25-foot (7.6-meter) boat when it ran into stormy weather before dawn Friday off the coast of this British territory. Thirty six people 23 women and 13 men were confirmed dead in addition to the more than 40 missing.
Searchers found no survivors or bodies on Saturday, dimming hopes for the rescue effort.
U.S. Coast Guard Petty Officer 3rd Class Barry Bena told The Associated Press on Saturday that Turks and Caicos authorities asked the U.S. Coast Guard to suspend its search, "apparently because they believed the likelihood of finding more survivors was very slim."
A survivor said the migrant ship sank after passengers panicked and shifted to one side, overturning the vessel and spilling most of the passengers into the shark-infested waters. But Turks and Caicos police initially notified the U.S. Coast Guard early Friday that the Haitian sloop capsized while a police boat was towing the intercepted vessel to shore, according to Bena.
It was not immediately possible to reconcile the differing accounts of the sinking.
ST. LUCIA: China severs relations with Caribbean island for switching ties to Taiwan
CASTRIES, St. Lucia (AP) China officially severed a 10-year diplomatic relationship with St. Lucia, a week after the tiny Caribbean nation restored ties with rival Taiwan.
The Chinese Embassy in St. Lucia issued a terse statement Saturday saying all agreements between the tropical island and the Asian superpower would be "suspended immediately" due to the April 30 switch, ending Beijing's financing for a nearly finished psychiatric hospital and scuttling plans for a cultural center.
China and Taiwan the self-governing island that Beijing claims is a renegade province have for years waged a battle of "dollar diplomacy," offering countries aid and trade inducements to switch diplomatic recognition from one to the other.
Tiny St. Lucia, with a population of 168,000, had long maintained diplomatic relations with Taipei under Prime Minister John Compton, until the country switched to Beijing shortly after Compton's United Workers Party was defeated in 1996.
But Compton's party returned to power last December, and Chinese pledges of more money and technical assistance failed to persuade St. Lucia from re-establishing ties with Taiwan.
On Saturday, the Chinese Embassy said the switch undermined Beijing's One China policy and had done "serious harm" to relations.
FRENCH CARIBBEAN: Voters on tiny islands kick off French presidential voting
PARIS (AP) Voters in France's overseas holdings, from French Guiana, Guadeloupe and Martinique in the Caribbean to French Polynesia in the Pacific, voted Saturday in the presidential election, choosing between conservative Nicolas Sarkozy and Socialist Segolene Royal a day before voters in mainland France.
Polls published Friday gave Sarkozy the lead over Royal in the race to succeed conservative Jacques Chirac. No electoral results will be published until after polls close Sunday in France at 8 p.m. (1800 GMT.)
If elected, Sarkozy, 52, says he would loosen labor laws to make the stagnant economy more competitive worldwide. Royal, 53, would be France's first woman leader if she wins. She wants to maintain generous welfare programs and raise minimum wage by 20 percent.
Both Sarkozy and Royal made campaign stops in the French Caribbean, part of a network of overseas lands once colonies, today called territories and departments that form an integral part of today's France.
Yet their 1.4 million voters, and soaring unemployment and struggling local economies are routinely ignored.
"Neither one of the candidates inspire me," said voter Paulette Bouton in Martinque. "Even if they came to Martinique, I think they don't know enough about our worries."
GUYANA: Country forms special unit to prevent trafficking in persons
GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP) Guyana has formed a special anti-smuggling unit to prevent trafficking in persons, a government official said Saturday.
Interior Minister Clement Rohee said the law enforcement unit will devise a national plan to prevent future victims of human traffickers in the South American country.
Human trafficking is not perceived to be a major problem in Guyana but the government was establishing the special unit in advance of Washington's next annual survey of human rights practices, Rohee said.
The United States has previously praised Guyana's efforts to battle the scourge.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: Flight 587 families invited to crypts with last remains
NEW YORK (AP) The last remains of those who died in the 2001 crash of American Airlines Flight 587 have been placed in two Bronx crypts, officials said Saturday.
Families of the 265 victims of the flight bound for the Dominican Republic have been invited to a Sunday dedication ceremony at Woodlawn Cemetery in the Bronx, said Susan Olsen, a cemetery official.
Olsen said the remains were entombed on Friday in granite and marble crypts in the cemetery's Garden Conservatory Mausoleum.
Officials placed 889 fragments that either were unidentified or identified but never claimed in four caskets. All 265 victims of the 2001 crash have been identified by their bodies or at least some remains, said Ellen Borakove, spokeswoman for the medical examiner.
Flight 587 crashed in the quiet neighborhood of Belle Harbor, Queens, after taking off from John F. Kennedy International Airport. Many of the victims were Dominican-born New York residents on their way to visit their native land.
In November, on the fifth anniversary of the crash, Mayor Michael Bloomberg dedicated a memorial wall bearing the victims' names. Overlooking the ocean about 15 blocks away from the crash site, the $9.2 million (euro6.78 million) memorial was designed by Dominican Republic native Freddy Rodriguez and funded with private and public
 Load-Date: May 5, 2007

 

End of Document
