

A package of news briefs from the Caribbean
Associated Press International
February 4, 2007 Sunday 12:13 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 936 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




GUANTANAMO: Life harsher for detainees in newest prison unit
GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE, Cuba (AP) Abdul Helil Mamut's good behavior earned him a spot in a medium-security compound at the Guantanamo Bay prison, where he slept in a barracks, shared leisurely meals with other prisoners and could spend more than half the day in an outdoor recreation area.
But in December, the detainee was among dozens transferred from Camp 4 to the maximum-security Camp 6, the newest section of Guantanamo Bay's military prison.
Now Mamut, an ethnic Uighur from China captured in Pakistan, spends all but two hours a day isolated in his cell. He eats and prays by himself. His only recreation comes in a concrete courtyard surrounded by high walls, separated from other prisoners by a chain-link fence.
The U.S. government says the unit provides detainees with more private and comfortable quarters.
But Mamut and other Uighur prisoners complain their days are now filled with "infinite tedium and loneliness," said Sabin Willett, an attorney for the men, in an affidavit filed in a Washington court.
"All expressed a desperate desire for sunlight, fresh air and someone to speak to," Willett wrote after a January visit to the prison, located on the U.S. military base in southeastern Cuba, where the U.S. holds nearly 400 men suspected of links to al-Qaida or the Taliban.
GRENADA: Police band plays Taiwan anthem at opening of China-financed stadium
ST. GEORGE'S, Grenada (AP) A diplomatic gaffe marred Saturday's inauguration of a China-financed stadium on this Caribbean island when a band performed Taiwan's national anthem.
Chinese Ambassador Qian Hongshan and scores of blue-uniformed Chinese laborers who built the new $40US million (euro30.7 million) Queen's Park stadium as a gift from Beijing were visibly uncomfortable as Taiwan's anthem echoed inside the 20,000-seat venue.
Describing it as a blunder, Grenada Prime Minister Keith Mitchell pledged an investigation into how the Royal Grenada Police Band could have prepared the anthem of Taiwan instead of China, which has waged an aggressive campaign in the Caribbean to woo nations away from relationships with its rival.
Since China and Taiwan split in 1949 amid a civil war, Beijing has claimed that Taiwan is a renegade province and should not have diplomatic ties with other countries.
"I am very saddened," Mitchell told the workers and Chinese Embassy staff from Grenada and neighboring Trinidad and Tobago. "This unfortunate error breaks my heart."
Police officials declined to comment except to say they would issue a statement later in the day.
Grenada switched diplomatic allegiance from Taiwan to China in 2005, a move that was sharply criticized by the main opposition party, the National Democratic Congress.
BRITISH VIRGIN ISLANDS: Police thwart Caribbean smuggling ring
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) Two British Virgin Islands men arrested by authorities from Guadeloupe on drug charges are suspected of being part of a smuggling ring that ferried narcotics in the Leeward Islands chain, police said Saturday.
Vadley Sylvester, 34, and Alfred Lettsome, 37, were allegedly in possession of 52 kilograms (114 pounds) of cocaine and 10 kilograms (22 pounds) of marijuana after authorities stopped their "go fast" boat in the Caribbean Sea off Guadeloupe's coast, according to Tamara Archibald-Gill, police spokeswoman for the British Virgin Islands.
The men, both of the British territory's main island of Tortola, were accused of picking up the drugs at sea from other smugglers off the coast of St. Vincent.
Three other men, including a Colombian man living in Puerto Rico, suspected of involvement in the network were also arrested, Archibald-Gill said.
The suspects were jailed pending trial in Guadeloupe, a French overseas department made up of nine inhabited islands.
SURINAME: Rescue teams find body of Guyanese man drowned in boat accident
PARAMARIBO, Suriname (AP) Rescue teams found the body of one of two Guyanese men who went missing after the boat they were riding in capsized on a river separating Guyana and Suriname, authorities said Saturday.
The other Guyanese traveler was not found and is feared drowned in the Corentyne River, Suriname's national police said in a statement. The other eight boat passengers were rescued by fishermen Friday when the vessel's outboard engine apparently got caught in a fishing net and flipped over.
The boat, one of many unofficial water taxis that each day takes hundreds of people across the river separating the two South American nations, was in a remote area about 250 kilometers (155 miles) west of Suriname's capital of Paramaribo.
CRICKET: West Indies players to attend training camp in advance of World Cup
BRIDGETOWN, Barbados (AP) West Indies players will attend a training camp this month to prepare for the World Cup.
Coach Bennett King announced the Feb. 22-28 camp on Saturday after the squad returned from a tour of India. The venue had not been selected yet.
"We have a lot of stuff to put in place as we try to be among the best team in the World Cup. We want to be as ready as we can be when the first ball bowls," King said.
Not all players would attend since some will likely be competing in the finals of the Carib Beer Series.
The West Indies must announce a 15-man World Cup squad by Feb. 13. The tournament runs March 13-April 28.
The West Indies is in Group D alongside Pakistan, Ireland and Zimbabwe and will at Jamaica's Sabina Park.
Nine host nations Barbados, Jamaica, St. Lucia, Trinidad and Tobago, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Grenada, Guyana, Antigua will host World Cup matches.
 Load-Date: February 4, 2007

 

End of Document
