

A package of news briefs from the Caribbean
Associated Press International
January 14, 2007 Sunday 11:46 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 1052 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




TURKS AND CAICOS: British Caribbean territory sets February general election
PROVIDENCIALES, Turks and Caicos (AP) The British Caribbean territory of Turks and Caicos will hold general elections on Feb. 9, the islands' premier has announced.
Prime Minister Michael Misick announced the date for the election, which is constitutionally due to be held this year, during a Friday news conference in the capital of Grand Turk.
In a statement, the premier said he is confident his ruling Progressive National Party will be elected to a second term.
"My government stands proudly on our record of achievement," said Misick, flanked by several cabinet ministers.
Misick's party won a majority in the British dependency's government in 2003.
Top issues for the territory's 21,000 residents are curbing rising crime and advancing the tourism-based economy.
Turks and Caicos, about 1,000 kilometers (600 miles) southeast of Miami, is largely self-governing but defers to Britain on defense, security and foreign affairs.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: Migrant dies, 23 others rescued after boat capsizes on way to Puerto Rico
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) A Dominican migrant died and 23 others were rescued Sunday after the boat they were traveling on capsized, a U.S. coast guard spokesman said.
Rescue crews found the overturned 25-foot (7.5-meter) vessel around 9:45 a.m. (1345 GMT) after a cell phone call from one of the migrants was relayed to the U.S. Coast Guard, said Guard spokesman Ricardo Castrodad.
The migrants, who were apparently trying to sail to the U.S. Caribbean territory of Puerto Rico, were rescued 36 hours after their boat overturned near Isla Saona, an island off the southeastern coast of the Dominican Republic, Castrodad said. One woman was found dead under the boat.
The survivors 20 men and three women, one of whom was 7 months pregnant were in good health and sent back to the Dominican Republic, he added.
Each year thousands of Dominicans try to cross the Mona Passage, a perilous 80-mile-wide (130-kilometer-wide) stretch of water separating Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic.
CUBA: Vice president leads delegation to Correa's inauguration in Ecuador
HAVANA (AP) Cuban Vice President Carlos Lage traveled to Ecuador on Sunday at the head of a delegation attending the inauguration of President-elect Rafael Correa, state-run media reported.
Lage has played an increasing international role for the island ever since President Fidel Castro became ill in late July and temporarily stepped down from power. Acting President Raul Castro, who did not travel to Ecuador, has focused more on domestic concerns.
Lage will meet with Correa, who takes office Monday, outgoing President Alfredo Palacio and Ecuadorean health and sports officials, Cuban news agency Prensa Latina reported.
Last week, longtime Communist leader Jose Ramon Machado Ventura represented Cuba at the inauguration of Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega.
ST. VINCENT: Lucian Small, comedian known across the Caribbean, dies at 60
KINGSTOWN, St. Vincent (AP) Lucian Small, a St. Vincentian comedian known across the English-speaking Caribbean for his spirited standup performances, has died, his family said. He was 60.
Small, who went by the stage name "Sa Luche," was found dead in his St. Vincent home early Sunday, according to his brother, Lloyd Small. The cause of death was not immediately known.
"We were not aware of any serious medical problem," his brother said.
Small first gained attention in his Caribbean homeland when he served as a master of ceremony during St. Vincent's national calypso competition.
The comedian regularly brought his stage show to neighboring islands, Britain, and the United States, where he performed at the famed Apollo Theater in New York.
Small is survived by his wife Helen and two daughters.
CUBA: Researchers help Cuban-Americans find their roots
FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. (AP) Cuban-Americans who lost their family histories when they fled the island nation are joining forces to rediscover their roots.
Jorge Pinon, a senior research associate at the University of Miami's Institute for Cuban and Cuban-American Studies, helped launch the Cuban Family History and Genealogy Project. It helps Cuban-Americans trace their family histories and helps preserve the history of groups ranging from indigenous tribes to the various cultures who settled on the island after the Spanish colonization began in the 15th century
"What happens with every migration is you bring with you your music, your food and you pass it on to future generations," Pinon said. "But we lose our family history."
Civil records in communist Cuban can be even harder to obtain, Pinon said, though he has traced his own bloodlines to the 1600s and documented 1,200 ancestors.
Cuban-American genealogists also are transcribing documents and putting them on a Web site to help others in their search. The records include burial lists, ship passengers and church records such as baptism, marriage and death certificates.
CRICKET: Lawson's bowling gives Jamaica edge over Windward Islands
CASTRIES, St. Lucia (AP) Strong bowling by Jermaine Lawson on Sunday enabled Jamaica to grab first innings points against the Windward Islands on the third day of their Carib Beer cricket match at Beausejour Cricket Grounds.
At the close of the day, Jamaica was 81 runs ahead with eight second innings wickets intact. But the prospect of a final result on Monday remained doubtful after three hours of play was lost because of rain.
Lawson, a former West Indies paceman, single-handedly gave Jamaica the initiative with five Windwards wickets for just 18 runs to finish with six for 70 in 19.4 overs.
End-of-the-day scores were Jamaica 289 and 43 for two wickets, Windward Islands 251.
The Windward Islands, resuming at 196 for four wickets, seemed on course to take control of the game with Darren Sammy and Hyron Shallow continuing to build on a partnership that had already produced 71 runs.
But Lawson dismissed both batsmen in the first hour's play. First, Shallow was caught for 39, then Lawson bowled Sammy off an inside edge for 80, which included eight fours.
At 219 for five, the Windwards were still in a good position to overtake the Jamaican side, but Lawson quickly ran through the lower order and they lost their last five wickets for just 32 runs.
 Load-Date: January 15, 2007

 

End of Document
