

A package of news briefs from the Caribbean
Associated Press International
February 2, 2007 Friday 2:16 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 2064 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




CUBA: Chavez says Castro has visibly improved, gained weight
CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez said Thursday that Cuba's Fidel Castro has visibly improved, describing how the ailing Cuban leader has gained weight and is walking around and studying.
"A notable improvement," Chavez said, describing Castro's condition when the two met recently in Havana.
"He has gained several kilograms, and I think he is walking about more than me, analyzing, studying," Chavez told a news conference in the Venezuelan capital of Caracas.
Footage of the meeting aired by Cuban state television on Tuesday evening were the first video images of the 80-year-old Cuban leader released in three months.
The communist-run government has kept Castro's condition and exact ailment secret, which has led to continuous speculation that he was gravely ill, possibly dying.
Images of the meeting, which officials from both governments say took place Monday, appeared to be aimed at quelling those rumors.
Cuban authorities have insisted that Castro is recovering, and have denied reports by U.S. intelligence officials that he had terminal cancer, although they stopped insisting weeks ago that the bearded guerrilla leader would return to power.
During the half-year since Castro fell ill, the nation has been governed by his brother Raul and a team of top leaders that includes Vice President and Cabinet Secretary Carlos Lage.
GUANTANAMO: U.S. removes Saddam photo amid criticism
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) A news report about Saddam Hussein's execution was removed from a recreation area at the Guantanamo Bay detention center after a detainee's lawyer accused officials of using it to frighten prisoners, a U.S. military spokesman said Thursday.
Authorities also removed an Arabic-language poster that depicted Saddam's capture, court appearances and death sentence, said Navy Cmdr. Robert Durand, a Guantanamo Bay spokesman.
The military decided the poster "appeared insensitive" and did not belong in the recreation area, where authorities post information about current events for detainees.
"The intent of this poster was to show that the Iraqi people are making progress and have delivered justice," Durand said in an e-mail from the detention center on the U.S. Navy base in southeastern Cuba.
Earlier, an attorney for Australian detainee David Hicks complained the military was attempting to intimidate prisoners with news of the Iraqi leader's execution.
"What they're trying to do is ground them into submission with the prospect of their execution," attorney Joshua Dratel said by phone from a Florida airport as he returned from a visit with Hicks.
Dratel said detainees were shown photographs of the execution, but Durand said the news article included only a picture of Saddam before the hanging.
DOMINICA: Venezuela's Chavez to open oil facility next month
ROSEAU, Dominica (AP) Venezuela announced that President Hugo Chavez will visit the Caribbean island of Dominica next month to open an oil storage facility funded by the South American country and to sign deals for new projects.
Chavez is scheduled to visit Dominica on Feb. 16, said Rodolfo Sanz, the Venezuelan foreign ministry's vice minister for the Latin America and the Caribbean, during a visit to the island on Thursday.
Part of Venezuela's regional Petrocaribe program, under which 14 Caribbean countries receive preferential terms to buy oil, the new facility will contain six tanks to store gasoline, diesel, jet fuel and liquefied natural gas.
Petrocaribe is widely seen as a bid by Chavez long at odds with Washington to make inroads in the Caribbean, where the U.S. is a major trading partner. Chavez calls it an alternative to U.S.-backed trade deals.
"We are doing with oil modestly, I insist what the liberators did with their swords," Chavez said Wednesday at a news conference in Venezuela, adding that state oil company Petroleos de Venezuela SA plans "to help liberate" countries from "international blackmail by the big oil transnationals."
Chavez also said Venezuela intends to build a refinery in Dominica but did not elaborate. The Venezuelan government said in a statement that Chavez will travel soon to Dominica, but did not specify when.
SURINAME: Canadian-owned gold mine shut down due to damage during strike
PARAMARIBO, Suriname (AP) The Canadian-owned Rosebel gold mine in Suriname has been temporarily shut down after striking workers allegedly flooded part of the plant, welded shut some gates and doors, and damaged 17 all-terrain vehicles, a company official said Thursday.
A number of workers began the strike one week ago at the mine, located about 100 kilometers (60 miles) south of the capital of Paramaribo, saying negotiations over a collective bargaining agreement were going too slow.
"We have no choice but to keep the plant shut for a couple of days. The damage is significant and things have to be restored first before production can start again," said Roy van Aerde, a spokesman for Rosebel Gold Mines NV.
The union said earlier this week that both sides had reached a deal to end the strike, but parent company IAMGold had said that was not the case.
During the strike, the union's board and more than 100 workers remained in the plant at the mine site.
Calls placed to a union official went unanswered.
Thursday evening on Suriname Today talk show, union chairman Errol Snijders, a former Labor Minister, denied that union members damaged the equipment.
Rosebel became a subsidiary of Toronto-based IAMGold in late 2006. The Surinamese government owns 5 percent of the mine, with the rest belonging to IAMGold.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: Dominican president pledges to build highways, bridges in rural areas
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) President Leonel Fernandez's office said Thursday the government will build highways and bridges in rural parts of the Dominican Republic, apparently responding to criticism that he has neglected those areas as the presidential campaign season begins.
Fernandez, who is expected to seek a third term in 2008 but has not officially entered the race, pledged US$232 million (euro178 million) to complete more than 100 projects this year, including a highway connecting towns along the Haitian border, his office said in a statement.
At least one project was promised in all 32 provinces of the Caribbean country of 9 million people.
In August, a 39-year-old unemployed man made national headlines when he carried a wooden cross more than 300 kilometers (190 miles) from his hometown on the Haitian border to the capital to demand funding for highways in his area.
Fernandez faces an election challenge from Miguel Vargas Maldonado, a construction company owner and former public works minister who was nominated as the candidate for the Dominican Revolutionary Party on Sunday. He is expected to campaign heavily on the rural projects issue.
The election is scheduled for May 2008.
HAITI: U.S. to provide US$20 million (euro15.4 million) to help Haiti's poor
WASHINGTON (AP) The United States said Thursday it would provide a US$20 million (euro15.4 million) grant to create jobs and provide other aid to Cite Soleil, a sprawling slum located on the outskirts of Haiti's capital, Port-au-Prince.
Undersecretary of State Nicholas Burns announced the grant after a meeting on Haiti by representatives of 22 countries plus international lending organizations.
Burns told reporters the United States supports a one-year extension for the U.N. mission in Haiti when its current mandate expires on Feb. 15. Other countries support a briefer extension.
Haitian Foreign Minister Reynald Clerisme said the U.N. force is helping to fight narcotics trafficking and other criminal activity. He added that drugs that travel through Haiti often are sent to the United States.
BERMUDA: British territory sees 23 percent increase in tourist arrivals in 2006
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) The number of tourists vacationing in Bermuda in 2006 increased 23 percent from the year before, the prime minister said.
Some 641,717 tourists visited the prosperous mid-Atlantic British territory in 2006, up from 521,024 in 2005, Premier Ewart Brown said Wednesday in a speech.
"All arrows were pointing in the right direction as air, cruise and yacht arrivals were all up showing double-digit percentage point increases," said Brown, who is also the tourism minister.
Air arrivals reached their highest level in the last six years with a nearly 11 percent increase over 2005. Tourists also spent as much as US$426.9 million (euro327.8 million), said Brown, who did not give a reason for the increase.
In 2005, the number of air arrivals dropped, which officials blamed on high fares and fears about storms. Critics said then that tourism was on the decline because the government had an inconsistent marketing plan.
The economy of Bermuda, located 1,030 kilometers (640 miles) east of the U.S. coast, is based on the financial service and tourism industries.
PUERTO RICO: 11 family members arrested on drug charges in U.S. territory
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) Authorities in Puerto Rico arrested 11 people from the same extended family on drug charges Thursday, saying they led a major trafficking ring in the southeast of the U.S. island territory.
The eight men and three women were arrested in Guayama on charges that include conspiracy to distribute cocaine and heroin, said Waldo Santiago, a spokesman for the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, which worked with Puerto Rican authorities in the operation.
Authorities were unable to arrest a ninth suspect, also a member of the family, who remains a fugitive, Santiago said.
The 11 who were arrested were being held in a federal jail outside the Puerto Rican capital. They face charges that could lead to life in prison.
U.S. VIRGIN ISLANDS: Haitian teen charged in raid of government bank accounts
CHARLOTTE AMALIE, U.S. Virgin Islands (AP) A Haitian teenager living in St. Croix has been charged in the alleged theft of US$382,000 (euro293,395) by hacking into U.S. Virgin Islands' government bank accounts, prosecutors said Thursday.
Hubo Luco, 18, was indicted on charges of wire fraud, bank fraud and access device fraud. U.S. Attorney Anthony J. Jenkins alleged that Luco linked the accounts at Banco Popular, based in San Juan, Puerto Rico, to his Internet bank account between May and August.
Prosecutors say Luco used US$53,000 (euro40,705) of allegedly stolen money to buy a 2006 Cadillac for his mother, 46-year-old Manuela Ventura, who was charged with aiding and abetting her son. She lives in the U.S. Virgin Islands and is also a Haitian citizen.
CAYMAN ISLANDS: Britain's Prince Edward to view storm repairs in British territory
GEORGE TOWN, Cayman Islands (AP) Britain's Prince Edward will tour areas of the Cayman Islands hardest hit by Hurricane Ivan in 2004 when he visits the British Caribbean territory this week, officials said Thursday.
Edward, the youngest son of Queen Elizabeth II, was scheduled to return to the East End district, which he visited shortly after Ivan tore through the Caribbean and destroyed thousands of homes as one of the strongest storms on record.
Since then, the Cayman Islands has largely rebuilt the district, about 30 kilometers (20 miles) east of the capital, George Town.
"I would like to take him back through there and show him the progress we have made," Infrastructure Minister Arden McLean said. "Today, East End is looking as good as it was and in most incidences better."
During his Saturday to Tuesday visit, the prince also was scheduled to view several environmental projects in the territory and attend the groundbreaking ceremony for a wind power project.
CRICKET: Tourist visa launched for World Cup
GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP) A special tourist visa for the cricket World Cup took effect Thursday.
The six-week tournament officially starts March 11, with West Indies playing Pakistan in the first game two days later.
The visa for use in the nine host Caribbean countries was originally to take effect Jan. 9 but tourism officials expressed concern it could affect non-cricket visitors.
Organizers expect as many as 100,000 visitors to attend the tournament, which is being held for the first time in the Caribbean.
The host nations have spent millions of dollars (euros) on new stadiums, roads and other improvements ahead of the tournament billed as the largest sporting event ever in the region.
 Load-Date: February 2, 2007

 

End of Document
