

A package of news briefs from the Caribbean
Associated Press International
February 21, 2008 Thursday 1:26 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 1080 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




CUBA: As Fidel Castro departs, Cuban expectations for small, free-market reforms build
HAVANA (AP) Fidel Castro spent nearly five decades railing against even the tiniest of capitalist reforms in the Western Hemisphere's only communist country.
Some Cubans are hoping his brother, Raul, would embrace free markets and more if he becomes president Sunday perhaps moving Cuba to something more like Vietnam or China, which also have communist leaders who control all things political, but let markets largely rule their economies.
The answer could start to emerge Sunday when Cuba's parliament meets to choose new leaders. While Raul Castro is likely to be named president, the choices for 30 other lawmakers on the Council of State, including his No. 2, could indicate how far the island's supreme governing body is willing to go toward opening the economy.
Fidel, 81 and ailing, took himself out of the running Tuesday for the top spot but may continue to wield enough power as Communist Party chief to stifle any major changes.
Raul, 76, has already tantalized many reform-seekers while serving as acting president for 19 months. He has urged unspecified "structural changes" in Cuba's communist system, acknowledged that state salaries don't meet basic needs, and called on Cubans to complain openly when government control of the economy flounders although, so far, there have been few changes beyond better pay for farmers and increased food production.
And as defense minister, Raul put Cuba's military at the forefront of the economy, as he and other top military officers assumed control of such key sectors as electronics imports, cigar exports, and tourism.
"There could be a new perspective with Raul, new freedoms that are exciting to some," said Sergio, a 47-year-old government factory worker.
PUERTO RICO: Teachers union declares strike after contract talks stumble
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) Puerto Rico's teachers union declared a strike Wednesday, threatening to shutter schools across the island after a breakdown in long-stalled contract talks.
The strike, set to begin Thursday, seeks improved conditions for the U.S. Caribbean territory's 42,000 public school teachers, union chief Rafael Feliciano said. The teachers are seeking higher pay, smaller classes, school repairs and more autonomy in designing curriculum.
"We are going to make them respect us," Feliciano told reporters outside the Education Department headquarters where more than a hundred teachers shouted "Deal or strike."
The government urged teachers who do not support the union's decision to continue working. Some union members had expressed reluctance because strike participants could be fired under a Puerto Rican law forbidding the disruption of the public education system.
"Unnecessary damage is being done to the teachers, students and parents," said Gov. Anibal Acevedo Vila, who added that the strike is "clearly illegal."
The government immediately halted contract talks that had been stalled for about two years. Negotiators appeared close to an agreement earlier this week, prompting Feliciano to withdraw threats of a strike.
But negotiations stumbled again Wednesday as the union sought to give teachers greater autonomy in designing curriculum.
The Puerto Rican labor secretary, Roman Velasco, accused the union of negotiating in bad faith. "You can't negotiate by demanding every five minutes that 'If this isn't signed there's going to be a strike,'" he said.
The government now will focus on keeping the island's 1,523 public schools open, Education Secretary Rafael Aragunde said.
GUYANA: President blames escalating gang violence on most-wanted fugitive
GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP) An armed gang led by Guyana's most-wanted fugitive is responsible for recent massacres in two small enclaves that killed 23 people, the country's president said as investigators prepared to question a new suspect Wednesday.
President Bharrat Jagdeo accused fugitive Rondell Rawlins of planning meticulous and deadly assaults on the coastal village of Lusignan and mining town of Bartica.
"This was not random. They had a lot of intelligence," Jagdeo said late Tuesday of the Bartica attack, according to the state news agency, GINA.
The rampaging gunmen, in towns dozens of miles (kilometers) apart, added to escalating gang violence that has left a bloody tally in recent weeks even by the standards of this violence- and poverty-wracked Caribbean nation.
Rawlins claimed responsibility for the Jan. 26 killings of six adults and five children in Lusignan, and threatened to launch more deadly attacks.
No one has yet claimed responsibility for last Sunday's hour-long shooting rampage in Bartica, a riverside town of 15,000 where gunmen killed three police officers and nine civilians, including five villagers asleep in their hammocks. They stole money, jewels and a cache of police and mining company weapons before escaping down the Essequibo River, police said.
Investigators on Wednesday questioned Antonio Devon James, 25, whom they suspect of captaining the getaway power boat, which was found abandoned. Police believe he may have colluded with the gang but was not a member.
The country has for years struggled with violent crime fueled by drug trafficking, which accounts for about 20 percent of the country's gross domestic product, according to the U.S. State Department.
HAITI: 2 Canadians charged with sexually abusing children in Haitian orphanage
PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti (AP) Two Canadian men were arrested and charged Wednesday with sexually abusing children in a Haitian orphanage, U.N. police said.
Orphanage volunteers Armand Huard, 64, and Denis Rochefort, 59, were arrested in Quebec after a two-year investigation into their activities in Les Cayes, a coastal city on the impoverished country's southern peninsula, said Fred Blaise, spokesman for U.N. police in Haiti. They will be tried in Quebec.
It was not immediately clear how many Haitian children may have been involved. Representatives with the Canadian embassy and UNICEF in Port-au-Prince said officials were looking into the case.
The investigation began in 2006 and was carried out by Haitian and Quebecois police, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and members of the 7,800-strong U.N. peacekeeping force, Blaise said.
More than 100 U.N. peacekeepers from Sri Lanka, also stationed on Haiti's southern peninsula, were expelled from the Caribbean nation in November, following allegations they had paid for sex with locals, including minors.
 Load-Date: February 21, 2008

 

End of Document
