

A package of news briefs from the Caribbean
Associated Press International
February 1, 2008 Friday 12:00 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 965 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




ARUBA: Police investigate evidence in Holloway case from Dutch journalist with hidden camera
ORANJESTAD, Aruba (AP) Aruban prosecutors said Thursday that authorities are investigating new information in the Natalee Holloway case provided by a Dutch crime reporter.
Information from reporter Peter R. de Vries "may help considerably" in resolving what happened to the American, who vanished during a May 2005 school vacation to the Dutch Caribbean island, the prosecutor's office said in a statement.
The statement did not specify the new material, but said it "may shed a new light on the mode" in which Holloway died and the "method by which her body disappeared."
An attorney for Joran van der Sloot, a Dutch man who was a suspect in the case, said it was irresponsible for prosecutors to make the announcement without describing their evidence.
De Vries, who appeared late Thursday as a guest on a Dutch TV show, said he used a hidden camera in Aruba and the Netherlands to obtain images "that have proved to be very important."
In a brief clip shown during the Pauw & Witteman news show, Holloway's mother, Beth Twitty, says, "Look what they have done. Look what they have done to Natalie."
It was not clear what she was reacting to.
Prosecutors dismissed their case against Van der Sloot and two other suspects in December, saying that they lacked evidence to charge them or even to prove a crime was committed. Authorities have said the case could be reopened if new evidence surfaces.
GUYANA: Police arrest, kill other alleged gang members suspected in weekend massacre
GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP) Guyana police arrested five men and killed two others they suspect are members of a gang that killed 11 people in a small coastal town last weekend, authorities said on Thursday.
Army Chief of Staff Gary Best said the men died during a gunfight with police and soldiers late Wednesday at Buxton Village, about a half mile from Lusignan, where six adults and five children were killed on Saturday.
Authorities have cornered about a dozen gang members in Buxton's thick jungles and plan to burn portions of it to uncover hiding places. The gang usually retreats there after committing armed robberies and clashing with rival gangs, Guyana Police Chief Henry Greene said.
Police said the five men arrested are members of a gang led by Rondell Rawlins, who on Wednesday called a local newspaper and pledged more violence if his pregnant, 18-year-old girlfriend does not appear.
Rawlins, who had accused police of abducting Tenisha Morgan, said he organized the killings, according to the paper's top editors. Authorities say they do not have her, but Greene said police are pursuing three people suspected of kidnapping her.
Residents in Lusignan and neighboring towns have organized several protests over what they say is police failure to prevent violence. Authorities have made arrests and used tear gas on the crowds.
PUERTO RICO: Teachers put off strike, but say still could happen
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) Puerto Rican teachers will remain on the job at least through next week, putting off a strike that had been threatened to start as early as Friday, the head of their union said.
Teachers Federation President Rafael Feliciano told a local radio station Thursday that teachers still might strike for higher wages and better working conditions, and he urged Puerto Rican Education Secretary Rafael Aragunde to resume negotiations.
With contract talks at an impasse, the union that represents the U.S. Caribbean territory's 42,000 teachers, had warned that a strike could start as early as Friday.
Feliciano told radio station WSKN that teachers have decided to stay on the job at least through next week. After that, a strike "will begin when the executive committee decides," he said.
Puerto Rican law forbids disruption of the public education system, so strikers are potentially vulnerable to being fired. The island's government labor relations board decertified the Teachers' Federation last month after some of its members authorized a walkout. Many rank-and-file unions members are divided over the threatened strike.
The starting base salary for a teacher in Puerto Rico is US$19,200 (euro13,000) a year lower than any U.S. state and about a third less than the average on the mainland.
ANTIGUA: Police order autopsy of dead agriculture minister after body found on beach
ST. JOHN'S, Antigua (AP) Police in Antigua said they are investigating the death of Agriculture Minister Charlesworth Samuel, who was found Thursday on a beach after having disappeared earlier this week.
An autopsy is expected, said Assistant Police Commissioner Davidson Whyte, who declined to say how Samuel might have died and whether foul play is suspected.
The health of Samuel, 69, had deteriorated in recent years, said Leon Chaku, chairman of the ruling United Progressive Party, which organized the search team that found his body.
A close relative said after Samuel disappeared Tuesday that he had wandered off before.
Several high-ranking government officials visited the site where his body was found.
"(He) was one of the members of parliament who enjoyed the full respect from both sides of the political aisle," said Gaston Browne, chairman of the opposing Antigua Labor Party.
CARIBBEAN: German Reinhold Fanz becomes new coach of Cuba's national team
FRANKFURT, Germany (AP) Reinhold Fanz is Cuba's new coach.
"It's an interesting job ... The goal is of course to qualify for the 2010 World Cup in South Africa," Fanz told the German soccer federation's Web site in an interview posted Thursday.
The German has coached Bundesliga clubs Hannover 96 and Eintracht Frankfurt.
If Cuba and the United States advance to the semifinals of the North, Central American and Caribbean region, they would play each other Sept. 6 in Cuba.
 Load-Date: February 1, 2008

 

End of Document
