

A package of business news briefs from the Caribbean
Associated Press International
April 11, 2008 Friday 1:43 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 894 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




PUERTO RICO: Cemex plant begins burning scrap tires for fuel, despite opposition
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) Mexican cement giant Cemex has started burning used tires for plant fuel in Puerto Rico, a move that is intended to relieve a garbage crisis but has raised concerns about environmental and health risks.
Cemex SAB's plant in the southern city of Ponce is the first to burn scrap tires for fuel in the U.S. Caribbean territory, according to Cemex Puerto Rico President Carlos Jacks.
Jacks said the practice will eliminate a noxious waste product from the island's garbage dumps. Puerto Rico, an island of nearly 4 million people, generates about 5 million used tires annually and faces a severe shortage of space for its garbage. Currently, only about 10 percent of the island's solid waste is recycled.
Environmentalists and a group of 81 Ponce residents have expressed concern that burning the tires will cause pollution and respiratory problems. But Jacks told reporters the plant will employ new pollution filters to contain emissions, and that it is complying with U.S. Environmental Protection Agency guidelines.
Javier Quintana, director of Puerto Rico's waste authority, said the public agency endorses the project.
Cemex Puerto Rico will replace about 20 percent of the imported coal it had used to power the plant by incinerating 1.5 million to 2 million tires per year in its cement kiln, the company said.
CUBA: Leftist alliance ALBA opens inaugural branch of its bank in communist-run island
HAVANA (AP) Cuba and its leftist allies in Latin America have opened the first branch of a development bank designed to break the region's dependence on the World Bank and other U.S.-backed lenders.
The bank is the main financial arm of the Bolivarian Alternative for the Americas, or ALBA, a trade alliance funded by Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez and his country's oil profits whose members also include Cuba, Nicaragua and Bolivia.
The ALBA bank will start with about US$1 billion (euro640 million) in assets and could offer up to twice that in loans and aid for development projects in Latin America and the Caribbean, said Venezuelan Finance Minister Rafael Isea, who attending the opening ceremony.
ALBA, an acronym that means "dawn" in Spanish, is intended to offer a socialist path to economic integration while snubbing U.S.-backed, free-trade deals.
The inaugural branch opened for business in Communist Cuba in a fourth-floor office in the Miramar Trade Center, a gleaming, high-rise enclave of shops and business suites in one of Havana's most exclusive neighborhoods.
"ALBA is filling a void ... financing productive projects to give more employment and an instrument to fight against poverty," said Cuban Central Bank President Francisco Soberon, flanked by a dozen bank employees in blue suits.
Chavez has urged Latin American leaders to withdraw billions of dollars in international reserves from U.S. banks, warning of a looming American economic crisis. Soberon repeated those concerns, saying "we are living in very risky moments."
PUERTO RICO: US Caribbean territory to invest in wind-generated energy
PONCE, Puerto Rico (AP) Puerto Rico's state-owned power company says it will buy millions of dollars (euros) in wind-generated energy for the next 20 years to lessen its dependence on petroleum.
The government will pay Windmar Renewable Energy US$11 million (euro7 million) a year for 50 megawatts, enough to serve up to 8,000 homes, company director Jorge Rodriguez has said.
Windmar, a Puerto-Rican based company, expects to soon build 25 windmills in southern Puerto Rico that could produce an estimated 120,000 kilowatts a year. Activists have criticized the project, saying several endangered bird species in a nearby protected forest will lose their habitat.
Oil-burning power plants provide most of the electricity in this U.S. Caribbean territory.
CARIBBEAN: Region ponders creation of megafarms amid high food prices
GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP) Caribbean governments are considering a proposal to establish megafarms in sparsely populated countries like Guyana and Suriname to boost food supplies and drive down prices.
Countries interested in the program would launch a joint venture with each other or with the private sector to cultivate large swaths of land, said Edwin Carrington, secretary-general of the Caribbean economic trade bloc Caricom.
Officials proposed the idea while meeting with Guyana President Bharrat Jagdeo.
Details of the proposal would be worked out at an upcoming economic conference in Guyana, Carrington said.
Food prices have risen as much as 40 percent recently in the region, with Caricom members spending on average US$3 billion (euro1.9 billion) a year to import food.
Trinidad already has proposed converting up to 20,000 acres (8,000 hectares) of its state-owned land into large farms.
PUERTO RICO: Tyco to close island plant and lay off 600 workers
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) A division of Tyco International Inc. says it is closing a plant in western Puerto Rico and expects to lay off 600 workers.
Tyco Safety Products says the plant in Aguadilla is closing because of high manufacturing costs. A recent company statement said the plant is expected to shut down in phases over the next year.
The plant manufactures products such as fire detection and anti-theft systems and is part of New Jersey-based Tyco International.
 Load-Date: April 11, 2008

 

End of Document
