

A package of news briefs from the Caribbean
Associated Press International
April 13, 2007 Friday 1:30 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 2381 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




HAITI: On patrol with the UN in newly tamed slum streets
PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti (AP) As their two white armored cars push deep inside Haiti's largest slum, the Brazilian U.N. peacekeepers peer over their rifles for enemy gunmen amid spray-painted slogans saying "Down with the U.N."
But the graffiti seems to be contradicted by the smiles and waves from gaunt women and children fetching water with plastic buckets.
Two months ago, U.N. peacekeepers couldn't set foot in Cite Soleil without waging gunbattles with armed gangs who controlled the seaside slum by Haiti's capital. "We used to take fire all the time," Lt. Jose Serrano told an Associated Press reporter accompanying the patrol he was leading.
Now his unit has gone more than 60 days without taking fire, and Cite Soleil is enjoying its most tranquil period since a 2004 revolt ousted former President Jean-Bertrand Aristide and led to the deployment of 9,000 U.N. peacekeepers.
The reason for the quiet, says the U.N., is its February offensive and the arrest of 400 suspected gang members, including several leaders wanted for a string of killings and kidnappings in Port-au-Prince.
The gangs, at least for now, are out of commission in Cite Soleil. A blue U.N. flag flies from a bullet-scarred school-turned-military base. A few days after Serrano's patrol passed through, U.N. special envoy Edmond Mulet made his second visit to the slum, and painted over a gang mural of a Kalashnikov rifle as onlookers cheered.
JAMAICA: Investigator says coroner's inquest into cricket coach's death to start April 23
KINGSTON, Jamaica (AP) A coroner's inquest into the killing of Pakistan's national cricket coach will begin in the Jamaican capital on April 23, the lead investigator said Thursday.
Deputy Police Commissioner Mark Shields did not disclose how many people would be called to testify at the inquest, which could run for weeks as authorities try to piece together Bob Woolmer's death the day after his team was eliminated from the Cricket World Cup.
Shields, a former Scotland Yard detective who became the second in command of Jamaican police in 2005, said British detectives conducting a review of the homicide probe would likely deliver their initial findings in the next couple of days.
"The team from Scotland Yard are conducting a review and I anticipate that the first part of that will be completed before the end of the week," Shields told The Associated Press. He did not say if the detectives' review would be made public.
Woolmer, 58, was found unconscious in his Kingston hotel room March 18 and pronounced dead at a hospital, the morning after his powerhouse squad's surprising ouster from cricket's premiere event with a loss to Ireland on St. Patrick's Day.
A pathologist who conducted Woolmer's autopsy initially ruled his death "inconclusive" but four days later announced he was strangled.
Shields has said Woolmer likely knew his killer or killers because there was no sign of forced entry at his room. More than three weeks later, investigators have not identified any suspects.
BAHAMAS: Anna Nicole Smith's mother seeks agreement with Birkhead on access to granddaughter
NASSAU, Bahamas (AP) Anna Nicole Smith's mother and former boyfriend were in last-minute negotiations Thursday to avert a showdown over custody for the late reality TV star's infant daughter.
Lawyers for ex-boyfriend Larry Birkhead, the baby's father, and Virgie Arthur met in private in the Bahamas to discuss a visitation arrangement, said Debra Rose, an attorney for Smith's mother. The outcome of the discussion was unknown.
Rose said Arthur, who was estranged from her celebrity daughter when she collapsed and died in February, will continue her legal bid for joint custody of the infant, Dannielynn, if the talks fail.
A Bahamian court was scheduled to hold a closed hearing Friday on the matter.
"We intend to proceed on that application unless something else comes along that causes us not to have to take that course of action," she said.
On Tuesday, a DNA expert revealed that Birkhead, a California photographer, was the father of Dannielynn, who could inherit a fortune. Following that revelation, Smith's companion, Howard K. Stern, said he would not fight to keep custody of the girl.
CUBA: Colombia rebel group a no-show at Havana talks, but Bogota still hopeful
HAVANA (AP) The latest round of peace talks between the Colombian government and the country's second-largest guerrilla group were delayed when rebel leaders failed to show up in Havana because of apparent travel problems.
Colombian officials said Thursday they still hoped that negotiators for the National Liberation Army, or ELN, would arrive after missing the opening session with peace envoy Luis Carlos Restrepo and several Roman Catholic bishops, who went ahead with talks without the rebels.
"Yesterday they were having problems traveling from Venezuela to Havana," Dario Mejia, an adviser to the Colombian peace commission, told reporters. "We are optimistic that we will be able to overcome these problems."
In Bogota, presidential spokesman Cesar Mauricio Velasquez said that if the rebels were having logistical or technical problems, the government could help them travel to the Cuban capital "to fulfill this meeting so important for Colombian society and the search for peace."
President Alvaro Uribe's government and representatives of the ELN have held five rounds of talks in Havana since 2005 without reaching a peace deal.
During the last round, in late February, rebel negotiators arrived several days late because of travel difficulties. Talks broke off without either side briefing reporters.
U.S. VIRGIN ISLANDS: Police identify body as that of missing 12-year-old girl
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) A body found in an industrial area of the U.S. Virgin Islands' capital was identified as a 12-year-old girl who had been missing for five days.
The body of Laquina Kadija Hennis, of St. Thomas, was found wrapped in a sheet and hidden in a wooden shed in Charlotte Amalie, Jean Greaux, a spokesman for Gov. John deJongh, said Thursday.
Police said the girl was killed, but declined to give any details.
"This is a murder case, and we will get to the bottom of the circumstances that led to the death of this child," Police Commissioner James McCall said.
McCall and Attorney General Vincent Frazer said police were questioning Daniel Castillo, 30, as a person of interest in the child's slaying. They did not say whether he and the girl knew each other.
Hennis was last seen Friday walking in the U.S. Caribbean territory's capital with an unidentified man.
"I will use all the power I have, all the power that the police have, to seek justice for Laquina Kadija," Gov. deJongh said in a statement. "We will find and bring to justice whoever committed this horrendous act."
After a four-day search, volunteer rescuers found the girl's body Wednesday in the Sugar Estate neighborhood. U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation agents in St. Thomas joined the investigation to help gather evidence, McCall said.
CARIBBEAN: New York City's former top cop cancels Caribbean consulting contracts
GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP) Former New York City police commissioner Bernard Kerik has withdrawn from contracts to advise two Caribbean governments on security because of unresolved legal troubles in the United States, Guyana's president said.
President Bharrat Jagdeo announced late Wednesday that Kerik was canceling commitments to Guyana and Trinidad. He said Kerik did not want either country "tainted" by the allegations of ethical violations.
"As far as he is concerned he is innocent and the charges will all go away, but he said he does not want his client to be caught up in this," Jagdeo said.
Kerik was to begin a one-year contract as Guyana's national security adviser in February. He also was hired as a consultant by Trinidad, although it was unclear when that job was to begin.
Opposition leaders in Guyana said Thursday the cancellation came too late to spare their small South American country from embarrassment.
"Kerik's appointment has already cast a blemish on the country," opposition leader Robert Corbin said. "His appointment was always ill conceived and defied all logic."
A New York-based attorney for Kerik, Kenneth Breen, declined to comment.
Earlier this month, The Associated Press reported that U.S. prosecutors could indict Kerik on multiple felony counts, including tax evasion, conspiracy to eavesdrop and providing false information, according to a person close to the investigation in New York. Kerik has denied any wrongdoing.
CAYMAN ISLANDS: Officials searching for Cuban migrants who broke out of detention center
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) Two illegal Cuban migrants escaped from a detention center in the Cayman Islands and are still at large, an immigration official said Thursday.
The pair have eluded authorities since they escaped the facility in a residential area early Thursday, according to Acting Chief Immigration Officer Kerry Nixon.
Meanwhile, immigration staff and police are also trying to locate two other Cuban migrants a man and a woman who escaped from the detention center on April 5.
Nixon declined to comment on how the migrants escaped from the Grand Cayman facility, which is surrounded by a fence topped with barbed wire. Grand Cayman, the largest of the territory's three islands, is where most of the population lives.
Illegal migrants are brought to the detention center while they wait to be repatriated or their asylum claims are reviewed.
Cubans who set foot on Cayman shores are generally returned home.
The wealthy British dependency is roughly 150 miles (241 kilometers) south of Cuba.
CUBA: New opposition group calls for human rights commission in parliament
HAVANA (AP) A new coalition of moderate Cuban opposition groups called Thursday for the creation of a human rights commission in the National Assembly, cheered by an agreement Havana struck with Spain to open a dialogue on human rights and other issues.
The recently founded Dialogue for Rights Coalition also announced it will work to eliminate the death penalty, distribute copies of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and win the release of political prisoners.
Manuel Cuesta Morua, whose Progressive Arc group is part of the coalition, said the group plans a signature drive to back its request that the parliament form a human rights commission. The Democratic Solidarity Party, which claims 1,000 Cuban members, is also a member of the coalition.
The group is at odds with many of Cuba's better known opponents, who were irritated that Spanish Foreign Minister Miguel Angel Moratinos did not meet with them during his visit to the island earlier this month.
Moratinos and his Cuban counterpart, Felipe Perez Roque, agreed to explore regular bilateral talks that could include a discussion of human rights.
PUERTO RICO: Island orders all government agencies to start recycling programs
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) All government agencies in Puerto Rico must begin recycling programs under an executive order announced Thursday, part of a strategy to reduce pressure on the U.S. territory's swollen landfills.
The order signed by Gov. Anibal Acevedo Vila will help the government toward a goal of recycling 35 percent of the island's garbage, according to Javier Quintana, director of the territory's waste authority. Currently, only about 10 percent of solid waste is recycled.
Each organization will be responsible for appointing a recycling coordinator. Agencies that do not comply within 180 days will face fines, Quintana said.
The Caribbean island of 4 million people, which produces more trash per person than nearly any country except the United States, faces a garbage crunch at a dwindling number of open landfills. Nearly half its dumps have closed since the early 1990s, some after reaching capacity and others for environmental violations.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: Alleged leader of Pennsylvania cocaine ring deported
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) Dominican authorities deported a U.S. citizen wanted in a multimillion dollar (euro) cocaine ring, officials said Thursday.
Adalberto "Frank" Rivera Diaz was wanted as a chief partner in an 11-man drug ring accused by the Pennsylvania attorney general's office of selling US$10 million (euro7.4 million) of cocaine in rural Lancaster County.
The 31-year-old of Dominican descent was arrested while visiting the central city of San Francisco de Macoris, the national anti-drug agency said.
He was flown to Miami aboard a commercial flight on Wednesday and turned over to U.S. authorities to face trial in Pennsylvania.
Rivera is suspected of making frequent trips to New York City to pick up shipments of cocaine in 2005. He faces charges including selling and possessing cocaine, criminal conspiracy and participating in a corrupt organization.
CRICKET: World Cup: Sri Lanka shows multi-faceted attack with Malinga missing against NZ
ST. GEORGE'S, Grenada (AP) Sri Lanka captain Mahela Jayawardene had said his team was not reliant on Lasith Malinga and on Thursday it proved it.
Malinga missed the World Cup Super 8s match against New Zealand after damaging left ankle ligaments in training. Chaminda Vaas stepped up with a man of the match performance to help Sri Lanka cruise to a six-wicket win over a major contender for the title.
Vaas took three wickets for 33 runs to help restrict the Kiwis to 219 for seven and the Sri Lanka batsmen easily took their team to 222-4 with five overs left.
The outcome defied predictions that Sri Lanka might struggle without the pace bowler whose unorthodox sideways action has clinched 15 wickets, more than anyone in the tournament besides Australia veteran Glenn McGrath.
"We are not a one-man team," Jayawardene said. "The last 16 months, we've played as a team and that's why we've won matches. What we do is we adapt to whatever combination we play.
"Lasith not being in the team gave us a different combination. That's something we lost."
The combination Thursday was Vaas backed up by fellow pacers Dilhara Fernando and Farveez Maharoof, with star spinner Muttiah Muralitharan taking 3-32 to join McGrath and Malinga atop the tournament bowling charts.
Vaas removed Stephen Fleming and Ross Taylor in the first three overs after Fleming had won the toss and chose to bat.
 Load-Date: April 13, 2007

 

End of Document
