

A package of news briefs from the Caribbean
Associated Press International
March 4, 2008 Tuesday 1:37 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 1253 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




PUERTO RICO: Puerto Rico says striking teachers must return to jobs to avoid expulsion
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) Public school teachers will face no disciplinary action for joining what is now an 8-day island-wide strike if they abandon picket lines and return immediately to work, the island's top education official said Monday.
Teachers who have defied previous government warnings to end their strike will not be dismissed or suspended if they return to classrooms right away, Education Secretary Rafael Aragunde told reporters.
He had recently warned that teachers who skipped more than five days of work during the strike were effectively abandoning their posts and faced expulsion from the public education system.
Teachers Federation President Rafael Feliciano has painted Aragunde's warnings as "irresponsible" threats.
The union declared the strike on Feb. 20 after 30 months of negotiations to increase teachers' salaries and address shortages of books, computers and other materials reached a deadlock.
The U.S. territory's government has refused to negotiate until the walkout ends, but Gov. Anibal Acevedo Vila said he was willing to meet with leaders of the now decertified union in an informal sitdown to encourage an end to the strike.
Puerto Rican public school teachers, who have been without a contract for more than two years, earn a starting yearly salary of $19US,200 (euro12,659) lower than in any U.S. state. Some have accused the union of ordering the walkout prematurely, while others expressed fear they could be fired under a local law that bans any disruption of public education.
GRENADA: Utility plans to erect wind turbines to reduce reliance on fossil fuels
ST. GEORGE'S, Grenada (AP) This southern Caribbean island's power company plans to erect wind turbines to reduce its reliance on imported fossil fuels, a top utility official said Monday.
Grenada Electricity Services Limited, the sole power provider for the island and its tiny outlying districts of Carriacou and Petit Martinique, has leased 300 acres (121 hectares) of land in St. Patrick's parish to establish a wind farm, said company manager Vernon Lawrence.
The utility, commonly known as Grenlec, is awaiting government permission.
The hurricane-prone Caribbean country of 90,000 inhabitants currently draws the large majority of its power from oil-powered facilities.
Grenlec and government officials are in the early stages of discussing financing and the amount of wind turbines to be used.
The project's first phase would make it a 6 megawatt wind farm, Lawrence said. Grenlec facilities currently have the capacity to provide 49 megawatts of electricity.
The Grenadian government pledged last year to have all police precincts, public schools and health clinics operate by solar power by 2010.
The push for renewable energy sources comes as Grenada receives preferential terms to buy fuel under the Petrocaribe accord, a 2005 agreement with Venezuela's state oil company which promises the island 340,000 barrels of gasoline, fuel oil and diesel a year.
It received its first shipment of 20,000 barrels of subsidized Venezuelan fuel last October.
GUYANA: Air traffic controllers trickle back to work after staging weekend sickout
GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP) Air traffic controllers trickled back to work Monday after most called in sick over the weekend in a salary dispute, Guyanese civil aviation authorities said.
No domestic or international flights were canceled by the two-day sickout since senior staff manned flight control towers at the Cheddi Jagan International Airport, according to Zulfikar Mohamed, chief of the civil aviation authority.
Roughly 20 of the country's 30 controllers called in sick to protest delays in retroactive pay increases of about 5 percent approved in 2005.
Mohamed said administrative problems have delayed implementation of the salary increases. Resolution was expected later this week as lawyers representing the two sides hash over the pay dispute.
Authorities said a tiny municipal airport east of the South American nation's capital, Georgetown, was temporarily shuttered due to the sickout.
The International Civil Aviation Organization, a U.N. group that sets basic security standards for civil aviation worldwide, did not immediately return a message seeking comment.
CUBA: Fidel Castro blames US for rising tensions between Venezuela, Ecuador, Colombia
HAVANA (AP) Fidel Castro blamed the U.S. for bringing Colombia to the brink of a military clash with neighboring Venezuela and Ecuador, writing on Monday that "genocidal plans of the Yankee empire" created tensions between the South American nations.
Venezuela and Ecuador ordered troops to their borders with Colombia and withdrew their ambassadors from Bogota after Colombia killed a top rebel leader, Raul Reyes, on Ecuadorean soil on Saturday.
"We can plainly hear the trumpets of war to the south of our continent as a consequence of genocidal plans of the Yankee empire," Castro wrote in an essay published in the Communist Party daily Granma.
Ecuadorean President Rafael Correa had planned to fly to Havana on Monday to participate in an economic forum, but Castro wrote that the crisis caused "our dear friend" to cancel his trip.
Colombian President Alvaro Uribe is an ally of Washington, which has backed his country's battle against the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, the country's largest guerrilla group.
Castro's comments, at the end of a lengthy essay on other topics, echoed accusations by his friend President Hugo Chavez of Venezuela that Washington was to blame for the crisis.
Castro, 81 and ailing, stepped aside as president last month. He was succeeded by his brother Raul, 76, who had been provisional president since Castro underwent emergency surgery in July 2006.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: Oil spill threatens beaches in Caribbean nation
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican (AP) Bands of fuel drifting off the Dominican Republic's southern coast could foul popular beaches and ports, the country's Environmental Ministry said on Monday.
At least 900 gallons of oil spilled into the sea early on Sunday during an on-ship fuel transfer east of the capital of Santo Domingo, Environmental Ministry spokesman Mayo Rodriguez said.
Technicians on Monday removed 20 cubic meters of tainted sand near the Puerto Caucedo port and a naval base. Beaches were closed in nearby Boca Chica and Juan Dolio, but currents have kept the slick away from popular tourist resorts so far, Rodriguez said.
The ship, which Dominican officials say was named the Seaboard Caribbean, was in transit to the United States at the time of the spill, Rodriguez said. Its registration could not be immediately confirmed.
HAITI: Closing arguments under way in Haitian slave trial
FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. (AP) Attorneys have begun closing arguments in the case of four members of a South Florida family accused of forcing a Haitian teen into involuntary servitude.
Federal prosecutor Edward Chung said Simone Celestin (cell-es-TEEN') was treated like the family's property and had no choice but to work for six years until she escaped in 2005.
Defense attorneys argue Celestin's allegations of modern slavery were part of her plan to secure legal residency in the U.S. Attorney Leonard Fenn says Celestin was frustrated about not attending school in Florida, but she was not locked away or abused.
None of the family members testified during the weeklong trial. All have pleaded not guilty.
Prosecutors will give their rebuttal Tuesday morning before the jury begins deliberations.
 Load-Date: March 4, 2008

 

End of Document
