

A package of news briefs from the Caribbean
Associated Press International
December 24, 2007 Monday 1:07 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 1677 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




CUBA: Chavez deepens Venezuelan investment in communist-run island
HAVANA (AP) Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez headed home after deepening his country's investment in communist-run Cuba this weekend, honking wildly as he drove himself to the airport and small groups of Cubans cheered him on.
Chavez and interim Cuban leader Raul Castro, who sat by his side Sunday in the open top four-wheel-drive vehicle, oversaw the signing of 14 new energy, finance, mining and agricultural agreements, including a project to expand an oil refinery in the eastern city of Santiago and develop petrochemical production on the island.
Communist Party newspaper Granma quoted Vice President Carlos Lage as saying that Venezuela and Cuba have signed more than US$7 billion (euro4.9 billion) in deals this year a figure cited by other officials in recent weeks.
The new accords come as Chavez continues to expand his oil-rich nation's largesse and influence across the region through cheap petroleum deals.
The agreements were signed Saturday in Santiago, where Chavez was led by Raul Castro on a tour of the military barracks that he and his brother Fidel attacked with a band of armed rebels in 1953, launching the Cuban revolution.
During the tour, Chavez repeatedly mentioned Fidel Castro, his 81-year-old socialist ally and close friend. Castro has not been seen in public since emergency intestinal surgery prompted him to cede power to a provisional government led by his younger brother Raul in July 2006.
HAITI: Caribbean country seeking Chevron's help to import Venezuelan fuel
PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti (AP) Haiti is seeking a contract with Chevron Corp. to ship Venezuelan oil purchased under President Hugo Chavez's discount fuel program, a government official said Sunday.
Haiti joined Chavez's Petrocaribe initiative more than a year ago, but has been unable to transport or receive any oil shipments so far, said Michael Lecorps, director of the aid management office in charge of implementing the program.
An agreement with Chevron to ship the oil from Venezuela to Haiti would allow the fuel-starved nation to import 14,000 barrels of oil a day, he said.
Under Petrocaribe's financing terms, Haiti would have three months to pay for 60 percent of each oil shipment, and 25 years to pay the balance at 1 percent interest, officials said.
Haitian President Rene Preval first announced the negotiations with Chevron, which operates Texaco gas stations in the impoverished Caribbean country, after returning Saturday from a Petrocaribe summit in Cuba.
"We're going to sign with Chevron and then we're going to start ordering oil," Preval said, adding that Venezuelan technicians will visit Haiti to consult on the project.
Chevron officials at the company's San Ramon, California, headquarters did not respond to requests for comment.
While Petrocaribe is mainly a financing program, Chavez encouraged heads of state at the 16-nation summit to take advantage of a clause that would allow them to pay for oil with services or local goods. Cuba, for instance, sends doctors to Venezuela in exchange for oil.
ANTIGUA: WTO ruling could resolve gambling dispute with US
ST. JOHN'S, Antigua (AP) Antigua and Barbuda's finance minister said he is hopeful an international ruling giving his nation the right to impose limited trade sanctions against the U.S. will push Washington to resolve a long-running dispute over Internet gambling.
The World Trade Organization on Friday backed Antigua's request to target U.S. services, copyrights and trademarks in retaliation for a U.S. online betting ban but will allow it to impose only $21 million (euro14.6 million) in annual trade sanctions.
Finance Minister Errol Cort described the WTO's "terribly flawed" decision as a setback for his twin-island nation, which had sought to apply US$3.4 billion (euro2.4 billion) in retaliatory measures against U.S.
Still, the ruling could pave the way for resolution, he stressed.
"We think that this decision, as terribly flawed as it may be, should still have the desired result of getting the U.S. to sit down with us and seek an amicable resolution," Cort said in a statement on Friday. "We look forward to meeting with the U.S. delegation in the very near future."
Neither the U.S. nor Antigua can appeal the WTO decision.
Antigua accuses the U.S. of crippling its gaming industry by banning Americans from placing online bets with gambling operators, including those based in the Caribbean nation. It sought impose trade sanctions in retaliation for lost revenue.
Washington acknowledged that the WTO ruled its Internet gambling restrictions are illegal, but said Antigua should only be compensated for about US$500,000 (euro347,705) in lost annual income.
ARUBA: Report: Former suspect in Holloway disappearance regrets no trial
AMSTERDAM, Netherlands (AP) Joran van der Sloot, the former suspect in the disappearance in Aruba of American teenager Natalee Holloway, told a Dutch newspaper he regrets that he was not formally prosecuted for any crime.
"I would have liked to have seen a trial, so that everything could be out in the open," Van der Sloot told DAG in his first public remarks since being released Dec. 7. He had been re-arrested in November for a new interrogation about Holloway's disappearance in 2005.
The newspaper published short excerpts from the interview Sunday ahead of Monday's edition. Spokesman Bob Witman of DAG said the interview was conducted via e-mail with Van der Sloot in Aruba, where he is currently staying.
Public prosecutors on the island closed their investigation Dec. 18, saying they believed Holloway was dead but they did not have enough evidence to prosecute Van der Sloot or two other former suspected accomplices in her disappearance.
Prosecutors said the case can be reactivated if "serious" new evidence emerges but that it would be impossible if they were to prosecute and fail, due to rules against double jeopardy.
Under Aruban law, the statute of limitations is six years for involuntary manslaughter and 12 for homicide.
Holloway was on a high school graduation trip to the island when she vanished May 30, 2005, hours before she was to return home to Mountain Brook, Alabama.
VIRGIN ISLANDS: Territory's governor signs tax reform measure into law
CHARLOTTE AMALIE, U.S. Virgin Islands (AP) Gov. John deJongh has approved legislation that transfers oversight of property tax collection in the U.S. Virgin Islands from the finance department to the office of the lieutenant governor.
The move is part of an ongoing effort to improve property tax assessment and boost revenues in the cash-strapped U.S. territory, where the three islands' accumulated debt has reached nearly US$3 billion (euro2 billion).
In a Sunday statement, DeJongh urged Senate President Usie Richards to back pending legislation that further revamps the Caribbean territory's tax system by establishing four different property classes, each with a separate tax rate.
The U.S. Virgin Islands has used the same rate of assessed value for all types of property since 1936. Raising duties on commercial holdings and timeshares would allow the government to meet budget targets, deJongh said.
TRINIDAD: Report: Bank head says nation must cut spending, boost food supply to tame inflation
PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) Trinidad and Tobago must reduce public spending and invest more in agriculture to lower food prices and stem rising inflation, the chief of the central bank said in comments published Sunday.
Annual inflation jumped from 7.3 percent in October to 8.1 percent in November, in large part due to escalating prices for rice and other staples, Central Bank governor Ewart Williams told the Trinidad and Tobago Express newspaper.
Food costs have increased 25 percent since 2005 in the oil- and gas-rich Caribbean nation, government figures show.
High wholesale food prices are felt most strongly in the countryside, where tens of thousands of people have missed out on gains from the nation's thriving energy sector, which accounts for 40 percent of Trinidad's gross domestic product.
HAITI: President marks Christmas with request for peace amid kidnapping spike
PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti (AP) President Rene Preval asked kidnappers to stop targeting youngsters during a somber holiday address Sunday in the impoverished Caribbean nation.
Preval made his plea before handing gifts to 500 disabled children at the national palace in Port-au-Prince. Standing beside Haitian music stars and an aide dressed as Santa Claus, he first implored and then threatened criminals to stop abducting children.
"Gangs, for me, please give the kids a chance," he said. "If you don't give the kids a chance, (the police) will make you."
Although the total number of abductions is down from previous years, Haiti has suffered a spate of kidnappings in the run-up to the holiday season.
At least 41 people have been kidnapped since Nov. 1 as criminals seek money for Christmas gifts. Many of the victims are children, seized by gangs or abducted by relatives.
The country is still reeling from the case of a 7-year-old boy who was killed and mutilated last month after his parents could not pay a US$680 (euro472) ransom.
"We hope these kidnappings will end," said teacher Stalina Persine, 48, who attended Sunday's ceremony. "It is a problem for everybody."
Persine's school, which educates mentally disabled children, is careful to send adults to escort children outside the building and conducts frequent headcounts to ensure no students are missing.
JAMAICA: Caribbean country rounds up prostitutes in holiday sweep
KINGSTON, Jamaica (AP) Jamaican police are rounding up prostitutes in Kingston's financial district in response to Christmas season complaints from business owners.
Police have in recent days conducted sweeps against prostitutes and men seeking prostitutes in New Kingston, the Jamaican capital's business center, assistant Superintendent Wayne Cameron said Sunday.
Sixteen suspects have been arrested in the past week, he said. Most, including four men accused of seeking prostitutes, were charged with loitering.
 Load-Date: December 24, 2007

 

End of Document
