

A package of news briefs from the Caribbean
Associated Press International
April 9, 2008 Wednesday 1:58 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 1100 words
Body




HAITI: Hungry Haitians storm presidential palace, loot businesses in expanding food riots
PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti (AP) Hungry Haitians stormed the presidential palace to demand the resignation of President Rene Preval over soaring food prices and U.N. peacekeepers battled rioters with rubber bullets and tear gas.
Rioters were chased away from the presidential palace but by late afternoon Tuesday they had left trails of destruction across Port-au-Prince. Concrete barricades and burned-out cars blocked streets, while windows were smashed and buildings set on fire from the capital's center up through its densely populated hills.
Outnumbered U.N. peacekeepers watched as people looted businesses near the presidential palace, not budging from the building's perimeter. Nearby, but out of sight of authorities, another group swarmed a slow-moving car and tried to drag its female driver out the window.
"We are hungry! He must go!" protesters shouted as they tried to break into the presidential palace by charging its chained gates with a rolling dumpster. Moments later, Brazilian soldiers in blue U.N. helmets arrived on jeeps and assault vehicles, firing rubber bullets and tear gas canisters and forcing protesters away from the gates.
Food prices, which have risen 40 percent on average since mid-2007, are causing unrest around the world. But nowhere do they pose a greater threat to democracy than in Haiti, one of the world's poorest countries where in the best of times most people struggle to fill their bellies.
Riots broke out in the normally placid southern port of Les Cayes last week, quickly escalating as protesters tried to burn down a U.N. compound and leaving five people dead. The protests spread to other cities, and on Monday tens of thousands took to the capital's streets.
PUERTO RICO: Cemex plant begins burning scrap tires for fuel, despite opposition
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) Mexican cement giant Cemex began burning used tires for plant fuel in Puerto Rico on Tuesday, a move that is intended to relieve a garbage crisis but has raised concerns about environmental and health risks.
Cemex SAB's plant in the southern city of Ponce is the first to burn scrap tires for fuel in the U.S. Caribbean territory, Cemex Puerto Rico President Carlos Jacks said.
Jacks said the practice will eliminate a noxious waste product from the island's garbage dumps. Puerto Rico, an island of nearly 4 million people, generates about 5 million used tires annually and faces a severe shortage of space for its garbage. Currently, only about 10 percent of the island's solid waste is recycled.
Environmentalists and a group of 81 Ponce residents have expressed concern that burning the tires will cause pollution and respiratory problems. But Jacks told reporters the plant will employ new pollution filters to contain emissions, and that it is complying with U.S. Environmental Protection Agency guidelines.
Javier Quintana, director of Puerto Rico's waste authority, said the public agency endorses the project.
Cemex Puerto Rico will replace about 20 percent of the imported coal it had used to power the plant by incinerating 1.5 million to 2 million tires per year in its cement kiln, the company said.
GUYANA: Military to teach recruits math, English, after most flunk remedial exam
GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP) Guyana's defense force says it will offer free math and English lessons to army recruits after most military service candidates flunked a remedial exam.
The Guyana Defense Force unveiled its plan Tuesday after just 17 percent of 400 military hopefuls passed an aptitude test similar to one given to elementary school students.
Army spokesman Col. Bruce Lovell says the military will contact recruits who nearly passed to offer them remedial courses.
The army in the English-speaking South American country has 2,200 soldiers and plans to add 300 more by August.
BASEBALL: White Sox manager's comments on Clemente stir controversy in Puerto Rico
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) For many baseball fans in Puerto Rico, no ball player could ever rival island-bred Roberto Clemente.
So Chicago White Sox manager Ozzie Guillen's statement that Clemente was only the third-best player produced by the island, behind Ivan Rodriguez and Roberto Alomar, has angered some.
"No one is going to take No. 1 away from Roberto for the moment," said Ramiro Martinez, a retired Puerto Rican sports reporter who covered Clemente's career beginning in the 1950s.
Clemente, a Hall of Fame right fielder with the Pittsburgh Pirates, ended his career with 3,000 hits. He died in a plane crash on New Year's Eve 1972 on a trip to deliver relief supplies to earthquake victims in Nicaragua.
Guillen set off debates across this U.S. Caribbean territory when he made the comparison on Saturday to the Detroit Free Press. He elaborated on Monday, saying he placed Rodriguez ahead of Clemente in part because he plays a more demanding position as a catcher and has endured the Texas heat for so many seasons.
"That's my opinion," said Guillen. "It doesn't have to be the right one."
Guillen, a Venezuelan, also described himself as the "biggest Roberto Clemente fan on earth" and said he carries a picture of Clemente in his wallet.
Clemente's son, Luis Roberto Clemente, who owns a nonprofit athletic center catering to children in Puerto Rico, said he learned of the statement in a text message from an exasperated friend in New York.
"I am very certain and very at ease about what my father has accomplished," Clemente told The Associated Press on Tuesday.
CRICKET: West Indies fined for slow over rate in test win over Sri Lanka
PORT-OF-SPAIN, Trinidad (AP) West Indies captain Chris Gayle was fined 70 percent of his match fee for failing to meet the minimum rate of overs in the second test defeat of Sri Lanka.
Each teammate also was fined 35 percent of their match fee for the same offense.
Match referee Chris Broad ruled West Indies bowled six overs short, breaching the code of conduct.
Gayle pleaded not guilty at the disciplinary hearing, but Broad said he failed to ensure the team met the minimum over-rate.
"During the hearing, neither the captain, coach nor manager was able to persuade me that the shortfall in overs was beyond their control or that the allowances permitted to teams by the match officials were not appropriate," Broad said.
"I saw very little evidence that the West Indies team, after learning of their slow over-rate predicament, actually tried to speed things up. Therefore, they left me with little option but to enact this penalty."
West Indies won by six wickets on Sunday, squaring the two-test series.
 Load-Date: April 9, 2008

 

End of Document
