

A package of news briefs from the Caribbean
Associated Press International
January 29, 2007 Monday 12:58 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 1577 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




GUANTANAMO: AP Interview: Muslim adviser working for US treads warily at base
GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE, Cuba (AP) The Middle Eastern man's name is a tightly held secret. No one in his family except his wife knows he works at this U.S. military base, where nearly 400 men captured in Washington's war on terror are held.
Known only as "Zak" by the detention staff and "Zaki" to the detainees, he is Guantanamo Bay's Muslim cultural adviser, a civilian employee who meets with detainees and helps their American captors understand their Muslim ways.
Zak says he has helped add books to the prison library, improve the prisoners' food and at times has raised prisoner concerns to the prison's military commander. But he's no advocate for the detainees, and many do not like him very much. Zak says detainees have branded him a traitor and an enemy of God and that they would kill him if they could.
Zak, who works for a private contractor hired by the military, is vague about his background, saying only that he is an engineer and was educated in Europe and the United States.
He and his wife owned a convenience store somewhere in the United States. They closed it, he said, because customers taunted her after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. Zak then became a translator for the United States, working in Iraq. He arrived at this base in southeast Cuba in 2005.
DOMINICA: Island's Carnival season opens to pulsing calypso beat
ROSEAU, Dominica (AP) Calypso bands and costumed revelers danced though the narrow lanes of Dominica's capital as the lush tropical island's annual Carnival season kicked off.
Thousands of people lined the streets of Roseau on Saturday, the celebration's opening day, to shimmy to Caribbean dance beats as masqueraders in ornate sequined costumes and towering headdresses marched past in formation.
Several old-timers said the festival's opening day was not as impressive as in past years, but Dennis Sushvo, a tourist from the Ukraine, was dazzled.
"This is beautiful! I love it," Sushvo shouted above the pulsing beat of drums as people wearing the traditional "sensay" costume, a full-body outfit made from vinyl bags and ropes with a face mask, strutted by.
As in many Caribbean nations, Carnival in Dominica is an annual rite of dancing, colorful costumes and tradition. The event took hold after the end of slavery in the region in 1834.
Dominica's Carnival celebrations will culminate with a band competition on Feb. 19-20. The island is a former British colony of about 70,000 people.
FRENCH CARIBBEAN: Socialist presidential candidate wrapping up get-out-the-vote tour
POINTE-A-PITRE, Guadeloupe (AP) French Socialist presidential candidate Segolene Royal on Sunday completed a campaign swing through the French Caribbean, home to more than half a million potential voters whom she said could make a difference in key elections next April.
In France's last presidential race in 2002, voter abstention in the islands of Guadeloupe and neighboring Martinique both former French colonies turned overseas departments was about 65 percent. But Royal, whom polls show running neck-and-neck with Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy, the governing UMP party's candidate, hopes to get out and dominate the Caribbean vote this election cycle.
"I need you. Vote," said Royal in a rally Saturday in the town of Les Abymes, in Guadeloupe. About 1,500 supporters attended the meeting a far cry from the 2,000 to 4,000 that Royal's campaign managers had hoped to draw.
Still, her campaign officials said they expected Royal to come first in round-one voting in the region, taking 45 percent in Guadeloupe and more than 55 percent in Martinique.
The Socialist candidate in the 2002 elections, Lionel Jospin, garnered only 23 percent of the vote in Guadeloupe and 29 percent in Martinique.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: Nation deports U.S. man accused in raping of minor in Indiana
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) Dominican authorities have deported a U.S. citizen wanted in Indiana in a rape investigation, an official said.
Kent Douglas Irwin, 44, faces rape charges in connection with the rape of a minor. He was arrested last week in Arroyo Frio, a small town in the center of the Caribbean country, and deported Friday to the United States, Dominican anti-drug agency spokesman Roberto Lebron said.
TRACK: Francique, Regis win island's most prestigious annual sports award
ST. GEORGE'S, Grenada (AP) Top runners Alleyne Francique and Hazel-Ann Regis have received Grenada's most prestigious annual sports award.
Francique, who retained the men's World Indoor 400 title last March in Russia and captured silver at the Commonwealth Games in Australia a few weeks later, has been named Sportsman of the Year six consecutive years.
The Texas-based runner received the honor at a ceremony Saturday evening in St. George's, the capital. The 31-year-old grew up in Conference, a farming community some 32 kilometers (20 miles) northeast of the capital, and is considered the island's most accomplished and beloved athlete.
Regis was a favorite to win the award after opening her 2007 indoor season with a second-place finish in the 200 at the Norwich Union International in Glasgow. She did not attend the ceremony because of her competition schedule.
Regis completed 2006 as the IAAF's 21st-ranked female athlete in the 400. The Louisiana-based runner won the Carolina Classics in Puerto Rico in May, and recorded a season-best 50.94 seconds at the Norwich Union British Grand Prix in Gateshead in June.
CRICKET: Trinidad dominates Windwards as Ganga and Barath lead attack
POINTE-A-PIERRE, Trinidad (AP) Skipper Daren Ganga and rising star Adrian Barath powered host Trinidad and Tobago to a dominating 364 for six at stumps Sunday on the first day of their Carib Beer Series match with the Windward Islands at Guaracara Park.
Ganga (123 not out) won the toss and elected to bat first on a flat pitch that offered little aid to the bowlers.
Sixteen-year-old phenom Barath (101) and the left-handed Gibran Mohammed posted a solid 143 for the opening stand before Mohammed made a well-played 60 for his second half century since being promoted to the top of the side's order.
Barath again outscored his captain in reaching 101, his second century so far in only his third outing for the senior national team this year.
The young batsman followed up his 131 against the Leeward Islands with a blistering knock, notching 16 boundaries in his hundred, which came off just 129 deliveries in 145 minutes at the crease.
Windwards' bowlers gained strength in the middle session when Trinidad slipped from 143 without loss to 211 for five. Left-arm spinner Denis George snapped up three quick wickets, to end the day with figures of three for 73 from 19 overs.
CRICKET: Collymore bowls Barbados into commanding position over host Jamaica
KINGSTON, Jamaica (AP) West Indies fast bowler Corey Collymore bowled leaders Barbados into a commanding position over Jamaica on Sunday in their top-of-the-table Carib Beer Series match at Chedwin Park.
Collymore, who was not considered for the West Indies tour of India, bowled accurately to end with 6 for 30 off 19 overs as Jamaica elected to bat after winning the toss.
Danza Hyatt was the only man to be dismissed before lunch, bowled by Collymore for 15 at 34-1.
Despite a 53-run second wicket partnership between captain Wavell Hinds, who joined Brenton Parchment and took Jamaica to lunch at 58-1, the home team lost everything in the post-lunch session. Barbados leads the competition by 30 points.
Hinds top-scored with 39, hitting six fours and a six off 111 deliveries while Parchment contributed 35, which included four boundaries.
Toward the end of the day's competition, Andrew Richards hit three fours in making 12 and Nikita Miller hit two fours in getting 10 against Pedro Collins 2-29 and Tino Best 2-27.
At stumps on the opening day's play, Barbados closed on 120 for three.
Dale Richards, who took 24 runs out of Jermaine Lawson's fifth over, will resume Monday on 74.
CRICKET: Guyana gains edge over Leeward Islands in Carib Beer Series opener
BERBICE, Guyana (AP) Guyana enjoyed a strong first day in their Carib Beer Series match against Leeward Islands as the South American nation's squad went 67 without loss, replying to the relatively modest 187 all out made by their opponents.
The Guyana bowlers, led by off spinner and West Indies Test player Narsingh Deonarine (4-24), delivered an admirable effort before openers Sewnarine Chattergoon and Royston Crandon. The home team, batting through the remaining 22 overs in the day, were unbeaten at stumps.
Guyana needs a further 121 runs for first innings honors when play resumes Monday at the Albion Community Centre Ground in the eastern Berbice region.
Winning the toss and taking first strike on a pitch that had some bounce, the Leeward Islands went to lunch on 81 for four, having lost four wickets in a clutter just before the break after openers Maxford Pipe and Codville Rodgers posted 59 for the first wicket.
Pipe and Rodgers played meticulously in occupying the crease for just under 90 minutes, bringing up the Leeward Islands' fifty in 80 minutes before Jeremy Gordon (2-42) initiated the breakthrough in the third over of his second spell. Gordon scattered the stumps of Rodgers, who made (26) including four fours.
The fast bowler then found the edge of Steve Liburd's bat for Azeemul Haniff to pouch a low catch to his left at second slip as the batsman pushed forward.
 Load-Date: January 29, 2007

 

End of Document
