

A package of news briefs from the Caribbean
Associated Press International
December 19, 2007 Wednesday 2:53 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 2063 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




ARUBA: Natalee Holloway disappearance becomes a cold case
ORANJESTAD, Aruba (AP) Prosecutors dismissed the case against the three main suspects in the disappearance of Natalee Holloway, saying Tuesday they still believe they were involved in her death but can't prove it after 932 days of searching failed to turn up a body.
The three young men were re-arrested last month after prosecutors discovered online chat sessions they hoped would break the case open. But none of the men talked in custody, and without the young American's body, prosecutors said they had no recourse but to close the most notorious missing-person case in the Caribbean.
If the three suspects were put on trial, the lack of evidence "would lead to an acquittal," the Public Prosecutor's Office said in a statement.
Moving Holloway into the cold-case files "is a tough burden to bear" for her parents, they acknowledged, but the prosecutors said they had little choice.
Holloway was 18 when she disappeared on May 30, 2005, the last night of a trip with members of her Mountain Brook, Alabama, high school graduating class. She was last seen leaving a bar with the three suspects: Joran van der Sloot and brothers Deepak and Satish Kalpoe, who all lived on this Dutch island off the coast of Venezuela.
Holloway's parents, who divorced years before her disappearance, have pushed hard to find what happened to their daughter and Americans have followed every development on tabloid TV.
Holloway's mother, Beth Twitty, is "terribly disappointed" with Tuesday's decision, her spokeswoman said.
CUBA: Castro hints at retirement, but doesn't want to fade as island's leader
HAVANA (AP) Fidel Castro says he won't stand in the way of "younger people" who can lead Cuba, but he also insists on being "of consequence" until the end of his life. So it goes with the ailing 81-year-old eager to see others keep the revolution going but reluctant to let go of power.
The real question is not whether Castro will retire, but whether it will make much difference in Cuba.
The answer: probably not, as long as he's alive.
Despite much excitement this week over one ambiguous sentence in a letter about global warming in which Castro indicated he will not hold back Cuba's younger leadership, Castro already has settled into a kind of reflective semiretirement.
He hasn't appeared in public in the 17 months since having intestinal surgery and naming his younger brother Raul, now 76, as Cuba's "provisional" president.
But island life has hardly changed under his brother, and the elder Castro has retained a vibrant role in Cuban politics, penning several essays a week and showing up sporadically in official photographs and prerecorded messages.
After the Castro brothers, few younger leaders stand out despite the fact that Fidel has made a priority of nurturing fresh talent to carry on Cuba's communist revolution.
Vice President Carlos Lage, 56, is Cuba's de facto prime minister and a strong possibility to be No. 2 if and when Raul Castro permanently assumes the presidency. Foreign Minister Felipe Perez Roque, 42, could be another candidate for vice president or a key role in the politically powerful Communist Party, which Castro also now heads.
GUANTANAMO: Judge says US must hold court hearings on prisoner status
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) The U.S. must hold court hearings to determine whether suspected terrorists imprisoned at Guantanamo Bay are prisoners of war or unlawful enemy combatants, a military judge said in a ruling that could delay war-crimes trials.
The judge, Navy Capt. Keith Allred, said in a ruling issued late Monday in Washington that a military administrative panel's status finding is not enough by itself to proceed with a trial at the U.S. base.
Only unlawful enemy combatants can be tried before the military tribunals under a 2006 law that set up the war-crimes trials.
Defense lawyers praised Allred's ruling, which would give detainees another opportunity to prove they are beyond the jurisdiction of the tribunals.
But a spokesman for the Office of Military Commissions, Army Maj. Robert Gifford, said the effect of the ruling is limited because it is not binding on other judges. Military prosecutors have not decided whether to appeal, he said.
Allred made the ruling in the case of Salim Ahmed Hamdan, a former driver for Osama bin Laden charged with conspiracy and supporting terrorism. The judge held two days of hearings this month on whether the Yemeni is an unlawful enemy combatant or a prisoner of war.
The judge said those two days of hearings would serve as a court hearing on his prisoner-of war-status and is expected to issue a ruling soon.
The U.S. holds about 290 men at Guantanamo on suspicion of terrorism or links to al-Qaida or the Taliban and has said it plans to prosecute about 80 before the military tribunals.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: President orders probe into opening of dam during Tropical Storm Olga
PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti (AP) Dominican President Leonel Fernandez has ordered an investigation into the opening of a dam during Tropical Storm Olga that flooded a highly populated river basin, killing at least 30 people, his press office said Tuesday.
A committee charged with overseeing dams in emergencies ordered the floodgates opened on Tavera Dam shortly before midnight Dec. 11, giving local authorities in the central province of Santiago less than an hour to warn residents that a devastating wall of water was on its way.
The incident has become political fodder for the Caribbean country's main opposition parties five months before polls open in a closely contested presidential election. Fernandez is seeking a third term in office.
"There are 33 people dead because of an irresponsible decision," Andres Matos, a spokesman for the opposition Dominican Revolutionary Party, told The Associated Press by phone.
Fernandez appointed Armed Forces Secretary Gen. Ramon Aquino Garcia to oversee the investigation and report back within 90 days.
The Dominican president said it was unacceptable for the country to have "30 or 40 deaths every time we are affected by a natural phenomenon," according to his press office.
Octavio Rodriguez, a member of the committee, told The Associated Press at the time that officials ordered the floodgates opened because they feared the primarily earthen dam would collapse under the strain of heavy rains, threatening the country's second largest city.
BERMUDA: Elections focused on corruption, racial resentment
HAMILTON, Bermuda (AP) The governing party in this wealthy British territory was seeking a third term Tuesday in general elections tinged by racial resentment and allegations of corruption.
Recent polls showed voters evenly split between Premier Ewart Brown's Progressive Labor Party, which took power in 1998 promising a better deal for blacks, and the conservative United Bermuda Party.
The governing party enters the election with a 22-14 majority in parliament. Results were expected Wednesday.
Blacks comprise about 60 percent of Bermuda's 62,000 people and the PLP says many continue to face discrimination in the mid-Atlantic island chain that has emerged as a global financial hub.
Opposition leader Michael Dunkley has called for less focus on race and criticized a PLP bill to enforce racial equality in the workplace.
The premier was among several PLP officials implicated by a recently publicized police dossier that alleged widespread corruption in the public housing corporation, but prosecutors found no evidence of criminal behavior.
Brown, 62, has responded to criticism over the scandal by accusing the UBP of "corruption, deceit, greed and telling lies" during its 30 years in power.
PUERTO RICO: Federal agents arrest 21 for product piracy
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) Federal agents arrested nearly two dozen people Tuesday in a crackdown on rampant copying of movies and music in the U.S. Caribbean territory.
The 21 suspected counterfeit dealers, who were indicted last month after raids at several flea markets across Puerto Rico, were charged with violating federal intellectual property rights statutes, according to the U.S. Department of Justice.
"This underground market is damaging to the artists, the local economy and the consumers," said U.S. Attorney Rosa Emilia Rodriguez, adding Puerto Rico's black market for counterfeit goods such as fake CDs and DVDs has grown in recent years.
Profits from the sale of counterfeit products are used by international organized crime groups to bankroll other criminal activities, according to Manuel Oyola Torres, special agent in charge of the island's U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement office.
U.S. copyright laws provide for maximum prison sentences of five years for a first offense and 10 years for a second or subsequent offense.
The Recording Industry Association of America and the Motion Picture Association of America are assisting ICE agents and Puerto Rican police in the effort.
It was not clear if the suspects, who could not immediately be contacted, had lawyers yet.
CUBA: Dissident asks parliament to free political prisoners, ease travel restrictions
HAVANA (AP) Internationally renowned dissident Oswaldo Paya asked Cuba's parliament on Tuesday to approve an amnesty for political prisoners and to allow Cubans to leave and visit the island without government visas.
Paya and another activist, Minervo Lazaro Chil, turned up at the National Assembly offices and hand-delivered "citizens' petitions" on both matters.
Legislative workers quietly registered the proposals according to protocol. Several men with walkie-talkies who routinely shadow Paya rushed inside the building at one point, but made no effort to stop the proceedings.
"This is a petition made on human terms, not political terms," Paya said to international reporters just outside parliament, drawing stares from a small group of neighbors and residents who gathered to see watch the makeshift news conference.
One proposal called for the release of all "nonviolent" prisoners of conscience, many of whom Paya said are in failing health.
According to the Havana-based Cuban Commission for Human Rights and National Reconciliation, an opposition group that the government does not recognize but tolerates, 246 political prisoners are held in Cuban prisons, down from 283 in July 2006, when 81-year-old Fidel Castro fell ill and ceded power to a provisional government headed by his younger brother Raul.
HAITI: President leaves for Cuba to attend oil summit, check health
PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti (AP) President Rene Preval said Tuesday that Venezuela has promised US$57 million (euro39.5 million) in aid to Haiti, which will be used for airport improvements, energy development and other projects.
Preval, 64, spoke to reporters at Port-au-Prince's airport before traveling to Cuba to attend a regional oil conference and undergo routine medical tests on his prostate.
Cuban doctors have been treating the two-time Haitian president since he was diagnosed with prostate cancer in 2001, a problem which he has since reported is under control.
"Last time the vital signs were good. I hope they're going to be good this time," Preval said.
Several Caribbean leaders will meet in Cuba with Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez about Petrocaribe, Venezuela's oil financing program that offers deferred payments to 15 regional countries to counter rising fuel prices.
Preval said Haiti has extended for another year an agreement with Venezuela to purchase oil on preferential terms, without providing details of the arrangement.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: Authorities arrest 2 men accused of shipping cocaine to Puerto Rico
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) Two Dominican men were arrested and charged with transporting 245 kilograms (540 pounds) of cocaine in territorial waters off this Caribbean country, anti-drug authorities said Tuesday.
Marcos Antonio Pena Naranjo, 38, and Fermin Ortiz Mata, 46, were accused of belonging to a drug-smuggling network that uses speedboats to sneak cocaine into the nearby U.S. territory of Puerto Rico, said Roberto Lebron, a spokesman for the Dominican anti-drug agency.
Agents who boarded the pair's boat found bundles of cocaine hidden beneath piles of fish in a refrigerator, Lebron said.
The Dominican Republic and Haiti, which share the Caribbean island of Hispaniola, are major transshipment points for South American drugs en route to Europe and the United States.
 Load-Date: December 19, 2007

 

End of Document
