

A package of news briefs from the Caribbean
Associated Press International
March 5, 2008 Wednesday 2:08 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 1724 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




PUERTO RICO: Teachers' union calls meeting to decide future of strike
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) Thousands of public school teachers are expected to meet in a sprawling stadium on Wednesday to decide whether to continue their weakening island-wide strike.
Teachers Federation President Rafael Feliciano announced Tuesday that teachers will gather at the Roberto Clemente Coliseum in the capital of San Juan to decide the future of what is now an 9-day strike for higher pay and better working conditions.
"Each one of the members of our organization will have the opportunity to (vote)," Feliciano said during a demonstration. "And this institution will democratically decide the course to follow."
The strike has shown signs of fizzling out in recent days. Roughly 86 percent of public school teachers went to class on Tuesday, along with 76 percent of the system's 500,000 students, according to Education Secretary Rafael Aragunde.
The syndicate that represents the island's 42,000 public school teachers declared the strike on Feb. 20 after 30 months of negotiations to increase salaries and address shortages of books, computers and other materials reached a deadlock.
Puerto Rican public school teachers, who have been without a contract for more than two years, earn a starting yearly salary of US$19,200 (euro12,659) lower than in any U.S. state. Some have accused the union of ordering the walkout prematurely, while others expressed fear they could be fired under a local law that bans any disruption of public education.
TRINIDAD: Prince Charles visits country in first stop of 'eco-friendly' Caribbean tour
CHAGUARAMAS, Trinidad (AP) Sometimes the fight against global warming can be downright pleasant.
Britain's Prince Charles, eschewing pollution-spewing jets, is touring the Caribbean on a 246-foot (75-meter) megayacht with hot tub, gym and 24-member crew as part of his battle to save the environment.
Charles and wife, Camilla, the Duchess of Cornwall, arrived Tuesday on the first leg of a five-island Caribbean tour that the prince's office swears will be friendly to the budget and the environment.
According to Clarence House, the couple's plans to sail rather than fly between islands will reduce the trip's carbon footprint. It will also be cheaper, though the prince's office declined to give a price tag for the royal jaunt to Trinidad, Tobago, St. Lucia, Jamaica and the volcanic island of Montserrat.
In a statement announcing the trip, Clarence House said the tour aboard the Leander, a yacht rented from British businessman Donald Gosling, would "advance key British government priorities in the promotion of sustainable development, environmental protection and youth opportunity."
It was not immediately clear how large of a carbon footprint would be left by the yacht as opposed to a charter flight.
The eco-conscious prince whose Jaguar and Land Rover have been converted to run on biofuels landed at a coast guard port in Chaguaramas in the former British colony, where the couple inspected an honor guard, according to Edmund Dillon, the Caribbean nation's defense chief.
ANTIGUA: George Walter, former prime minister, dies at 79
ST. JOHNS, Antigua (AP) George Walter, a former premier who advocated for Antigua and Barbuda's full independence from Britain, died Tuesday. He was 79.
Walter died of a heart attack at the state-owned Holberton Hospital in St. Johns, his younger brother, Selvyn, confirmed. The former Antiguan premier had been hospitalized for about a week.
In 1971, Walter led the Progressive Labor Movement to victory in elections, defeating Vere Bird Sr. four years after the colony became a British dependency with domestic autonomy.
As premier, Walter campaigned for full independence and opposed a British proposal to make Antigua and Barbuda an island federation. But the self-governing territory's economy struggled during his tenure, especially after Walter's government shut down the islands' sugar industry, and he was ousted by Bird in 1976 elections.
Antigua and Barbuda became an independent nation in 1981.
In a late Tuesday statement, Prime Minister Baldwin Spencer described Walter as a "true champion" of the Caribbean country's working class.
"He will always remain on Antigua and Barbuda's roll of honour for his sterling contributions," Spencer said.
After his defeat in 1976, Walter was convicted of illegally selling metal to the government while in office and imprisoned for three months after his rival's government pursued a case against him. But the conviction was later found to be groundless and was overturned by the West Indies Court of Appeal.
Walter then became an influential boss of the powerful Antigua Workers Union.
State funeral arrangements have not been finalized.
GUYANA: Scottish teen volunteer dies in fall from cliff, police say
GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP) A Scottish teenager who was volunteering as a science teacher in Guyana died after falling from a cliff during a hike, police said Tuesday.
Pamela McCarroll, 18, died Sunday when she slipped and tumbled from a precipice in a southwestern Amazon district of the South American country, according to a police statement.
McCarroll, who was from Beith in Ayrshire, had been in Guyana to teach science to an indigenous community through the Scottish nonprofit Project Trust, which sends teenage volunteers to do social work abroad.
She had arrived in September and was walking with a friend when she slipped and fell down the cliff on Sunday, the group said.
"Pamela was an admirable teacher, very conscientious and hard working," the nonprofit said in a statement.
GUANTANAMO: Lawyers for Canadian at Gitmo investigate source of leaked video
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) U.S. Vice President Dick Cheney's office may have leaked an incriminating video of a Canadian terror suspect facing a war-crimes trial, according to a claim filed by the suspect's lawyers in Guantanamo Bay military court.
Lawyers for Omar Khadr say the video, which apparently shows their client making a roadside bomb in Afghanistan, may have been leaked to the television program "60 Minutes" to counter publicity that has focused on legal setbacks in the case and descriptions of Khadr as a child soldier.
"60 Minutes" aired the tape in November.
Air Force Col. Morris Davis, former chief prosecutor-turned-critic of the Guantanamo tribunals, said Cheney's office may be the source of the video, according to the claim.
Cheney's office did not have any contact with "60 Minutes" on the matter and did not provide the tape, said spokeswoman Megan Mitchell.
A spokesman for "60 Minutes," Kevin Tedesco, also denied the allegation, saying the program had "absolutely no contact" with the vice president's office regarding the story.
Khadr, who was 15 when captured in Afghanistan in 2002, is expected to be one of the first to go to trial at the Guantanamo Bay military base, where the U.S. plans to prosecute about 80 detainees before military tribunals.
CARIBBEAN: Governments to tackle rising food prices at Bahamas summit
GEORGETOWN, Guyana (AP) Caribbean governments plan to seek agreement on strategies to curb rising food prices at a two-day summit in the Bahamas, regional officials said Tuesday.
Trade ministers from the 15-nation Caribbean Community aim to propose a list of items to be excluded from import taxes at a meeting Wednesday in the Bahamian capital of Nassau, where heads of government will hold meetings beginning Friday.
"They are expected to make a determination regarding the removal or reduction of the common external tariff on certain commodities," the trade bloc said in a statement.
Member states' disagreements over which items deserve special treatment have stalled discussions so far.
Food prices have risen as much as 40 percent recently in poor island nations, where the cost of fertilizer and imports have been driven up by international energy prices.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: Country demands to be a host of 2009 World Baseball Classic
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic (AP) The president of the Dominican Republic's baseball league said the nation will pull out of next year's World Baseball Classic if it is not chosen as a host site.
"If they do not give us the opportunity of being a host, like we have requested, the Dominican Republic will not participate," league president Leonardo Matos Berrido said at a news conference Monday.
The tournament is jointly run by U.S. Major League Baseball and its players' union. Both declined comment.
When the WBC began in 2006, sites were Anaheim, California; Kissimmee, Florida; Phoenix; San Diego; San Juan, Puerto Rico; Scottsdale, Arizona; and Tokyo. Tournament organizers have said the 2009 event will include the same 16 teams that contested the 2006 tournament, which was won by Japan.
HAITI: 2 Florida women convicted of keeping Haitian teen as a slave
FORT LAUDERDALE, Florida (AP) A mother and her adult daughter were convicted of keeping a Haitian teen as a slave for six years in their South Florida home, with a jury rejecting their claims that the girl feigned abuse so she could remain in the United States.
Evelyn Theodore, 74, and Maude Paulin, 52, were convicted of conspiring to violate Simone Celestin's 13th Amendment rights to be free from slavery and forcing her to work for them.
Paulin, a Miami-Dade County teacher, also was convicted of harboring an illegal alien for financial gain.
Theodore and Paulin's ex-husband, Saintfort Paulin, were both acquitted of that count but convicted of a lesser charge of harboring an illegal alien. Claire Telasco, Paulin's sister, was acquitted of conspiracy and forced labor charges.
Prosecutors alleged that Celestin was stolen at age 5 from her mother and grandmother in a mountain village and forced to pretend she was an orphan at the orphanage Theodore ran with her late husband in Ranquitte, Haiti.
At age 14, the girl was taken to the U.S. on a 29-day visa. Prosecutors alleged that for the next six years, Celestin's life consisted of 15-hour work days as an unpaid servant, with no schooling. She escaped in 2005.
Celestin, now 22, testified Wednesday that she considered suicide after years of beatings and intimidation. She tearfully described sleeping on the floor, rummaging through cast-off clothes in the garage for something to wear, bathing from a bucket or a garden hose and scrubbing floors when she should have been in school.
 Load-Date: March 5, 2008

 

End of Document
