

A record number of women are serving in parliaments around the world but still just over 16 percent
Associated Press International
February 28, 2006 Tuesday 1:44 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 538 words
Byline: By EDITH M. LEDERER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS 
Body




A record number of women are serving in parliaments around the world but they still account for just over 16 percent of all lawmakers, the Inter-Parliamentary Union said in its annual report card.
IPU Secretary-General Anders Johnsson told a news conference on Monday that "the good news" is that women's participation continues to increase. But the figures also show "how much is left to be done to achieve true equality of status between men and women in politics," he said.
"Women account for roughly half of the world's population," Johnsson said. "They remain dramatically underrepresented in national parliaments and other levels of governments."
In 2005, Johnsson said, elections took place in 39 lower houses of parliament, or single-chamber parliaments, and 1,569 women gained seats accounting for 20.5 percent of members elected.
"The year of 2005 also saw tremendous progress in countries emerging from conflicts Afghanistan, Burundi, Iraq and Liberia are some of those countries where women had previously been excluded or marginalized from political life," he said.
And in a historic victory, Kuwaiti women were finally granted the right to vote and stand for national office, he said.
In another record set last year, women now account for over 30 percent of the members in 20 parliaments, Johnsson said. Newcomers to the list included Andorra, Burundi, New Zealand and Tanzania.
But the target of having a minimum of 30 percent women lawmakers was set at the U.N. women's conference in Beijing in 1995 for all parliaments not just a small proportion, he noted.
The IPU statistic revealed that by the end of 2005, an average of 16.3 percent of members in the upper and lower houses of parliament were women, up from 15.7 percent in December 2004. This continued the progress since 1995 when the proportion of women in parliament stood at 11.3 percent, the report said.
"There are, of course, incredible inbalances between regions: Nordic countries remain in the lead with 40 percent of women parliamentarians, Arab states at the other end have about 8 percent," Johnsson said.
Although the Arab figure may seem low, however, "it is an incredible improvement" from only a few years ago when women accounted for only a few percentage points of Arab parliamentarians, he said.
Norway topped the ranks in 2005 parliamentary elections with 37.9 percent women while Kyrgystan, Micronesia, Saudi Arabia and Tongo elected no women members of Parliament.
But overall, Rwanda has the highest female representation in parliament at 48.8 percent, followed by Sweden at 45.3 percent. The United States is below the average at 15.2 percent.
The largest gains in 2005 were in several Latin American countries, particularly Honduras where women's participation registered an 18 percentage point increase to 23 percent, the IPU said. It noted that quotas have been implemented in Argentina, Bolivia, Honduras and Venezuela to promote the candidacies of women.
Both Denmark and Germany registered slight decreases in the proportion of women elected to parliament last year, and in Egypt only 2 percent of those elected in 2005 were women, the report said. In Bulgaria, Dominica and St. Vincent and the Grenadines, the percentage also dropped, it said.
 Load-Date: February 28, 2006

 

End of Document
