

Abortion legislation, access around the world
Associated Press International
March 9, 2006 Thursday 4:59 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 445 words
Body




EUROPE
 Britain: Available with restrictions until the 24th week, after that if the pregnancy threatens the women's life, may cause grave permanent injury to her physical or mental health or if there is a substantial risk that the baby will be seriously handicapped.
 Germany: Available in the first 12 weeks if the woman is in a "state of distress" and undergoes counseling by someone other than the physician performing the procedure.
 Spain: Legalized in 1985, available in cases of rape, fetal deformation or risk to the mother's mental or physical health.
 Sweden: Legalized in 1975 and available on demand until the 18th week; after that social authorities must give permission.
AFRICA:
 Benin, Burkina Faso, Chad, Guinea and Mali: Recognize grounds for abortion as saving a woman's life and protecting her health in cases of rape, incest and fetal impairment, according to the Center for Reproductive Rights.
 South Africa: Legal since 1997 on demand in first 12 weeks; from week 13-20 available if a doctor advises and after that only if there is a risk to the woman or fetus.
ASIA:
 China: Legal and common, as government birth control rules limit most urban couples to one child and most rural couples to two. Local officials accused of coercing abortions. Legal ban in place on aborting a fetus because of its sex.
 India: Legalized in 1971 and viewed as a way to curb population growth, although access is limited. Prenatal sex determination tests illegal.
 Indonesia: Illegal in world's most populous Muslim nation except when the mother or fetus have severe health problems.
 Japan: Widely available since 1948; allowed before the 22nd week if mother's health is at risk from physical or economic factors or if mother was raped or otherwise incapacitated at time of conception.
 Philippines: Illegal in predominantly Roman Catholic country.
LATIN AMERICA:
In predominantly Roman Catholic Latin America, abortion is usually illegal, although many countries make exceptions for when the mother's life is at risk. An exception is Cuba, where abortion is legal, widespread and free through universal health system for women over 18. There were 52.5 abortions for every 100 births in 2004, according to Cuba's Ministry of Public Health.
MIDDLE EAST
Abortion is banned in Middle East nations from Morocco to Iran, in line with Islamic Shariah law, which strictly forbids the practice though most allow it if the mother's life is endangered. The sole exception is Tunisia, where abortion is allowed on demand during the first trimester. In Egypt, it is allowed before 120 days if doctor specifies reasons requiring it.
Sources: AP reporting around the world, except where indicated.
 Load-Date: March 10, 2006

 

End of Document
