

Advocacy group raises concerns over threats to press freedoms in the United States
Associated Press International
March 29, 2008 Saturday 5:04 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 598 words
Byline: By LUIS ALONSO LUGO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARACAS Venezuela
Body




An association representing newspapers from across the Americas raised concerns on Saturday that U.S. courts have unjustly jailed and fined journalists who refuse to reveal their sources.
Inter-American Press Association warned against "disturbing signs on the press freedom front" in the United States, but the group applauded the U.S. Congress for taking up a bill that would give federal protection to reporters asked by prosecutors to identify confidential sources.
In a report issued at its midyear meeting in Caracas, the IAPA criticized U.S. District Judge Reggie Walton for ordering former USA Today reporter Toni Locy to pay up to $5US,000 (euro3,165) a day for refusing to reveal her sources for stories about a criminal investigation into the 2001 anthrax attacks.
Locy was found in contempt in February after she refused to identify confidential Justice Department sources for stories involving Steven Hatfill, a former Army scientist under suspicion in the attacks. The fines are being delayed pending appeals.
"The ruling is unprecedented because it also prohibits her former employer, or anyone, from reimbursing her," it said, noting that Walton also is considering whether to find former CBS reporter James Stewart in contempt.
The Miami-based IAPA also cited concern that New York Times reporter James Risen was subpoenaed in January by a grand jury in Alexandria, Virginia, apparently to divulge confidential sources who provided information for his 2006 book, "State of War."
The book's allegations, not published in the newspaper, describe an unsuccessful CIA effort to infiltrate Iran's nuclear program. Risen is fighting the subpoena.
"These latest cases show a growing trend by the federal government and private lawyers to force journalists to reveal their sources," the IAPA said. "More than 40 reporters and media groups have been subpoenaed or questioned about their confidential sources, their notes and other aspects of their work in federal courts over the last few years."
The IAPA also condemned the continued detention of Associated Press photographer Bilal Hussein, who has been held in Iraq by the U.S. military since 2006 but has never been charged.
Hussein, an Iraqi who was a member of an AP team that won a Pulitzer Prize for photography in 2005, "continues to be jailed without formal charges. No evidence has been disclosed to show wrongdoing," the report said. The case "raises questions about due process and speedy justice," it said.
Hussein is being held in U.S. military detention in Iraq under a United Nations resolution that the military says permits it to hold any individuals deemed a security threat. Pentagon spokesmen have alleged that Hussein was suspected in a range of terrorist-related activities.
The Inter-American Press Association praised the U.S. House of Representatives for taking up a bill in October that would shield reporters from being forced by prosecutors to reveal their sources.
Under the measure, federal courts would join 32 states and the District of Columbia in protecting reporters from being forced to reveal confidential sources, except in certain cases.
The IAPA argues the legislation is needed to keep the public informed about government corruption, but the Bush administration and other opponents say it could harm national security.
On another positive note, the IAPA welcomed approval of the Open Government Act legislation signed into law last year by U.S. President George W. Bush, calling it "one of the most important legislative victories in recent years for advocates of better access to government records."
 Load-Date: March 30, 2008

 

End of Document
