

Afghanistan opium poppy production up in nearly half of the country, says U.N. official
Associated Press International
March 13, 2006 Monday 7:07 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 319 words
Dateline: VIENNA Austria
Body




Afghanistan is defying international efforts to combat opium poppy cultivation with early indications for this year showing an increase in nearly half of its 30 provinces, the head of a key U.N. anti-drug agency said Monday.
Antonio Maria Costa, head of the U.N. Office on Drugs and Crime, mentioned the Andean countries as one area of success at the start of a session of a the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the U.N. policy-making body on drug issues.
He said that coca cultivation in the Andean region had declined by a third over the past five years to just over 150,000 hectares (more than 370,000 acres) in 2004 even though Colombia accounted for all of the downward trend with Peru and Bolivia registering increased areas of cultivation.
For opium poppy, the trend is almost identical with "just over 150,000 hectares now versus just over 220,000 five years ago," he said.
But in Afghanistan, "the early signs for 2006 indicate that opium cultivation is up in 13 provinces," he said. "Instability, a weak criminal justice system, corruption, the power of warlords, and patchy law enforcement make the implementation of the government's counter-narcotic strategy difficult."
Afghan Defense Minister Abdul Rahim Wardak, on a visit to NATO headquarters in Brussels, Belgium, on Monday, told a news conference there that Afghan forces were taking action against poppy cultivation. He said an operation under way in the southern Helmand province had eradicated "thousands of acres" of poppy fields.
The head of the U.S. delegation, Gregory L. Schulte, described growing meth use as a "global problem that requires a global response."
He said his delegation would introduce a resolution at the five-day meeting calling for an international database of meth processors used for legal purposes that "will allow countries to identify potential diversions by understanding legitimate requirements compared to actual imports."
 Load-Date: March 14, 2006

 

End of Document
