

Airports the main FIFA concern ahead of 2014 WCup
Associated Press International
September 28, 2009 Monday 5:33 PM GMT

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 411 words
Byline: By TALES AZZONI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO 
Body




FIFA sees the lack of airport infrastructure as the biggest problem facing Brazil ahead of the 2014 World Cup.
"The main concern in relation to Brazil is airports," FIFA secretary general Jerome Valcke told the O Globo newspaper ahead of the governing body's executive meeting in Rio on Tuesday. "There are no good airports. My feeling is that a lot of people will want to come to Brazil in 2014. It's a special place, a magnificent country."
There are few major airports in Brazil and delays and congestion are common occurrences in the nation's air system. The most critical situation is in Sao Paulo, South America's biggest city and a major hub for international flights. The nation's capital of Brasilia and Rio de Janeiro also have deficiencies.
The Brazilian government recognizes that significant improvements at the country's outdated airports will be key to accommodating the hundreds of thousands of visitors expected during the World Cup, and is spending billions on infrastructure in the 12 cities slated to host matches.
Brazil Defense Minister Nelson Jobim last year talked about the possibility of the government building a fourth airport in Sao Paulo and privatizing the operations of the international airport in Rio de Janeiro and another in the city of Campinas.
Officials said the government will make all the necessary investments to fix the current problems, and that the lack of airport infrastructure won't be an issue by the time the tournament begins in 2014.
In addition to the traveling problems, Valcke said visitors may also face a lack of sufficient tickets for the World Cup matches in Latin America's biggest country.
"Tickets will be the hardest thing to get," he said Monday. "I know a lot of people who tell me that the trip to Brazil during a World Cup is already on their agenda."
Valcke said there will be a need to "take good care of these issues" of ticketing and air travel.
The secretary general of football's governing body also reiterated concerns about Sao Paulo's Morumbi stadium, which is likely to host the event's opening match.
"Morumbi can host any group match," Valcke said. "But if the idea is to host an opening match or a semifinal, it doesn't meet all the requirements."
He said some of the problems at Morumbi included a lack of sufficient space for hospitality events, the press and some viewing restrictions to fans.
Valcke said most of the 12 stadiums are "on the right track" in terms of being ready for the tournament.
 Load-Date: September 29, 2009

 

End of Document
