

Analysis: The terrifying right to remain silent
Associated Press International
February 3, 2010 Wednesday 5:10 PM GMT

 Copyright 2010 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON DATELINE
Length: 807 words
Byline: By MATT APUZZO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




When Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab stopped talking to FBI agents after a failed attempt to blow up a plane on Christmas Day, it was not a failure of the U.S. criminal justice system or the president, regardless of what Republican critics say.
And when Abdulmutallab started talking again a week ago, thanks to some clever FBI field work, it was not a validation of the system or the president, regardless of what the Obama administration says.
Nearly a half century after the Supreme Court ushered "You have the right to remain silent" into the American lexicon, a Nigerian man with a poorly designed bomb failed to take down an airplane but managed to ignite a dispute over whether that right extends to terrorism suspects.
The suddenly fierce debate over how to investigate suspected terrorists allows politicians to ignore history, mischaracterize the U.S. Constitution and add new uncertainty to a system that two administrations and countless intelligence officials from both parties have spent a decade trying to clarify.
It was a somewhat unexpected controversy. Abdulmutallab, after all, was not the first terrorism suspect captured in the U.S. since 2001. The Bush administration sent many terrorists to prison, including U.S. sleeper cell members, a Sept. 11 co-conspirator and a man who tried to bring down an airplane with a bomb in his shoe.
All were read their rights. All got lawyers. All appeared in court.
Abdulmutallab was not even the first terrorism case on President Barack Obama's watch. Najibullah Zazi is under indictment in New York in an alleged al-Qaida bombing plot. Before he was charged, he and his lawyer spent days talking to the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
That is hardly unusual. A 1996 study by University of California, Irvine, criminologist Richard Leo found that 78 percent of defendants in cases he reviewed waived their right to remain silent and cooperated with investigators.
After the Christmas plot, however, the president's critics say the administration should have treated Abdulmutalab as an enemy combatant. The right to a lawyer, Sen. Susan Collins, a Republican, alleged last week, is reserved for American citizens, not foreign terrorists.
Collins is wrong. Immigrants, even those who entered the U.S. illegally, are guaranteed lawyers in the U.S. when they commit a crime. But the danger of the argument is not in its legal weakness. It is in its consequences.
It is not exactly clear where Collins suggests Abdulmuttallab should have been sent. To a military prison? The Supreme Court has never weighed in on whether that is lawful. Twice, President George W. Bush had the chance to test the question, but both times he dropped the issue and brought the cases in criminal court.
Had Obama sent Abdulmutallab to a military prison, there is no guarantee he would have talked. Some detainees at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba cooperated, some did not. Some prisoners cooperate with the FBI, some do not.
What is certain, however, is that throwing Abdulmutallab in a military prison would have touched of a yearslong court challenge like the ones that stalled Bush's anti-terrorism policies.
And it would have jeopardized the chances of ever bringing a criminal case. Which means that, years later, Obama, like Bush, would face the question of what to do with dangerous prisoners who can neither be prosecuted nor set free.
Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, a Republican, said Wednesday that enemy combatants should be taken offshore, interrogated and prosecuted at Guantanamo Bay. That represents a dramatic policy shift from both the Bush and Obama administrations, a shift that likely would require an act of Congress and has little to no federal case law supporting it.
Critics of the Abdulmutallab case also raise questions they don not even try to answer. Like what role the lead domestic counterterrorism agency, the FBI, will have if not to question terrorists? Or how the agents are supposed to sort out domestic terrorism cases, such as the Oklahoma City bombing, from foreign terrorism cases before they even conduct interviews?
Should Timothy McVeigh, a U.S. citizen executed for the bombing, have been prosecuted in a military base in Cuba?
The Obama administration quietly seethed while taking this recent criticism, knowing that the FBI had persuaded Abdulmutallab to start talking again, providing intelligence about his contacts with al-Qaida in Yemen. And when that fact surfaced Tuesday, a senior administration official said it vindicated the strategy they had held all along.
The problem with that? If Abdulmutallab's silence was not proof the president was wrong, then his new cooperation is not proof the president was right. Otherwise, this is a debate the U.S. is going to have again and again.
EDITOR'S NOTE Matt Apuzzo is a member of the Washington enterprise team for The Associated Press.
 Load-Date: February 4, 2010

 

End of Document
