

Around the world, US vote sparks buzz for change
Associated Press International
November 5, 2008 Wednesday 3:24 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 946 words
Byline: By JOSEPH COLEMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TOKYO 
Body




With the leadership of the world's most powerful country at stake, millions crowded hotels and pubs or tuned in eagerly to televisions and radios on their way to work Wednesday, hungry for early results of the U.S. presidential election.
Initial projections gave Barack Obama a lead in electoral votes over John McCain, and many around the world grabbed the news despite the millions of votes still to be counted as a sign that the United States was on the verge of a historic turningpoint, politically and socially.
In parts of the world where the United States is known for its racial divisions, many people focused on the prospect of a black American president an event that runs directly counter to their assumptions about the U.S.
"My image of America used to be a country run by the white people, but now it's changing," said 65-year-old Tokyo taxidriver Kenji Doi an Obama supporter as he listened to a Wednesday morning radio broadcast on the vote.
"I think American voters are making the courageous decision to choose an African-American president," he said.
From the streets of Tokyo to the pubs of Ireland, from sidewalk cafes of Paris to the beaches of Rio de Janeiro, workers, partiers and officials acknowledged that America's economic, military and cultural might made the election globally important.
"The eyes of the world are on this," said Australian Phil Keeling, who had plastered his head-to-toe red, white and blue outfit with both Obama and McCain buttons as he crowded into a hotel ballroom in downtown Sydney, Australia to watch election results on two giant TV screens.
"There's a chance the image of the U.S. may change dramatically, and it's nice to be part of it," said Keeling, who refused to say which candidate he preferred. Around him, Australians and American stood under a cloud of red, white and blue balloons and snacked on American treats like mini hamburgers and hot dogs.
Hopes were also high among many critical of President George W. Bush's policies that an Obama victory would herald a more inclusive, internationally cooperative U.S. approach. Many cited the Iraq war as the type of blunder Obama was unlikely to repeat.
At a party in Rio de Janeiro where Brazilians and Americans watched results come in, 33-year-old music producer Zanna said an Obama win would show that "Americans have learned something from the bad experiences of the Bush administration and that they choose well that they choose Obama."
"Choosing Obama is a great opportunity for Americans to show the world they can change, be humble and learn from their mistakes, which were not small," said Zanna, who uses only one name.
Umang Khosla, a senior marketing manager in Mumbai, India, with a multinational shipping company, said Obama would be widely welcomed after Bush, whom he said "was hated the world over."
"With Obama, the world will see the Americans as having more sense, being more receptive to change. Bush was hated the world over," Khosla said don his way to work. "If Obama even remotely changes things, perceptions will change."
The excitement was not limited to Obama supporters.
In Paris, longtime McCain supporter Kay Angelis described it as "a bit lonely and a bit odd" being pro-Republican in France. But being in the clear minority at an election night party swarming with Obama supporters didn't dent her enthusiasm.
"I appreciate experience ... And I think American voters do too," the 85-year-old said. She lamented Obama's "whirlwindy" campaign and lack of foreign policy heft and warned that whoever wins will "inherit many global conflicts and enemies."
Scores of U.S. voters living in the Mexican state of Baja California crossed the border to cast their vote, including Roberto Chavez, 32, an engineer who has dual citizenship.
"Usually I only vote in Mexican elections because I live here, but I'm going to vote in this election because I want Obama to win," he said.
In Germany, where more than 200,000 people flocked to see Obama this summer as he burnished his foreign policy credentials during a trip to the Middle East and Europe, the election dominated television ticker crawls, newspaper headlines and Web sites.
Obama-mania was evident not only across Europe but also in much of the Islamic world, where Muslims expressed hope that the Democrat would seek compromise rather than confrontation.
The Bush administration alienated Muslims by mistreating prisoners at its detention center for terrorism suspects at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and inmates at Iraq's Abu Ghraib prison human rights violations also condemned worldwide.
Nizar al-Kortas, a columnist for Kuwait's Al-Anbaa newspaper, saw an Obama victory as "a historic step to change the image of the arrogant American administration."
Yet McCain enjoyed a strong current of support in Israel, where he is perceived as tougher on Iran than Obama. Taking a cigarette break on a Jerusalem street corner, bank employee Leah Nizri, 53, favored McCain.
"He's too young," she said of Obama. "I think that especially in a situation of a world recession, where things are so unclear in the world, McCain would be better than Obama."
Even in Europe, McCain got some grudging respect: Germany's mass-circulation daily Bild lionized the Republican as "the War Hero" and running mate Sarah Palin as "the Beautiful Unknown."
At a Berlin party, Joe Noussair of Philadelphia said claimed that America's image had been tarnished had more to do with Europeans than American policy.
"There's no way to please Europeans," the visiting architect, who voted for McCain, said at a meeting organized by Republicans Abroad. "It comes at no cost to them to detest us."
AP correspondents worldwide contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: November 5, 2008

 

End of Document
