

Around the world, Obama victory sparks cheers
Associated Press International
November 5, 2008 Wednesday 4:37 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 1237 words
Byline: By JOHN LEICESTER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS 
Body




Like the breaking of a dam, the election of Barack Obama as the first black man in the White House unleashed a global tide of admiration, hopes for change, and even renewed love for the United States after years of dwindling good will during the Bush administration.
Some likened Obama's stunning ascent to power to Neil Armstrong's first steps on the moon, the release of Nelson Mandela and the fall of the Berlin Wall as a turning point for humanity. Kenya's president declared a public holiday in Obama's honor; people across Africa stayed up all night or woke before dawn Wednesday to watch U.S. election history being made; in Latin America, a region that shifted sharply left during the Bush years, Obama's victory was greeted with cheers.
In London, a young boy on his way to school punched the air and cried 'OB-A-MA! OB-A-MA!' In the town of Obama, Japan, dancers cheered in delight when their namesake's victory was declared. In Cuba, official reaction was far more muted. Granma, the Communist Party daily, ran a small gray box at the bottom of its front page, proclaiming "Obama to the White House."
Global celebrations were often also tempered by sobering concerns that a 47-year-old man with limited experience of government faces global challenges as momentous as the hopes his campaign inspired wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, the nuclear ambitions of Iran, the elusive hunt for peace in the Middle East and a global economy in turmoil.
In the Muslim world, skepticism remained high that Obama would make much difference. Elsewhere, many expressed hope for a more balanced, less confrontational America, but said they also expect Obama to put U.S. interests first.
In the heat, often joy, of the moment, the difficulties Obama will face were often forgotten and American voters even forgiven for the era of President George W. Bush, when U.S. ties with many countries grew strained. People expressed amazement and satisfaction that the United States overcame centuries of racial strife to elect an African-American president and one with Hussein as a middle name. Some said U.S. voters had blazed a trail that minorities elsewhere could follow.
"This is the fall of the Berlin Wall times 10," Rama Yade, France's black junior minister for human rights, told French radio. "America is rebecoming a New World."
"On this morning, we all want to be American so we can take a bite of this dream unfolding before our eyes," she said.
In Britain, The Sun newspaper borrowed from Armstrong's 1969 Moon landing to describe Obama's election as "one giant leap for mankind."
"What an inspiration. He is the first truly global U.S. president the world has ever had," said Pracha Kanjananont, a 29-year-old Thai sitting at a Starbuck's in Bangkok. "He had an Asian childhood, African parentage and has a Middle Eastern name. He is a truly global president."
Hopes were high that Obama would act as an antidote to the anger felt toward Bush, perceived by many as a go-it-alone president who ignored international opposition in going to war in Iraq. Many said they expected that an Obama victory would herald a more inclusive, internationally cooperative U.S. approach. Many cited the Iraq war as a type of blunder Obama was unlikely to repeat. Callers to French radio RTL said how pleased they were to see Bush leave and Obama arrive.
"We hated Bush so much and we wanted so much to love America and now, again, we can," said Dominique Moisi, one of France's foremost foreign policy analysts.
Europe, where Obama is overwhelmingly popular, is one region that looked eagerly to an Obama administration for a revival in warm relations.
Poland's Foreign Minister Radek Sikorski spoke of "a new America with a new credit of trust in the world."
French President Nicolas Sarkozy told Obama in a letter that "your election raises great hopes in France, in Europe and in the rest of the world."
Pope Benedict XVI sent Barack Obama a personal note saying he would pray for God's blessings on the American people and on the new president-elect.
In Latin America, leaders from Mexico to Chile expressed hope for warmer relations based on mutual respect a quality many felt was missing under Bush. Venezuela and Bolivia, which booted out the U.S. ambassadors after accusing the Bush administration of meddling in their internal politics, said they were ready to re-establish diplomatic relations, and Brazil's president was among several leaders urging Obama to be more flexible toward Cuba.
Obama "will create peace around the globe. I believe that," said Milva Ramos, a 28-year-old black nurse in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, where people expressed a mixture of joy, disbelief, and hope for the future. "He'll present the calmer face of the U.S. to the world. The fact that he's black increases the clout of blacks around the world. It's remarkable that a man with a black face is now the most powerful man in the world."
The magnitude and emotion of the world reaction illustrated the international character of the U.S. presidency. It also showed how many still look to Washington as the place where global issues of war and peace, prosperity or crisis, are decided.
Skepticism, however, was high in the Muslim world, where the Bush administration alienated many with the Iraq war, the treatment of prisoners at the U.S. detention center for terrorism suspects at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and inmates at Iraq's Abu Ghraib prison.
Some Iraqis said they would believe positive change when they saw it.
"Obama's victory will do nothing for the Iraqi issue nor for the Palestinian issue," said Muneer Jamal, a Baghdad resident. "I think all the promises Obama made during the campaign will remain mere promises."
In Pakistan, a country vital to the U.S.-led war on the al-Qaida terrorist network and neighbor to Afghanistan, many hoped Obama would bring some respite from rising militant violence that many blame on Bush.
Still, Mohammed Arshad, a 28-year-old schoolteacher in the capital, Islamabad, doubted Obama's ability to change U.S. foreign policy dramatically.
"Bush gave America a very bad name. He has become a symbol of hate. But I don't think the change of face will suddenly make any big difference," he said.
Obama also faced skepticism on the other side of the Mideast divide, in Israel.
Shoshana Bair, 27, an Orthodox Jewish woman who runs a medical not-for-profit group in Jerusalem, was fearful that Obama's allegiance would lie with the Palestinians and that Israel would be pushed into "land concessions without receiving anything in return, and the division of Jerusalem," the holy city that both Jews and Palestinians claim as their capital.
The economy is another challenge of international concern. Many expressed hope that Obama would help reverse the punishing financial meltdown and said they expected that fixing the U.S. economy would be his first priority. Some in Asia, a region heavily dependent on exports to the U.S. market, worried the Democrat would try to protect American producers at their expense.
But that a country where blacks were segregated when Obama was a child now voted him into power was an inspiration to many beyond U.S. shores, and hailed as the dawn of "a totally and completely new era" by the leader of Nigeria, Africa's most-populous nation.
Obama's election, said President Umaru Yar'Adua, "has finally broken the greatest barrier of prejudice in human history."
AP correspondents worldwide contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: November 6, 2008

 

End of Document
