

As England, Paraguay fans arrive in Frankfurt, security tightens across the city
Associated Press International
June 7, 2006 Wednesday 12:22 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 447 words
Byline: By MATT MOORE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: FRANKFURT Germany
Body




Police wearing body armor and private security guards patrolling the banks of the River Main on Wednesday provided evidence that city and sporting officials are ready for potential fan violence ahead of this weekend's World Cup match.
Across a city known more for its skyscrapers and array of banks than its soccer, scores of England supporters are beginning to arrive for Saturday's Group B opener against Paraguay, which is scheduled to start at 3 p.m. (1300 GMT).
"We're expecting more than 40,000 England fans for the game," Frankfurt police spokesman Peter Freier told The Associated Press.
He said that German police would be joined by their British counterparts on Friday and Saturday for patrols in and around Frankfurt.
More than 100,000 England fans are expected in Germany for the World Cup, with about 10,000 actually holding tickets. Frankfurt is a transit hub, with its international airport the second-busiest in Europe, and featuring dozens of flights daily to and from British cities including London.
British and German police have been working together to ensure that hooligans from both countries won't be out in force.
In England, German and British police are patrolling airports and ferry terminals in a bid to keep known hooligans from leaving the country. About 3,500 Britons have had to surrender their passports so they cannot travel and Germany has suspended its rules granting passport-free travel to EU citizens.
British police officers have also traveled to Germany to bolster the work of colleagues hoping to avert riots or other incidents, such as those which marred the 2000 European Championship co-hosted by Belgium and the Netherlands.
Michael Endler, who oversees the deployment of people for the national German police agency ZIS, said Wednesday there were no clear threats to the start of the World Cup, including in Hesse the state in which Frankfurt lies.
"One can go to all the games without having to worry about their safety," Endler said.
He also said that no country's fans were being targeted by police.
"We are taking into account all fans of all countries and hoping that they will be welcomed cordially," Endler said.
There has been concern that hooligans from England, Poland and the Netherlands, as well as from Germany, might try to fight rival fans.
He said that of the 3,500 English fans who had to surrender their passports, there had been unconfirmed reports that five hooligans had managed to make it to Germany.
Aside from hooligans, police are monitoring extreme right-wing groups who could use the games as a platform for demonstrations, and students who might use game days as a way to protest and get attention from the media and fans.
 Load-Date: June 8, 2006

 

End of Document
