

Asia urged to lead the way in solving global economic crises amid failure by world bodies
Associated Press International
June 15, 2008 Sunday 4:29 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 569 words
Byline: By VIJAY JOSHI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: KUALA LUMPUR Malaysia
Body




As an emerging center of world power, Asia must take the lead in finding solutions to crises such as the surge in fuel and food prices because global institutions such as World Trade Organization are proving to be impotent, business leaders said Sunday.
The comments came at the annual World Economic Forum on East Asia, a high-profile gathering of business and government leaders, in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
As economic clout drifts away from the United States and Europe to Asia it must spearhead the resolution of economic crises, said Yashwant Sinha, India's former finance minister.
Global institutions that deal with economic problems are looking "pretty out of date," Barclays Plc Chairman Marcus Agius told the forum's first session.
"I believe that the international institutions we have at the moment including the World Trade Organization are woefully inadequate in dealing with the global challenges," said Sinha.
He gave the example of the crisis in the world stock markets stemming from the subprime mortage debacle in the United States.
Had the crisis occurred anywhere in Asia or Latin America, a "huge team" from the International Monetary Fund would have descended there with advice, just as it did during the 1997-98 Asian financial crisis, Sinha said.
"There is a major regulatory failing in the U.S. What is the IMF doing about the U.S.? Nothing," said Sinha, also a former foreign minister.
"Global institutions are inadequate. They are not responding to global challenges," he said, highlighting record- high crude oil prices, which reached nearly $140US last week before settling at $134US.86 on Friday.
Rapid hikes in the price of rice and other agriculture products have also set off riots and protests from Africa to Asia and elevated fears of a global food crisis.
"I would say that this is where there is an opportunity for Asia. There are a whole host of things that Asian nations can do together. We must start writing the rules of the game," said Sinha, now a member of India's Parliament.
Asian countries must help each other in dealing with crises because the U.S. can no longer be expected to be "the locomotive of the global economy," said Yoshimi Watanabe, Japan's minister of financial services and administrative reforms.
"The Asian countries are in the same boat, we share the same destiny," he said.
Asia, led by India and China, will define the global economy in the future, thanks to its insatiable demand for consumer goods, investment opportunities and rapidly growing economies, those attending the forum were told.
"The shift in the economy around the world has been dramatic," Lord Peter Levene, chairman of London-based Lloyd's, the world's biggest insurance market, told reporters before the start of the conference.
"If you're traveling in Europe and the United States, there's a feeling of doom and gloom. Here you step off the plane and it's the opposite. This is the right place to be at the moment," Levene said.
Still, Asian governments are confronted with a wide range of risks, Levene said, noting that China is spending immense time and expense to deal with natural disasters and other threats.
"Up to very recently, the (Asian) region was a follower in the global agenda. This is the first time the region is becoming a leader," said Peter Brabeck-Letmathe, chairman of the Swiss food and drinks giant Nestle.
Associated Press reporter Sean Yoong contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: June 16, 2008

 

End of Document
