

Australian teen completes round-the-world sail
Associated Press International
May 15, 2010 Saturday 6:26 AM GMT

 Copyright 2010 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 642 words
Byline: By KRISTEN GELINEAU, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SYDNEY 
Body




A 16-year-old Australian girl finished her seven-month-long journey Saturday to become the youngest sailor to circle the globe solo, nonstop and unassisted.
Thousands of spectators cheered as Jessica Watson sailed into Sydney Harbour, the finale to an epic adventure in which she battled 40-foot (12-meter) waves, homesickness and critics who said she'd never make it home alive.
Watson docked at the city's iconic Opera House, bursting into tears and gasping in relief as she stepped off her yacht and into the arms of her parents, whose decision to let their daughter attempt such a feat was seen by some as irresponsible.
Clinging onto her father and brother as she tried to find her land legs, Watson walked slowly and tentatively along a pink carpet rolled out in her honor her first steps on land in 210 days.
"People don't think you're capable of these things they don't realize what young people, what 16-year-olds and girls are capable of," Watson told the raucous crowd, many wearing pink clothes and waving pink flags to match the color of her yacht, Ella's Pink Lady. "It's amazing when you take away those expectations what you can do."
Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd greeted Watson at the Opera House with a grin and a hug, dubbing her "Australia's newest hero" a description Watson dismissed.
"I'm actually going to disagree with the Prime Minister," she said, as the crowd laughed. "I don't consider myself a hero. I'm an ordinary girl who believed in her dream."
Watson, from Buderim, north of Brisbane in Queensland state, sailed out of Sydney on Oct. 18 despite protests by critics that she was too immature and inexperienced for the treacherous journey. Her parents maintained that she was well-prepared and noted she has been sailing since she was 8.
"She said she'd sail around the world, and she has," a tearful Julie Watson said as she watched her grinning daughter cruise past the finish line from a nearby boat. "She's home."
Watson's journey took her northeast through the South Pacific and across the equator, south to Cape Horn at the tip of South America, across the Atlantic Ocean to South Africa, through the Indian Ocean and around southern Australia.
Australian Jesse Martin holds the current record for the youngest person to sail around the world solo, nonstop and unassisted, after he completed the journey in 1999 at the age of 18.
Martin boarded Watson's boat after she'd crossed the finish line, allowing to relax and wave to fans as she cruised across the harbor to the Opera House. Watson was given a goodie bag that included a can of whipped cream, which she partially injected into her mouth before laughing and turning away from the cameras.
She was also joined on board by Britain's Mike Perham, who completed a solo circumnavigation at the age of 17 in 2009, though technical problems forced him to stop for assistance.
Watson's feat, however, will not be considered an official world record, because the World Speed Sailing Record Council discontinued its "youngest" category.
And though she sailed nearly 23,000 nautical miles, some sailing enthusiasts have also argued that Watson didn't travel far enough north of the equator for her journey to count as a true round-the-world sail as defined by the record council's rules. Watson's managers have dismissed those claims and argued she doesn't need to adhere to the council's rules anyway, since they won't be recognizing her voyage.
The route took Watson through some of the world's most treacherous waters, and the teen battled through monstrous storms and suffered seven knockdowns.
But her journey was also peppered with moments of beauty. On her blog, she described stunning sunrises over glassy seas, the excitement of spotting a blue whale and the dazzling sight of a shooting star racing across the night sky above her boat.
Online:
http://jessicawatson.com.au
 Load-Date: May 16, 2010

 

End of Document
