

Australia's World Cup success could take Asia along for the ride 
Associated Press International
June 14, 2006 Wednesday 12:13 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 652 words
Byline: By JOHN PYE, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: BERLIN Germany
Body




A World Cup win that had Australian fans in rapture and Japanese in tears might have sent shudders from Yokohama to Yemen as Asia witnessed its newest recruit deflate its continental champion.
It also could boost the region's chances of hosting the World Cup again in 12 years.
Even before Australia's 3-1 victory over Japan on Monday its first at the World Cup in 32 years, Asian Football Confederation president Mohamed bin Hammam told The Associated Press that he knew the match would have a dramatic impact on the continent, regardless of the result.
He views Australia as a crucial contributor in the development of the sport in Asia, which now stretches from Australia's southern island state of Tasmania, through the Far East, across the Indian subcontinent and Central Asia, and west to the Arab Middle East.
And that gives the AFC three prominent candidates for soccer's quadrennial championship.
"I think 2018 will be the right time for us to rehost the World Cup," Hammam said. "We have so many candidates: China, Australia they're very ready we have India if they want to accept the challenge.
"These are the three major markets for 2018."
Hammam has no problem promoting Asia's newest member federation for such a major event.
"Australia as a continent is enjoying a very strong economy. The infrastructure there wouldn't require much investment," he said. "The governments always support the big events like World Cup I believe Australia would host a very good World Cup."
Australia only joined Asia six months ago after frustrating attempts at getting a direct route to the World Cup through Oceania. By then, the Socceroos already had qualified for Germany 2006 after edging Uruguay on penalties in an Oceania-South America playoff.
FIFA's executive committee agreed in principle to rotate the World Cup among its six regional confederations after Germany beat South Africa to become the 2006 tournament host. It resolved to make Africa the first beneficiary of the new policy and South Africa will stage the 2010 championship. A South American nation is to run the 2014 event.
Hammam said he did not believe a rotation system was in the best interests of soccer.
"The rotation has given Africa a chance to host the World Cup and that's a good thing ... going beyond that, it's South America," he said. "If (the rotation) exists, it should stop there.
"There should be a minimum three or four continents bidding for the World Cup after that."
England is considering a bid for 2018, which could make things difficult if Australia enters the bidding.
"If Asia has the best market and the best candidates, why can't it be elected," Hammam said. "I would like to see the competition between Asia and Europe, or CONCACAF we have to give the world the best World Cup to keeping enhancing the image."
Returning to Asia would spark another surge similar to the one that followed the 2002 World Cup in Japan and South Korea.
Hammam said the development of the national associations and club competitions had been "immense" since then, when South Korea reached the semifinals and co-host Japan was knocked out in the second round.
Asia had four guaranteed berths 2006. South Korea opened its Group G preliminaries with a 2-1 comeback win over Togo.
Iran lost 3-1 to Mexico in its Group D opener and Saudi Arabia faced Tunisia in Group H on Wednesday.
Australia, which hosted two Summer Olympics as well as rugby and cricket World Cup tournaments, already is talking about a future World Cup bid.
Earlier this year, Football Federation Australia chief executive John O'Neill, who led the organizing committee for the 2003 Rugby World Cup, indicated his country would like to have a World Cup.
"We would be very keen to give it a crack in 2018, and if that doesn't work to put a stake in the ground for 2022," he said.
Australia's next test will be its biggest yet, facing five-time and defending champion Brazil in Munich on Sunday.
 Load-Date: June 14, 2006

 

End of Document
