

Australian teen nears end of round-the-world sail
Associated Press International
May 14, 2010 Friday 7:42 AM GMT

 Copyright 2010 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 715 words
Byline: By KRISTEN GELINEAU, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SYDNEY 
Body




A 16-year-old Australian girl poised to become the youngest person to sail solo, nonstop and unassisted around the world on Friday likened the final hours of her mammoth journey to the countdown to a supercharged Christmas.
"Have I mentioned how excited I am? It's like the day before Christmas," Jessica Watson wrote on her blog as she approached the finish line of her nearly 23,000 nautical mile voyage. "Except I don't ever remember getting this excited about Christmas,"
A flotilla of pleasure boats are expected to fill Sydney Harbour on Saturday and tens of thousands of people to line the foreshore to welcome Watson after more than seven months alone at sea.
She will dock her pink 34-foot (10-meter) yacht at the landmark Opera House, where she will take her first steps on dry land and be greeted by her parents, a throng of media and Prime Minister Kevin Rudd.
Watson, from the small town of Buderim in Queensland state, sailed out of Sydney on Oct. 18, despite protests from critics who said the trek was far too treacherous for someone so young. Her parents stood by their decision to let their daughter go, arguing that she had been sailing since she was 8 and was well-prepared.
Watson said she wasn't surprised by the criticism, telling The Associated Press before she left that years of careful planning proved she was not being reckless.
Watson battled 40-foot (12-meter) waves and multiple knockdowns during her journey, which took her northeast through the South Pacific and across the equator, south to Cape Horn at the tip of South America, across the Atlantic Ocean to South Africa, through the Indian Ocean and around southern Australia.
She has stayed well-fed thanks to a steady supply of prepackaged meals (lamb chops were a favorite), dried fruit, candy and the occasional cupcake, baked on her stove. As the end neared, she told her parents via the online video chat program Skype she was eager for a fresh salad and pavlova, a fruit-topped meringue dessert popular in Australia.
Watson's parents Julie and Roger flew over the yacht Friday in a helicopter, and spoke by radio with their daughter, who said she was struggling to come to terms with the end of her voyage.
"This morning it was just another day sailing out here. But having mum and dad fly over so close and actually seeing them in person -- it was suddenly, oh my goodness, it's all coming to and end," she said in comments broadcast by Ten Network television, one of her sponsors. "It's not just another day out here, it's all happening."
People around the world have followed Watson's adventures on her blog, which she has regularly updated from an onboard computer. She has used a satellite phone and Skype to keep in touch with her family and management team in Australia.
"It just constantly amazes us we just can't get over how much she's captured people and taken them along with her journeys," Julie Watson said.
Fellow Australian Jesse Martin holds the record for the youngest person to sail around the world solo, nonstop and unassisted, after completing the journey in 1999 at age 18. But Watson's feat will not be considered an official record because the World Speed Sailing Record Council discontinued its "youngest" category.
Some sailing enthusiasts argue Watson didn't travel far enough north of the equator for her journey to count as a true round-the-world trek as defined by the record council's rules. Watson's team dismiss those claims and argue she doesn't need to adhere to the council's rules anyway, since they won't recognize her voyage.
Sixteen-year-old American Abby Sunderland of Marina del Ray, California, launched her own solo round-the-world bid in January. In May, she had to pull into port in South Africa for boat repairs, ending her nonstop attempt. She still plans to try to complete her voyage.
Though Watson is excited for her homecoming, she said she was sad that her adventure was ending.
"I'm going to miss being out of range of my annoying brother! I'm going to miss doing things at my own pace and singing at the top of my voice without clearing the room," she blogged.
"I'm going to miss the kick I get from overcoming challenges by myself, flying along in the dark. A new sunset every night and the time I always take to watch it."
Online:
http://jessicawatson.com.au
 Load-Date: May 15, 2010

 

End of Document
