

Bank of the South sets launch date on Nov. 3 in Venezuela
Associated Press International
October 8, 2007 Monday 11:18 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 293 words
Byline: By MICHAEL ASTOR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO Brazil
Body




The Bank of the South once just a gleam in the eye of South American leaders now has a due date.
Finance Ministers from seven nations announced Monday that the multinational funding institute, which will operate similarly to the Inter-American Development Bank, will be founded Nov. 3 in Caracas, Venezuela.
The bank is the brainchild of Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez, who has been promoting it as an alternative to the International Monetary Fund, which he blames for perpetuating poverty and contributing to inflation in Latin America.
"We can now say that the Bank of the South is about to become reality," Brazilian Finance Minister Guido Mantega told reporters in Rio de Janeiro. "It will finance integration and will be open to all of South America's 12 countries."
"There is still important work to be concluded," Mantega said, adding that the countries involved have yet to determine details such as the bank's financial structure and how much each nation will contribute.
Chavez has touted the bank as a counterweight to U.S. influence and a way for the region to chart its own economic course.
But Venezuelan Finance Minister Rodrigo Cabezas said Monday that "the bank is not against anything or anyone. It is in favor of the people of South America."
"This is not a bank of one country or of one president," he added.
The bank will lend for development projects at interest rates similar to those charged by other multilateral institutions, Mantega said.
He added that the finance ministers of each member nation will sit on the bank's administrative council and that each country will have one vote.
The launch date was agreed to during a daylong meeting between the finance ministers of Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Ecuador, Paraguay, Uruguay and Venezuela.
 Load-Date: October 9, 2007

 

End of Document
