

Baseball, softball out at the 2012 Olympics
Associated Press International
February 9, 2006 Thursday 11:39 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 463 words
Byline: By STEPHEN WILSON, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: TURIN Italy
Body




They're out! Baseball and softball won't be played at the 2012 London Olympics.
Baseball and women's softball remain on the program for the 2008 Beijing Games, and will be eligible to reapply for readmission to the 2016 Games.
London, however, is no longer possible.
"We will work with them at the Olympic Games at Beijing and see if there's a chance to come back in the program" after London, IOC president Jacques Rogge said. "I understand the disappointment of those who pleaded for the reinstatement."
Down to their final chances at the IOC's annual meeting Thursday, neither sport even made it to a vote. Support of at least 51 percent of members was required before reinstatement could go to a secret ballot.
After that, each sport would have needed majority backing in a second vote.
They never got that far: It was 46-42 against baseball and 47-43 against softball in the preliminary round.
The sports were narrowly voted out at the IOC assembly in Singapore in July, becoming the first removed from the Olympics since polo in 1936. Softball fell one vote short of making the cut 52-52, with one abstention. Baseball was eliminated by a 54-50 vote.
Because no other sports won admission, London 2012 is left with 26 sports on the program, two short of the maximum.
International Baseball Federation head Aldo Notari and International Softball Federation president Don Porter had expressed confidence that the sports would be readmitted.
American member Anita DeFrantz opened Thursday's debate with a plea for readmission of softball, saying the sport was only dropped because voting members incorrectly associated it with baseball.
"It is a women's sport," she said. "It is a separate sport and should be considered separately from the merits of baseball. This sport has its own policies, provides an opportunity for women and finally deserves to be on our program."
Members from Cuba, Australia, Guatemala, Brazil, Spain, Canada, South Africa and Taiwan were among those speaking in favor of readmitting both sports. Several delegates said the Singapore vote should be overturned because no replacement sports were brought in.
While some members are opposed to reviewing a decision taken just seven months ago, Australian member Kevan Gosper said the IOC should have the courage to do so.
"We should be big enough to review a decision if there is good cause," he said. "I think there is good cause and there should be no embarrassment that we are looking at it so soon."
American delegate Jim Easton took part in the vote. In Singapore, he recused himself because of his business interests as a manufacturer of sports equipment.
Citing "very significant changes in my business situation," Easton said he had received clearance from the IOC ethics commission and executive board to vote.
 Load-Date: February 10, 2006

 

End of Document
