

Billionaire Buffett faces the faithful at Berkshire Hathaway annual meeting
Associated Press International
May 6, 2006 Saturday 4:08 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 457 words
Byline: By JOSH FUNK, AP Business Writer
Dateline: OMAHA Nebraska
Body




Billionaire Warren Buffett greeted thousands of his faithful followers Saturday at the Berkshire Hathaway Inc. annual meeting, likely to face questions on everything from his successor to his company's latest acquisition.
Company officials predicted a record crowd of more than 20,000 people at the gathering Buffett likes to call "Woodstock for capitalists."
University of Kansas junior Luiza Loureiro got in line for the meeting at 1:30 a.m. and said two or three other people were already there. The student from Brazil said she came so early because she wanted a chance to ask Buffett about Latin American investments and her finance professor offers extra credit to students who ask a question during the meeting. She was among more than 200 students who came from Lawrence, Kansas.
The meeting started with a humorous movie, and its first segment was a cartoon spoof of "American Idol" called "Omaha Idol." The cartoon show hosted by Oprah Winfrey featured a competition to determine Berkshire's next acquisition, with Rapper Snoop Dogg, Microsoft chairman Bill Gates and Vice President Dick Cheney making the finals of the competition.
Gates touted his latest invention: a firewall made out of asbestos that you hold up when find yourself in a fire.
Cheney offered the weapons of mass destruction that he discovered on a hunting trip with Buffett and Berkshire vice chairman Charlie Munger. During a commercial break, the cartoon Buffett recommended buying additional life insurance before going hunting with Cheney.
But Snoop Dogg's guard dog television designed to be placed in a home window won the competition based on a cartoon applause meter.
Shareholders who have grown to expect big things from their investment in Buffett's creation were eager to hear more about Berkshire's latest acquisition, announced Friday, and about plans that Buffett might have for the $44.7 billion (euro35.23 billion) cash the company held at the end of the year.
The world's second-richest man is also likely to face questions about his successor because he mentioned in his annual letter that the company board had chosen one. No name has been announced.
Berkshire said Friday it was acquiring an 80 percent stake in privately held Iscar Metalworking Cos., which makes metal cutting tools, in a deal that values Iscar at $5 billion (euro3.94 billion). A news release on the deal did not say what Berkshire is paying for its 80 percent.
Berkshire already owns a diverse mix of more than 60 companies, including insurance, reinsurance, carpet, jewelry, furniture, restaurants and utility firms. And it has major investments in such companies as H&R Block Inc., Anheuser-Busch Cos. and Coca-Cola Co.
On the Net:
Berkshire Hathaway: http://www.berkshirehathaway.com
 Load-Date: May 7, 2006

 

End of Document
