

Bodies of children slain in the U.S. return to native El Salvador
Associated Press International
April 12, 2007 Thursday 4:33 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 369 words
Dateline: SAN SALVADOR El Salvador
Body




The bodies of four small children who were killed in their U.S. home and their father, who committed suicide in the same house, have arrived for burial in the family's Salvadoran hometown.
The remains of Vanessa Rodriguez, 4; her sisters, Carena, 1, and Elsa, 9; their 3-year-old brother Angel, and their father, Pedro Rodriguez, 28, arrived Wednesday at El Salvador's international airport, just south of the capital, San Salvador.
"The repatriation has been completed. The bodies arrived on three different flights Wednesday and will be buried on Thursday," said government official Elizabeth Quintanilla.
Pedro's parents, Rosa and Pedro Rodriguez, received the bodies from authorities, then threw themselves over the small coffins in grief.
"This is the saddest moment of my life," Rosa said between sobs. "Thank God the bodies are finally here and will get a Christian burial."
The four children's mother, Deysi Benitez, is on the FBI's national list of missing persons. Benitez's mother, Maria Quinteros, said Wednesday her daughter wasn't involved in the killings.
"I don't think she could have committed such a horrendous thing," Quinteros said. "If they can't find her, it's because she's also dead."
Officials found the five bodies on March 26 at the family's three-bedroom townhouse in Frederick, Maryland.
Autopsies showed that the three girls were suffocated and Angel, the boy, was bludgeoned to death. Authorities have declined to say who may have killed the children.
The five bodies will be buried in the family's Salvadoran hometown of Sensuntepeque, 100 kilometers (60 miles) northeast of the capital. Mayor Edgar Bonilla said the city was paying the funeral costs. The Salvadoran government and members of the Salvadoran community in Maryland helped pay to ship the bodies home.
Relatives and co-workers have said the family struggled with language problems and financial difficulties and that the marriage was troubled. The parents and their oldest daughter were legal immigrants from El Salvador, while the three other children were born in the U.S.
Rodriguez learned March 15 that he would lose his factory job at a door-manufacturing plant scheduled to close in July. Benitez worked in a restaurant kitchen.
 Load-Date: April 13, 2007

 

End of Document
