

Bodies of children slain in the U.S. return to native El Salvador
Associated Press International
April 11, 2007 Wednesday 9:24 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 371 words
Dateline: SAN SALVADOR El Salvador
Body




The bodies of two small children who along with two siblings were killed in their U.S. home arrived Wednesday for burial in the family's Salvadoran hometown.
The remains of Vanessa Rodriguez, 4, and her 1-year-old sister, Carena, arrived on a commercial flight that landed at El Salvador's international airport, just south of the capital, San Salvador.
Government official Elizabeth Quintanilla said family members of the victims were still waiting for the remains of two other siblings, 9-year-old Elsa and 3-year-old Angel, as well as the body of their father, Pedro Rodriguez, 28, who hanged himself in the same house.
The children's grandparents, Rosa and Pedro Rodriguez, received the bodies from authorities, and then threw themselves on the small coffins and wept.
"This is the saddest moment of my life," Rosa said. "Thank God the bodies are finally here and will get a Christian burial."
The children's mother, Deysi Benitez, is on the FBI's national list of missing persons. Benitez's mother, Maria Quinteros, said Wednesday her daughter could not have been involved in the killings.
"I don't think she could have committed such a horrendous thing," Quinteros said. "If they can't find her, it's because she's also dead."
Officials found the five bodies on March 26 at the family's three-bedroom home in Frederick, Maryland.
Autopsies showed that the three girls were suffocated, while Angel was bludgeoned to death. Authorities have declined to say who may have killed the children.
The five bodies will be buried in the family's Salvadoran hometown of Sensuntepeque, 100 kilometers (60 miles) northeast of the capital. Mayor Edgar Bonilla said the city was paying the funeral costs. The Salvadoran government and members of the Salvadoran community in Maryland helped pay to ship the bodies home.
Relatives and co-workers have said the family struggled with language problems and financial difficulties and that the marriage was troubled. The parents and their oldest daughter were legal immigrants from El Salvador, while the younger children were born in the U.S.
Rodriguez learned March 15 that he would lose his factory job at a door-manufacturing plant scheduled to close in July. Benitez worked in a restaurant kitchen.
 Load-Date: April 12, 2007

 

End of Document
