

Bolivia's capital fight fails to make the agenda at constitutional summit
Associated Press International
January 16, 2008 Wednesday 3:04 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 401 words
Byline: By PAOLA FLORES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LA PAZ Bolivia
Body




Bolivia's once-violent fight to relocate its capital was reduced to a whimper Tuesday, when key talks on a new constitution proceeded despite a walkout by leaders from the former government seat of Sucre.
The quiet colonial gem of Sucre, home of both Bolivia's 1825 founding and the nation's highest courts, has long sought the return of the executive and legislative branches it lost in a brief 1899 civil war to La Paz, now a bustling modern capital.
The issue became a rallying point for the political opposition last year while an assembly met in Sucre to rewrite the constitution. Street protests over relocating the capital tied up the negotiations for months, and rioting killed three people there in November.
But an attempt to broach the capital topic fell on deaf ears at a tense meeting Tuesday between President Evo Morales and Bolivia's nine state governors.
Ariel Iriarte, interim governor of Sucre's state of Chuquisaca, angrily walked out when two lobbyists for moving the capital he had brought with him were denied entrance to the high-level meeting.
"We've done nothing wrong in making the country realize how Chuquisaca feels," Iriarte told reporters as he left the presidential palace.
The cold reception was remarkable for an issue that only months ago seemed ready to tear the country apart.
Sucre's proposal enjoyed wide support in several eastern states and served as a bargaining chip against a Morales-allied majority in the Constituent Assembly.
But the assembly finished its work in December, handing Morales a new constitution granting wider representation to Bolivia's long-oppressed indigenous peoples while closing the opposition-controlled Senate.
Before the framework goes before voters later this year, Morales and opposition state governors are sitting down for talks over the document's most contested points work Sucre's capital protests had prevented last year.
Sucre, it seems, now stands alone with its dreams of capital glory.
"The only reason that Sucre's demand for the capital had any leverage was because the opposition to Evo decided strategically to use it as a device to blow up the Constituent Assembly process," said Jim Shultz, director of the Democracy Center, a Cochabamba-based nonprofit monitoring Bolivian politics.
"Whether the opposition decides to take it up again is a more interesting question," he continued. "Do they really want the dialogue to succeed?"
 Load-Date: January 16, 2008

 

End of Document
