

Bolivia's president says Petrobras should 'give' the country its refineries
Associated Press International
October 31, 2006 Tuesday 6:54 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 333 words
Byline: By DAN KEANE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LA PAZ Bolivia
Body




President Evo Morales suggested Tuesday that Brazil's Petrobras simply "give" its two Bolivian oil refineries to his government as talks continued over the Brazilian state energy company's nationalization deal with its Andean neighbor.
Petroleo Brasileiro SA, or Petrobras, and other international companies last week signed new contracts allowing them to continue operating in Bolivia under the terms of Morales' May 1 decree nationalizing the country's natural gas and oil resources.
Yet to be determined, however, is how much Bolivia will pay to buy back two Bolivian-built but Petrobras-operated refineries that together produce 90 percent of Bolivia's fuel for domestic consumption.
"The refineries, two or three refineries that cost what, $50 million, $100 million for Brazil, that's nothing," Morales told a news conference Tuesday in the capital La Paz. "If I were Brazil, I would give them away."
The two refineries in question are together estimated to be worth some US$150 million (euro118 million).
The president added that his government "would like to buy back the refineries" and was "totally open to discussion" on the subject.
Brazilian Mines and Energy Minister Silas Rondeau said Monday Brazil won't simply give the refineries to Bolivia, saying the two nations are separately assessing their value, according to Brazil's Agencia Estado news agency.
After the values are determined, Brazil and Bolivia will negotiate an amount for Petrobras to be compensated for the refineries. But he said no timeframe has been set for the conclusion of those negotiations.
The two countries have set a deadline of Nov. 10 to resolve the price that Brazil pays Bolivia for natural gas, but that deadline could be extended, Rondeau said. Bolivia wants a much higher price. The Andean nation supplies Brazil with about 50 percent of its natural gas, and the figure is closer to 80 percent in Sao Paulo, Brazil's industrial heart. It is used by industry for power generation, and as fuel for cooking and cars.
 Load-Date: November 1, 2006

 

End of Document
