

Bolivian decree nationalizing the gas industry
Associated Press International
May 4, 2006 Thursday 3:11 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 466 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Bolivia has proven and potential natural gas reserves of 48.7 trillion cubic feet, second in South America to Venezuela's 151 trillion cubic feet.
Foreign companies have invested US$3.5 billion (euro2.8 billion) for Bolivian gas production and exploration since 1997 but new investments have been largely frozen since May of last year when a new Bolivian law raised taxes on production to 32 percent.
On Monday, President Morales called on soldiers to secure gas fields and other installations and threatened to evict foreign companies unless they sign new contracts within six months giving Bolivia majority control over the entire chain of production.
A look at the main points of Morales' natural gas nationalization decree:
 "The (Bolivian) State retakes the property and total and absolute control of these resources."
 As of May 1, 2006, petroleum companies doing business in Bolivia have six months to sign contracts turning over control of natural gas production control to the nation's cash-strapped state-owned oil company, Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales Bolivianos, or YPFB.
 Companies must undergo an audit by YPFB to remain in the country.
 Companies that do not comply with the deadline will be prohibited from operating in Bolivia.
 YPFB will set all conditions on natural gas production, transportation, marketing and pricing for exports and for the Bolivian market.
 Foreign companies operating in Bolivia will continue to pay the state 50 percent of the value of their production while new contracts are negotiated except at the country's two largest gas fields, where the state will take 82 percent. The latter fields are co-owned by Brazil's Petroleo Brasileiro SA, Spanish-Argentine Respol YPF SA and France's Total SA.
 YPFB will take a majority stake in Bolivia's two main refineries owned and operated by Petrobras.
 YPFB will re-establish a majority stake in the Bolivian petroleum companies Chaco SA, Andina SA and Transredes SA, which hads been parcially privatized in 1997. Foreign companies also have stakes in the companies.
In the event that the companies refuse to sell, the Bolvian government could confiscate their shares, according to Vice President Alvaro Garcia Linera.
The decree also applies to oil production, but Bolivia produces just 50,000 barrels of crude daily and exports very little.
Ownership details:
Repsol owns 50 percent of Andina. Panamerican Energy, in which British Petroleum has a 60 percent stake, owns 50 percent of Chaco.
Transredes, which owns the bulk of Bolivia's gas and oil pipelines, has 25 percent ownership by the Dutch-British conglomerate Royal Dutch Shell and 25 percent ownership by Prisma Energy of the United States. Petrobras owns both refineries in Bolivia (Palmasola and Gualberto Villarroel). It bought both in 1999 for US$100 million.
 Load-Date: May 5, 2006

 

End of Document
