

Bolivia's president celebreates Inca language's leap into the digital age
Associated Press International
August 25, 2006 Friday 4:42 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 658 words
Byline: By DAN KEANE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SUCRE Bolivia
Body




You have to press "Qallariy" to begin.
Pronounced "KAH-lyah-ree," the word replaces "Start" on Microsoft Windows' familiar taskbar in a new Quechua translation of the program, which got its Bolivian debut Friday.
President Evo Morales, the South American nation's first Indian leader, has found an ally in the U.S. software giant as he promotes the native tongues of his country's indigenous majority.
There are an estimated 10 to 13 million Quechua speakers in South America, and Morales hopes to empower the marginalized people who primarily speak this and other indigenous languages in Bolivia. Among the first users of Quechua software will be Indian members of a constituent assembly meeting in this colonial city to rewrite the nation's constitution.
Unveiling the software Friday at a gathering of Quechua Indians in striped red and black ponchos and colorful hats, a Microsoft executive and Bolivian Foreign Minister David Choquehuanca spoke mostly Spanish, with a little Quechua mixed in.
"Achay agradecey ("Thank you" in Quechua) for trusting in us," said Nelson Cuentas, chief of Microsoft's Bolivian operations, told a gathering. "Microsoft Bolivia wants indigenous culture to form a part of the information age, thanks to this truly new digital vision."
Choquehuanca said Microsoft is helping Bolivia launch a new era of inclusion after centuries of prejudice faced by Quechua-speakers.
"It was not so many years ago that Quechua was considered backward," Choquehuanca said, "but in these last few years our people are in a full process of emergence, and the world knows we are individuals."
First launched in Peru in June and now freely available for download online, the software is a simple patch that translates the familiar Microsoft menus and commands. Microsoft Corp. teamed up with several universities in Peru's Quechua-speaking south to create the translation program, joining 47 other versions of Windows in such languages as Kazakh, Maori and Zulu.
"More than anything, I was surprised," said 21-year-old Dilma Arancibia, a Quechua speaker invited to a Thursday preview of the program. "If they hadn't done this with Quechua, and if we don't teach it to our children, the language would definitely cease to exist."
And while relatively few South American Indians have regular access to a computer, the project is already paying dividends for Microsoft: The company recently won a contract from the Peruvian government for 5,000 Quechua-equipped computers.
"Technology should be available to all," Microsoft said in a statement in response to e-mailed questions about the translation. "It helps improve the lives of people."
Linguistics professors spent nearly three years reconciling 22 dialects of the language many without a formal written form to compile a vocabulary fit for Microsoft's programs.
For "file," they chose "kipu" (KEE-poo), borrowing the name of an ancient Inca practice of recording information in an intricate system of knotted strings. "Internet" became "Llika" (LEE-ka), the Quechua word for spider web.
The Quechua translation also includes many English words, as well as a few in Spanish.
The greatest challenge was likely finding a balance between the use of foreign words and the creation of new terms, said Serafin Coronel-Molina, a linguist at Princeton University and native Quechua speaker.
Borrowed words "are one way that a language evolves," he said. "But you can't just fill up a language with borrowed words, because then what have you got?"
It seems the computers are also still trying to figure out Quechua.
Sandra Picha was one of a dozen Quechua speakers invited to type out a letter to Morales at Thursday's preview. As she filled the screen with Quechua words, Microsoft's automatic spell-checker underlined every single one in red.
"It says I've written it all wrong," she laughed.
Associated Press Writers Leslie Josephs in Cuzco, Peru, and Allison Linn in Seattle, Washington contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: August 26, 2006

 

End of Document
