

Brazil double-take: Barack Obama's on the ballot
Associated Press International
September 18, 2008 Thursday 11:15 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 350 words
Byline: By BRADLEY BROOKS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BELFORD ROXO Brazil
Body




With Barack Obama on the ballot in at least eight local elections in Brazil, you might think the Democratic presidential candidate is keeping his options open in case John McCain winds up in the White House.
Not at all. Due to a quirk in Brazilian electoral law, candidates can put any name they want on the ballot, as long as it isn't offensive. At least eight candidates have chosen to be known as "Barack Obama" in the Oct. 5 elections.
The Illinois senator is hugely popular in Brazil. The prospect of a black U.S. president has generated enthusiasm across the country, where more people call themselves black than anywhere except Nigeria.
A variety of Brazilian candidates are hoping they can ride his distant coattails into office.
Claudio Henrique dos Anjos, who's running for mayor of Belford Roxo on the outskirts of Rio de Janeiro, took the name Barack Obama de Belford Roxo and said he's gone from third place in the polls to a tie.
Dos Anjos, who would be the first black mayor of Belford Roxo, says he has incorporated elements of Obama's speeches into his own, and is using the same theme of change in his campaign.
"He influences us not only because he's the first black candidate, but because he fought for his dream, believed in his dream and defeated the odds," dos Anjos said. "This attitude is contagious both in Brazil and the world at large."
On the streets, as campaign workers pass out leaflets, a rapper chants from speakers on the back of a pickup truck: "Vote for Barack Obama! He stands for change!"
Alexandre Nunes Jacinto, a 48-year-old air conditioner salesman, says his candidacy for city council in the dusty northeastern town of Petrolina is partly a tribute to the American. He read Obama's biography four years ago and was impressed with the way he crossed racial barriers.
"Like Barack, I believe racism is something we should overcome," he told The Associated Press. And his new name has stuck.
"Since I registered my new name, Alexandre died," Jacinto said. "Now everybody calls me Barack."
Associated Press writer Marco Sibaja in Brasilia, Brasil, contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: September 19, 2008

 

End of Document
