

Brazilian city caps violent week with cultural celebrations, while question remain over the dead 
Associated Press International
May 20, 2006 Saturday 7:08 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 685 words
Byline: By MICHAEL ASTOR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAO PAULO Brazil
Body




Lawyers and rights defenders on Saturday stepped up pressure on the government to release the names of 107 people killed by police during a week of battles against organized criminals.
Sao Paulo state Gov. Claudio Lembo has balked at identifying those killed during the weeklong series of attacks on police and counterattacks against suspected gang members.
"It's a question of preserving the privacy of the families," Lembo told reporters Saturday. "Each one will have a proper death certificate issued."
Local news media reported that the Sao Paulo State Security Secretariat had seized the forensic reports of the 107 who were reportedly killed by police. State security and morgue officials declined to comment on the reports.
"And the names of the dead?" asked a headline Saturday in the Rio de Janeiro newspaper O Globo.
"I think not releasing the names is very bad because the population loses confidence in the police. The best thing would be to release as much information as possible so we can see if there were errors by a few individual police or if it was part of a wider policy to kill victims," said Denis Mizne, executive director of the rights group Sou da Paz, or I Am of Peace.
"The Sao Paulo police have improved a lot in recent years in reducing homicides against civilians and this could put them back at square one," he added.
But as the violence ebbed, Sao Paulo seemed more intent on commemorating a return to its normal routine.
The city on Saturday planned a round-the-clock celebration dubbed "Virada Cultural," or "Cultural Turnaround," featuring, concerts, dance, theater and other arts at stages, museums and theaters across the city
Brazilian music star Joao Bosco was the top headliner amid some 500 events scheduled Saturday evening through Sunday afternoon. City officials said they would keep buses and subways running throughout the night and police promised beefed-up security.
"The week started out badly and we can end it on a lighter note. People going out will be a way to prove Sao Paulo hasn't given in to the bandits," said Caio Luiz de Carvalho, president of the Sao Paulo tourism board.
The event was canceled earlier in the week but was revived as the violence declined. Police said Saturday that there were no new attacks reported since Friday and only minor skirmishes the day before that.
The attacks began May 12, with members of the organized crime group First Capital Command, or PCC, killing 41 police and prison guards, burning buses and orchestrating prison rebellions across the state.
Police killed 107 suspected criminals during those attacks and in counter-raids that followed. Eighteen inmates were killed in prison rioting and four bystanders were killed.
"The city has returned to normal. The police have carried out security work with good results. The population can feel secure," said police spokesman Lt. Emerson Massera.
Still, many residents of this sprawling metropolis of 18 million people remained jittery Saturday
"I'm shocked. What happened shows a lack of government control," said Cesar Romero, 55, an artist. "This was something predictable that was bound to happen, but the authorities don't want to see that. Because of all the inequality a lot of poor people admire the PCC and they are heroes while the police are incompetent."
Federal prosecutors were meeting with morgue officials Saturday in an attempt to keep them from burying 17 bodies that had not been identified. They pledged to investigate reports that many of the victims had been executed at close range.
The deaths evoked comparisons with a 1992 massacre in Sao Paulo's Carandiru prison, where police killed 111 inmates quelling a riot in a Sao Paulo penitentiary.
While human rights groups decried the violence, many people here supported the action and said police should deal harshly with criminals to maintain law and order.
"This thing about human rights is a lie," said Maria de Lourdes Cunha, 40, "My father was killed (in a separate attack) and no one from human rights knocked on my door to see how I was doing."
Associated Press reporter Hellen Berger contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: May 21, 2006

 

End of Document
