

Brazil's president says Pan Am games will reveal new image to the world
Associated Press International
July 12, 2007 Thursday 4:57 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 516 words
Byline: By PETER MUELLO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO Brazil
Body




The Pan American Games will show the world that Brazil can stage the soccer World Cup and one day the Olympics Games, according to President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva.
"We know that what's at stake is the image of Brazil," Silva said in Thursday's editions of several Brazilian newspapers. "If everything works out, it will be marvelous. This image will be carried with great pride outside of Brazil."
Brazil, which has won a record five World Cups but hosted only one, in 1950, is a leading candidate to stage the 2014 World Cup.
However, getting the chance to stage the Olympics has proved more elusive although Rio is a leading candidate for the 2016 Games, along with Chicago, Madrid and Tokyo.
"From now on, Brazil has to compete every time there is a rivalry for the Olympics, and say it is capable," Silva told the Sao Paulo daily Folha de S. Paulo.
The hemisphere-wide Pan Am Games, long seen as a pre-Olympic warmup, will bring athletes from 42 countries to Rio for the July 13-29 event.
Silva downplayed claims of overspending and budgets being broken in preparing the games sites and the "Pan Am village" where the athletes will stay.
Silva said the final cost was 2 billion reals (US$1.05 billion), more than twice what the respected Getulio Vargas Foundation projected it would be in 2001.
"I think those responsible spent what they had to spend," Silva told the Rio daily Jornal do Brasil. "Now, whoever thinks we spent too much, ask for an accounting. For me, it would be welcome."
Silva said public safety was a major concern, citing a two-month police siege of the Alemao slum complex in Rio's poor north side that ended earlier this month.
"In terms of preparation and theories about public safety, what we're doing for the Pan American Games is the most sophisticated there is," he said. "Actually, this is the embryo of a new security policy that will be adopted in major Brazilian cities."
Recent problems with air traffic, with delayed or canceled flights stranding many passengers in airports around the country, won't happen again during the games, Silva said. Defense Minister Waldir Pires and Air Force Commander Juniti Saito would help avoid any possible protests by air traffic controllers.
The number of foreign tourists expected to attend has declined, which some blame on problems with travel and crime and the decreasing importance of the Pan Am Games on a global scale. But Silva said the problem was the strong local currency and a weak U.S. dollar.
"The question of the decrease in tourists is a small problem related to the exchange rate," Silva said. "What's important for us to consider is this: The arrival of foreign tourists has declined some 9 percent, but domestic tourism in Brazil has increased sharply."
Brazil is counting on a growing influx of tourists especially since the Christ the Redeemer statue on Rio's Corcovado mountain was elected last week as one of the new seven wonders of the world, Silva said.
"You can be sure that as the end of the year approaches we'll have a flood of tourists, especially now, with Christ the Redeemer as a seventh wonder," he said.
 Load-Date: July 13, 2007

 

End of Document
