

Brazil's currency punches through 2-to-the-dollar level
Associated Press International
May 15, 2007 Tuesday 7:49 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 391 words
Byline: By PETER MUELLO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO Brazil
Body




Brazil's strengthening currency punched through the psychologically important 2-to-the-dollar level Tuesday for the first time since 2001, bolstered by strong trade surpluses, foreign investment and stable U.S. interest rates.
The real closed at 1.98 to the U.S. dollar, a level long feared by Brazil's massive agribusiness sector, which relies heavily on exports that are becoming more expensive for foreign buyers. It was the strongest showing for the real since Jan. 31, 2001.
While high commodity prices have helped blunt the impact of the real's value against the dollar, exporters fear they could be hurt badly if the currency continues to strengthen.
The real has gained against the dollar for four consecutive years, despite aggressive action by Brazil's Central Bank, which has been purchasing billions of dollars. It stood at nearly 4-to-the-dollar in late 2002.
Positive economic reports in Brazil and the United States helped boost investor sentiment Tuesday, analysts said.
In an interview with Globo TV, economist Alexandre Mathias of Unibanco SA said it was "inevitable" that the real would continue to strengthen because of the heavy cash inflows.
He predicted the real will remain in the 1.9- to 2-to-the-dollar range for several months.
President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva said his administration will offer economic aid to exporters and domestic manufacturers hurt by the real's rise, but he didn't offer details and insisted that Brazil's currency will remain free-floating.
"We intend to offer aid to those hurt by the strengthening of the currency, as some say, or from competition from China, as others claim," Silva said at a news conference in the capital of Brasilia.
Finance Ministry officials said recently that the government would offer tax abatements for companies hurt by the real's appreciation. The real has gained 7 percent against the dollar so far this year after advancing nearly 9 percent against the greenback in 2006.
The weak dollar means Brazilian farmers will have a harder time paying debts with fertilizer companies or buying fertilizer for the 2007-08 crop later this year, said Eduardo Daher, who heads Brazil's fertilizer industry association.
"The big problem is that our clientele loses income," he said. "Loan defaults become more frequent with fertilizer lenders. This is not a healthy situation unfolding."
 Load-Date: May 16, 2007

 

End of Document
