

Brazil to have a hard time throughout the World Cup, Juninho says
Associated Press International
June 20, 2006 Tuesday 4:27 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 861 words
Byline: By TALES AZZONI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BERGISCH GLADBACH Germany
Body




Juninho doesn't expect things to get much easier for Brazil at the World Cup.
The defending champions struggled in their first two matches against Croatia and Australia, picking up wins but being heavily challenged.
"Brazil better wake up now and realize that it will suffer a lot to win this World Cup," the Lyon player said. "This (competition) is being played at a very high level, it's being hard to hold on to results, to win matches."
Juninho, a backup to Kaka in Brazil's magic quartet scheme, noted the so-called weak teams will likely continue giving a hard time to the traditional squads.
"Australia played very well against us. Who would've thought something like that 10 years ago, that Australia would face Brazil like it did?" Juninho said. "Other nations, even some which have been eliminated, like the Ivory Coast, have played well, too.
"We've seen Portugal struggle to beat Iran."
The 31-year-old Juninho may get a chance to start Thursday in Brazil's last group match after coach Carlos Alberto Parreira hinted he may rest some of the starters ahead of the second round.
"I'm prepared to get in, we just need to wait for Parreira's decision," Juninho said.
Brazil secured a spot in the second round after the 1-0 win over Croatia and the 2-0 victory over Australia.
Juninho, who helped Lyon win its fifth consecutive French league title earlier this year, was a member of Brazil's squad that won the Confederations Cup last year in Germany.
Playing in his first World Cup, Juninho has scored six goals in 40 matches with Brazil.
CLEAN AFTER YOURSELF: South Korea's fans have won a special place in the hearts of order-loving Germans.
South Korean fans who gathered in front of giant screens in Leipzig to watch Sunday's 1-1 draw with France impressed the locals by dutifully picking up their garbage at the end of the match.
As if that were not enough, the city government said Monday, the South Koreans also cleared the tables at fast-food outlets set up for fans saving cleaning firms the trouble.
VOTE OF CONFIDENCE: Portugal is through to the second round of the World Cup for the first time in 40 years, and it's getting a helping hand from someone who's been there before.
Eusebio, a national soccer icon who helped guide Portugal to a third-place finish in 1966, is staying with the team at its training camp in Marienfeld.
He arrived in Germany after its opening win over Angola to watch its second match when the Portuguese overcame Iran 2-0 a result that put Portugal into the knockout round.
"After we beat Iran, there's no way I'm going back to Lisbon. I feel I have to be here with the players," the 64-year-old Eusebio said Tuesday. "I have a hunch they can go even further than we did."
Portugal coach Luiz Felipe Scolari said he appreciated the presence of Eusebio, nicknamed the Black Panther, who was on hand to dispense words of wisdom.
"Often when we're around the table at lunch or dinner we'll ask Eusebio to say a word to the players," Scolari said. "It helps their confidence and motivates them."
MISSED OUT: Hundreds of British schoolchildren missed out on seeing a World Cup match because their tickets were fake.
About 380 kids from across the country were refused entry to a match in Frankfurt on Saturday. Portugal beat Iran 2-0.
"They were not able to go to the match as it appears the tickets were from a doubtful source," said Christopher Bradey, a teacher accompanying the children.
FIFA spokesman Andreas Herren told Britain's Press Association that it was a regrettable situation.
"But unfortunately the incident confirms what FIFA and the local organizing committee have been warning against from the start, that only tickets from official sources should be acquired and not other sources of a dubious nature," Herren said. "Unfortunately it is youngsters who are paying a high price for that."
FERDINAND MILESTONE: England defender Rio Ferdinand will win his 50th cap on Tuesday when his team plays Sweden.
It's taken a little longer than others of his experience to get there. Ferdinand missed eight months of 2004 after missing a doping test, and last year he was dropped by England coach Sven-Goran Eriksson.
But Ferdinand's return to form for Manchester United has pushed him ahead of Sol Campbell in Eriksson's preferred starting lineup.
"Why is Rio back to his best? He has woken up," Eriksson said. "I always said Rio has everything as a central defender. He is the most elegant central defender you will find.
"He has one yellow card in 49 games. That's incredible. He is quick, a good header of the ball, has good technique. He has everything."
SAVIOLA'S OPINION: Argentina midfielder Javier Saviola is expecting Brazil to play better. And he'd like to face Mexico not Portugal in the first game of the second round.
"Brazil isn't at the level you would expect," he said. "But in spite of not playing well they've won their games. This is a privilege most teams don't have."
Asked bluntly his choice in the next round, the Sevilla player didn't flinch.
Mexico.
"These are two very different teams," Saviola said. "Mexico, perhaps, has more speed. If I had to choose it would be Mexico. Portugal has more players that can change the game."
 Load-Date: June 21, 2006

 

End of Document
