

Brazil and the United States pledge cooperation on trade
Associated Press International
June 6, 2006 Tuesday 9:23 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 333 words
Byline: By MICHAEL ASTOR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO Brazil
Body




The U.S. commerce secretary and Brazil's trade minister agreed to increase cooperation on protecting intellectual property and expanding business opportunities between the two countries.
Differences between the two countries have disrupted progress not only on a hemisphere-wide free trade agreement but also negotiations before the World Trade Organization. Brazil objects to U.S. farm subsidies that prevent its products from reaching U.S. markets, while the United States objects to piracy of American products in Brazil, from movies to computer software.
U.S. Commerce Secretary Carlos Gutierrez, who arrived in Brazil on Sunday, and Brazilian Minister of Trade and Industry Luiz Fernando Furlan signed a memo of understanding Tuesday to allow for informal talks between the two nations on several trade-related issues.
"We discussed themes that are within our reach," Furlan said after his morning-long meeting with Gutierrez. "The United States is the biggest foreign investor in Brazil, and Brazil has widened its investments there ... in the United States. So there are a series of issues."
Furlan said the memo covers cooperation on technical barriers, intellectual property and improving and expanding business opportunities.
The two men, however, did not discuss the proposed Free Trade Areas of the Americas (FTAA), Brazilian media said.
The United States has been a strong advocate of the hemispherewide free trade agreement, a proposal that has made little headway since it was first proposed in 1994.
Intellectual property remains an issue, Gutierrez told The Associated Press in an interview Monday.
"Brazil has made progress on piracy and is focused on the issue," he said. "We believe more progress should be made. I believe the numbers on software (piracy) are still pretty high."
Trade between the two countries totaled US$39 billion (euro30.6 billion) last year, with Brazil's U.S. exports totaling US$24 billion (euro18.8 billion) and its U.S. imports US$15 billion (euro11.7 billion).
 Load-Date: June 7, 2006

 

End of Document
