

British fans soak up the sun, sample German beer before World Cup opener
Associated Press International
June 10, 2006 Saturday 12:16 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 537 words
Byline: By ROBERT MILLWARD, AP Soccer Writer
Dateline: FRANKFURT Germany
Body




England fans soaked up the sun and headed for the bars for a beer before their team's World Cup game against Paraguay on Saturday.
Bars in downtown Frankfurt opened around 10 am (0800 GMT) and the fans were quick to fill them, chanting and singing songs during the buildup to their team's opening match.
Although Frankfurt police reported 20 arrests in the city overnight, only four were English and none of the incidents were soccer related.
"It's peaceful and going very well," Frankfurt police spokesman Peter Freier said Saturday. "There have been incidents but nothing to do with soccer hooliganism.
With up to 40,000 English fans arriving for the game, there is a heavy security presence in Frankfurt. Police in England are confident they have kept the main potential troublemakers at home, however, issuing more than 3,500 banning orders on known hooligans who have been ordered to hand in their passports.
Although police in Munich reported 103 arrests in the city before and after Germany's 4-2 opening game victory over Costa Rica, most were for drunken behavior and there were no serious incidents.
Police in Gelsenkirchen, where Ecuador beat Poland 2-0 in Friday's second match, said six fans from Germany and Poland were arrested for bodily harm. Some 25,000 Polish soccer fans went to the city for their opening day game.
"In all these cases, large amounts of alcohol were involved," police spokesman Konrad Kordts said. However, he added, overall "the situation was calmer than at a normal Bundesliga match."
Freier said that, of the 20 arrests in Frankfurt, 10 were Germans, four English, two Polish, one Italian, one from former Yugoslavia, one Canadian and one from Bosnia-Herzegovina who was being sought for other criminal matters.
Three of the Germans and three English were arrested for an incident with doormen outside a club near the main train station. The other 14 were arrested in the Sachsenhausen area of the city on the other side of River Main.
"They were only very drunk and some got a bit aggressive," Freier said. Of the 20 arrested, only the Bosnian had been held.
Stephen Thomas, an assistant chief constable from Manchester, who is part of the British contingent working with German police, said the atmosphere in the city had been tense, but was defused.
"There was a fairly tense atmosphere at times, and some very good work from the Frankfurt police, moving in at the right time, with the help of our spotting operation, to defuse issues," he told reporters.
While many of the English fans headed for the bars or the big squares in Frankfurt, supporters with tickets arrived in their hundreds at the stadium. Only 10,000 English fans are thought to have bought tickets while many more were trying to buy them in black market trade going on outside the main train station.
"They are asking 600 euros for two 28 pound (euro40 tickets)," said Lawrence Duignan, from Blackpool. "That's way too much and you're not even sure they are genuine tickets. There's a good chance they may be dud (fake) and it's not worth taking the risk."
Frankfurt police said that some English fans had been mistakenly told that there were genuine tickets on sale at the stadium and issued a statement saying that was not true.
 Load-Date: June 11, 2006

 

End of Document
