

British-based commission says road accidents kill 1.2 million people around the world each year
Associated Press International
June 8, 2006 Thursday 2:14 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 334 words
Byline: By LAURA-CLAIRE CORSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON 
Body




Road accidents kill 1.2 million people each year around the world, and the deaths are increasing rapidly in poorer nations, according to a report released Thursday.
In addition to the deaths, 50 million people are injured in road accidents each year, according to the report by the British-based Commission for Global Road Safety.
Some 85 percent of the deaths and injuries are in low- and middle-income countries, where road deaths are forecast to more than double by 2020, the report said. High-income countries should expect a 28 percent decrease in road deaths.
Road traffic injuries, which is the world's 10th leading cause of death, are most prominent in Asia, Africa and Latin America.
Sub-Saharan Africa, where less than 20 percent of highways are paved, is a primary area of concern because of its limited infrastructure, the report said. By 2020, road crash deaths are expected to rise 80 percent in that area, while South Asia should expect a 144 percent increase if nothing is done to curb road accidents.
In low-income nations, the annual cost of road crashes is estimated at between US$65 and US$100 billion per year the latter figure nearly matching overseas aid from richer nations.
"In 2005, millions of people and the leaders of the G-8 responded to the call to make poverty history," said former NATO Secretary-General Lord Robertson, the commission's chairman.
"Yet many of the gains for development won in 2005 will be at risk if action is not taken to reverse the growing epidemic of road traffic death and injury, with its terrible human and economic cost."
The most effective steps to take immediately would be to promote the use of helmets for motorcyclists and seatbelts for use in cars, controlling vehicle speed and curbing drunk driving, commission Secretary David Ward said.
The commission is a charity established by a grant from the Federation Internationale de l'Automobile, or FIA, world motor sport governing body.
On the Net:
http://www.fiafoundation.com/commissionforglobalroadsafety
 Load-Date: June 9, 2006

 

End of Document
