

Bush critics condemn Chavez's reference to Bush as 'the devil'
Associated Press International
September 23, 2006 Saturday 2:34 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 870 words
Byline: By IAN JAMES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez said he stands behind his description of U.S. President George W. Bush as "the devil." But his charged comments, coming near U.S. legislative elections, also have drawn condemnation from some Bush critics.
"I wanted President Chavez to please understand that even though many people in the United States are critical of our president that we resent the fact that he would come to the United States and criticize President Bush," Democratic Congressman Charles Rangel said Thursday.
The New York City tabloids were more aggressive, with The New York Daily News' front page headline Friday telling Chavez to "ZIP IT!" and the New York Post calling him a "jerk" and the "Caracas crackpot."
There were also signs that efforts by Chavez to reach out to the American people by boosting sales of discounted heating oil to the poor could face some new obstacles.
Maine's Democratic Governor John Baldacci, who approved an agreement last winter to buy discounted oil, said Thursday he had no plans to seek a similar arrangement this winter. He said Chavez's words about the Republican president were "unnecessary and offensive."
Alex Baker, the chief executive of retail developer AIG Baker Shopping Center Properties, said Thursday that his company will no longer use Citgo gas products in its vehicles in response to Chavez's remarks. Citgo is the U.S.-based refining arm of Venezuela's state-run oil company.
Baker, in remarks to the Hoover, Alabama, Chamber of Commerce, said he is also asking all contractors and vendors who do business with his company in the 36 states where it operates to boycott Citgo products.
Democratic Senator Christopher Dodd, whose home state of Connecticut has also participated in the program, called Chavez's comments "destructive to the United Nations as an institution" and said Chavez should face a rebuke.
Chavez told hundreds of supporters at a Harlem church on Thursday that he stands by his words.
"Sometimes the devil takes the form of people," Chavez said. He called the war in Iraq criminal and said Bush is a "sick man."
Insults have increasingly flown between Caracas and Washington since 2002, when the U.S. swiftly recognized leaders who briefly ousted Chavez in a coup, before Chavez returned to power amid massive street protests.
U.S. officials regularly call the Venezuelan leader a destabilizing force, and Bush has said he sees Chavez as a threat to democracy. Chavez has called Bush a "devil" in other speeches.
Some observers, such as civil rights leader the Rev. Jesse Jackson, suggested both Chavez and the Bush administration ought to calm their rhetoric and avoid name-calling. Jackson met with Chavez Thursday night, saying he was concerned.
"I think that he should not be calling President Bush 'devil.' President Bush should not be calling him 'evil' or calling him 'tyrant,'" Jackson said.
Chavez returned to Caracas on Friday. While in New York, he accused the U.S. of keeping his doctors and his security chief from coming to by not granting them visas. "Some people would like for me not to come, but I come. I come to say what I think must be said," Chavez said on Thursday.
He said he did not prepare a script for his U.N. speech, but rather went in with ideas and spoke spontaneously.
Chavez described himself as a friend of the American people, and announced that Venezuela would more than double sales of discounted heating oil to poor Americans. But, he insisted, "we're enemies of imperialism" meaning the Bush administration.
He also used the world "devil" to refer to examples of barbarism in the world, mentioning nuclear weapons, the Iraq war and the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. After the mention of Sept. 11, a man in the audience blurted out, "the devil," and Chavez replied, "Yes, friend, the devil. That's barbarism."
But Chavez did not mention an idea he voiced earlier this month, when he suggested theories of U.S. government links to the attacks are "not absurd" and bear examination. He said at the time that such theories were plausible in part because the Bush administration needed to justify its invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq.
In his visit to New York, Chavez urged Americans to conserve energy and recited the words of Americans from Mark Twain to Abraham Lincoln. He repeated his warning that he would halt oil shipments if the U.S. tries to oust him.
The U.S. has sought to block Venezuela's bid for a seat on the U.N. Security Council, arguing it would be a disruptive force and backing Guatemala instead. Chavez says Venezuela would be "the voice of the Third World" if chosen in a U.N. vote next month.
Chavez is practicing a sort of "diplomacy for show" that thrives on confrontation, said Milos Alcalay, who was Chavez's U.N. ambassador until he resigned in 2004 amid differences with the government. "A post for non-permanent membership in the Security Council has never been so politicized."
Some who turned out to hear Chavez speak said they share the views behind Chavez's message, even if they might choose different words.
"He likes to set fires, to do good or just to get people riled up," said Natalia Munoz, a 25-year-old public health coordinator who attended a speech. "He gets a lot of people thinking."
 Load-Date: September 23, 2006

 

End of Document
