

Bush visits Chicago as he tries to boost popularity on the road
Associated Press International
July 8, 2006 Saturday 1:11 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 458 words
Byline: By TARA BURGHART, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CHICAGO 
Body




President George W. Bush had breakfast at a popular diner and met with business leaders during an overnight trip to Chicago, part of an effort to boost his sagging popularity by putting him on the road more often this summer.
Inside the diner Friday morning, Bush greeted customers, who said they appreciated what the president was doing. Guinn Gandy, a Texas native who now lives in suburban Aurora, said no one asked any difficult questions.
"It's not appropriate here," Gandy said. "The man's trying to have breakfast."
The president also had dinner with Democratic Mayor Richard M. Daley, who joined Bush at a news conference Friday.
White House counselor Dan Bartlett said similar trips were being planned for the president throughout the summer, with Bush spending more time in communities to "really sink his teeth into the local market."
There also was some political fundraising on the trip, as Bush helped raise $1.2 million (euro940,000) for Judy Baar Topinka, the Republican state treasurer who is trying to unseat Democratic Governor Rod Blagojevich in November elections.
Outside the hotel where the fundraiser was held Friday, several dozen protesters carried anti-Bush and anti-war messages. A few demonstrators burned American flags.
On Thursday, Bush dined with business leaders, including Juan Ochoa, president and CEO of the Illinois Hispanic Chamber of Commerce. He said Bush and his guests spent about 20 minutes talking about immigration reform and its prospects in Congress.
"It was comforting for me to know a Republican president would make an attempt to pass immigration reform," said Ochoa, who called himself a staunch Democrat. "President Clinton had eight years and at no point did I feel it was a priority for him."
They also spoke about the morale of troops in Iraq and leadership in South America, he said.
One protester at the restaurant, in a gentrifying neighborhood just south of the city's business district, said Bush needed to visit other spots in Chicago if he wanted to hear from average Americans.
"If he really wants to meet with real people, this is certainly not the place to do it," said Lindsie Chait, holding a sign reading "Bush Step Down." "He should go to poorer areas of the city."
Larry J. Sabato, director of the University of Virginia Center for Politics, said trips like the one to Chicago demonstrate that Bush does connect better with voters in informal sessions out of Washington. But he said the main problem is the unpopularity of the Iraq war.
"Until things look up in Iraq, and American troops are coming home in significant numbers, Bush's own numbers won't improve much," Sabato said in an e-mail.
Associated Press writers Don Babwin, Michael Tarm and Carla K. Johnson contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: July 8, 2006

 

End of Document
