

Canada to increase military presence in the Arctic
Associated Press International
July 9, 2007 Monday 7:08 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 472 words
Byline: By ROB GILLIES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: TORONTO 
Body




Canada announced plans Monday to increase its military presence in the Arctic in an effort to assert its sovereignty over the Northwest Passage sea route, which the U.S. insists does not belong to Canada.
Prime Minister Stephen Harper said six to eight new patrol ships will be built to guard what he says are Canada's waters.
"Canada has a choice when it comes to defending our sovereignty over the Arctic. We either use it or lose it. And make no mistake, this Government intends to use it," Harper said.
U.S. Ambassador David Wilkins has criticized Harper's promise to defend the Arctic, claiming the Northwest Passage as "neutral waters."
The disputed route runs from the Atlantic to the Pacific through the Arctic archipelago. While Canadians have long claimed the waters as their own, Ottawa has generally turned a blind eye to the United States, whose navy has sent vessels and submarines through what it considers an international strait.
As global warming melts the passage which is only navigable during a slim window in the summer the waters are exposing unexplored resources, and becoming an attractive shipping route. Commercial ships can shave off some 4,000 kilometers (2,480 miles) from Europe to Asia compared with the current routes through the Panama Canal.
The U.S. Geological Survey estimates the Arctic has as much as 25 percent of the world's undiscovered oil and gas.
"The ongoing discovery of the north's resource riches coupled with the potential impact of climate change has made the region a growing area of interest and concern," Harper said.
He said a deep water port will also be built. Harper did not name the location of the new port but said it will serve as an operating base for the naval ships and will also be used for commercial purposes.
Canada also wants to assert its claim over Hans Island, which is at the entrance to the Northwest Passage.
The half-square mile (1.3 sq. kilometer) rock, just one-seventh the size of New York's Central Park, is wedged between Canada's Ellesmere Island and Danish-ruled Greenland, and for more than 20 years has been a subject of unusually bitter exchanges between the two NATO allies.
In 1984, Denmark's minister for Greenland affairs, Tom Hoeyem, caused a stir when he flew in on a chartered helicopter, raised a Danish flag on the island, buried a bottle of brandy at the base of the flagpole and left a note saying: "Welcome to the Danish island."
The dispute erupted again two years ago when former Canadian Defense Minister Bill Graham set foot on the rock while Canadian troops hoisted the Maple Leaf flag.
Denmark sent a letter of protest to Ottawa, while Canadians and Danes took out competing Google ads, each proclaiming sovereignty over the rock 680 miles (1,094 kilometers) south of the North Pole.
Some Canadians even called for a boycott of Danish pastries.
 Load-Date: July 10, 2007

 

End of Document
