

Catholics bear the heat as Valencia dons Vatican colors for papal party
Associated Press International
July 9, 2006 Sunday 12:06 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 554 words
Byline: By CIARAN GILES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: VALENCIA Spain
Body




Yellow and white lollipops. Yellow and white ice cream. It's a papal party!
This Mediterranean port became a veritable sea of yellow and white as hundreds of thousands of Catholics family groups, couples, nuns and priests donned the colors of the Vatican and took up nearly every square inch of the city center to witness the visit of Pope Benedict XVI.
With the focus on family values, they came from all over Spain but also from distant corners of the world in search of a message of support from the pontiff.
"We Catholics needed this visit," said 25-year-old Eliana Ramos, from Mendoza, Argentina. "The world is in moral decline. Especially among young people. There are no young people in the churches anymore. Hopefully, this visit will bring people back to God."
On a personal level, Ramos explained she had had three miscarriages but still wanted children.
"We're still fighting. Hopefully God will look down on us and help!"
The pope came to Valencia to wrap up a nine-day church congress on family issues.
Throughout the city, massive groups of people of all ages trooped about chanting slogans in favor of the pope. Most were wearing the distinctive yellow and white backpacks issued to registered pilgrims on arrival or bought in stores for euro20 (US$25) a pop.
Crowds packed the squares and park areas, squeezing together to share any spare spot of shade to shelter from a punishing sun and stifling humidity.
Priests and nuns joined groups of youths sitting on the sidewalks tucking into takeaways and drinking refreshments.
Huge queues stretched around the city's ice cream and fruit juice stalls. Much on the demand at one stall in Plaza de la Reina, just yards (meters) away from the cathedral, was flavor of the week: 'Crema Benedict XVI,' a mixture of cream and lemon the Vatican colors, of course at euro1.70 (US$2.17) a tub which went down a treat in the 35-degree Celsius heat but then laid heavy on the stomach.
Some, however, were not having so good a time.
"This is horrible. The heat is killing us," said Catalina Toth, 58, who was leading a group of 45 Hungarians.
"We're trying to get to the beach to eat some paella (a famous Valencian rice dish) before the pope speaks again. Do you know where the beach is?"
Ecuadorean immigrant Diego Tuquerres, 19, who described himself as "a believer," was enjoying it all. Selling papal head scarves on the footpath at euro2 (US$2.50) each, he had already made euro50 (US$75) by midday and seen the pope, too, albeit on the giant screen set up in the middle of the square.
Down at the parkland area where the pope was to address pilgrims from a specially built altar later in the day, people camped out with mattresses and tents listening to a blend of soft jazz interspersed with sacral music beating from the banks of speakers set up at nearly every corner.
Adrian Glenewickel, a 25-year-old Polish immigrant said he had come to Valencia to see both the pope and Socialist Prime Minister Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero. When asked if he knew that Zapatero was not exactly considered a great friend of Catholics, he said:
"Yes, but he is good for immigrants and he wants peace with the Basques," he said, referring to the Socialist government's relatively liberal immigrant policies and its moves to negotiate an end to the violent campaign of the Basque independence group ETA.
 Load-Date: July 9, 2006

 

End of Document
