

Chavez puts the brakes on drive for revolutionary change in Venezuela
Associated Press International
January 6, 2008 Sunday 11:18 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 468 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER TOOTHAKER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARACAS Venezuela
Body




President Hugo Chavez is putting the brakes on his drive for revolutionary change in Venezuela, shifting away from radical socialist reforms in favor of a pragmatic focus on everyday problems from soaring crime to trash-strewn streets.
One month after voters rejected reforms that would have greatly expanded his power and enshrined socialist principles in the constitution, Chavez is toning down his revolutionary rhetoric to focus on lingering day-to-day problems affecting Venezuelans of all political leanings.
"I'm forced to reduce the speed of the march," Chavez said Sunday, telling new members of his Cabinet to "accept reality" and "put their feet on the ground."
A close ally of Cuban leader Fidel Castro, Chavez spent much of 2007 promoting his idyllic vision of a new Venezuela transformed through "21st-century socialism," and he began by nationalizing the country's electricity, telecommunications, natural gas and oil industries.
But Venezuelans tugged on the reins in December, narrowly voting down his far-reaching constitutional changes and forcing the former paratroop commander to rethink his strategy for remaking this oil-rich, yet poverty-stricken South American nation.
"The problem is not an abstract ideology, it's putting it to work," said Steve Ellner, a political science professor at Venezuela's University of the East. "The ideologues have to demonstrate the ideology can work."
Ellner expects Chavez to shelve "ambitious schemes that may be criticized as impractical," such as building offshore cities similar in design to oil platforms in the Caribbean Sea.
Instead the government is turning its attention to entrenched problems such as high crime, rampant corruption and food shortages.
Polls show that high crime rates among the highest in the Western Hemisphere are a leading concern for Venezuelans. The Justice Ministry reported 9,402 homicides nationwide in 2005 but has yet to reveal complete figures for 2006 or 2007.
Meanwhile a 22.5 percent annual inflation rate last year the steepest in Latin America and shortages of staples like milk, eggs, sugar and beef have prompted consumers to question the government's economic policies, including price controls.
Others complain of ineffectual trash collection in major cities and the bumper-to-bumper traffic that clogs the streets of Venezuela's increasingly chaotic capital.
Speaking during his weekly radio and TV show on Sunday, Chavez vowed to tackle violent crime and graft within Venezuela's public administration, which he said have reached intolerable levels.
"Insecurity and corruption, they are inherited evils that we must stop cold and not allow to continue expanding. If we don't stop them, they become the biggest enemy of our revolution," Chavez said. "I call for us to fight more successfully against these scourges."
 Load-Date: January 7, 2008

 

End of Document
