

Chavez-ordered controls on contraband to Colombia hurt the poor in his own nation
Associated Press International
January 31, 2008 Thursday 1:26 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 778 words
Byline: By FRANK BAJAK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: URENA Venezuela
Body




Thousands of Venezuelans lined up near the border with Colombia to buy food confiscated from smugglers a momentary bonanza produced by President Hugo Chavez's crackdown on an underground economy that thrives on his government's price controls.
But Wednesday's fire-sale of tons of cooking oil, rice, sugar and pasta to people with Venezuelan ID cards did little to quell anger along the border, where citizens on both sides are suffering from Chavez' order to seize Colombia-bound contraband.
The border enforcement, spurred by Chavez' political spat with neighboring President Alvaro Uribe, was designed to hurt Colombians, who buy Venezuelan goods at a discount. But the ban is hitting his own people, whose livelihoods depend on the free flow of goods across one of South America's most porous borders.
Hardest hit are the poor Venezuelans and Colombians alike who live across the Simon Bolivar International Bridge in Cucuta, Colombia's fifth largest city, and depend on cheaper Venezuelan food staples.
Chavez ordered the crackdown more than a week ago as his war of words with Uribe escalated. The Venezuelan leader said Colombia's leftist rebels should be classified as insurgents, not terrorists, sparking an angry response from Bogota and sending relations between neighbors at an all-time low.
The vitriol notwithstanding, legitimate cross-border trade is barely affected. And commercial and familial ties are so strong across this frontier that few believe the row could escalate into the armed conflict Chavez has accused Colombia and the United States of fomenting.
But merchants and factories in the Venezuelan border town of San Antonio suffered an estimated 85 percent drop in sales this month as a result of the smuggling crackdown.
Cucuta residents have all but stopped crossing the border, where travel documents are rarely checked, to shop for basics that cost nearly twice as much in Colombia.
Isabel Castillo, president of San Antonio's chamber of commerce, told The Associated Press that about 40 stores have closed because of the confiscations, which authorities say have netted about 5,000 tons of contraband nationwide.
In nearby Urena, the central square is nearly deserted, killing sales for street vendor Ofelia Sepulveda, who is Colombian.
"It's a conflict between those who are comfortable (Chavez and Uribe), but we're the ones who are paying," she lamented, worrying about how she'll be able to feed her three children.
On Sunday, National Guard soldiers confiscated two bags of flour and three kilos (6.6 pounds) of sugar from Sepulveda, who said she was taking it home. But others cart the cheap food to neighborhood stores on the Colombian side, reselling it for a modest profit.
About 40 percent of cross-border trade passes through Urena and San Antonio, where merchants say that despite the ban, Venezuelan products are still reaching Cucuta's stores. Many accuse Venezuelan guardsmen of selective enforcement taking bribes to let tractor-trailer loads of contraband into Colombia, while taking sacks of food from people like Sepulveda.
Venezuela's 2,200-kilometer (1,370-mile) border with Colombia has always been more of a boon than a barrier to people on both sides.
Thousands of Colombians live or work on the Venezuelan side and vice versa.
"Ninety percent of the cars here are Venezuelan," said Lt. Col. Jorge Ivan Florez, the Colombian regional police commander in Cucuta. They cost half as much as Colombian cars, and Cucuta residents are allowed to have Venezuelan plates.
The border trouble is as much a function of turmoil in Venezuela's economy as of tension over Uribe's objections to Chavez's involvement with Colombia's leftist rebels.
Chavez lost his patience with Uribe in November after the Colombian president thwarted Chavez, who was negotiating a prisoner swap with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia. The group later released two hostages.
Many consider Chavez's attempt to rally his countrymen against Colombia a bid to distract Venezuelans from domestic shortcomings. Price controls on many basic food items an attempt to rein in 23 percent annual inflation have contributed to shortages of everything from milk to cooking oil in this petroleum-rich nation.
But the contraband controls will end up hurting Chavez politically, said Alejandro Garcia, an anti-Chavez councilman in Urena.
"There are 100,000 Venezuelans in Cucuta," Garcia said as he negotiated his SUV through a knot of border-bound traffic congesting downtown Urena. "This is a whim of the president that's going to cost him votes."
AP writers Fabiola Sanchez in San Antonio, Venezuela, and Tatiana Guerrero in Bogota, Colombia, contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: January 31, 2008

 

End of Document
