

Chavez supporters mobilize massive get-out-the-vote campaign in Venezuela
Associated Press International
December 2, 2006 Saturday 12:09 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 707 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER TOOTHAKER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARACAS Venezuela
Body




Recorded bugles blared from loudspeakers in city plazas as President Hugo Chavez's party mobilized a massive get-out-the-vote campaign, handing out fliers and preparing fleets of motor scooters to ferry voters from hillside slums to polling centers.
Friday's events were part of a highly coordinated effort to secure a sweeping re-election victory Sunday for Chavez, who has set an ambitious goal of winning 10 million votes in a country with just 16 million registered voters.
His enemies are vowing to prevent that and hand a victory to veteran opposition leader Manuel Rosales. They closed campaigning late Thursday, beating on pots and pans across Caracas while fireworks lit up the sky.
In the city's poor barrios, meanwhile, Chavistas were organizing the masses.
"Get ready to defend the revolution! We all have to vote. It's our duty," 28-year-old Jairo Antonio Smith bellowed through a bullhorn at a bustling plaza in downtown Caracas. Smith was hawking CDs with a recorded bugle call that Chavez supporters plan to blast over loudspeakers as a pre-dawn wake-up on Sunday.
The Chavez campaign also plans to line up motorcycle taxis and rented buses on the fringes of densely packed slums to whisk voters to polling centers.
Rosales' campaign, which draws its strongest support from the middle and upper classes, plans to mobilize more than 2 million volunteers across the country as election monitors.
At an upscale Caracas villa on Thursday night, more than 2,000 Rosales supporters raised their hands and swore to prevent any attempts to tamper with ballots by remaining at polling stations until final results are announced.
"If it means staying there until the next day, we'll do that," said Gloria Alvarado, a 34-year-old nurse who said she would bring sandwiches and coffee to watch over boxes containing slips generated by electronic voting machines. "We must be ready to defend our votes."
In Caracas' San Augustin slum, meanwhile, pro-Chavez volunteers like Ivan Aponte have been making last-minute repairs to motor scooters they will use to take voters to the polls.
Aponte and a dozen friends belong to what Chavez calls his campaign "battalions," each of which is charged with getting at least 10 pro-Chavez voters to the polls.
"We've got everything ready. Chavez is going to win a knockout victory," Aponte said, motioning to his sprawling hillside slum. "This is where the votes are, and they belong to El Comandante."
Rosales supporters cite polls predicting the vote will be tight, although an independent AP-Ipsos survey found Chavez with a large lead.
Chavez said in a late-night TV appearance Thursday that if the opposition tries to contest the results by claiming fraud, provoking disturbances or other ploys he will immediately call a referendum on whether to change the constitution to end presidential term limits.
He has mentioned such a plan regularly in recent months, regardless of how the opposition responds to the result. The current constitution would bar Chavez, in office since 1998, from running again in 2012 unless term limits are eliminated.
With tensions rising, lines formed in Caracas on Friday as people tried to make withdrawals from banks and stocked up on groceries in case of postelection trouble.
But the head of the European Union's 130-member delegation, Italian EU deputy Monica Frassoni, said she noted a "lower level of tension" than in past votes here.
Information Minister Willian Lara warned that security forces could act against any unruly opposition protests.
"If any of these small groups try to disturb the public order and the calm climate ... the state will act diligently and restore public order," Lara said.
Speaking to reporters Friday, Rosales warned against possible attempts by the government to rig the vote while denying that his supporters would disrupt balloting.
"Nobody is going to win through fraud because I'm not going to accept it," Rosales said. "I'm not thinking about resorting to violence or using tricks to win, but I'm not going to accept violence aimed at intimidating the people from the other side either."
Chavez said Thursday that intelligence agents recently foiled a plot for a sniper attack on Rosales. But Rosales' campaign said it had no knowledge of the plan.
 Load-Date: December 2, 2006

 

End of Document
