

Chavez says Venezuela could cut off oil exports to the United States
Associated Press International
February 18, 2006 Saturday 3:02 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 639 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER TOOTHAKER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARACAS Venezuela
Body




Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez warned on Friday that he could cut off oil exports to the United States if Washington continues trying to destabilize his left-leaning government.
Chavez statements came a day after U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said the Venezuelan government posed "one of the biggest problems" in the region and that its ties to Cuba were "particularly dangerous" to democracy in Latin America.
"The government of the United States should know that if they go over the line, they are not going to have Venezuelan oil," said Chavez, a self-styled "revolutionary" and close ally of Cuban leader Fidel Castro.
"I have already taken measures regarding this. I'm not going to say what because they think that I can't take these measures because we would not have any place to send the oil. They are mistaken," he added.
Speaking to government supporters at the presidential palace, Chavez said "many countries ask us for more oil and we have had to tell many countries we can't send them more" because Venezuela the world's fifth largest oil exporter ships 1.5 million barrels of oil a day to the United States.
Relations between Chavez and the administration of U.S. President George W. Bush hit new lows in recent days after Washington expelled a high-ranking Venezuelan diplomat in response to Chavez booting out a U.S. embassy official for alleged spying.
Earlier Friday, Venezuela demanded an explanation from Washington for being labeled one of Latin America's biggest threats as a visiting U.S. State Department delegation aimed to ease tensions between the governments.
"We are going to ask for an explanation, we've already done so verbally," said Maripili Hernandez, Venezuela's vice minister for North America.
Hernandez said a written demand was being sent to the State Department asking it to clarify Rice's comments.
The dispute was addressed during a meeting Friday between a State Department delegation led by the Director of Andean Affairs Philip French and Venezuela's National Assembly President Nicolas Maduro, Hernandez said.
The delegation did not immediately respond, she added.
Chavez, a fierce Washington critic, accuses the U.S. government of repeatedly trying to discredit his government and orchestrate his ouster. American officials deny those charges but accuse him of authoritarian tendencies and threatening democracies in the region.
Chavez, who frequently refers to Bush as "Mr. Danger," said U.S. officials would fail in their attempts to turn Latin American nations against Venezuela.
"You create your front Mr. Danger, we will create ours," Chavez said. "We are going to defeat the empire."
On Thursday, Rice told the House Foreign Relations Committee that Chavez posed a threat to democracy in Latin America and criticized Venezuela's increasingly close relationship with communist-led Cuba.
"The Chavez government is attempting to influence Venezuela's neighbors away from democratic processes," Rice said, adding that the country's close ties to Cuba were "particularly dangerous" for regional stability.
Chavez said Rice's statements "constitute a threat," and formed part of an alleged effort aimed at creating chaos and political upheaval in this oil-rich yet poor South American nation ahead of presidential elections in December.
Several opposition parties have announced they will boycott the vote if the National Assembly, which is completely controlled by a coalition of pro-government parties, do not appoint an unbiased elections council that would permit a manual vote count.
Opposition leaders accused the National Electoral Council of being pro-Chavez, and have repeatedly raised concerns about voter registration and touchscreen voting machines.
Chavez, who was elected to a six-year term in 2000, has vowed to win the next election and govern Venezuela until 2013 or longer.
 Load-Date: February 18, 2006

 

End of Document
