

Children ask world leaders to make them the top priority at high-level UN meeting
Associated Press International
December 14, 2007 Friday 5:34 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 649 words
Byline: By EDITH M. LEDERER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS 
Body




Fifteen-year-old Millicent Orondo Atieno spoke to world leaders from the podium of the U.N. General Assembly and urged them to make children their number one priority.
"Teach the child of today, so as not to punish the adult of tomorrow," the Kenyan student said Thursday. "If adults commit to us for a better present, we commit to them a better future."
She spoke on behalf of about 90 young people from 51 countries who traveled to New York to meet with leaders attending a high-level General Assembly session that ended Thursday on implementation of a blueprint adopted at the first U.N. children's summit in 2002.
The blueprint focuses on improving health, protection of children against abuse, violence and exploitation, and fighting HIV/AIDS. It includes goals ranging from reducing malnutrition among children under 5 by at least one-third to increasing the percentage of children who receive a primary education to at least 90 by 2010.
While the summit document was adopted by 180 nations, Europe, Canada and many Latin American countries complained that it did not reaffirm the right to contraception, sex education and sexual and reproductive health services.
A declaration adopted by consensus Thursday by more than 140 government delegations cites "encouraging progress" since 2002 in creating a world fit for children including fewer deaths among children under 5, more children in school than ever before, more medication available for youngsters with HIV/AIDS and more laws and policies to protect children from violence, abuse and exploitation.
But it stresses that "many challenges persist," calling the eradication of poverty "the greatest global challenge."
The declaration states that despite the decrease in child deaths, the number remains "unacceptably high." Malnutrition, pandemics, malaria and other preventable diseases continue to pose "a significant obstacle" to a healthy life for children. Many youngsters still lack access to education," and a large number of children are still subject to violence, exploitation and abuse, as well as to inequity and discrimination," especially girls, it says.
The declaration calls for a scaled-up response by governments, more partnerships with the media and private sector, and global, regional and national initiatives to achieve the summit goals. It backs greater participation by children in the decisions that affect them.
Atieno, who lives with her father, a cook, in an informal settlement on Nairobi's outskirts, told the General Assembly "there should be no argument about the best interests of the child as being the number one priority."
"You often `consider' the best interests of the child, but just talking about it is not enough," she said. "It should be the guiding principle that should steer all your decisions and all your actions.
"We recommend that when you a preparing national budgets, for example, every decision should be consistent with the best interest of the child," Atieno said.
Children are also demanding quality education including "life skills education" to protect themselves from diseases, protection of children's rights, and greater involvement in discussions where decisions are being made that affect them, she said.
"We don't want to hear any more good intentions," Atieno said. "We want to see more actions."
Atieno received loud applause from delegates and again when she went outside the assembly chamber to meet reporters, stressing again that children must be heard.
"If we don't see action, we will raise our voices higher," she pledged.
Shahida Jamil, Pakistan's minister of women development, social welfare and special education, praised the special session for "nudging governments to continuously focus on issues" related to children and "to bring in projects that move in the direction of these goals."
This year's focus on children suffering through violence "is very pertinent," she added.
 Load-Date: December 15, 2007

 

End of Document
