

Chile says Pinochet's oldest daughter has requested political asylum in the U.S.
Associated Press International
January 26, 2006 Thursday 12:00 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 360 words
Dateline: SANTIAGO Chile
Body




The oldest daughter of former dictator Gen. Augusto Pinochet has requested political asylum in the United States, the government reported Wednesday.
Interior Minister Francisco Vidal said U.S. Ambassador Craig Kelly informed Chile of the request made by Lucia Pinochet, who arrived in Washington earlier in the day but was denied entry because of an arrest warrant here.
Vidal appeared upset about the surprise request by Pinochet's daughter, who faces charges of tax evasion and using a false passport in Chile.
"Chile is a democratic state, a state of law, where all citizens are assured of a just trial," the minister said.
Foreign Minister Walker said the U.S. government told Chilean officials Wednesday afternoon that Lucia Pinochet was being transferred to an immigration service detention center and that a decision could be made regarding her request for political asylum within three days.
"We are absolutely confident that it will be rejected," Walker said.
Lucia Pinochet flew to Washington from Argentina, where she had traveled Sunday, hours after she was due to appear before court officials to be served notice of her indictment.
The arrival of Lucia Pinochet in Washington came as a major surprise here. He mother, two sisters and one brother who were also indicted on the same charges were notified of the request by court officials and remain free on bail.
But the oldest daughter of the 90-year-old former ruler, who is himself indicted on tax evasion charges, did not respond to the summons.
The government said Lucia Pinochet refused throughout the day to talk to the Chilean consul at the airport or to talk on the phone with the judge handling the case, Carlos Cerda.
The tax evasion charges are related to an investigation of Pinochet's secret, multimillion dollar bank accounts abroad.
Lucia Pinochet's son Rodrigo Garcia, who accompanied her in her trip to Argentina and then returned to Santiago, sent a local newspaper a statement he said was a written by his mother.
"They are not trying to determine the source of my father's funds but ... aim at defaming each and every member of my family."
In the letter, Lucia Pinochet denies any wrongdoing.
 Load-Date: January 26, 2006

 

End of Document
