

Chilean navy plane spots American sailor adrift at sea; trawler to the rescue
Associated Press International
January 5, 2007 Friday 2:27 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 568 words
Byline: By EDUARDO GALLARDO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SANTIAGO Chile
Body




A Chilean navy search plane has located an American solo sailor on his disabled yacht off the southern tip of South America, and rescuers will probably reach him early Friday, the military said.
A fishing trawler was heading to rescue Ken Barnes, 47, whose attempt to sail around the world was interrupted when his 44-foot ketch hit a storm that broke both its masts and soaked the sailor's supplies and food.
His girlfriend, Cathy Chambers, said he called her Tuesday in California on his satellite phone to say he was in trouble because of a storm. Although his battery was running low, he managed another brief call on Thursday morning, saying he was surviving on Pop Tarts and granola bars. He has a small cut on his leg, she said.
"He's doing the best that he can. There was a ray of hope when I told him they were on their way to him," Chambers said. "He's a survivor, he's a fighter and he's very methodical in his thinking."
Barnes' life did not appear to be in immediate danger. He had a life raft, a survival suit and weather that was improving.
One of the navy plane pilots, Capt. Gonzalo Vasquez, told Chilean state television that the disabled yacht, called the Privateer, was not in danger of sinking.
Navy Capt. Luis Vidal said the trawler Polar Pesca 1 was expected to reach the Privateer on Friday morning near the western entry to the Straits of Magellan. The trawler was about 295 miles away when the plane spotted the yacht Wednesday.
A navy tugboat with a helicopter and a merchant boat were also ordered to join the rescue effort.
The other navy pilot, Capt. Cesar Delgado, said "we will continue to fly, keeping watch on the yacht, so we can support the boats now sailing toward it with information."
It was sunny in the area on Thursday afternoon and winds and waves were soft, Vidal said by telephone from Punta Arenas, near Chile's southwestern tip. He said those conditions were expected to last until the trawler reached Barnes.
The Privateer had been disabled by strong winds and 40-foot waves as it sailed near the tip of South America.
The U.S. Coast Guard and Chilean maritime officials picked up signals from Barnes' distress beacon Tuesday afternoon, when he was believed to be about 500 miles off the Pacific coast.
Barnes' relatives said Chilean and American officials told them the trawler could reach him as early as late Thursday. It was expected to take Barnes to Punta Arenas, where he would be treated by doctors and possibly flown to the Chilean capital, Santiago. The ship had a paramedic team, food and fresh clothing.
U.S. Embassy spokeswoman Judith Baroody said the embassy had been in contact with both Barnes' family and Chilean authorities and had "full confidence" in the ability of Chilean authorities to handle the emergency.
According to his Web site, Barnes had planned his trip for several years.
"For many years, probably from the age of 10, I have liked the solitude of sailing, the adventure, the adrenaline associated with the chance encounter of the unknown," he said.
He set off in the Privateer from Long Beach, California, on Oct. 28.
Chambers said she had supported Barnes' dream to sail around the world, but had now changed her mind.
"He attempted it, he tried it, but after what I know now no way! His life is too important," she said.
Associated Press writer Gillian Flaccus contributed to this report from Port Beach, Calif.
On the Net: http://www.kensolo.com
 Load-Date: January 5, 2007

 

End of Document
