

Chinese piling up the gold medals at world championships
Associated Press International
September 8, 2007 Saturday 4:32 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 701 words
Byline: By NANCY ARMOUR, AP National Writer
Dateline: STUTTGART Germany
Body




The Chinese like to joke their goal is to win all gymnastics medals at the Beijing Olympics next summer.
Maybe they're not kidding.
The Chinese won three of the five event finals at the world gymnastics championships Saturday, bringing to five their stash of gold. That's three fewer than they won last year and there's still another day to go.
Cheng Fei repeated as vault champion, edging Hong Su Jong of North Korea and Alicia Sacramone of the United States. Chen Yibing won his second title on still rings, beating out former world champions Yuri Van Gelder of the Netherlands and Jordan Jovtchev of Bulgaria. Xiao Qin won his third title on pommel horse, topping Krisztian Berki of Hungary and Britain's Louis Smith.
And Yang Yilin won a bronze on the uneven bars, too.
"They can be caught," Ron Brant, coordinator of the U.S. men's team, said of the Chinese. "But they're going to be formidable, no question about it."
In the other event finals, tiny Ksenia Semenova of Russia beat out Nastia Liukin for the gold on uneven bars. It was the second year in a row Liukin, the 2005 champ on bars, had to settle for silver.
Diego Hypolito regained his title on floor. The Brazilian was the world champion in 2005, then finished second to Romania's Marian Dragulescu last year. But Dragulescu and Olympic floor champ Kyle Shewfelt both missed worlds with injuries.
"I'm very sad the other people are sick, and I hope they get better for the competition next year," Hypolito said.
But nothing could take away from Hypolito's happiness on this day. Not only was he the world champion, he won on big sister Daniele's 23rd birthday. Daniele, a member of Brazil's women's team, rushed down from the stands to congratulate her brother.
"I gave her my flowers," Hypolito said. "I will buy her something, but I couldn't go out from the hotel."
China won a record eight medals at worlds last year, including a sweep of the team titles. But the Chinese weren't too concerned with improving on or even matching that haul this time around.
The goal is to cash in next year, when China hosts its first Olympics. So the Chinese brought some youngsters with them. The women left Pang Panpan, a member of last year's world team, and Olympic bronze medalist Zhang Nan at home, bringing three 15-year-olds instead.
The men brought 19-year-old Zou Kai, who had just one other world appearance on his resume.
"The more the better," said Lu Shanzhen. "We'd like to get more younger gymnasts to have more difficult technique so we'll have a bigger group to choose from."
And inexperience has hardly been a problem. The Chinese men breezed to their third straight team title, and Yang Wei became the first man since 1926 to repeat as the all-round champion.
On Saturday, it was Cheng starting the heavy metal barrage. She packs more power into her vaults than anyone else, soaring high above the apparatus. But she has catlike reflexes, landing solidly and effortlessly. When she completed the second of her two vaults, Cheng knew she was golden again, smiling and pumping her fists.
Xiao is a master on pommel horse. It's an event many men dread and with good reason. Not only is their strength tested as they swing and slap their hands around the horse, they have to exhibit dexterity, balance and ballet-like grace, not an easy combination.
But Xiao pulls it off perfectly. His body almost looks two dimensional as he swings around the pommel horse, his hips swiveling and his upper body staying still.
And when he did his flares scissor-kicking his legs up, over and behind the horse the crowd actually oohed and aahed. His score of 16.3 was .6 points ahead of Berki.
On rings, Chen moved from one strength move to another with as little difficulty as other people have flexing their muscles. And no matter how many flips and tumbles he did, the support cables barely moved.
The Chinese might very well add to their medal pile Sunday. Cheng will compete on floor exercise, where she's the reigning world champion, and Jiang Yuyan also qualified for floor. Li Shanshan will go for the title on beam, where she had the highest qualifying score.
Yang will try and repeat as the parallel bars champion. Teammate Huang Xu also qualified for parallel bars.
 Load-Date: September 9, 2007

 

End of Document
