

China rejects mandatory greenhouse gas emissions cuts and blames the West for its lavish ways 
Associated Press International
December 7, 2007 Friday 3:11 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 762 words
Byline: By MICHAEL CASEY, AP Environmental Writer
Dateline: BALI Indonesia
Body




China insisted Friday it would not consider mandatory cuts on greenhouse gases, saying the United States and other industrialized countries should take the lead in fighting climate change by being less extravagant.
China, which some believe has surpassed the United States as the world's top emitter of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases, also questioned the fairness of binding cuts when its per capita emissions are about one-sixth of Washington's.
It said, too, that it has only been pumping pollutants into the atmosphere for a few decades, whereas the West has done so for hundreds of years.
"China is in the process of industrialization and there is a need for economic growth to meet the basic needs of the people and fight against poverty," said Su Wei, a top climate expert for the government and member of its delegation at the U.N. Climate Change Conference in Bali.
"I just wonder whether it's fair to ask developing countries like China to take on binding targets," Su said. "I think there is much room for the United States to think whether it's possible to change (its) lifestyle and consumption patterns in order to contribute to the protection of the global climate."
Delegates from nearly 190 nations are attending the Dec. 3-14 gathering charged with launching negotiations that will lead to an international accord to succeed the 1997 Kyoto Protocol on global warming.
Kyoto, which was rejected by the United States, commits three dozen industrialized countries to cut their greenhouse gases an average of 5 percent below 1990 levels between next year and 2012, when it expires.
One of the factors that led Bush to reject Kyoto was complaints that fast-developing countries like China, India and Brazil were not required to cut their emissions under the pact.
After years of dodging the issue and appearing defensive on global warming, diplomats and activists say China is playing a constructive and positive role at the Bali conference.
"I think China is taking climate change seriously and that's a good sign that there will be a good outcome here in Bali," said Artur Runge-Metzger, head of the European Commission delegation at the conference on the Indonesian island.
China has expressed support for a post-Kyoto agreement and used the conference to spread the message that it is doing plenty to address climate change from boosting its use of renewable energy to 10 percent by 2010 and improving energy efficiency by 20 percent. It also has launched a massive tree planting program and has rolled out a national climate change policy.
"China is acting. We will do what we should and what we can do," Su said, describing his country's climate policy as ambitious," Su said. "All we care for is the well being and the future of mankind."
Even hard-to-please environmental groups who relish lambasting industrialized countries for pollution are praising Beijing, though it's clear China has more to do. It relies heavily on dirty, outdated coal burning techniques, has 20 of the world's 30 most polluted cities and some of the most polluted rivers.
China's ranking of 40th on Germanwatch's annual index, which ranks 56 industrialized and emerging countries, was an improvement of four places over last year, the group said Friday.
The United States and Saudi Arabia were the worst on the list, at 55th and 56th places, respectively.
Environmental watchdog Germanwatch noted the Chinese government has enacted policies promoting renewable energy, including mandates that solar, wind, hydroelectric and other forms of renewable energy provide 10 percent of the nation's power by 2010. It also has ordered key industries to reduce energy consumption by 20 percent.
Politicians and activists said China's defensive posture of the past has given way to constructive discussions at the Bali climate change conference. Beijing has also taken the lead among developing countries in calling for wealthier nations to speed up the transfer of cleaner technologies to emerging economies to help shift away from fossil fuels.
Hans Verolme, director of WWF International's Global Climate Change Program, attributed China's position to concerns over energy security and a recognition that climate change is already having a severe impact on the country, with worsening drought, water shortages and floods.
"China has made up its mind about a year ago that it was going to get serious," Verolme said. "They want to show to the world it understands and it wants to do what is necessary to stop dangerous climate change."
On the Net:
Germanwatch: http://www.germanwatch.org/ccpi.htm
 Load-Date: December 8, 2007

 

End of Document
