

Christ the Redeemer monument becomes Catholic holy site in Brazil
Associated Press International
October 12, 2006 Thursday 5:39 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 468 words
Byline: By ELIZABETH DWOSKIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO Brazil
Body




Rio's famous Christ the Redeemer statute, which looks down on the city from its mountaintop perch, was raised to the status of an official Roman Catholic sanctuary on Thursday, 75 years after it was inaugurated.
Rio de Janeiro Cardinal Eusebio Scheid said he decided to consecrate the space, which includes the monument and the church at its base, because he felt that the statue was becoming better known more as a tourist destination than a religious site.
"This is not a historic or a tourist attraction," he said at an open-air mass to mark the anniversary. "Let's take back the sacred sense of this monument."
Hundreds of nuns and priests from all over Rio de Janeiro mingled with camera-toting tourists during the mass celebrated under sunny skies Thursday morning.
The Archdiocese hopes the monument's new status will attract more religious pilgrims to the site, one of the best known in the world's largest Roman Catholic country. Scheid said it should be seen as "an official Catholic destination."
As early as 1850, the church had expressed an interest in erecting a statue on the hill called Corcovado. In 1921, the Archdiocese of Rio de Janeiro organized an event called "monument week" to raise money for the cause.
The 125-foot (38-meter)-tall statue, weighing more than 1,000 tons, was built 1926-1931. Parts were carried up the hill using the Corcovado Railroad, and the statue was constructed at the top.
According to history books, French-Polish architect Paul Landowski shaped and sculpted the figure's head and hands. Brazilian engineer Heitor da Silva Costa made the design. It was inaugurated on Oct. 12, 1931, by president Getulio Vargas.
Though the Rio Archdiocese owns the monument, Landowski's heirs have taken steps in recent years to demand royalties for his work on the statue.
More than 300,000 tourists visit the Christ the Redeemer monument each year.
A 2002 renovation added three panoramic elevators and four escalators, making the site more accessible for handicapped and elderly visitors, who previously had to climb 222 steps to reach the statute.
Also on Thursday, more than 150,000 people gathered in Brazil's biggest shrine to celebrate the country's patron saint.
Pilgrims attended several masses throughout the day in the city of Aparecida, some 150 kilometers (90 miles) east of Sao Paulo, commemorating the Nossa Senhora Aparecida, or Our Revealed Lady.
The celebration marks a national holiday in Brazil, which also celebrates Children's Day on Oct. 12.
Several hundred people required medical attention because of the hot weather, but no serious injuries were reported.
One of Brazil's presidential candidates, Geraldo Alckmin, was among those visiting the shrine and attending a mass. Alckmin will face incumbent President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva in a runoff election on Oct. 29.
 Load-Date: October 13, 2006

 

End of Document
