

Coca production on the rise in Colombia despite record eradication and billions in U.S. aid
Associated Press International
June 20, 2006 Tuesday 7:52 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 736 words
Byline: By JOSHUA GOODMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOGOTA Colombia
Body




A key component of the U.S.-backed war on drugs appears to be failing.
Despite record drug seizures and the largest coca eradication campaign in history last year, production of the plant used to make cocaine actually increased by 8 percent in Colombia, to 860 square kilometers (330 square miles), the United Nations Office of Drugs and Crime, or UNODC, said Tuesday.
The new U.N. findings come on the heels of a similar report in April by the U.S. Office of National Drug Control Policy that showed Colombia's coca production skyrocketed 26 percent from 2004 to 2005, in part due to a near doubling of the area surveyed.
Taken together, the two reports are the strongest evidence yet that a cornerstone of the U.S.-led war on drugs the aerial fumigation of coca fields is failing to meet its goal of halving coca production in the Andes.
The results may hamper the efforts by President Alvaro Uribe, Washington's staunchest ally in Latin America, to win additional U.S. backing for Plan Colombia, the anti-drug strategy that American taxpayers have financed to the tune of US$4 billion (euro3.1 billion) since 2000.
Despite spraying coca fields last year totaling 25 times the size of Manhattan, the U.N. said Colombian coca production expanded for the first time in five years by 60 square kilometers (23 square miles).
"If this is the start of a return to much higher levels of coca, then it will be a problem," UNODC executive director Antonio Maria Costa said at a press conference in Bogota. "But I don't think that will happen. The government has every intention to continue its eradication efforts at the same high level as the past few years."
Partially offsetting the rise in Colombian production were declines in the world's two other coca-producing countries, Bolivia and Peru.
Overall, coca production in the Andean region rose 1 percent, to 1,596 square kilometers (616 square miles) from 2004, according to the U.N.'s Andean coca survey.
In Colombia, the world's largest cocaine producer, the biggest increases were observed in the lawless, largely uninhabited jungles near its borders with Venezuela and Ecuador.
The spreading of the coca frontier eastward toward Venezuela squares with comments by U.S. anti-drug officials who have alleged that corruption within the government of Washington-bashing Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez may be converting Colombia's neighbor into a major drug route.
Colombia is believed to be the source of 90 percent of the cocaine consumed in the United States.
Last year, the government eradicated a record 1,700 square kilometers (656 square miles) of coca, mainly through aerial spraying of the herbicide glyphosate, up from 1,370 square kilometers (529 square miles) in 2004.
With drug traffickers a step ahead of the spray planes, developing techniques to better camouflage illegal crops and increase yields, Uribe has asked the Bush administration to boost financing for fumigation efforts.
However, key members of the U.S. Congress and growing numbers of Colombians have suggesting it may be time to throw in the towel on the potentially environmentally harmful practice, expanding instead alternative economic programs for poor farmers who grow coca on behalf of the country's cartels.
Currently about a third of the roughly US$700 million (euro556 million) in annual U.S. aid to Colombia funds economic and social development programs.
Although production is on the rise in Colombia, the U.N. said it declined in Peru and Bolivia, the world's two other coca-producing nations.
Bolivia's coca production fell by 8 percent last year, according to the U.N. The United States, however, is concerned Bolivia's leftist, coca-growing President Evo Morales who took office in January could relax his country's drug-fighting efforts.
In Peru, the world's second-largest cocaine producer, the coca crop declined by 4 percent.
The apparent declines differ widely from findings by the United States, based more heavily on satellite imagery, which estimated coca plantings grew by 38 percent in Peru and nearly 10 percent in Bolivia last year.
For anti-drug efforts to be successful, Costa said the United States and Europe must curb their appetite for cocaine and come forth with more support for alternative crop development programs in South America.
"Our aid efforts need to be multiplied at least tenfold in order to reach all impoverished farmers who need support," he said in a statement.
 Load-Date: June 21, 2006

 

End of Document
