

Colombia's far-right warlords to acknowledge crimes, ask allies to do the same
Associated Press International
November 23, 2006 Thursday 11:40 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 581 words
Byline: By TOBY MUSE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOGOTA Colombia
Body




Colombia's far-right paramilitaries called Thursday for the creation of a truth commission where they can confess their actions in the brutal civil war and urged their allies in politics, business and the security forces to do the same.
The announcement comes as a scandal deepens over ties between the paramilitaries, responsible for dozens of large-scale massacres and thousands of killings, and the political class in this country.
The statement was made by the paramilitaries leaders from their special prison, La Ceja, where they've been residing for the past two months as part of a peace deal with the government.
"We understand and accept that a fundamental part of the Justice and Peace Law lies in the confession of the truth of what occurred in the recent history of our national tragedy," said the letter, signed by all the leading members of the paramilitaries. "The knowledge of the full truth is decisive for the strengthening of democracy, national reconciliation and forgiveness."
The paramilitaries, created by drug-traffickers and landowners to wrest control of the country from leftist rebels, also alluded to their supporters in the rest of society, especially politicians and the security forces. The paramilitaries' targets included leftist guerrillas, their civilian supporters, civic leaders, human rights workers, journalists and anyone who revealed the extent of the paramilitaries' infiltration of Colombia's public institutions.
"We ask publicly that those who urged us on, collaborators and direct beneficiaries, the businessmen, industrialists and political leaders ... members of the security forces, join us in this task without apprehension or fear," said the letter. "We don't want to seem as informers."
Authorities are investigating five politicians, including a former governor and two senators, for their close ties with the paramilitaries, with some accused of murder and others of forming the paramilitaries to help steal public funds, kill political opponents and extort votes from a terrorized politician.
A number of other prominent politicians are expected to be investigated soon. The paramilitaries have in the past said that they controlled as much as 35 percent of the country's congress.
The warlords also expressed concern for their loved ones.
"We call for protection for our wives, children, and families, that are especially vulnerable," said the statement.
One of the leaders, Salvatore Mancuso, recently complained that assailants had tried to kill his son.
As part of the peace deal, which saw the demobilization of more than 30,000 fighters, the leaders will stand trial in special tribunals where they can be sentenced to a maximum of 8 years in prison.
Leaders must confess to all their crimes. If they don't, they can be judged for each crime they failed to admit, and be tried in regular courts where they will likely receive substantially longer sentences.
Critics of the peace deal say it is too lenient, with a number of mechanisms in the law that urges the paramilitaries not to tell the whole truth.
In recent interviews, paramilitaries said they had complied with all their promises in the peace deal, but have asked the government for greater guarantees that there will be limits on the potential reparations they must pay their victims. They also want a law that would prevent them from being extradited. The United States has fingered a number of the warlords as some of Colombia's top drug-traffickers and demanded their extradition.
 Load-Date: November 24, 2006

 

End of Document
