

Colombia's FARC rebels still hold more than 700 hostages; a look at some of the best known
Associated Press International
January 10, 2008 Thursday 8:47 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 379 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, freed two hostages on Thursday, but is still believed to hold more than 700 others. Colombia's largest rebel movement has held some of those for more than a decade.
The FARC is asking for ransom for the vast majority of the captives, but calls 44 of them "political prisoners," offering to swap them for hundreds of jailed rebels. Those include 14 soldiers, 19 police officers, seven politicians, a state governor and three U.S. defense contractors.
Some of the best known:
 Ingrid Betancourt, a presidential candidate abducted in February 2002. Because she also holds French citizenship, France's government has campaigned for her release. She turned 46 on Christmas Day.
 Marc Gonsalves, Tom Howes and Keith Stansell, civilian Pentagon contractors working for a subsidiary of Northrup Grumman Corp., were seized after their drug surveillance plane went down in February 2003. The U.S. Embassy says they are the longest-held American hostages currently in captivity anywhere in the world. Gonsalves, 35, born in Connecticut, reportedly suffers from hepatitis. Howes, 54, born in Massachusetts, is a former flight instructor. Stansell, 43, born in Miami, is a former Marine.
 Alan Jara, former governor of Meta, was kidnapped from a clearly marked U.N. caravan during government-rebel peace talks in July 2001. The last proof of life received by his family was a 2003 videotaped interview.
 Colombian Sen. Jorge Gechem, 55, was kidnapped when the FARC hijacked a domestic airliner in 2001 and forced it to land on a highway. The act prompted the government to end three years of peace talks.
 Sigifredo Lopez is the last survivor of 12 provincial lawmakers who were kidnapped in a state assembly chamber in April 2002 by FARC commandos dressed as police officers. The FARC reported the deaths of the other 11 in June, saying they were killed in a shootout with unknown forces. The government says they were killed in cold blood.
 Army Cpl. Pablo Emilio Moncayo was 19 when he was taken hostage during a 1997 raid on a mountaintop communications post. His father, a rural schoolteacher, walked more than 1,000 kilometers (600 miles) across Colombia last year to rally support for a prisoner swap. He is the longest held of the 44.
 Load-Date: January 11, 2008

 

End of Document
