

Colombia extradites 14 top paramilitary warlords to the United States 
Associated Press International
May 13, 2008 Tuesday 10:15 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 831 words
Byline: By FRANK BAJAK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOGOTA Colombia
Body




Colombia extradited 14 paramilitary warlords to the United States on Tuesday to stand trial on drug trafficking charges in a surprise move applauded by the Bush administration as evidence that Colombia deserves a trade deal.
But many Colombians worried that a narrow U.S. focus on drug crimes would enable the warlords and their politician allies to escape responsibility for human rights violations including the deaths of at least 10,000 people.
Spirited out of Colombian prisons before dawn were Salvatore Mancuso other top leaders of Colombia's illegal right-wing militias notorious figures blamed for modern Colombia's worst atrocities.
Victims' families fear the extraditions will impede efforts to fully catalog the warlords' crimes, unearth scores of mass graves and bring to justice the politicians and businessmen who allegedly colluded with them.
"They've taken away all the witnesses," said Claudia Lopez, an independent researcher who helped uncover the scandal that has led to the jailing of 31 members of Colombia's 268-seat congress for allegedly promoting or benefiting from the paramilitaries.
Almost all the jailed politicians are close allies of President Alvaro Uribe, including former Sen. Mario Uribe, his second cousin and longtime political adviser. Another 30 politicians are under investigation.
U.S. officials vowed Tuesday to cooperate with Colombian prosecutors, and Uribe said any assets seized from the warlords in U.S. court proceedings would go to compensate the victims.
"It's a great day," U.S. drug czar John Walters told The Associated Press. The U.S. justice system, he said, is "far less likely for them to be able to attack or intimidate or corrupt."
The Bush administration said the extraditions should prompt U.S. congressional Democrats to reconsider their opposition to the Colombian trade deal, which has stalled over Democrats' accusations that Uribe has failed to crack down on the militias for killing union organizers.
Chief Prosecutor Mario Iguaran estimated unforfeited assets to be worth more than $200US million (euro129 million).
Some 50 warlords demobilized along with more than 31,000 fighters, promising to confess to their crimes, surrender ill-gotten gains and halt illegal activities in exchange for reduced jail terms and protection from extradition.
But Uribe said in a nationwide TV address that the militia bosses were continuing to commit crimes from prison, failing to "duly cooperate" with investigators and neglecting "to compensate victims hiding assets and delaying their delivery."
Most of the defendants were taken in handcuffs and bulletproof vests early Tuesday for flights to Florida in an unmarked U.S. government plane. Eventually, they'll be tried in Washington, Miami, Tampa, Fla., New York and Houston. As part of the extradition agreement, none will get life sentences, the Department of Justice said.
The leaders include Mancuso, Diego Murillo (also known as "Don Berna") and Rodrigo Tovar, a military officer's son who went by the name Jorge 40. All but one are charged with cocaine trafficking. Other charges include money laundering and conspiracy to provide material support to a designated terrorist group.
Last week, Colombia extradited a paramilitary boss for the first time. Carlos Mario Jimenez, known as Macaco, was accused of continuing to run drug gangs from behind bars.
Mancuso's lawyer, Hernando Benavides, called the extradition a violation of due process, noting that his client had surrendered more than $20US million in assets and implicated politicians and businesses in the scandal.
"Many of the current trials stem from his testimony," Benavides said.
Mancuso told the AP last year that all banana exporters paid the militias three cents per crate. U.S.-based Chiquita Brands acknowledged paying the paramilitaries and was fined $25US million (euro19 million) by the Justice Department for it last year.
Some victims argued that the mass extradition dims chances the warlords will confess to their most heinous crimes.
"They are not going to confess over there," Maria Eugenia Cobaleda of Medellin told the AP. She blames Don Berna for her two brothers' disappearance a decade ago.
Formed in the 1980s to defend wealthy ranchers and drug traffickers against extortion and kidnappings by leftist rebels, the militias eventually killed at least 10,000 people, including dozens of labor activists, Iguaran has said. They became de facto rulers along Colombia's Caribbean coast, in many cases deciding which politicians could run for office, even as they stole millions of acres of prime land and wrested control of lucrative drug-trafficking routes.
At least 160,000 people have registered as victims, said Ana Teresa Bernal of Redepaz, an independent group that helps victims of Colombia's conflict.
So far, none have received reparations.
Associated Press writers Vivian Sequera, Toby Muse and Tatiana Guerrero in Bogota, Curt Anderson in Miami and Michael Sniffen in Washington contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: May 14, 2008

 

End of Document
