

Colombian peso at 7-year high against the dollar
Associated Press International
May 22, 2007 Tuesday 10:16 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 441 words
Byline: By JOSHUA GOODMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BOGOTA Colombia
Body




Colombia's peso hit a seven-year high against the dollar Tuesday, as an International Monetary Fund mission arrived for talks on ways to cool off the red-hot economy.
Colombia's currency had surged 20 percent since 2004 and analysts had expected it to retreat this year. Instead, the peso has risen another 14 percent more than any other currency in the world as record investment continues to propel the economy.
On Tuesday the peso reached 1,954 against the dollar, its highest value since March 29, 2000.
Colombia's Central Bank raised reserve requirements on new deposits earlier this month in an effort to curb capital inflows that are blamed for the soaring peso. It also has steadily ratcheted up interest rates to blunt a resurgence of inflation.
In recent weeks economists have floated a range of ideas, from further interest rate hikes and monetary intervention to more extreme measures like adopting the dollar and imposing capital controls.
On Tuesday, the Central Bank said Colombia received $5US.5 billion (euro4 billion) in net capital inflows this year, versus just $357US million (euro265 million) the same period a year ago. A little more than half of that amount came in the form of foreign direct foreign investment, though remittances from Colombians living abroad and repatriations of cash held overseas by companies also increased sharply.
The potent mix of inflation and a strong peso are hurting flower growers and other major exporters, which are forced to pay more for materials and wages even as margins on their dollar revenues shrink.
Benedict Clements, head of the IMF mission to Colombia, downplayed the currency's surge in comments to reporters, attributing it to market forces "consistent" with economic growth.
"The more important thing is to focus on inflation," he said.
Twelve-month rolling inflation reached 6.26 percent at the end of April, well above the central bank's target for 2007 of 3.5 to 4.5 percent.
The economy grew an estimated 7 percent in 2006 and it is expected to surpass 5.5 percent this year.
Clements also said Colombia could recover its investment grade status, lost in 1999 amid increasing guerrilla violence, by approving unspecified economic reforms.
In March, Standard & Poor's lifted the country's rating to one notch below investment grade, citing strong growth and healthier government accounts.
Colombia's last agreement with the IMF was a $600US million (euro450 million) "standby" line of credit that expired last November without being drawn upon. It has not been renewed and finance minister Oscar Zuluaga said Tuesday the government has no intention of seeking a new accord with the IMF.
 Load-Date: May 23, 2007

 

End of Document
