

Concentration the key to Euro success, says France coach Raymond Domenech
Associated Press International
May 22, 2008 Thursday 2:32 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 487 words
Byline: By JEROME PUGMIRE, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: CLAIREFONTAINE France
Body




France coach Raymond Domenech has a specific purpose for playing South American teams ahead of the European Championship improving his players' focus.
"A big competition is won with concentration. All the teams are pretty even. The teams that concentrate the most can go right to the end," Domenech said Thursday. "The team that stays lucid despite the fatigue and doesn't make mistakes."
That's where the pre-tournament friendlies against Ecuador, Paraguay and Colombia come in.
"I like playing the South Americans," Domenech said. "They have a special quality in that they are able to send you to sleep. You need to concentrate at all times against them, to step up the rhythm of the game.
"You get the impression they're strolling. But all of a sudden they're in front of the goal taking a shot."
Staying focused is especially hard after a tough domestic season that leaves many players craving rest.
Wednesday's Champions League final between Manchester United and Chelsea featured four members of Domenech's squad, and another eight will figure in Saturday's French Cup final between Lyon and Paris Saint-Germain.
The eight Lyon players are among the provisional 30-man squad that Domenech takes to the pre-tournament base camp in the Alpine ski resort of Tignes. He will look at some fringe players against Ecuador in nearby Grenoble on Tuesday, before cutting seven hopefuls from his final list of 23 the following day.
France then takes on Paraguay in Toulouse on May 31 and Colombia at Stade de France on June 3 before heading to the June 7-29 event in Austria and Switzerland. The two-time European champion takes on Romania, Netherlands and Italy in Group C.
While some players may be tired, others haven't played enough.
Stalwart defenders like Lilian Thuram of FC Barcelona and Bayern Munich's Willy Sagnol have not figured much for their clubs. Thuram was in and out of the Barca side, while Sagnol's long recovery from a knee injury restricted him to handful of games for the German Bundesliga champion.
Domenech is not worried about the 36-year-old Thuram's form, yet has concerns over Sagnol's fitness levels.
"(Thuram) is such a professional, he is ready," Domenech said. "He doesn't worry me."
But Sagnol quickly needs to pick up match sharpness with the opening game less three weeks away.
"Contrary to the others who need rest, he needs playing time, Domenech said. "We will see what happens over the three games."
Domenech's pre-tournament plans have also met some minor turbulence with Lyon president Jean-Michel Aulas refusing Domenech's offer of a plane ride to take the Lyon players to Tignes directly after Saturday's Cup final.
"I offered this to Lyon, to get the Lyon players back quicker," Domenech said. "They didn't understand all of the advantages of it. They preferred to keep their group together and party in Paris after (the Cup final).
"I will get the players (on Sunday). I hope they're in good shape."
 Load-Date: May 23, 2008

 

End of Document
