

Conservative Mexican candidate calls presidential race a war against the past
Associated Press International
March 11, 2006 Saturday 7:44 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 344 words
Byline: By MARK STEVENSON, Associated Press
Dateline: MEXICO CITY 
Body




Conservative presidential candidate Felipe Calderon on Saturday described his campaign as a "war" against the ghosts of Mexico's past.
Calderon appeared to be trying to match the tough rhetoric of front-running leftist candidate Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador, who has accused his rivals of conspiring against him and serving the interests of bankers.
"This is a war, gentlemen," Calderon told a meeting of supporters of his National Action Party. "One of two things will happen: either we promote change, or we return to any scenarios of the past."
Referring to the former ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI, which is running third in the polls, Calderon attacked the idea of a return to "the corruption of the PRI" and also denounced "those who time and time again ran the country into debt."
The latter was apparently a reference to Lopez Obrador, whom Calderon has compared to the presidents who ruled Mexico between 1970 and 1982. Those presidents sponsored large-scale handout programs, but also ramped up the country's foreign debt and provoked economic crises.
Calderon was not the only one lashing out at Mexico's left on Saturday.
In an appearance at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, former president Carlos Salinas de Gortari said asked if the left represented a threat to Mexico's reform process.
Salinas replied that "the rhetoric is going more toward the demagoguery side. That can be risky because the biggest challenge for the democratic process is the sense of institution or the rule of law."
"We have seen so many times in Latin America where the democratic institutions are being weakened by the new political leaders of the 21st century, not to name any names," Salinas said.
Lopez Obrador has long accused Salinas de Gortari of leading a conspiracy of "dark forces" to block his bid for the presidency, and usually refers to the ex-president as "unnamable one."
Salinas de Gortari's 1988-1994 presidency was marred by debt and a financial meltdown just weeks after he left office, and he is still widely resented in his home country.
 Load-Date: March 12, 2006

 

End of Document
