

Contractors kidnapped by Colombian rebels were longest-held US captives in the world
Associated Press International
July 3, 2008 Thursday 1:29 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 671 words
Dateline: BOGOTA Colombia
Body




When the drug-surveillance plane carrying Pentagon contractors Marc Gonsalves, Thomas Howes and Keith Stansell went down in rebel-held Colombian jungle in February 2003, it seemed like any public efforts to rescue them disappeared as well.
While France exhorted the world to care about the plight of French-Colombian hostage Ingrid Betancourt, and even sent a humanitarian mission in a failed rescue attempt this year, the U.S. government remained nearly silent about any efforts to free the men, employees of a Northrup Grumman Corp. subsidiary that has supported Colombia's fight against drugs and rebels.
Long before their rescue Wednesday, the three Americans who were being flown to Texas to reunite with their families and undergo tests and treatment at Brooke Army Medical Center in San Antonio had become the longest-held American hostages in the world.
Howes is a native of Chatham, Massachusetts; Gonsalves' father lives in Hebron, Connecticut; and Stansell's family lives in Miami, Florida.
These families eventually complained publicly about what seemed to be the U.S. government's failure to act. At one point, Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez seemed like he was doing more than anyone in Washington to free them.
"We didn't know what the heck was going on," Gonsalves' father George told reporters. "I'm getting information from you guys."
The Americans' fate seemed particularly grim after "proof-of-life" images released last November showed them appearing haggard, even haunted, against a deep jungle background.
The contractors and Betancourt were among a group of rebel-designated "political prisoners" whom the FARC planned to release only in exchange for hundreds of imprisoned rebels. But every attempt at talking about a prisoner swap seemed to go nowhere.
Behind the scenes, however, Colombia's armed forces were closing in on the rebels, with the help of billions of dollars in U.S. military support.
Last month, Defense Minister Juan Manuel Santos said soldiers had spotted the three men in the southern jungles, but they disappeared into the forest before the troops could attempt a rescue.
And after the men were freed Wednesday, U.S. Ambassador William Brownfield said U.S. and Colombian forces cooperated closely on the rescue mission, including sharing intelligence, equipment, training advice and operational experience.
The Americans appeared healthy in a video shown on Colombian television, though Brownfield, who met with them at a Colombian military base, said two of the three he didn't specify whom were suffering from the jungle malady leishmaniasis and "looking forward to modern medical treatment."
George Gonsalves was mowing the yard of his Hebron, Connecticut, home when an excited neighbor relayed the news he had seen on television: "I didn't know how to stop my lawnmower. I was shocked. I couldn't believe it."
"We're still teary-eyed and not quite have our wits about us," said Stansell's stepmother Lynne in Miami.
And Howes' niece in Massachusetts, Amanda Howes, says the rescue "redefines the word miracle."
Congratulations poured in to Colombian President Alvaro Uribe from U.S. President George W. Bush and both presidential candidates. Republican Sen. John McCain said Uribe had told him in advance of the rescue plans while he was campaigning in Colombia. "It's a very high-risk operation," he said. "I congratulate President Uribe, the military and the nation of Colombia."
Democrat Barack Obama also sent his congratulations, saying he supports "Colombia's steady strategy of making no concessions to the FARC, and its targeted use of intelligence, military, law enforcement, diplomatic, and political power to achieve important victories against terrorism."
Gonsalves' father, who later got a phone call from the FBI confirming his son was free, expected an emotional family reunion in Texas, especially for his son's three children, now teenagers. "Think about your children if they don't see you for a week a weekend or a month," he said. "It's five years pulled out of your life."
 Load-Date: July 3, 2008

 

End of Document
