

Cuba returns fugitive 40 years on the run to the U.S.
Associated Press International
April 25, 2007 Wednesday 11:21 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 375 words
Byline: By LAURA WIDES-MUNOZ, AP Hispanic Affairs Reporter
Dateline: MIAMI 
Body




A man who fled to Cuba after he was convicted of mail fraud more than 40 years ago was expelled from the island Wednesday and sent to Miami where U.S. Marshals arrested him.
Joseph Adjmi, 70, was sentenced in 1963 to 10 years in prison but disappeared before serving his sentence, according to a statement released by the U.S. State Department.
Adjmi arrived at Miami International Airport and was carried from the plane complaining of chest pains. He was taken to a local hospital where he remained Wednesday evening, said State Department special agent in charge Ed Moreno.
Upon his release, Adjmi will be sent to Tampa where he was originally convicted, Moreno said.
Last year, Cuban officials alerted the U.S. that Adjmi was in their custody for fraud-related crimes he had committed on the island. They intended to expel him upon his release and asked the U.S. to take him, said Moreno.
Moreno called Cuba's decision to return Adjmi unusual but not unprecedented.
"It's a sporadic thing," he said.
State Department officials say Cuba still harbors more than 60 high profile criminals wanted in the U.S.
Adjmi's extradition comes as Venezuela and Cuba are calling on the U.S. to extradite Luis Posada Carriles, a militant Cuban exile and aging ex-CIA operative suspected in a decades-old Cuban airliner bombing. Posada, 79, was living in Venezuela at the time of the airplane bombing and escaped from jail while awaiting trial in the case. Venezuela wants the U.S. to try him or send him back there.
Posada sneaked into the U.S. in 2005. He was recently released from jail as he awaits trial on charges that he lied to immigration authorities while trying to become a U.S. citizen.
The U.S. will not return him to Venezuela citing concerns that he might face torture there.
Among the U.S. fugitives Cuba has refused to hand over is former Black Liberation Army member Assata Shakur also known as Joanne Chesimard convicted in the 1973 killing of a New Jersey state trooper.
Cuba has also refused to turn over fugitive financier Robert Vesco, who evaded U.S. authorities during decades on the run. But in 1996, a Cuban court sentenced Vesco to 13 years in prison for producing and marketing a cancer and arthritis drug without the Cuban government's knowledge.
 Load-Date: April 26, 2007

 

End of Document
