

Delegates challenged to protect the world's oceans at Brazil environment conference
Associated Press International
March 28, 2006 Tuesday 3:42 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 400 words
Byline: By MICHAEL ASTOR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CURITIBA Brazil
Body




Protecting the Earth's oceans represents one of the biggest challenges facing delegates from over 100 nations gathered here for a U.N.-sponsored conference on biological diversity, environmentalists said Monday.
Deep sea trawling in international waters has seriously depleted the world's fish stocks, threatening many species with extinction and radically altering undersea habitats.
While 12 percent of the Earth's land surface enjoys some form of the environmental protection, the same is true for only 0.5 percent of the world's oceans.
"The alternative is you pay now or you pay later. Either you restrict the amount of fish taken from the oceans ensuring stocks for humans in the future or you continue to mine them and stocks are destroyed," Roger McManus, senior director of Conservation International's global marine program, said by telephone from Washington D.C.
The problem McManus said is that most of the ocean's waters lie beyond the 200 miles (322 kilometers) that countries claim as their sovereign territory.
"Early in history, there was a discussion of how to divide up the oceans and the idea that prevailed was that everyone would have rights of passage. In some sense that's been misinterpreted as rights of use and abuse," he said.
Environmental groups are proposing that governments join together to declare protected areas, where fisheries would be managed in a sustainable manner.
Last week, the environmental group Greenpeace presented delegates at the eighth biannual Conference of Parties to the Convention on Biodiversity in Curitiba, 650 kilometers (400 miles) southwest of Rio de Janeiro, with maps showing which areas of the high seas most warranted protection.
"At prior meetings, governments agreed to protect 40 percent of the world's oceans by 2010 and so far they've done nothing," said Marcelo Furtado of Greenpeace. "We're presenting them with a concrete plan. If you want to do this, this is how it could be done."
Greenpeace was calling for a moratorium on all deep sea fishing until a sustainable management plan could be worked out.
McManus of Conservation International said he believed the idea of protecting the world's oceans is one that would eventually take hold.
"These management regimes provide a mechanism to consider how to go about using this resource, without destroying features and wonderful aspects of ocean we haven't even discovered yet," McManus said.
 Load-Date: March 28, 2006

 

End of Document
