

Democrats appear to be counting on it once again being 'the economy, stupid'
Associated Press International
June 29, 2008 Sunday 7:03 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 804 words
Byline: By STEVEN R. HURST, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




The last time a Democrat retook the White House from the Republicans, Bill Clinton relied, in part, on the slogan: "It's the economy, stupid." Sixteen years later the sentiment appears dominant again in the contest between Democrat Barack Obama and Republican John McCain.
The U.S. stock market dipped precipitously last week, unemployment is rising, oil prices are at record highs and home prices have fallen sharply developments that have put the American economy well out front of the Iraq war, the issue that was expected to dominate voter concern in the 2008 campaign.
Both candidates returned to the issue over the weekend, as they focused on immigration reform a worry among both working-class voters concerned about losing jobs to cheaper labor and the Hispanic community.
Heading into the fourth week of their battle for the presidency, Obama has seized on the economic downturn to hammer McCain as an opponent who would do little more than continue the policies of fellow Republican George W. Bush, whose stewardship in the White House is widely unpopular.
McCain, meanwhile, has sought to burnish credentials on security and foreign policy by emphasizing Obama's short tenure in national politics as a first-term senator. McCain, a fourth-term senator from Arizona and a Vietnam war hero, says the United States is winning the Iraq war, now in its fifth year, and charges Obama with recklessness in his call for a troop pullout over the first 16 months of his presidency.
Bill Clinton turned Bush's father, George H.W. Bush, out of the white house in 1992 during a tough economic period despite the elder Bush having enjoyed broad popularity after the first Gulf War a year earlier, when a U.S.-led coalition drove then-Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein's invading forces out of Kuwait.
The Bill Clinton victory showed then, as it appears to be showing now, the depth of U.S. voter concerns about pocketbook issues over those of international affairs. Once again, the economy, according to U.S. polling, is outstripping foreign affairs, the Iraq war in particular as the top concern among voters.
With U.S. gasoline prices above $4 a gallon (about $1 a liter) and the stock market on the verge of the 20 percent pullback that is considered the threshold for a bear market, the economic pinch has refocused the campaign through the early weeks of their contest.
At the same time, the candidates sought to bolster their support with America's fastest-growing minority group on Saturday, courting the Hispanic community.
The issue of undocumented immigrants from Mexico and Latin America is a key issue in the election, especially among voters who blame workers who enter the country illegally for taking jobs from Americans during trying economic times.
McCain called immigration reform an issue deeply important to Hispanics his "top priority." Obama accused his opponent of caving in to conservatives. They spoke separately to about 700 Hispanics who attended the National Association of Latino Elected and Appointed Officials conference.
McCain co-sponsored broad bipartisan Senate legislation last year that would have overhauled the immigration system and improved border security; the legislation split the Republican Party as critics pushed for a border-enforcement only approach.
After the measure failed, and in the heat of the Republican nomination race, McCain emphasized the need to secure the borders first before enacting other reforms, which he said were still needed.
The Republican drew sustained applause Saturday after answering the question of whether "comprehensive immigration reform" and not just enforcement would be a top priority in his first 100 days in office.
Appearing later, Obama accused McCain of walking away from comprehensive immigration reform.
McCain met Sunday with evangelist Billy Graham and his son, Franklin, at the family's mountaintop retreat in North Carolina. McCain, who has had a reputation as a maverick within the Republican party, is actively courting religious voters and trying to win over skeptical conservatives.
Obama met this month with the younger Graham, who was part of a group of some 30 evangelicals with whom the candidate was meeting in Chicago.
On Saturday, McCain met privately with Iraqi President Jalal Talabani. Afterward, McCain said the country is making significant but fragile progress.
He expressed confidence about prospects for the two countries completing a complex agreement that would keep U.S. troops in Iraq after a U.N. mandate expires at year-end.
Earlier Saturday, Obama made a previously unannounced stop at Walter Reed Army Medical Center to visit wounded war veterans.
Obama has criticized the Bush administration for its treatment of veterans returning from the Iraq and Afghanistan wars, and has suggested McCain would continue Bush policies if elected.
 Load-Date: June 30, 2008

 

End of Document
