

Developing countries' G-24 decries lack of progress by the rich toward meeting aid goals
Associated Press International
April 13, 2007 Friday 9:07 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 655 words
Byline: By HARRY DUNPHY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




Ministers from 24 developing countries expressed disappointment Friday in the industrialized nations' lack of progress toward meeting promises they made two years ago to provide increased aid to the poor countries.
The ministers said a World Bank Global Monitoring Report presents evidence that government-provided development assistance fell in real terms in 2006 and is projected to remain flat in 2007.
In a communique issued after their meeting, the G-24 said while more aid has not turned up, "There has been a marked improvement in the underlying conditions in low-income developing countries to utilize aid effectively."
They said these countries have made sustained efforts to ensure economic stability and to carry out changes aimed at improving governance and attracting investment led by the private sector.
"Ministers called therefore for a rapid and front-loaded increase in official development assistance to meet the (millennium development goals) and ensure an improved distribution of gains from global prosperity," the communique said.
The goals, approved by 189 countries in 2000, are objectives agreed to by the international community for developing countries to reach by 2015. They include halving the proportion of people living on less than $1 a day; achieving universal primary education; reducing infant and maternal mortality; and ensuring environmental sustainability.
Specifically, they said the seven major industrialized nations should follow through on their commitment made at a 2005 summit meeting in Gleneagles, Scotland, to double aid to sub-Saharan Africa by 2010.
The G-24 ministers met on the sidelines of the spring meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. Established in 1971 to coordinate developing countries' positions on international and financial issues, the G-24 includes nations from Asia, Africa and Latin America, including growing economic powers such as India and Brazil. China sits in on the meeting as an observer.
The ministers welcomed stepped-up efforts by the World Bank to combat corruption but said "the bank needs to give more attention to the supply side of corruption and the private sector's role at both the country and the global levels."
As they did last year, the ministers said increasing the representation in the governing bodies of the bank and the IMF of countries with emerging economies "remains of the utmost importance for the legitimacy and effectiveness" of the two institutions.
Felisa Miceli, Argentina's minister of economy who chaired the G-24 sessions, said, "Our voice needs to be heard, and the G-24 is a good tool for that."
She noted that poor countries account for half of the world's gross domestic product, hold most of the world's international currency reserves, represent 80 percent of the world's population and constitute more than three-quarters of the membership of the 185-nation World Bank and IMF.
IMF officials hope they can build a consensus to take the problems of the developing countries into account. IMF Managing Director Rodrigo de Rato said he is trying to convince IMF members that increasing the influence of developing countries is vital to protecting the organization's credibility.
Smaller European countries, which stand to lose influence if IMF voting rights are recalculated to reflect growth in other parts of the world, argue the formula to determine these rights should not emphasize the size of an economy. Large developing countries, however, want economic might to factor heavily in determining the distribution of voting rights.
At present major industrialized nations such as the United States, Japan, Britain, Germany and France have single seats on the IMF's 24-member governing executive board, while a country like Brazil, with South America's largest economy, shares a seat with eight other countries. The United States is the largest shareholder in the IMF.
On the Net:
IMF: http://www.imf.org
 Load-Date: April 13, 2007

 

End of Document
