

Developing economies get to sit with the big boys
Associated Press International
November 16, 2008 Sunday 12:00 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON DATELINE
Length: 742 words
Byline: By ANNE GEARAN, AP Diplomatic Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




There were new faces at Saturday's emergency economic summit, nations whose smaller and historically weaker economies mean they rarely get a seat at the global financial table.
China, India, Brazil, Argentina and others had the same opportunity to talk as did the United States and European powers, and their message was plain: You can't ignore us anymore.
Brazilian President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, who sat shoulder to shoulder with President George W. Bush, set the tone.
"The emerging economies have to be taken into consideration in today's globalized world," Silva said.
The old economic high command, the powerful Group of Eight industrial economies, has no reason to exist anymore, Silva said, and the old global financial architecture controlled by big rich nations has been "rejected by history."
By including some two dozen countries and international institutions at the command performance summit in Washington, Bush may have tried to diffuse responsibility for a crisis the developing world sees as Made in America. But he also acknowledged the new global economic reality.
The big economies are taking the brunt of a spreading global recession, and developing economies are expected to provide almost all of the worldwide economic growth next year. China has built the largest cash reserves in the world at the same time that the United States has gone further into debt.
The summit, with a goal of preventing another similar crisis in the future, looks like what analysts say the future of international economic decision-making will be.
"Emerging market countries were not the cause of this crisis, but they are amongst its worst affected victims," Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh told the group.
"India is experiencing this negative impact. After growing at close to 9 percent per year for four years, our growth rate is expected to slow down," to between 7 percent and 7.5 percent, Singh said.
World Bank President Robert Zoellick said the summit was a productive start. What matters now are the follow-up actions, Zoellick said. "People are looking to leaders for a global, coordinated and fast response." In particular, he called for government spending programs to stimulate national economies, and said China had demonstrated leadership with its $580 billion stimulus package. "Further decisive actions will be needed," he said.
Long a power player in international diplomacy, China is getting used to using its growing economic clout while nations in the old economic clubhouse get used to seeing China as a first-order global partner.
Bush has approved a $700 billion rescue package for the U.S. economy, which remains the single largest in the world. But China took a proportionally larger step with the announcement last week of a nearly $600 billion package to boost economic growth through higher spending on construction and social programs.
China's economic growth fell to 9 percent in the latest quarter after a stunning 11.9 percent expansion last year. Exporters say foreign customers are canceling orders, which has led to layoffs and factory closures.
Chinese President Hu Jintao was under pressure at the weekend meeting to use China's $2 trillion in reserves to help expand an International Monetary Fund stability fund. Beijing has yet to respond directly to such suggestions but Hu was pressing Western leaders to give developing countries a bigger role in such global financial institutions, a measure that analysts say might be a condition for a Chinese contribution.
The summit declaration endorsed such calls in general terms.
"Emerging and developing economies should have greater voice and representation in these institutions," the declaration said, referring to the IMF and World Bank.
IMF Managing Director Dominique Strauss-Kahn said at a news conference that it would be up to the IMF's most influential members, the United States and European countries, to determine whether developing countries would be given a greater say.
He added that countries can achieve influence in several ways, including greater voting rights and being added to the IMF's board.
Japanese Prime Minister Taro Aso said Friday that Japan is ready to lend up to $100 billion to the IMF to support nations reeling from the global financial crisis. The IMF has dipped into its reserves fund to provide emergency loans to Iceland, Hungary and Ukraine worth more than $30 billion.
Associated Press writer John Dunbar contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: November 16, 2008

 

End of Document
