

DNA tests identify the 90th child of Argentines disappeared during dictatorship
Associated Press International
May 29, 2008 Thursday 1:12 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 393 words
Byline: By MAYRA PERTOSSI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES Argentina
Body




DNA tests have established the identity of an Argentine woman taken from her parents during the country's military dictatorship the 90th such child identified by a group of grandmothers searching for their missing relatives.
Laura Ruiz Dameri, now 27, had refused to cooperate, but a federal judge ordered inspectors to gather DNA samples from her belongings, a statement by the Grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo human rights group said on Wednesday.
A national DNA databank maintained by the grandmothers on Tuesday confirmed a 99.99 percent match between Dameri's DNA and that collected from family members of Orlando Ruiz and Silvia Dameri, political dissidents who disappeared during Argentina's 1976-1983 dictatorship.
The couple was kidnapped in 1980 along with their two older children, when Silvia Dameri was five-months pregnant. She gave birth to Laura Dameri in August at the Navy Mechanics School, one of the regime's largest secret detention centers, the grandmothers' group said in a news release.
Silvia Dameri and her three children were transferred to another secret detention center outside Buenos Aires months later, where she disappeared. The two older children were abandoned at hospitals in different parts of the country in December 1980, with signs around their necks saying "Marcelo" and "Victoria."
Both were adopted by local families and found by the grandmothers' group in 1990 and 2000. They agreed to DNA testing and set out to find their sister, the group said.
"For a while now we grandmothers have suspected that Laura was the sister that Marcelo and Maria de las Victorias were searching for," the grandmothers' statement read. "The three children were taken to different parts of the country deliberately, to keep the family from uniting at some point. But the truth comes to light sooner or later."
Because her two siblings had been abandoned, their adoptions were legal. But a federal judge has ordered Laura Dameri's adoptive father, former naval officer Antonio Azic, 67, detained.
Nearly 13,000 Argentines disappeared during the country's so-called dirty war, according to government figures, although human rights groups put the toll at 30,000. Some were known to have given birth in secret detention centers. Many of their mothers now grandmothers have sought about 500 such children. Dameri is the 90th they have identified.
 Load-Date: May 29, 2008

 

End of Document
