

Down to the wire: 3 cities face vote for 2014 Winter Games
Associated Press International
July 4, 2007 Wednesday 2:04 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 864 words
Byline: By STEPHEN WILSON, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: GUATEMALA CITY 
Body




Reward Russia with its first Winter Olympics? Take the games to a new Asian market in South Korea? Or return to the Austrian Alps for the first time in nearly 40 years?
That's the choice facing the International Olympic Committee on Wednesday in the closely contested vote for the host city of the 2014 Winter Games.
Amid frantic lobbying in the final hours of the campaign, the race was too tight to call between Sochi, Russia; Pyeongchang, South Korea, and Salzburg, Austria.
"I think they are very close," IOC president Jacques Rogge told The Associated Press on Tuesday. "I think 4-5 votes will make the difference."
In a sign of the high stakes and national prestige involved, Russian President Vladimir Putin, South Korean President Roh Moo-hyun and Austrian Chancellor Alfred Gusenbauer are pushing the bids in Guatemala and will feature in the final presentations to the IOC assembly on Wednesday.
It's the first time in Olympic bidding history that each of the candidate cities has been represented in person by its head of state or government.
"Russia has made an enormous contribution to the development of the Olympic movement and winter sports, but it has never had an honor to host Winter Olympic Games," Putin said.
Salzburg seems the most vulnerable of going out in the first round of voting, which would set up a head-to-head final between the Russian and Korean bids. But the secret vote is highly unpredictable, and many members may be influenced by the presentations.
"Each of the three cities could stage perfect games," Rogge said, stopping briefly in a hotel lobby packed with IOC members and bid city officials. "As usual the decision will be made on the basis of the file and the human factor the trust that the members have in the bid committee to put on great games."
The IOC officially opened its 119th session late Tuesday in a ceremony at the national theater featuring the Olympic anthem played on a marimba. Rogge urged the members to back his proposal for a Youth Olympic Games for athletes aged 14-18.
The 2014 contest pits Salzburg, renowned for its experience and tradition of winter sports in the heart of Europe, against the more unknown quantities of Sochi a summer and winter resort on the Black Sea and Pyeongchang, a growing winter sports center in Korea's divided Gangwon province.
"I don't sense a ground swell for one or the other," American IOC member Jim Easton said. "I think it's going to be a really tight vote. It's going to boil down to some political (factors). What is going to be the best for the Olympic movement in the long run?
"To go to Europe again or another country where you haven't been? You're taking a little bit of an educated chance to go where you haven't been before, but sometimes those give you the best games."
Of the IOC's 111 members, 97 are eligible to vote in the first round. Members from bidding countries are ineligible to vote as long as their cities remain in contention. Five members are absent due to illness or personal reasons.
It's unlikely any candidate will gain a winning majority of 49 votes in the first round. The city with the fewest votes is eliminated, setting up a two-way final in the second round. The key to victory is picking up second-choice votes from the city knocked out first.
The vote is particularly open because about half of the IOC's members have no real connection with winter sports.
"It makes it more of a crapshoot in the winter contest," Easton said.
Austria has staged the Winter Games twice, both times in Innsbruck (1964 and '76). Russia, which has won 293 Winter Olympic medals, has staged only the Summer Olympics (Moscow 1980). South Korea, which held the 1988 Seoul Olympics, is looking to become the first Asian country other than Japan to get the Winter Games.
Salzburg, once considered the front-runner, feels outgunned by the political and economic might of the Russians and Koreans. The Austrians push their bid as offering "what money can't buy" security, safety, passionate winter sports fans and world-class venues already in place.
"We believe the choice tomorrow is clear, and that Salzburg is offering something very special safe and secure, good for the environment and no risk," Gusenbauer said. "We may be a small country but we have a big offer in terms of real long-term legacy."
Putin's government has committed US$12 billion (euro8.8 billion) to developing Sochi into a new winter sports complex linking the "Russian Riviera" coast with the soaring Caucasus Mountains. While nearly all the venues need to be constructed from scratch, the Russians say the work will be completed in plenty of time.
"In Russia, this high level of support means that we always deliver on our promises. We never let our partners and friends down," Deputy Prime Minister Alexander Zhukov said.
Pyeongchang lost by three votes to Vancouver, British Columbia, in the vote for the 2010 games. The Korean city got the most votes (51) on the first ballot before losing 56-53 in the final round.
Kim Jin-sun, governor of Gangwon province, said holding the games in Pyeongchang would "spread winter sports across Asia" and serve as a catalyst for peace and reconciliation on the Korea peninsula.
 Load-Date: July 4, 2007

 

End of Document
