

Down to the wire: tight race for 2014 Winter Games
Associated Press International
June 28, 2007 Thursday 11:24 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 1053 words
Byline: By STEPHEN WILSON, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: LONDON 
Body




One bid offers a traditional Alpine setting in the heart of Europe. Another promises a unique coastal and mountain layout on the Black Sea. A third trumpets the opening of a winter sports frontier in Asia.
The International Olympic Committee is faced with three very different proposals for the 2014 Winter Games, and there is no telling which will prevail as the bid campaign enters its final days.
The three finalists Salzburg, Austria; Sochi, Russia, and Pyeongchang, South Korea all have a chance of winning when the IOC votes by secret ballot next Wednesday in Guatemala City, Guatemala.
"I suppose it will be very close," IOC president Jacques Rogge said. "I expect it to be as close as Singapore."
Two years ago in Singapore, London edged Paris in the final round for the 2012 Summer Olympics. That was the most competitive and glitzy bid contest in Olympic history, featuring five of the world's iconic cities, including New York, Madrid and Moscow.
The 2014 race has paled in comparison, generating little buzz outside the three bidding countries. The stakes, however, are high as the IOC considers whether to take the Winter Olympics back to their European roots or into new territory.
The candidates are leaving nothing to chance. All three are sending their top national government leaders including Russian President Vladimir Putin to push their case to the voters in Guatemala. They are mindful of how then-British Prime Minister Tony Blair's presence in Singapore played a key role in London's victory.
"This is not a Muppet show," Sochi bid chief Dmitry Chernyshenko said. "Russia is very serious about this. For President Putin, it is his personal challenge. He's really passionate about this."
Under tight rules enacted after the Salt Lake City bidding scandal, the candidates have had limited contact with the IOC members. Visits to the bid cities were prohibited. In Guatemala, bid leaders will be free to lobby in the hotel hallways, bars and dining rooms. Also crucial will be the cities' final 45-minute presentations on the day of the vote.
"What makes really the difference is the confidence the IOC members have in the bid committee, the confidence in the people," Rogge said. "The human factor is a very important one, and I think that will make the difference."
Austria has staged the Winter Games twice, both times in Innsbruck (1964 and 1976), and has hosted about 250 world championships and World Cup events in the past 10 years.
Russia, winner of 293 Winter Olympic medals, has never held the Winter Games. South Korea would be the first Asian country outside of Japan (Sapporo 1972 and Nagano 1998) to get the Games.
Salzburg was once considered the front-runner, but lost steam after a bid leadership change, low public support ratings in an IOC survey and the fallout from the Austrian doping scandal at the 2006 Turin Olympics.
"Six months ago, Salzburg was the favorite," said IOC executive board member Gerhard Heiberg of Norway, one of the chief organizers of the 1994 Lillehammer Games. "Things have happened since then. Today it's not the case anymore.
"I think it is very, very open at this moment. A lot has to do with the heart and not so much with the brains."
In a June 4 technical report, the IOC gave Pyeongchang the best overall review. But that may not mean much in the end.
"Since the publication of the evaluation commission report, we were a bit elated, but the same time humbled," said Pyeongchang bid chairman Han Seung-soo, a former Korean parliamentarian. "I've been in politics for 18 years, and until you open the vote, you just don't know."
All three cities have weaknesses.
Some question whether Korea deserves another major sports prize so soon after being awarded the 2011 world athletics championships in Daegu and the Asian Games in Incheon in 2014 the same year as the Olympics.
Sochi needs to build virtually all of its venues from scratch, eliciting a warning in the IOC report that "construction would have to be tightly monitored in order to ensure timely delivery for the Games."
In the last few months, the IOC banned six Austrian athletes for life and imposed a US$1 million (euro740,000) penalty on the Austrian Olympic Committee for the blood doping cases in Turin. The Austrian committee responded by banning 14 team officials for life.
"You have to learn from the crises," said Gernot Leitner, one of the Salzburg bid's executive directors. "I think at the end of the day, it did not turn out as a weak point. Like in normal life, every crisis you overcome makes you stronger. It's still an open race."
IOC members often vote less on the technical merits of a bid and more for reasons of personal choice, politics, geography, sentiment and emotion. That's especially true for the Winter Games, as many members have little knowledge or interest in winter sports.
Four years ago, little-known Pyeongchang nearly pulled off an upset for the 2010 Winter Olympics, getting the most votes (51) on the first ballot. With Salzburg eliminated in the first round, Vancouver picked up the Austrian city's votes to edge Pyeongchang 56-53 in the final ballot.
The system for Wednesday's vote is the same: Unless a city secures a majority of the 102 eligible votes in the first round, the candidate with the fewest votes goes out, leaving the remaining two in the second round.
Oil-rich Russia is committed to spending US$12 billion (euro9 billion) to develop the Sochi region into a new winter sports complex linking the palm-lined Black Sea coast the so-called "Russian Riviera" to the soaring Caucasus Mountains.
Pyeongchang's bid promotes peace and reconciliation on the divided Korean peninsula and promises to expand winter sports in Asia.
Salzburg plays up its reputation as a traditional European winter sports mecca with most world-class venues already in place that is capable of re-creating some of the magic of the Lillehammer Games.
Putin is leading Sochi's delegation, while Austrian Chancellor Alfred Gusenbauer and South Korean President Roh Moo-hyun will also attend.
Putin figures to make the biggest impact because of his stature on the world stage, and his recent spats with the Bush administration could win the Russians favor with members in the Europe-dominated IOC.
"He will make a difference, absolutely," Heiberg said. "His personality will be important there."
 Load-Date: June 28, 2007

 

End of Document
