

Drug trafficking through the Caribbean, focus of anti-drug summit
Associated Press International
March 16, 2007 Friday 4:03 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 391 words
Byline: By JONATHAN M. KATZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SANTO DOMINGO Dominican Republic
Body




Days before presidents and prime ministers began arriving in the Dominican Republic for a regional anti-drug summit, authorities in the capital stopped a pregnant woman and her young son boarding a plane for Madrid.
She had three pounds (1.36 kilograms) of pure cocaine taped under her shirt.
The example is one of many instances of drugs moving from the Caribbean to Europe a plight plaguing Latin America and a focus of Friday's conference between regional leaders in the Dominican capital.
"Drugs have taken a real back seat to the war on terror ... this summit is a very important thing in that the nations in the region appear to be not only demanding a new leadership but are stepping in to fill a vacuum," said Eduardo Gamarra, director of the Latin American and Caribbean Center at Florida International University.
The drugs flow through South America to the Caribbean. From there, the contraband moves via armadas of "fast boats" to the United States and to Europe, flown out on planes from hidden airstrips or carried by drug mules.
The smuggling shows no sign of abating.
Illegal flights from Venezuela to Hispaniola spiked in 2006, suggesting a surge of cocaine being sneaked over the island shared by Haiti and the Dominican Republic, the U.S. State Department reported this month in its annual drug assessment. Last year, a container bound for Europe from South America was detained in a Dominican port carrying thousands of pounds (kilograms) of cocaine.
Dominican and Haitian officials come to the conference pledging cooperation in efforts to fight both South American shipments and smuggling across their porous 362-kilometer (225-mile) border, and hoping for increased help from the United States in doing so.
"This new effort comes accompanied by an increase in action by the United States, as a fundamental ally of Caribbean states in the fight against a problem that affects all nations," Dominican Foreign Minister Carlos Morales Troncoso said.
U.S. drug enforcement chief Karen Tandy, who will send a representative, visited with the presidents of Haiti and the Dominican Republic this month to launch a joint anti-drug program aimed at curtailing networks that use the island as a transshipment point.
Colombian President Alvaro Uribe, other Caribbean heads of state and officials from Europe and Venezuela are expected to attend.
 Load-Date: March 17, 2007

 

End of Document
