

Egypt scoffs at new 7 wonders of the world contest
Associated Press International
January 29, 2007 Monday 12:54 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 634 words
Byline: By ANNA JOHNSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO Egypt
Body




Egypt is scoffing at a global contest to name the new seven wonders of the world, saying it is a disgrace that the ancient Pyramids of Giza the only surviving structure from the traditional list of architectural marvels must compete for a spot.
Top Egyptian officials have criticized the popular contest that urges people around the world to vote for their top sites from a list of 21 finalists that lumps the pyramids with upstart wonders like New York's Statue of Liberty, the Eiffel Tower in Paris and Peru's Machu Picchu.
The pyramids are "living in the hearts of people around the globe, and don't need a vote to be among the world wonders," said the head of Egypt's Supreme Council of Antiquities, Zahi Hawass, according to the state-run Middle East News Agency.
Egyptian officials refused to meet with the organizer of the "New 7 Wonders of the World" contest, the Swiss adventurer Bernard Weber, when he visited Egypt earlier this month, said the contest's spokeswoman Tia B. Viering. When Weber tried to hold a press conference near the pyramids, she said, police shut it down.
Organizers say the hostility is unwarranted, claiming the competition is supposed to renew international interest in culture and history, not strip the pyramids of their ancient status.
"The contest is not about taking something away, it's about moving something into modern times," Viering said.
The Egyptian pyramids are the only surviving structures from the traditional list of seven wonders of the ancient world, derived by later authors from various lists of marvels cited by ancient Greek and Roman writers.
Besides the pyramids, according to the Encyclopedia Britannica, the best known list includes the Hanging Gardens of Babylon, the Colossus of Rhodes, the ancient lighthouse that once stood on the island of Pharos in Alexandria, Egypt, and three other long-vanished edifices.
Choosing a new roster of world wonders has attracted ongoing interest over the years: The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, UNESCO, list of World Heritage Sites includes 830 selections.
Weber started his project in 1999, collecting nearly 200 nominations. That list was eventually narrowed to 21 by a panel of architectural experts, chaired by former UNESCO chief Federico Mayor.
But Weber wanted the masses to pick the top seven. People can vote on the Internet, by phone or by sending a cell phone text message until July 6. The seven winners will be announced on the symbolic date of July 7.
Half of the revenues raised by the campaign will go toward restoring historic sites, including the Bamiyan Buddha statue in Afghanistan, which was destroyed by the Taliban regime.
As part of the campaign, Weber is visiting each of the 21 sites, which also include the Great Wall of China, the Sydney Opera House, Stonehenge and the Acropolis in Athens.
Almost everywhere Weber has gone, he has been welcomed, but not in Egypt.
"We think it's about ego, and we don't know why the hostility is there," Viering said in a telephone interview from Belgium this weekend.
Egypt's Culture Minister Farouk Hosni, according to the Middle East News Agency, called the contest "nonsense" and "an attempt to seek celebrity and their efforts to meet Egyptian officials to give the contest significance won't take place. They have to understand the archaeological and the historical stature of the pyramids."
Egypt's ire may not hurt the pyramid's chances of making it on the new list. With more than 24 million votes so far, Viering said tombs which are more than 4,000 years old are in the top seven.
"We know that people all around the world want the pyramids as part of this as do people in Egypt," Viering said.
Associated Press writer Maggie Michael contributed to this report.
On the Net:
New 7 Wonders: http://www.new7wonders.com
 Load-Date: January 29, 2007

 

End of Document
