

Even in disgrace, Blagojevich finds the spotlight
Associated Press International
June 17, 2009 Wednesday 10:34 AM GMT

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 556 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER WILLS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SPRINGFIELD Illinois
Body




Former Illinois Governor Rod Blagojevich has been rejected by the people of his state, bounced out of office by legislators and indicted by federal prosecutors. But in the world of entertainment, he's a hit.
Television, radio, theater all are familiar with rebuilding shattered reputations and seizing opportunities for publicity. All have welcomed Blagojevich.
The Second City comedy troupe has a huge success with its biting stage show "Rod Blagojevich Superstar," and Blagojevich himself joined Saturday's performance. He opened the show standing on a chair, his arms outstretched as if crucified, and then helped with some improv afterward.
The producers of NBC's "I'm a Celebrity ... Get Me Out of Here!" courted Blagojevich for their eating-bugs-and-bickering show in the jungles of Costa Rica. They settled for his wife, Patti, when a judge wouldn't let him leave the country.
Blagojevich also has become a staple on a Chicago morning radio show, alternately attacking his political enemies and discussing his wife's performance on reality TV. He's no stranger to bigger shows like "Larry King Live" and "Today," either.
Blagojevich's love of the spotlight has even inspired some bizarre offers designed to grab a headline whether or not he agrees to participate. The host of a Chicago sports show challenged Blagojevich to a drag race, for instance, and the owner of a Nevada brothel offered him an internship that would play out on the HBO series "Cathouse."
Even more than most politicians, Blagojevich always craved public approval.
Put him in front of a crowd as governor, and he would get them cheering by promising a state grant or vowing to battle their enemies. He seized any opportunity to shake hands, chat with folks about his love of Elvis and remind everyone that he opposed any tax increase.
Federal prosecutors say that as governor, Blagojevich schemed to profit financially and politically from his power to award state contracts, appoint people to government boards and name President Barack Obama's replacement in the U.S. Senate.
When the Chicago Democrat was kicked out of office in January and later indicted, he could have stayed in seclusion. Instead, he has sought out the spotlight, and the entertainment world has offered it to him eagerly.
Both sides get the same benefits: money and attention.
Second City, for instance, can link itself to a funny politician the same way "Saturday Night Live" did with vice presidential candidate Sarah Palin, said Susan Murray, who teaches at New York University and writes about television and culture.
Meanwhile, Blagojevich gets more public attention and a chance to change people's impression of him. It may not hurt for potential jurors in a future trial to see him as an unpretentious guy with a devoted wife.
"He seems like a personality who would be attracted to that risky media behavior. He has little to lose since his political career is over," Murray said.
Blagojevich also gets money to pay his mortgage and his legal bills.
Patti Blagojevich's TV appearance will raise money for charity, but she's also being paid to appear. The ex-governor's Second City appearance also involved a contribution to charity and a payment to Blagojevich. Their publicist wouldn't say how much.
"They need to make a living. They needed to feed their family," said spokesman Glenn Selig.
 Load-Date: June 18, 2009

 

End of Document
