

Even if Brazil wins again, it can't keep the cup
Associated Press International
June 22, 2006 Thursday 2:42 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 540 words
Byline: By JOHN PYE, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: BERLIN 
Body




Brazil won't get to keep the World Cup trophy if it wins its sixth title at Germany 2006.
And, just for the record, the 350 free tickets given to British school children who were victims of con artists is also a one-off.
FIFA communications director Markus Siegler would not even entertain speculation that Brazil, or any other team, would get to keep one of the most globally recognized prizes in sport.
Brazil kept the original Jules Rimet trophy in 1970 after becoming the first three-time winner of the World Cup.
The Brazilians have won it twice since then, and so have Argentina and Germany, leading to the perennial question about FIFA handing over the existing cup for the team that wins it three times.
Siegler responded with a flat "no" to the question Thursday at a daily news conference, not entering into any further debate.
He spent more time explaining that FIFA president Sepp Blatter's decision to give the British students tickets for a World Cup quarterfinal was strictly a one-time deal.
British Prime Minister Tony Blair got involved after hearing how the students paid for tickets and went to Germany on organized tours, only to discover that there was no tickets.
If England reaches the quarterfinals it plays Ecuador in the second round on Sunday the students will get tickets to the July 1 match at Gelsenkirchen.
If England does not advance, the tickets will be valid for the June 30 quarterfinal at Berlin, which could feature host Germany and Argentina.
"FIFA has made it possible, it was not easy," Siegler said. "This is a once off."
Another FIFA spokesman said the tickets came from a contingency allocation that usually if not needed for security or other reasons were released close to the match.
"We've literally scraped together everything we have," Andreas Herren said. "This is not just some reserve we have for every match."
Tickets have been an issue, with organizers saying every match has been a sell out. There were only 38,000 people at the tied Iran vs. Angola match at Leipzig on Wednesday, but organizing committee Wolfgang Niersbach said officially the match was a sell out.
Organizers were examining the turf at venues in Hamburg, Gelsenkirchen and Cologne and considering replacing some surfaces before the quarterfinals.
"The visible appearance is not as optimum as we'd have liked, our experts will continue to work on it," Niersbach said. The grass at all 12 World Cup venues was relaid last month when the German league season ended.
That coincided with unseasonal rain and cold weather, leading to some complaints from players.
"If you're looking for a scapegoat it was the local organizing committee," Niersbach said. "We're a bit upset about it. We've heard some complaints through the media, but have received no formal complaints.
"It has not effected the quality of the football."
Loose sods of grass might not be an issue at the next World Cup.
Qualifying an earlier statement from Blatter, Siegler said the rules of the game allowed for artificial grass and it was "too early to rule it out for 2010."
South Africa President Thabo Mbeki and the 2010 organizing committee will meet with Germany 2006 organizers in an official handover ceremony on July 7 before a concert near the Brandeburg Gate at Berlin.
 Load-Date: June 23, 2006

 

End of Document
