

Ex-British paratrooper on round-the-world walk bitter at Russian deportation order
Associated Press International
April 15, 2006 Saturday 11:04 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 551 words
Byline: By HENRY MEYER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSCOW 
Body




A British adventurer whose 7 1/2-year attempt to walk around the world is probably over after a court in the remote Russian Far East ordered him deported for illegally entering the country expressed bitterness at his treatment on Saturday.
Karl Bushby, 37, a former paratrooper who has walked 27,000 kilometers (17,000 miles) since he began his trip in 1998 at the southern tip of South America, was detained on April 1 along with a companion after the pair made a hazardous trip across the frozen Bering Strait.
A court in the Arctic province of Chukhotka on Friday ordered Bushby and American Dimitry Kieffer fined 2,000 rubles (US$72; euro60) each and deported. Under Russian law, foreigners who are deported are automatically barred from re-entering the country for five years.
"Seven or eight years full of sweat and tears, we got here, to the point where we were told we would never get. And suddenly it came from the left flank and knocked us over," Bushby told The Associated Press by telephone from the village of Lavrenty, 800 kilometers (500 miles) northeast of the provincial capital Anadyr.
"We told them that this would be the worst possible outcome for us, but they don't think we've had it hard, we could have been sent to prison," he said.
Bushby, who wants to be the first person to walk around the world from South America to Alaska, into Russia and then Europe said he would appeal. "There'll be an appeal, oh hell yes," he said.
His lawyer, Alexander Perelygin said the appeal would be lodged on Monday and should either be rejected or upheld within 24 hours, the ITAR-Tass news agency reported.
The stocky, sandy-haired Briton was detained for entering Russia without going through a border checkpoint after a perilous 15-day trek across a 120-kilometer (56-mile) stretch of the frozen Bering Strait. Kieffer had accompanied him on the Bering leg.
Karl's father Keith Bushby told the AP after the court ruling that his son and supporters had hoped for intervention from Roman Abramovich, the billionaire Russian oil tycoon who is the governor of Chukotka and owner of Britain's Chelsea soccer club, but that they have been unable to reach him.
"It's easier to get to the queen of England," he said by phone from Britain.
Bushby said his son was not surprised by the conviction, but that he had hoped that "given the unique circumstances, they might have shown some leniency."
After Russia, the British adventurer planned to turn west across Europe and back to his hometown of Hull, in northern Britain, completing a journey of 58,000 kilometers (36,000 miles) by 2010.
Bushby and Kieffer created a stir when they arrived in Chukhotka carrying satellite phones, GPS mapping equipment, a video camera and a pistol to protect themselves against polar bears and officials reportedly initially treated them with suspicion as possible intelligence agents.
A spokesman for the British Embassy in Moscow urged the Russian government Saturday to allow Bushby to finish his round-the-world journey but seemed pessimistic about the likely outcome.
"We hope he will be able to go through Russia, complete his journey and return to Yorkshire. But in the final instance, it's an immigration matter for the Russian authorities, there's not much we can do," he said.
On the Net:
Bushby's site: http://goliath.mail2web.com
 Load-Date: April 16, 2006

 

End of Document
