

Federal authorities arrest 11 people on charges of selling counterfeit drugs over the Internet
Associated Press International
September 20, 2006 Wednesday 11:14 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 423 words
Byline: By DORIE TURNER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ATLANTA 
Body




Federal authorities have indicted 11 people in the Central American nation of Belize and in Georgia, North Carolina, South Dakota and on charges of selling counterfeit prescription drugs over the Internet.
Investigators believe many of the drugs had little or no medicinal value, and that those behind the scam netted more than $19 million (euro15 million).
The company, Hi-Tech Pharmaceuticals of Norcross, Georgia, marketed the drugs as Canadian through unsolicited e-mails, but the pills actually were made in Belize, the U.S. attorney's office said Wednesday.
Four Georgia residents implicated in the scam appeared before a federal magistrate Wednesday in Atlanta. Prosecutors showed photographs of the company's squalid drug lab in Belize, where pills were stored in large garbage cans marked with "Viagra" and "Lipitor."
In the photos, the equipment used to make the pills was covered in dust and dirt, and rooms were filled with unorganized boxes and canisters.
Customers "thought they were getting legitimate and safe prescription drugs over the Internet from Canada at cheaper prices, when in reality they received adulterated fakes that were crudely made in an unsanitary house in Belize," U.S. Attorney David E. Nahmias said.
Nahmias said the drugs were "not properly produced or regulated. You don't know what you're getting." He said authorities did not know how many customers were involved, but obviously they numbered at least in the hundreds.
Assistant U.S. Attorney Aaron Danzig said Hi-Tech and its subsidiaries are still operating. The company is estimated to be worth $35 million (euro27.61 million) and to have produced more than 30 million pills.
Attorney Tim Fulmer, representing Hi-Tech, said in a statement that the facts will show there is no basis for the indictment.
All four Georgia residents pleaded not guilty to the charges. Magistrate Linda Walker released one defendant on $75,000 (euro59,167) bond. Three others were held without bond.
Nahmias said those arrested out of state would have hearings in those states. One of the accused, Georgia resident Brad Watkins, remained at large, he said.
The indictment seeks forfeiture of numerous properties, automobiles and bank accounts, and a judgment of at least $19.8 million (euro15.62 million).
Nahmias said the defendants are accused of making 24 different drugs, including counterfeit versions of Vioxx, Viagra, Cialis, Valium and Xanax, and marketing them through unsolicited "spam" advertisements as authentic generic versions of drugs being imported from Canada.
 Load-Date: September 21, 2006

 

End of Document
