

Felix toll rises to 64 as survivors and bodies are pulled from the sea
Associated Press International
September 6, 2007 Thursday 7:42 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 740 words
Byline: By BAYARDO MENDOZA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PUERTO CABEZAS Nicaragua
Body




A group of 109 Nicaraguan Miskito Indians who sought refuge in canoes when Hurricane Felix roared over them were tossed into a violent sea when the canoes sank. At least 52 found something to hang onto, fighting for hours to stay alive as huge waves and lightning crashed around them.
On Thursday, 25 bodies were found floating in the debris-strewn water, raising the total death toll to 65, but another 32 people were still missing. The 52 survivors were pulled from the sea, many suffering dehydration, and were being treated in the seaside Honduran town of Villeda Morales, on the Nicaraguan border.
Interviewed by phone from the remote and swampy jungle coast, Honduran Col. Saul Orlando Coca told The Associated Press that U.S. and Honduran military officials were patrolling the ocean and inlets with helicopters and boats, while soldiers walked the beaches on foot. Local villagers also were searching for the missing.
Martin Alvarez, who captains a fishing boat, told Nicaraguan authorities he pulled nine decomposing bodies from the ocean and was bringing them back to shore, but that had yet to be confirmed, said Ramon Arnesto Soza, a Nicaraguan civil defense chief in the area.
Even those who endured the storm on land lacked fresh water. An AP photographer reached one isolated village where residents were breaking open fallen coconuts and had nothing else to drink.
About 150,000 Miskitos descendants of Indians, European settlers and African slaves live on island reefs and in small jungle hamlets, mostly along the Honduran and Nicaraguan coast.
The debris prevented at least one rescue mission from coming ashore in Sandy Bay, where the eye of Felix made landfall the day before with catastrophic 160 mph winds and a projected storm surge of 18 feet above normal tides. From a distance, the sailors could see fallen palm trees and wooden homes reduced to splinters.
They also saw women on the shore, crying openly.
The Nicaraguan government said it would need at least $30US million in aid to rebuild.
Food and fuel remained scarce Thursday even help arrived in the regional capital of Puerto Cabezas, a town difficult to reach even in good weather. Honduran Defense Minister Aristides Mejia sent boats and a military helicopter to help with rescues.
The U.S. Southern Command sent an amphibious warship, the USS Wasp, to Nicaragua to help coordinate U.S. relief efforts. Venezuela also sent aid, and 57 Cuban doctors and nurses already on medical missions on the Miskito coast helped as well.
Felix developed very quickly over the deep warm waters of the southern Caribbean. Nicaragua posted a hurricane warning less than 24 hours before it hit the coast, and scrambled to notify the remote, autonomous region where many have a long-standing mistrust of the central government. Few realized the storm would grow to a Category 5 hurricane so quickly, and some who were warned didn't believe it would be so dangerous.
Felix was nothing more than a steady rain Thursday in the Mexican state of Chiapas, but swollen rivers and unstable mountainsides kept thousands of people from their homes in Central America. In Honduras, a 15-year-old was buried by mud while trying to repair a water line in Tegucigalpa, and a 34-year-old man drowned in a ditch in El Progreso.
The remnants of Henriette, meanwhile, dumped rain Thursday on Arizona and New Mexico. That hurricane hit Mexico for the second time in two days Wednesday, near the port city of Guaymas, and then weakened over the Sonoran desert.
It left nine dead, including a clam digger swept away by high tides and a man who fell while trying to repair his roof. One woman drowned in high surf in Cabo San Lucas, and landslides buried six in Acapulco as Henriette marched up the Pacific Coast.
Some 5,000 people woke up in Mexican shelters Thursday. San Carlos, a beach town packed with American retirees next to the port city of Guaymas, was among those hit.
"Waves reached up to the boulevard," said San Carlos resident Fatima Reyes, 23. "It blew away roofing, trees and signs."
Mexican navy Capt. Leopoldo Mendoza said a navy helicopter was searching the Bay of La Paz for a small boat missing since Tuesday in Henriette's high seas with two Mexicans and two Japanese nationals on board.
Associated Press writers Freddy Cuevas in Tegucigalpa, Honduras; Filadelfo Aleman in Managua, Nicaragua; and Richard Jacobsen in Mexico City contributed to this report.
On the Net:
http://www.nhc.noaa.gov
 Load-Date: September 7, 2007

 

End of Document
