

Felix Gonzelz-Torres represents his adopted country at the Biennale posthumously
Associated Press International
June 14, 2007 Thursday 2:50 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 623 words
Byline: By COLLEEN BARRY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MILAN Italy
Body




Cuban-born Felix Gonzalez-Torres was short-listed to represent the United States, his adopted country, in the Venice Biennale during his lifetime. But the honor was bestowed only after his death.
For only the second time, the United States has chosen to exhibit an artist posthumously at the biennial event that often highlights the work of an emerging artist. But what message does this send to living artists, struggling to be seen?
"One of my reasons for nominating Felix is that he is such an important artist for a newer generation of artist," Nancy Spector, a Guggenheim curator who has curated the American Pavilion in the Giardini of the Venice Biennale, said in a phone interview from Venice. "I felt his work was incredibly vital and urgent. He would have been of an age to have been here, but he died so young.'"
Gonzalez-Torres died in 1996 at the age of 38 from complications due to AIDS. Born in Cuba, he moved to Puerto Rico as a boy and joined the local art scene there before moving to New York City in 1979.
He had his first solo exhibitions in New York in 1988, at the Intar Latin American Gallery and the Rastovski Gallery, and he participated in hundreds of group shows in his lifetime. His work also appeared in several important museum exhibitions, including at the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles and the Guggenheim in New York.
"His work can be seen and read as a lamentation on loss," said Spector, who knew Gonzalez-Torres and curated his 1995 retrospective at the Guggenheim. "The work is political and very much about democracy. He was very proud to be an American. ... He really embraced the democratic system and was very critical of the things he thought would compromise that."
In his lifetime, that was the encroachment of the conservative right, linked to homophobia and social justice, Spector said.
The exhibit includes a piece made of strings of cascading lightbulbs called "Untitled" (America) and another featuring cubelike stacks of thousands of pieces of paper. The pieces of paper each stamped with different inscriptions, "Veterans Day Sale" one stack; "Memorial Day Weekend" on another are free for the taking and are replenished to maintain the cube shape.
Only one piece on exhibit was not realized in his lifetime: two marble pools that sit end-to-end outside the U.S. pavilion. Gonzalez-Torres had made about five sketches of the pools and had plans, never carried out, to create the piece for another 1995 retrospective.
His specifications called for the pools to be made out of local stone, so they have been cut from Italian marble, each a solid piece of stone and minimalist in spirit, Spector said.
"How beautiful that was to be able to use Italian marble," she said.
Gonzalez-Torres knew and loved Venice, Spector said, having lived there briefly in the 1980s. His work also was included in the group exhibit at the 1993 Biennale and Spector said the fact he had agreed to be considered to represent the United States at the 1995 Biennale was critical to her decision to nominate him for this showing. Gonzalez-Torres is only the second artist chosen posthumously to represent the United States, following Robert Smithson in 1982.
"It also is the international platform of the Venice Biennale. The idea of his being a Cuban-born American citizen gay man who died from AIDS being in a position really in the center," Spector said.
"He always talked about infiltrating the system, being in the museum, to subtly disrupt the status quo and deliver messages that were not always the ones that the powers wanted to hear. I think it is very meaningful that he would be selected and have this platform unfortunately, posthumously."
Eds: The Venice Biennale opened June 6 and runs through Nov. 21.
 Load-Date: June 15, 2007

 

End of Document
