

Fidel Castro takes time off from reading the news to lunch with Garcia Marquez
Associated Press International
July 10, 2008 Thursday 4:59 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 351 words
Byline: By WILL WEISSERT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HAVANA 
Body




Fidel Castro kept a frenetic schedule for nearly five decades as a global icon who infuriated 10 U.S. presidents. Now 81 and ailing, he describes his most pressing activity as reading and writing about the news.
Castro published a wistful essay Thursday in Cuba's state press, saying he set aside "a mountain of news cables" about the G-8 summit in Japan in order to chat with longtime confidant, Gabriel Garcia Marquez.
"I decided to rest," Castro wrote in the column, entitled "The Day Off."
It gave a glimpse into the now-quiet life of a man who long dabbled in nearly every element of Cuban affairs. He said Tuesday's talk with the Colombian novelist was the first time he'd invited a visitor to lunch since he underwent emergency intestinal surgery in July 2006.
Forced to the sidelines of government, Castro has dedicated himself to writing essays about world events for Cuban readers while his younger brother Raul heads the government.
Castro said he began to talk with Garcia Marquez and his wife Mercedes Barcha at 11:35 a.m., reminiscing about "dozens of events" over the 50 years of their friendship. Two hours later, they were still talking.
"I invited them to have lunch, something that I have never done with any visitor in these almost two years. Which I had never thought to do."
Castro referred indirectly to his mortality, said he stuck to the diet doctors had prescribed "not to add years to my life, but productivity to my hours."
He said his talks with Garcia Marquez, more than once a year, had been "a prescription against the powerful tensions" of life as a revolutionary leader.
Garcia Marquez's friendship may even have saved his life, Castro suggested, referring to a plot to assassinate him as he rode in a horse-drawn carriage during a 1994 visit to Colombia. Castro invited his friend to accompany him on the ride through the streets.
"They were in Cartagena with telescopic rifles and automatic weapons, waiting in ambush at a point in the walled zone. And once again, those who were to pull the trigger trembled. The pretext was that Gabo's head got in the way, obstructing the view."
 Load-Date: July 11, 2008

 

End of Document
