

FIFA to hear South American complaints about the high altitude stadium ban
Associated Press International
June 27, 2007 Wednesday 12:09 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 651 words
Byline: By SHEILA NORMAN-CULP, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ZURICH Switzerland
Body




All of South America is on edge, waiting to see if FIFA will revise or even cancel its ban on international matches at high altitude.
Citing medical concerns for players and an unfair home advantage for highland teams, the world body last month prohibited international tournaments and World Cup qualifying matches in stadiums above 2,500 meters (8,200 feet).
The ruling took South America by surprise, igniting front-page news and a firestorm of protest. It eliminated matches in the capitals of Bolivia, Colombia and Ecuador, and in the stadiums of leading teams in Peru, Chile and Mexico.
With Bolivian President Evo Morales leading the campaign, CONMEBOL voted unanimously two weeks ago to press FIFA to overturn the ban.
On Wednesday, FIFA's executive committee was to formally hear CONMEBOL's arguments, presented by the panel's three South American members: CONMEBOL president Nicolas Leoz of Paraguay, FIFA vice president Julio Grondona of Argentina and Ricardo Teixeira of Brazil.
CONMEBOL officials say FIFA has reassured them the ban will be revised so it only affects matches at stadiums above 3,000 meters (9,840 feet). A FIFA spokesman, however, insisted Tuesday that no changes to the ban have been decided.
"Contrary to reports out of South America, there has been no new ruling," FIFA spokesman Andreas Herren said.
Without alterations, matches would be prohibited in the Bolivian capital of La Paz, 3,600 meters (11,800 feet) above sea level; the Colombian capital of Bogota, 2,640 meters (8,700 feet) above sea level, and in the Ecuadorean capital of Quito, 2,800 meters (9,200 feet) above sea level. An increase to 3,000 meters would allow games in Bogota and Quito, but not in La Paz or in Cuzco, Peru.
Having Argentina and Brazil argue their case is troubling to the Andean nations, who have accused the lowland powers of being behind the ban in the first place. In the past, Argentina and Brazil have complained about the disadvantages of having to play at altitude.
Herren said Tuesday there was no reason for either Argentina or Brazil to excuse themselves from the debate because it did not specifically involve their national teams.
Brazil's complaints in the past have included not being able to get players released from European clubs early enough to acclimate them for matches at altitude.
Ecuador Foreign Minister Maria Fernanda Espinosa, who presented the Andean nations' case to FIFA president Sepp Blatter at a meeting in Zurich on Tuesday, said it was only fair play to rescind the ban.
"We believe because of the scientific and medical studies that altitude is not a problem," Espinosa told the AP. "You need some previous adaptation, but what we have seen is that it is more dangerous to play in the heat and the humidity than to play in the altitude."
Morales reportedly was fly to Zurich after Bolivia's Copa America opener Tuesday night in Venezuela to discuss the issue with Blatter, but Herren said nothing yet was certain about the visit.
Morales says the FIFA ruling discriminates against soccer players born in the mountains and even played a soccer game on the icy slopes of Bolivia's highest Andean peak in protest.
At a meeting two weeks ago, Andean doctors on CONMEBOL's medical panel insisted there were "no major problems" with playing at altitude. Other medical experts disagree, however, saying that playing at higher elevations can cause headaches, nausea, fatigue and insomnia.
CONMEBOL also wants FIFA to study other factors that could cause medical problems at games, including "heat, cold and snow." Andean officials say matches played in extreme heat like some in Brazil could also be medically dangerous to players but complain that FIFA has not sought to ban those games.
At Wednesday's meeting, FIFA's executive committee also plans to address the reorganization of its administration after the resignation earlier this month of FIFA general secretary Urs Linsi.
 Load-Date: June 27, 2007

 

End of Document
