

Fox says Mexico working closely with the U.S. to strengthen border security
Associated Press International
March 31, 2006 Friday 9:39 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 519 words
Byline: By OLGA R. RODRIGUEZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CANCUN Mexico
Body




President Vicente Fox said Friday that Mexico is committed to having more secure borders, citing his government's fight against drug trafficking and a crackdown on migrant smugglers.
Immigration and border security and how to strike a balance between the two dominated a two-day North American summit between Fox, U.S. President George W. Bush and Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper.
Bush said a secure border was necessary to ensure the region's economic prosperity.
"If people are concerned, that, for example, the towns along the border are not secure, it's going to be difficult to keep prosperity alive," Bush said.
Fox said his government has strengthen enforcement on his southern border to stem the flow of Central American migrants heading to the United States and has sent hundreds of federal agents to its northern border to contain a turf war between rival drug gangs.
The United States has asked Mexico to do more to strengthen security along their common border, especially in the border city of Nuevo Laredo, where a rash of drug-related violence has been a source of tension between the two countries.
Last year, the United States irked many Mexican officials when it closed the U.S. Consulate in Nuevo Laredo, across from Laredo, Texas, citing concerns with widespread violence.
"There is great commitment to win the battle against organized crime and drug trafficking, especially in Nuevo Laredo," Fox said.
The city of 330,000 has been caught in a turf war between rival drug gangs fighting for billion-dollar smuggling routes into the United States. Since Jan. 1, more than 60 people have been slain there despite the heavy presence of federal troops.
Fox also lauded a program with the United States to prosecute people smugglers as a successful joint effort to tighten border security.
The Oasis Program, which allows for the exchange of intelligence that can serve as evidence to prosecute members of people-trafficking networks, has already helped put 120 migrant smugglers in prison, Fox said.
The program is currently in place along the border between San Diego and Yuma, Arizona, and U.S. and Mexican authorities are considering extending it all the way to New Mexico.
Fox also has promised to begin extraditing suspected drug traffickers to the United States, something the U.S. has long requested.
But he ruled out any possibility that Mexico would try to stop its migrants from crossing the border illegally.
"We can't infringe upon the right of people to move freely within our territory," Fox said Thursday.
Mexico's top priority with its northern neighbor is a migration accord that would address the status of the estimated 6 million Mexican workers living illegally in the United States.
Fox cheered a proposal approved by the U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee Monday that would legalize more than 1 million undocumented migrant agricultural workers and provide temporary work visas.
The president has criticized legislation passed by the U.S. House of Representatives last year that would make it a felony to be in the U.S. illegally and erect fences along one-third of the U.S.-Mexican border.
 Load-Date: April 1, 2006

 

End of Document
