

France looks to Les Bleus to wipe away the blues
Associated Press International
July 7, 2006 Friday 7:47 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 720 words
Byline: By LAURENCE FROST, AP Business Writer
Dateline: PARIS 
Body




As if the expectations of millions of supporters weren't pressure enough, the French soccer team will be playing for more than just fans' gratification when it faces off against Italy in Sunday's World Cup final, government officials and economists say.
A dazzling performance by the much-maligned national side could give French economic confidence a shot in the arm, Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin said Friday.
"This is a great and powerful incentive to move forward, to face up to challenges," Villepin said.
Sporting achievement cannot be expected to produce economic growth on its own, he conceded, but "if we're psychologically more inclined to look to the horizon, to the future and the challenges ahead, then that encourages the economy."
The country's mood has lifted palpably as Les Bleus, who suffered withering press criticism when they made an uncertain start to the competition as 12-1 outsiders, went on to dispatch Spain, then Brazil, then Portugal, to reach the World Cup final.
France's feel-good factor could prove short-lived if they fail at the last test, according to research conducted by ABN Amro, before the championship began. Italy's, on the other hand, would take off.
"Economic growth among world champions tends to outstrip that in the losing finalist countries during a World Cup year," the Dutch bank says in a report entitled Soccernomics 2006. "With a few exceptions, it is a case of winner takes all."
With more room for improvement in the flagging Italian economy Italy has achieved less than half of France's 1.5 percent average growth over the past five years a win for the Squadra Azzura would be the best outcome for the global economy, ABN Amro concludes.
National sporting triumphs boost consumer morale, the report said France's main household confidence index rose about 10 points in the 12 months following its last World Cup win in 1998 and "happier consumers are inclined to spend more."
The World Cup's direct macro-economic benefits are less clear, economists broadly agree. Like the game itself, the championship has economic losers as well as the obvious winners advertising companies, drinks and sportswear makers and bars.
French electronic goods sales surged 9.3 percent in May as households equipped themselves with new TVs, economist Nicolas Bouzou points out, but auto sales fell 0.7 percent as they put vehicle replacements on hold.
"The World Cup's impact is above all a redistributive effect among sectors," said Bouzou, who works for Paris-based economics consultancy Xerfi. Tourist numbers have also been below par in June and July as people stayed home to watch, he added.
Companies in all sectors can also have trouble with productivity. Valery Germain, a 34-year-old IT worker, said offices at his Paris-based company were half-deserted during afternoon matches. "People were going to the bar across the street to watch them on TV," he said.
As they were in July 1998, France's main economic indicators are already improving. Growth is picking up, unemployment has fallen 1 percentage point to 9.1 percent in the year to May, and consumer morale rose two points to minus-28 in June.
But with less than a year to go before elections, the government of President Jacques Chirac whose poll ratings are close to their all-time low has everything to gain from an accelerated return of confidence.
"Far from being swamped by globalization, France can remain in the world's economic first division," Finance Minister Thierry Breton said in his own televised pep-talk on Thursday.
"We can see today that France believes in its energy, in its talent, in its collective play," he added.
Others kept their feet more firmly on the ground. Pascale Romirez said the World Cup glory hadn't yet trickled down to the jobseekers at the unemployment office where she works, inside a housing project with graffiti-streaked walls and urine-stained doorways.
Romirez believes that only concerted government efforts to improve education and job schemes can improve the reality of life in her northern Paris suburb of La Courneuve, which was among those that saw rioting by disillusioned youths last fall.
"We need more than a victory in the final to get these people into the work force," she said.
Associated Press Writers Emmanuel Georges-Picot and Angela Charlton contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: July 8, 2006

 

End of Document
