

French president meets with pope at the Vatican, they discuss hostages
Associated Press International
December 20, 2007 Thursday 8:58 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 623 words
Byline: By VICTOR L. SIMPSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: VATICAN CITY 
Body




French President Nicolas Sarkozy met with Pope Benedict XVI on Thursday, saying he was personally "moved" by his first audience at the Vatican since taking office in May.
They discussed a range of international issues, including "the drama of hostages," an apparent reference to France's efforts to free Ingrid Betancourt, who is being held by Colombian guerrillas.
Betancourt is a dual French-Colombian citizen and former presidential candidate in the South American country. She has been held for nearly six years and France has been actively seeking her release.
During his daylong visit to Rome, Sarkozy also pitched his idea for a union of Mediterranean countries, gaining support from leaders of Italy and Spain.
The Vatican described the visit as "cordial" and noted what it called the good relations between the French government and the Roman Catholic Church.
Sarkozy, in talks with the pope and a second meeting with the Vatican's secretary of state Cardinal Tarcisio Bertone, discussed themes of "common interest" in France and the "role of religion, in particular the Catholic Church, in the world," the Vatican said.
Before the visit, Sarkozy's spokesman, David Martinon, described the Vatican as "extremely active and influential" in diplomacy.
"It's a partner that counts, and it's a heavyweight ally on a great number of subjects," such as on Lebanon and the Israeli-Palestinian crisis, Martinon said.
The two men held 25 minutes of private talks. Sarkozy then introduced members of his delegation to Benedict, including a priest known for his work with troubled youths and a standup comedian known for his off-color jokes.
The French leader arrived at the Vatican about 15 minutes behind schedule after flying in from Paris. Benedict greeted him outside his study and two men posed for photographers before taking their seats at a desk for their talks.
"Where did you learn your French?" Sarkozy asked Benedict. "In school," the German pope replied.
Sarkozy presented the pope with three books, including one he had written before becoming president on the role of religion in secular France.
After the talks, Sarkozy visited excavations under St. Peter's Basilica.
Sarkozy later visited St. John Lateran Basilica, where he accepted the title of honorary canon.
The title dated back to the kings of France and is one that not all French presidents wanted to accept because of the sensitivities surrounding the separation of church and state.
In a speech at the Basilica, he said that both Christianity and secularism were key elements of French history.
"My presence among you today attests to France's fidelity to its own history and to one of the major sources of its civilization," the president told a group of prelates including the pope's vicar for Rome, Cardinal Camillo Ruini.
Sarkozy drummed up support for his project for a Mediterranean Union in separate talks with Italian Premier Romano Prodi and Spanish Prime Minister Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero.
The three leaders issued a joint appeal for increased cooperation in the region, saying the Mediterranean Union "wants to be the heart and engine" of such dialogue.
They announced plans for a summit to be held in Paris July 13-14 gathering countries north and south of the sea, including fellow EU nations.
"It's in the Mediterranean that some of mankind's future will be decided," Sarkozy said at a joint news conference with Prodi and Zapatero. "In the Mediterranean we have to find agreements and put aside hate and destruction."
All leaders insisted the plan, which has drawn some criticism in Europe, would boost ongoing EU dialogue with Mediterranean countries that are not part of the European bloc.
Associated Press writer Alessandra Rizzo in Rome contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: December 21, 2007

 

End of Document
