

Friction with Chavez in Venezuela as group reviews news media freedoms in the Americas
Associated Press International
March 28, 2008 Friday 9:40 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 433 words
Byline: By FABIOLA SANCHEZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARACAS Venezuela
Body




Newspaper executives from across the Americas began evaluating threats to press freedoms Friday amid tensions with President Hugo Chavez's government.
Leaders of the Inter American Press Association said they have concerns about Venezuela's stance toward the news media, but the group's president said the purpose is to evaluate restrictions facing the media throughout the region.
"Venezuela is not the focus of our meeting. The focus is the hemisphere," said Earl Maucker, who also is editor of the South Florida Sun-Sentinel. Maucker said the group came to Caracas "to talk about press freedom issues in every country among our membership."
Chavez's supporters attended a parallel, government-organized forum nearby titled "The Latin American Meeting on Media Terrorism."
At that forum, Robert Mercado, a 21-year-old student, denounced the press association as a group that "defends the interests of the rich" and is aligned with Chavez's enemies in the U.S. government "to discredit and attack free, progressive governments."
Chavez said Thursday that he expects a "great debate" this weekend as the dueling conferences dissect and defend Venezuela's stance toward the news media.
He predicted during a visit to Brazil that the press association "will surely condemn Venezuela for violation of freedom of expression, but they are going to say that in Venezuela. What cynicism."
Maucker denied the Miami-based group is unfairly targeting Venezuela. He said the association also has many concerns about the situation in the United States including journalists who are threatened with jail time for refusing to reveal their sources, and a reluctance by the U.S. government to release certain information.
"When we were in Miami last year (for a meeting), we were critical of the U.S. ... That is the way we operate," Maucker said.
Maucker said the group is open to dialogue and would welcome a chance to discuss issues or clear up any "misunderstanding" with Chavez or other officials. Chavez has yet to take them up on the invitation.
The Inter American Press Association has repeatedly criticized Chavez's record on press freedom, accusing his government of using government-friendly prosecutors and judges to bring trumped-up charges against journalists.
Chavez says press freedom is alive and well, noting that dozens of newspapers, TV and radio stations regularly criticize his government. He often has clashed with Venezuela's news media, accusing TV channels and newspapers of conspiring against his government.
Associated Press writers Luis Alonso and Jorge Rueda, in Caracas, contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: March 29, 2008

 

End of Document
