

Friction with Chavez as group reviews press freedoms in the Americas at Venezuela meeting
Associated Press International
March 28, 2008 Friday 11:38 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 569 words
Byline: By FABIOLA SANCHEZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARACAS Venezuela
Body




Newspaper executives from across the Americas evaluated threats to press freedoms on Friday amid tensions with President Hugo Chavez's government.
Leaders of the Inter American Press Association said that they have concerns about freedom of the press in Venezuela, but that their meeting is meant to review restrictions that journalists face throughout the Western Hemisphere.
"Venezuela is not the focus of our meeting," said Earl Maucker, the group's president. Its conference is in Caracas "to talk about press freedom issues in every country among our membership," he said.
Chavez's supporters attended a parallel, government-organized forum nearby, named the "Latin American Meeting on Media Terrorism." Speakers there criticized "slanted reporting" by media outlets that they accused of colluding with Washington and the corporate elite.
Robert Mercado, a 21-year-old student, denounced the Inter American Press Association as a group that "defends the interests of the rich" and works with Chavez's enemies in the U.S. government "to discredit and attack free, progressive governments."
Chavez said Thursday that he expects a "great debate" as the dueling conferences dissect and defend Venezuela's stance toward the media.
The press association "will surely condemn Venezuela for violation of freedom of expression, but they are going to say that in Venezuela. What cynicism," Chavez said.
Maucker, who is also editor of the South Florida Sun-Sentinel, denied that his Miami-based group unfairly targets Venezuela. He said the group is also concerned about free press issues in the United States where journalists can be jailed for refusing to reveal their sources and the government can be reluctant to release some information.
The group, which invited Chavez to address its semiannual meeting, welcomes a chance to discuss issues or clear up any "misunderstanding" with Venezuelan officials, Maucker said. Chavez has yet to take them up on the invitation.
The Inter American Press Association has repeatedly criticized Chavez's record on press freedom, accusing his government of using government-friendly prosecutors and judges to bring trumped-up charges against journalists.
But Chavez says the news media enjoy ample freedom in Venezuela, noting that dozens of newspapers, TV and radio stations regularly criticize his government. He often has clashed with local media, accusing TV channels and newspapers of conspiring against his government.
Elsewhere in Latin America, about 30 journalists have recently been threatened in Colombia and 25 others are jailed in Cuba a "shame for our hemisphere," said Gonzalo Marroquin, head of the Association's press freedom commission.
But there has also been a "marked deterioration" in press freedom during Chavez's nine years in office, Marroquin said, citing an "aggressive posture" by the government, a law aimed at regulating broadcast media and "harassment" of news organizations, often through legal actions.
The press association last year opposed Venezuela's decision to force opposition-aligned channel RCTV off the air by refusing to renew its license.
Meanwhile, the number of pro-government television channels has grown in Venezuela. David Natera, editor of the newspaper Correo del Caroni, called that a concern, saying "hegemony over the media leads to totalitarianism."
Associated Press writers Luis Alonso and Jorge Rueda in Caracas contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: March 29, 2008

 

End of Document
