

From headscarves to hard hats: Mothers of the Plaza build housing for Argentina's poor
Associated Press International
September 20, 2007 Thursday 12:44 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 452 words
Byline: By BILL CORMIER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES Argentina
Body




White headscarves became the symbol of the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo as they battled a dictatorship that killed their children. Now they've donned hard hats, filling a new role as homebuilders for the poor.
The Mothers are still fighting for the prosecution of agents of Argentina's 1976-83 military regime. But as their hair goes white and their numbers thin, they are trying to build a human-rights movement that will outlive them. Their latest project: an ambitious plan to build housing for low-income residents.
Backed by center-left President Nestor Kirchner, donations and more than $10US million (euro7 million) from the city of Buenos Aires, the Mothers are building four projects totaling more than 1,200 apartments, employing the jobless and offering them a future in Argentina's main construction union.
The mothers came to the world's attention in April 1977 with regular marches in front of the presidential palace demanding an official accounting for sons and daughters who were secretly arrested and murdered under military rule. Soon some of the mothers were "disappeared" as well, but the group kept up its gutsy protests, inspiring anthems by Sting ("They Dance Alone") and the group U2 ("Mothers of the Disappeared").
One of their leaders, Hebe de Bonafini, says the new venture is an extension of their original crusade: "I think the first human right is the right to work. Because when people work, families eat ... children have homes, children are happy," Bonafini said.
Some construction workers will stay on as security guards, cooks or daycare workers after moving out of flimsy plywood homes into rent-free 75-square-meter (800-square-foot) apartments they have built.
"I used to scavenge and had to go out on the streets with my kids in the cold and heat," said Marisa Cortes, a mother of seven earning a paycheck on the project. "Now my children go to bed on a full stomach at night."
Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo Foundation representative Sergio Mauricio Schoklender says more than 1,000 people have been hired half of them women for the four housing projects now under way.
Soon, the group will hand over the first 36 apartments each painted a cheerful red and furnished down to the kitchen tablecloths creating an island of relative tranquility inside the capital's "Hidden City" slum. An abandoned hospital is becoming a community center, health clinic and school.
The original "Mothers" all of whom are older than 75 now also want to create a university, newspaper, radio station, cafe and library.
"The search for our children was the start of our struggle," said one, Evel Petrini. "We know we will never physically get our children back. But these young people are our children today."
 Load-Date: September 20, 2007

 

End of Document
