

From his small island, Castro stood tall around the world
Associated Press International
February 20, 2008 Wednesday 12:53 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 913 words
Byline: By JOHN RICE, Associated Press Writer
Body




Fidel Castro may have resigned as Cuba's president, but he remains a towering figure, loved and hated across continents. Long after he ditched his cigar and traded military fatigues for tracksuits, Castro remains both a Cold War icon and a model of resistance to the world's lone superpower.
Castro made clear in his resignation announcement Tuesday that he has no plans to disappear he'll keep writing his columns as "Comrade Fidel," doing his best to guide the revolution.
"This is not my farewell to you," he wrote. "My only wish is to fight as a soldier in the battle of ideas... Perhaps my voice will be heard."
Castro's refusal to fade away even as he hands over power brought waves of accolades and frustration around the globe.
"The great legend continues. Fidel is the only living legend in the history of humanity," Brazil's President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva said. "He built this through his strength of character, strength of will and also lots of controversy."
Castro's tattered band of rebels caught the imagination of Cubans and others worldwide as they toppled Fulgencio Batista's corrupt dictatorship in 1959 amid exulting crowds.
But darker images soon took hold: Castro's victorious rebels held impromptu trials and firing squads for hundreds of Batista followers, followed by prison for those who challenged the new system.
By the tens of thousands, desperate refugees risked their lives to flee across shark-filled waters part of a mass migration that transformed the face of Miami, Florida and other communities across the United States. Ever since, many of those exiles have dreamed of the day when Fidel Castro would no longer run Cuba a dream denied by his brother Raul's likely succession on Sunday.
Castro's "half-a-century-old reign of terror has come to an end, yet the system he created all those years ago to maintain total control over the population remains," said the Cuban-American National Foundation, a leading U.S. anti-Castro group.
Others in Latin America also were critical, if less vehement.
"What we can do is ask the Cuban people if they want to continue with this regime, this dictatorship, because that's what it is," Costa Rican President Oscar Arias said.
Still, Castro's flamboyant defiance of 10 U.S. administrations enthralled millions, especially in Latin America. Many were inspired by Cuba's universal health care, lack of malnutrition and relatively egalitarian system in a world where the gap between rich and poor yawns ever wider. They believed Castro's Marxism could solve poverty and injustice in the hemisphere.
Some were just glad to see a small country poke its finger in the eye of a Washington establishment seen as backing military dictatorships when it served its interests.
Castro and Cuba "have demonstrated to the world and above all to the empire that the Cuban revolution does not depend on one person," said Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez, a critic of Washington who often refers to the U.S. as "the empire."
Castro "will always be in the vanguard" of Latin America's revolutions, and "all the revolutionaries of this continent are Fidel's children," Chavez added.
"Fidel has been a giant of history and resigns as a giant," said Nicaraguan Foreign Minister Samuel Santos, whose Sandinista government is allied with Castro. "He is one of the greatest personalities of humanity's contemporary history."
Castro made Havana a cornerstone of the so-called nonaligned movement of developing nations, drawing scores of world leaders to conferences, where they denounced the policies of more-powerful nations particularly the United States.
His international influence became so outsized that his retirement prompted reflection a world away.
"Fidel Castro is a courageous man who was able to resist the superpowers of the world for more than four decades," said Patrice Citera, 30, walking through downtown Kinshasa, Congo. "But he has done well to cede power now because he was not meant to be president eternally."
Castro won the gratitude of many Africans by sending 350,000 troops to battle the former white-dominated South African government in Angola's civil war, draining resources from the apartheid system.
When Nelson Mandela was inaugurated as South Africa's first black president in 1994, he made Castro a guest of honor and praised Cuba's "selfless support for the struggle to free all of South Africa's people."
The Congress of South African Trade Unions on Tuesday called Castro a hero and "an inspirational leader of the poor and oppressed throughout the world."
Castro's early attempts to spread revolution across the Americas largely fizzled, including a Cuban-backed effort by Ernesto "Che" Guevara to bring revolution to Bolivia, where he was captured and killed in 1967.
But Cuban-backed rebels toppled Nicaragua's government in 1979 and battled until peace treaties were signed in the 1990s in El Salvador and Guatemala.
As the Cold War faded, Castro emerged as a mentor or confidant to a new generation of leftist Latin American presidents, including Brazil's Silva, Venezuela's Chavez and Bolivia's Evo Morales, welcoming all of them to Havana long before they won power.
In a recent meeting with Castro, Chavez referred him as "the father of all revolutionaries in this America" and told him, "You will never die."
"Fidel, you know it, we will take charge of continuing to fan the flame."
Associated Press Writers Eddy Isango in Kinshasa, Congo, and Filadelfo Aleman in Managua, Nicaragua contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: February 20, 2008

 

End of Document
