

Globally, outlook of CEOs for the coming year is brighter, survey finds
Associated Press International
January 23, 2007 Tuesday 11:01 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 608 words
Byline: By MATT MOORE, AP Business Writer
Dateline: DAVOS Switzerland
Body




Chief executives worldwide expect growth in markets such as Brazil, China, India and Russia to keep increasing and are optimistic about higher revenues at their companies, but are concerned about over-regulation and finding enough skilled workers.
The annual Global CEO Survey, released by PricewaterhouseCoopers on Tuesday, also found that half of the nearly 1,100 chief executives surveyed were starting to shift resources toward efforts to contain risks like scarcity of oil supplies, terrorism and political instability. Global climate change was also a concern for 40 percent.
The report was released on the eve of the five-day annual meeting of the World Economic Forum, which has drawn some 2,500 business leaders, heads of states and other officials to its annual meeting in the Swiss Alps.
More than 90 percent of those polled were confident that revenue growth at their companies would keep increasing in the next 12 months. Farther ahead, 93 percent said they were very confident about reaching new revenue targets and growth through the next three years.
The reasoning? With globalization showing no signs of abating, company chiefs believe that business expansion will be helped by increased market penetration, more openings worldwide and mergers and acquisitions, many of them across borders.
"CEOs around the world, at companies large and small, are increasingly positive about their ability to grow their companies and take advantage of the opportunities globalization offers for new markets, new products and new customers," said Samuel A. DiPiazza, CEO of New York-based PricewaterhouseCoopers.
Geographically, the survey, now in its 10th year, said that most CEOs expect growth to continue to increase in markets in Brazil, China, India and Russia, along with other emerging countries, including Vietnam and Indonesia. Mexico, Turkey and South Korea are also countries lauded with potential for significant business growth.
While almost three-quarters of those polled said that globalization has helped expansion in developed and emerging economies, some 23 percent said that the biggest growth opportunities came from better market penetration in existing markets, while 21 percent cited expanding into new markets near existing ones.
Nearly 80 percent of the CEOs said they preferred to pay for new growth, be it acquisitions or expanding current operations, with cash on hand, while less than 20 percent said they would look to equity markets for support. Just 10 percent said they were mulling private equity or venture capital financing.
Despite the overall optimism, CEOs said there remained barriers to growth, with 73 percent calling over-regulation a problem, up from 64 percent a year ago. Concerns about attracting skilled workers were high, particularly in Asia and the Pacific, where 88 percent of the CEOs surveyed said they had reservations about a looming scarcity. Worldwide, 72 percent of CEOs said they were concerned about a lack of skills.
"If CEOs are to make the most of global opportunities for the long term, they must fully understand the realities and risks of funding their growth, working in diverse cultures, managing dispersed resources and competing with a growing set of global players," DiPiazza said.
Approximately half of the CEOs said they had completed, or were planning a cross-border merger or acquisition to drive growth, with most looking to adjacent countries.
PricewaterhouseCoopers interviewed 1,084 CEOs in 50 countries by phone and by mail in Japan during the final quarter of 2006. Face-to-face interviews were done in China and Kenya. The names of the CEOs and their companies were not released.
 Load-Date: January 24, 2007

 

End of Document
