

Golden balls ready for the World Cup final
Associated Press International
July 6, 2006 Thursday 6:06 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 983 words
Byline: By JOHN PYE, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: BERLIN 
Body




The golden balls are ready for Sunday's World Cup final.
Adidas chief executive Herbert Hainer handed Chancellor Angela Merkel one of the special golden "Teamgeist Berlin" balls at a ceremony in the German capital on Thursday.
"With this, we can enter the final phase of the World Cup," Merkel said, adding that Germany had been a "wonderful host" for the month-long event.
Italy and France will play Sunday's final with the golden ball which, other than color, is identical to the black-and-white "Teamgeist" ball used throughout the World Cup.
Fifteen of the balls are being provided for the final at Berlin's Olympic Stadium. Merkel's copy is destined for an exhibition on soccer at the chancellery.
Adidas' tournament ball, which has sold millions of copies worldwide, is "an ambassador for Germany in the world," she said.
ANTI-RONALDO CAMPAIGN: Cristiano Ronaldo of Portugal is up for the Best Young Player award at the World Cup, but no thanks to one block of voters.
An e-mail urging fans to vote for anyone but the Portuguese winger turned the Internet voting on its head.
Ronaldo, criticized by English fans who feel he got Wayne Rooney sent on in the quarterfinal game against Portugal, had been leading the voting on http://www.FIFAworldcup.com. But an e-mail urging fans to vote for Ecuador's Luis Valencia saw Valencia jump from 195,377 to 331,087 votes. Ronaldo went from 210,290 to 241,775.
The top-three vote-getters will join three others chosen by FIFA's Technical Study Group. The same group will announce the winner on Friday.
The award, sponsored by Gillette, goes to "the player born on or after Jan. 1, 1985, who makes the biggest impression at the FIFA World Cup." Criteria includes "style, charisma, fair play and appetite for the game, as well as pure technical skill."
STICKY SITUATION There is something Jens Lehmann should remember to slip into his socks to be prepared for his team's third-place match on Saturday. Chewing gum.
During the quarterfinal penalty shootout with Argentina, Lehmann had a crib sheet in his right sock with detailed information on players' kicking habits. Next time he needs to also put some chewing gum into his sock. He ran out of gum in Germany's 2-0 loss to Italy in the semifinals.
"Normally a piece of chewing gun lasts for a whole match, but mine was used up unusually quickly," Lehmann said. "It became very unsavory. So I asked one of the ball boys to get me another piece of gum. He couldn't quite believe it and asked me if I was serious, but he did eventually go get one for me."
SHOT DEFICIENT: Franz Beckenbauer, who won World Cups as a Germany captain and as a coach, said the reason there's been fewer goals scored in this tournament than in the previous two is simple: players aren't taking enough shots.
"It's elementary. If you don't have shots at goal, there can't be goals," he said. "After the World Cup, we'll analyze things and we'll discuss the low goal average we'll evaluate and see what can be done.
"This ball has enormous acceleration the players have got this weapon, the ball, yet not enough has been done with it."
COLOR CLASH: French coach Raymond Domenech doesn't want his team's colors to clash.
A man who pays intricate attention to detail, he feels about the outfits Les Bleus wear. Either it is all-blue, the traditional color of Les Bleus or all-white, their away outfit.
"I love teams that play in one, united color. It is symbolic," he said, expressing his dislike for uniforms that have shorts in one colors, jerseys in another and socks in a third.
For Sunday's World Cup final, France will be all-white against the all-blue of Italy's Azzurri.
LOYALTY: Jens Lehmann's loyalty at this World Cup has been strictly with the German national team. Until now.
The Arsenal goalkeeper's ties showed Thursday when he said he hoped Arsenal captain and French striker Thierry Henry would win the Golden Ball award for the World Cup's top player.
"If you have shared a locker room with Henry for three years you would wish him luck because you would realize what a pro he is," Lehmann said.
But Lehmann said he would also be cheering for German teammate Miroslav Klose, also shortlisted, and the tournament scoring leader with five goals.
"I would definitely be happy for Miro. He played a wonderful World Cup," Lehmann said. "It's a case of split loyalties and I can't say publicly who I really hope will win."
Klose said if he had to pick a non-German for the award, he'd choose French midfielder Zinedine Zidane.
"He's a great player and great strategist. He puts the ball right into his forwards' feet. It would be a great way to bid farewell to his international career," Klose said.
BOOK 'EM: Beckenbauer, head of the Germany 2006 organizing committee and one of the sport's greatest players, has a solution that might stop players from pleading with referees to book opponents.
"If the injured player is saying to the referee, 'give him a yellow card,' if I were the referee I'd be giving the injured player the yellow."
One of the criticisms of the World Cup has been the increased frequency of players simulating fouls, and diving to the ground faking injuries hoping that their opposite number will get booked.
"I don't like it. It's unsporting and unfair and there's no place for it," Beckenbauer said. "You cannot tolerate this as a referee."
TAKE A PICK: Italy and France have improved so dramatically during the World Cup, even the most astute judges like Beckenbauer can't split them.
"France was lucky to get out of the group stage by the skin of its teeth and then in the quarterfinal against Brazil, it's difficult to play better," he said.
"Italy struggled against the United States despite having an extra man in the group stage. Against Australia, it was only a penalty that was widely discussed that got them through.
"But both teams played well in the semifinals and have arrived in their best form it should be fascinating."
 Load-Date: July 7, 2006

 

End of Document
