

Gore says he wants to push the environment to the forefront of the 2008 US presidential race
Associated Press International
June 14, 2007 Thursday 8:35 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 333 words
Byline: By COLLEEN BARRY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MILAN Italy
Body




Al Gore, the former U.S. vice president-turned-environmentalist, said Thursday that he hoped to push the environmental agenda to the forefront of the 2008 U.S. presidential election but probably not as a candidate.
"I don't plan to be a candidate again. I haven't completely ruled out that possibility, but I don't expect to be a candidate," Gore told several hundred people, including scientists and university students, at a Benetton-sponsored event organized around an environmental exhibit.
Gore said the political will is lacking to make the kind of commitments needed to combat global warming and that climate awareness needs to be spread on the popular level to put pressure on policy makers.
Gore said his stops in Europe including Greece and Turkey have been aimed at spreading the word about the growing crisis, as are the Live Earth concerts on July 7 in cities around the world: New York; Tokyo; Shanghai, China; Johannesburg, South Africa; Sydney, Australia; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Hamburg, Germany; and Istanbul, Turkey.
Gore said he is seeking to make climate change the key issue in the presidential campaign although he declined to comment on any candidate's environmental policy at this stage.
"In general, the debates have not featured prominently an exchange of views on the climate crisis," Gore said. "If I do my job, it will be the No. 1 issue in 500 days."
But he also urged grass-roots action, saying it will take a "massive change of public opinion" for the political establishment to act. He cited his own policy disappointments as vice president, recalling the bitter experience of having Congress reject a carbon tax he proposed and the failure of lawmakers to ratify the Kyoto protocol he helped negotiate.
Another example came more recently, at the G-8 summit in Germany this month.
"Where climate change is concerned, the result at the G-8 was a disgrace disguised as an achievement," Gore said, adding, "It is no secret the government of my country was the principal obstacle."
 Load-Date: June 15, 2007

 

End of Document
