

Haiti's Preval is man of the hour, but keeps low profile
Associated Press International
February 17, 2006 Friday 10:06 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 726 words
Byline: By ANDREW SELSKY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PORT-AU-PRINCE Haiti
Body




President-elect Rene Preval avoided the public Friday as he met in private with political leaders in a suburban home to smooth the roiled political waters that followed his turbulent election victory.
Haiti, and much of the world, waited to hear Preval's plans to form a new government, to address violence and poverty in Haiti and his stance on his former mentor, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, a former slum priest living in exile after being ousted as president by a violent rebellion two years ago.
But a day after Preval was declared the winner of the Feb. 7 elections, he postponed a news conference until Wednesday and remained inside his sister's gated house in the hills east of the capital, where he has been meeting with politicians of various stripes. Among them was Chavannes Jeune, who finished fourth in the election with about 5 percent of the vote.
"Preval has always preached reconciliation," said Volcy Assad, campaign manager for Preval. "It's logical that he's meeting political leaders."
Fritz Longchamp, one of Preval's campaign coordinators, said the president-elect wants to forge a parliamentary coalition.
"He has begun a dialogue with some political leaders," Longchamp said, without elaborating.
More details emerged, meanwhile, on the behind-the-scenes negotiating on the deal that declared Preval the winner earlier this week, as this Caribbean nation was paralyzed by protests amid allegations results were being rigged to deny him a first-round victory.
Preval had been a hair short of an outright majority with more than 90 percent of the vote tabulated. Haitian officials decided in a meeting Wednesday that ran past midnight to divide the 85,000 blank ballots cast among the candidates in proportion to the percentage they had already received. That gave Preval just over 51 percent and outright victory.
If Preval had fallen short of a majority, he would have faced a second-round election in March against second-place finisher, Leslie Manigat.
Chilean Ambassador Marcel Young said his country and Brazil sought to resolve the election dispute with Haitian authorities as the nation teetered on the brink of upheaval, with tens of thousands of Preval supporters taking to the streets claiming fraud.
"We expressed our worry and I think it produced healthy dialogue and helped lead to a quick solution," Young said, adding that Haitian authorities decided to divide the blank votes among the candidates.
"We were talking with them almost every day because it was an untenable situation," he said. "There was no commerce and things couldn't continue this way. ... Our country didn't do anything but facilitate a dialogue."
Manigat, also a former president, has accused election officials of breaking the rules to give Preval a first-round victory.
Charles Henri Baker, the third-place finisher, all but accused Preval of fraud.
"There was no clear winner in the first round," Baker said. "What happened was that Haiti's future president took hold of the results."
Bob Maguire, director of the international affairs program at Trinity University in Washington, said Preval could be keeping silent because he wants to choose his words carefully.
"This is a very delicate moment and he has to be really careful about what he says, because every word is being parsed like it hasn't been before," Maguire said by phone. "So he could just be being extra cautious about things."
Maryse Narcisse, Aristide's spokeswoman, declined to say whether Aristide and Preval were in contact.
The U.S. government believes the return of Aristide could destabilize the country and has hinted that he should remain in exile in South Africa.
"President Jean-Bertrand Aristide will make a statement next week," Narcisse said by phone from New York.
Preval, who led Haiti from 1996 to 2001, became the first elected president ever to finish his term when he left office five years ago.
After he is inaugurated on March 29, he will lead a nation where heavily armed street gangs wage gunfights with U.N. peacekeepers, where the rich and poor are divided by mistrust and hatred and where a rash of kidnappings is driving out business owners.
The son of a former government official, Preval has vowed to crack down on hardened criminals.
Associated Press writers Stevenson Jacobs, in Port-au-Prince, and Alfred de Montesquiou in San Juan, Puerto Rico contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: February 18, 2006

 

End of Document
