

Highlights from the AP-Ipsos pre-election poll in Venezuela
Associated Press International
November 23, 2006 Thursday 9:08 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 637 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




Highlights from an Associated Press-Ipsos poll conducted Nov. 10-18 among 2,500 registered voters interviewed in person at their homes across Venezuela, including 1,500 deemed likely to vote in the Dec. 3 presidential elections. Results subject to sampling error of 2 percentage points for all registered voters, 3 points for likely voters. All percentages listed are among registered voters unless otherwise noted.
VOTE PREFERENCE: Hugo Chavez enjoys a 59 percent to 27 percent lead over Manuel Rosales among likely voters, with 13 percent undecided or refusing to answer.
DIRECTION OF VENEZUELA: Six in 10 registered voters said that, in general, things in Venezuela are going in the right direction and that the country's economy is in good shape. There were significant differences by social class and education, with those in the lower social classes and education groups more likely to be optimistic about the situation.
DEMOCRACY AND VOTE INTEGRITY: Most Venezuelans are satisfied with democracy in their country, but many express doubts about the integrity of the voting system and freedoms in the country.
 79 percent of registered voters see the political system as at least somewhat democratic. Sixty-three percent believe presidents should be able to hold more than two consecutive terms a view that could help Chavez change the constitution to run again in 2012.
 46 percent, however, say they believe there is less freedom today than in the past.
 Only 44 percent are very confident that votes are counted accurately in Venezuela, and only 42 percent are very confident that votes are kept secret.
 57 percent are at least somewhat concerned that they will face reprisals for how they vote. Rosales supporters were much more likely to say that (79 percent) but almost half of Chavez supporters also expressed worry (46 percent).
CHAVEZ JOB APPROVAL: 63 percent approve of how the Chavez administration is doing its job. Chavez got highest marks for handling health care (74 percent) and education (75 percent), and lowest marks for handling crime (34 percent approved) and corruption (45 percent). On other issues, 66 percent believe Chavez's nationalist oil policy has benefited more Venezuelans and 58 percent approve of his handling of poverty. Subsidized grocery stores, job training and free health clinics were cited as the most important social programs.
VENEZUELA'S PROBLEMS: 67 percent say crime is one of the most important problems facing the country. Unemployment ranked second. Also, 49 percent think the Chavez government's foreign aid has diverted funds that could be better used to solve problems at home; 46 percent disagreed.
VIEW OF CHAVEZ: 69 percent overall said they had a positive view of Chavez. However, more than 60 percent consider Chavez both authoritarian and confrontational, and 48 percent believe the incumbent is more occupied with his own political interests than those of Venezuela.
OTHER LEADERS: President Bush was highly unpopular 63 percent had an at least somewhat negative opinion of Bush, with only 20 percent viewing him at least somewhat positively. By comparison, 42 percent rated Cuban leader Fidel Castro positively.
 43 percent viewed Colombian President Alvaro Uribe positively, and President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva of Brazil won positive marks from 53 percent.
OTHER COUNTRIES:
 51 percent saw the United States as a military threat.
 Nearly half (46 percent) rated Cuba positively, compared to 37 percent for the U.S. and 28 percent for Iran.
POLITICAL SYSTEMS: Venezuelans overwhelmingly oppose adopting a Cuba-style political system (84 percent). As for the economic system, 37 percent favor having a socialist economic system, 22 percent favor a capitalist system, and 33 percent favor a combination.
Analysis by Associated Press manager of news surveys Trevor Tompson.
 Load-Date: November 24, 2006

 

End of Document
