

How the black-market peso exchange system works
Associated Press International
April 27, 2006 Thursday 1:51 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 313 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




The U.S. Customs Service says Colombian drug cartels use this complex scheme, called the black-market peso exchange system, to evade Colombian currency and import tariffs and launder an estimated US$5 billion (euro4 billion) a year in illicit profits:
 The cartels export drugs to the United States, where they are sold for U.S. dollars.
 In Colombia, cartel operatives contact a third party, known as a peso broker, to launder the drug money.
 The peso broker enters into an agreement with the cartel, in which he agrees to exchange pesos he has in Colombia for dollars the cartel controls in the United States. Once the exchange occurs, the cartel has effectively laundered its money and is out of the process. The peso broker must now launder the dollars he has accumulated in the United States.
 The peso broker uses his contacts in the United States to place the drug dollars into the U.S. banking system. The broker, still operating in Colombia, now has a pool of drug-origin money in the United States to "sell" to Colombian companies that legitimately import U.S. goods. The U.S. goods used often are home appliances, consumer electronics, liquor, cigarettes, auto parts, precious metals and footwear.
 The Colombian importing companies place orders for U.S. goods and make payments through the peso broker. Again, the broker uses contacts in the United States to buy the requested goods from legitimate U.S. manufacturers and distributors. The broker pays for the goods using a variety of methods, including bank accounts he has in the United States.
 The purchased U.S. goods are shipped to Caribbean or South American destinations, sometimes through Europe or Asia, then smuggled into Colombia. The Colombian importers take possession of the goods, having avoided paying heavy Colombian import and currency tariffs, and they pay the broker for the goods with Colombian pesos.
 Load-Date: April 27, 2006

 

End of Document
