

IMF chief says the international lender must change its ways to satisfy a changing world
Associated Press International
April 19, 2006 Wednesday 10:04 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 447 words
Byline: By HARRY DUNPHY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




The International Monetary Fund must start changing its method of operating to deal with the changing world economy brought about by globalization, its managing director said Wednesday.
Rodrigo Rato said the days were over when a group of major industrialized nations made economic decisions that led to an orderly evolution of the global economy, as happened during the last two decades of the 20th century.
Rato said there are new players in the global economy he did not name them and even those players will change over the next five to 10 years.
"We need to move with the times and move ahead from what was an orderly way of addressing global issues in the 1980s and 1990s to a more multilateral way of consulting," he said.
Rato said the 184-nation IMF "can play a very unique role" in these consultations that would involve the major industrialized nations and emerging economies such as Brazil, Russia, India and China.
"We need to establish procedures to guide consultations regarding spillovers and linkages" in how the world's economies interact, he said.
Rato said how such consultations will develop will be discussed Saturday at the IMF spring meeting.
Another issue on the agenda is a continuing examination of governance considerations, including individual countries' voting rights at the IMF and the money that countries put toward the fund, called quotas.
"The emergency of strong new economies has to be recognized," Rato said. "It is not a regional issue but getting new legitimacy for the institution."
For example, Brazil, which has South America's largest economy, is spoken for on the 24-member executive board by a person who represents eight other countries, while the United States, Japan, Britain, France and Germany each has its own representative.
The United States, which has the world's largest national economy, contributes most to the IMF and thus has the largest single vote.
It has proposed that individual European countries who have votes join together under one European Union vote, a suggestion that has not gone down well with the European countries involved.
Rato also said that while the world economy has become more resilient, "financial crises are not going to disappear, and the fact that the international community has a last lender" in the IMF "is an important feature in the security of the international financial architecture."
Asked about reports the IMF is forecasting its first annual loss in decades in 2007 because favorable global conditions means it lends less, Rato said the IMF was exploring using some of its $9 billion (euro7.3 billion) in reserves in investments.
"There is no cash crunch," said the IMF's chief spokesman, Tom Dawson.
 Load-Date: April 20, 2006

 

End of Document
