

IMF study finds slower growth in United States fails to hold back the global economy
Associated Press International
April 5, 2007 Thursday 12:03 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 654 words
Byline: By JEANNINE AVERSA, AP Economics Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




The global economy is forging ahead despite slower growth from its No. 1 player, the United States, the International Monetary Fund concluded Wednesday.
Still, a sharper-than-expected U.S housing slump could pose a risk to the world's economic performance, IMF researchers warned.
"So far, however, the U.S. slowdown has had little discernible effect on growth in most other countries," the IMF said.
That is because the troubles in housing so far, while painful, largely have been contained and have not spread to many other sectors of the U.S. economy.
Last month IMF chief Rodrigo de Rato predicted worldwide economic growth for all of this year to clock in at close to 5 percent. Rato said that would be the strongest five-year span for the global economy since the late 1960s.
That having been said, there still is a worry that fallout from the residential real-estate bust in the United States could spread and seriously crimp business investment and consumer spending. That would cause the U.S. economy, the world's largest economy and biggest importer, to log slower growth than currently anticipated.
Under such a scenario, "the spillover effects into other economies would be larger," the IMF said. Central banks, however, could take steps "to cushion the potential contractionary effects on economic activity," the IMF said. One such step would be to lower interest rates, although the IMF was not explicit.
Spillover effects are most important for countries with close trade and financial ties with the United States, particularly Latin America and some industrial countries, the IMF said.
On average a 1 percentage point reduction in annual U.S. economic growth is associated with a growth decline of 0.2 percentage points in Latin America, and 0.4 percentage points or more in Mexico and Canada, the IMF said. In contrast, contagion, or spillovers, from a U.S. slowdown are "quite small" for Africa and the Middle East.
"The old saying `If the United States sneezes, the rest of the world catches a cold,' remains relevant," the IMF said. Disturbances to U.S. economic activity influence growth in other countries, especially given increased globalization, which has produced greater trade and financial ties among nations.
At the same time, the old saying could be a bit exaggerated, the IMF added.
Researchers found that past episodes of "highly synchronized" economic growth declines logged by countries around the world did not result primarily from developments specific to the United States. Instead, they were caused by factors that affected many countries at the same time. A jarring oil price shock in 1974-1975 was cited as a case in point that hit many countries at the same time. Another example: the bursting of the information technology bubble in 2000, the IMF said.
In other research, the IMF said:
 The global labor force has risen fourfold over the past two decades, reflecting an influx of workers from China, India and the former Eastern bloc countries. However, the extent of offshoring, or moving work to locations outside a given country, remained quite limited in "advanced" economies, including the United States. Offshoring made up about 5 percent of gross output in advanced economies in 2003, the most recent period available, the IMF said.
 The skewed pattern of global trade and investment patterns that are viewed as a threat to the world economy's long-term stability could be helped if the U.S. dollar were to go down in value and the currencies of other countries, with big trade surpluses, including China, were to go up in value.
Even a depreciation in the value of the dollar of less than 10 percent could bring about a narrowing in the U.S. trade deficit, the IMF said.
The research is contained in the IMF's World Economic Outlook, which will be released in its entirety next week in advance of the April 14-15 spring meetings of the IMF and World Bank.
On the Net:
IMF: http://www.imf.org/
 Load-Date: April 5, 2007

 

End of Document
