

Immigrant family's effort to live the American dream end in tragedy outside Washington
Associated Press International
March 29, 2007 Thursday 3:16 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 844 words
Byline: By MARCOS ALEMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN SALVADOR El Salvador
Body




A missing mother whose four children and husband were found dead in the family's suburban Washington, D.C., home said she had been beaten by her husband and wanted to separate, her sister in El Salvador said.
Police said Deysi M. Benitez, 25, may have left the country or could already by dead. Her four young children were found Monday dead in their beds of unknown causes and the father was hanging from a banister in the Frederick, Maryland, townhouse.
In a telephone interview with The Associated Press Wednesday, Angela Benitez, who is two years older than Deysi, said her sister and Pedro Rodriguez, 28, were having problems in their marriage and that he beat her at least once, last December.
"I didn't see it, but she called me and told me that he had left her face a complete mess, that it was a miracle he didn't kill her," Angela Benitez said. Deysi asked for a separation "but he told her he wouldn't allow it."
The last time Angela spoke with Deysi, however, she "was talking very calmly. She didn't tell me anything ... and he was there."
Authorities still had no leads to finding Benitez and police said the search could become international.
"We are doing everything we can to try to locate her and, of course, first and foremost, to verify that she's OK," Frederick police Lt. Thomas Chase said.
A portrait emerged of an immigrant family struggling to live the American dream. They worked menial jobs to pay the mortgage for their townhouse in the far suburbs of Washington, took in a boarder and had a few run-ins with the law, including a shoplifting arrest over children's clothing.
Rodriguez arrived in the United States from El Salvador in 1998 and Deysi Benitez in 2001, the sister said. The couple married in Frederick in 2002 and struggled with financial and legal problems, living at one point in an apartment subsidized by a homeless advocacy group.
Angela, the sister, said the couple worked separate shifts, Pedro during the day and Deysi at night.
El Salvador's consul general, Ana Margarita Chavez, taped a televised appeal to be aired Wednesday in the Washington area by a local Univision affiliate. She said she urges Benitez to contact her, saying "I will provide her with security and also that I understand her situation and I was going to be waiting for her phone call."
But Chavez acknowledged that the appeal may be in vain.
"There are so many scenarios. One is that maybe she already left the country," Chavez said. "There is another one that maybe she is dead."
Chavez said she was able to locate family members in Sensuntepeque in north-central El Salvador. The consul general said Angela Benitez told her she spoke with her sister daily until March 16, when Deysi stopped answering her cell phone.
Chase said the unanswered calls supported the theory that she has come to harm. "Absolutely, we're concerned about that," he said.
Before the bodies were found Monday, neighbors and co-workers said they hadn't seen Benitez for at least 10 days, and that neither the children nor Rodriguez had been seen for several days.
Police were awaiting toxicology results to explain the deaths of Rodriguez, daughters Elsa, 9, Vanessa, 4, and Carena, 1, and 3-year-old son Angel. Poisoning and suffocation were possible causes of the children's deaths, Chase said. Blankets had been pulled up over their heads.
The father had apparently hanged himself, police said.
Benitez worked in fast-food restaurants, then took a job at an Outback Steakhouse a few blocks from their hillside home, neighbors said. Rodriguez worked at a Masonite International Corp. door manufacturing plant, according to company spokesman Larry Repar.
Oscar Velasquez, who worked with Rodriguez, described him as generally happy and calm. He said through an interpreter that any problems were in the couple's relationship.
Frederick police records show officers were called to the townhouse eight times between March 5, 2006, and Monday. The calls were for a variety of reasons: noise, parking issues, disorderly conduct, a verbal dispute, and most were resolved without an arrest.
Benitez had faced a charge of theft of less than $100US (euro74.92) , resolved last May when she agreed to do 24 hours of community service. Her attorney, Dino Flores, said she had tried to shoplift children's clothing. A few years earlier, she had been ordered to pay a $500US (euro374.59) fine and spend a day in jail in another theft case.
Flores, whose practice serves several Hispanic residents, said some immigrants who chase the American dream aren't prepared for the expenses and end up in crushing debt.
Despite any difficulties, Frederick County Public Schools spokeswoman Marita Loose said the family's two oldest girls, who attended nearby Hillcrest Elementary School, were happy children.
Outside the townhouse Wednesday, small piles of stuffed animals, flowers, candles and children's crayon drawings were left at the base of trees. One sign read in Spanish: "I'm sorry for your babies."
Associated Press Writers David Dishneau, Alex Dominguez and Jacquelyn Martin contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: March 30, 2007

 

End of Document
