

In U.S. hostage trial testimony, Colombian rebel says he never has seen the 3 hostages
Associated Press International
November 7, 2006 Tuesday 10:26 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 377 words
Byline: By MATT APUZZO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




Colombian rebel leader Ricardo Palmera testified Tuesday that he had never seen the three Americans he is accused of helping hold hostage and described his guerrilla organization as noble and peaceful.
Palmera, who introduced himself by his nom de guerre, Simon Trinidad, faces charges of providing material support to a terrorist group and hostage-taking. Prosecutors say he plotted to use three American defense contractors as bargaining chips after their plane crashed in Colombia in 2003.
Over the objections of prosecutors, Palmera described his wealthy upbringing, his education in economics and his early entrance into Colombia's unstable political environment.
Asked why he joined the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, Palmera replied: "To save life, to fight for social, political and economic changes in my country, and to reach peace."
Palmera, who appeared relaxed and confident as he testified through a translator, is the most senior member ever captured of Latin America's largest rebel army.
The case could have profound repercussions in Colombia, where tentative steps are being made toward talks between the FARC and the government on a prisoner swap. The FARC is demanding the release of some 500 of its imprisoned comrades, including Palmera, in exchange for the release of 62 hostages who include former presidential candidate Ingrid Betancourt and the same three U.S. defense contractors Palmera is charged with kidnapping.
Palmera mentioned those contractors only briefly Tuesday. He spent most of the afternoon explaining the history of the Communist group and describing it as protecting Colombian society from exploitation.
The FARC, a force of 12,000 fighters, has been battling the Colombian government for four decades in a conflict that claims thousands of lives a year. The FARC also has become involved in drug trafficking and is on a U.S. list of international terrorist organizations.
The group finances itself through drug trafficking, extortion and kidnapping. Since 2000, the United States has given Colombia more than $4 billion (euro3.1 billion) to fight the insurgency and the world's largest cocaine industry.
Palmera's testimony was scheduled to continue Wednesday. He also will face cross-examination by prosecutors.
 Load-Date: November 8, 2006

 

End of Document
