

Interpol calls for the arrest of 6 sought in 1994 Argentina bombing
Associated Press International
March 15, 2007 Thursday 2:27 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 329 words
Dateline: PARIS 
Body




Interpol plans to issue international requests for the arrest of five prominent Iranians and a Lebanese militant sought in connection with Argentina's worst terrorist attack, the international police agency said Thursday.
The six are wanted in Argentina in the 1994 bombing of a Jewish cultural center in Buenos Aires. Interpol said, however, that it turned down Argentina's request for help in the arrests of three other former top Iranians, including former President Hashemi Rafsanjani.
Iran has denied involvement in the bombing and said it would oppose any attempt to detain Iranian citizens. Both countries are member countries of the Lyon, France-based international police agency.
Interpol said it would issue "red notices" for the Iranians on March 31, unless either Iran or Argentina appeals the decision. In that case, no red notices would be issued and the matter could go before Interpol's general assembly in November.
A red notice is an Interpol request that a wanted person be arrested for possible extradition. While the measure cannot force countries to arrest or extradite suspects, people with red notice status appear on Interpol's equivalent of a most-wanted list.
The six people that Interpol plans to issue red notices for include former Iranian intelligence chief Ali Fallahijan and a Lebanese militant, Imad Moughnieh.
The three that Interpol declined to issue red notices for are Rafsanjani, former Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Velayati and the former ambassador of Iran in Buenos Aires, Hadi Soleimanpour.
Eighty-five people were killed and 200 wounded when a van packed with explosives blew up outside the seven-story Jewish community center in Buenos Aires on July 18, 1994.
Argentine prosecutors have alleged that the attack was orchestrated by leaders of the Iranian government and entrusted to the Lebanon-based militant group Hezbollah.
In 2006, Argentine Judge Rodolfo Canicoba Corral said he was seeking the detentions of Rafsanjani and eight others.
 Load-Date: March 16, 2007

 

End of Document
