

IOC welcomes presidents but for the last time?
Associated Press International
September 30, 2009 Wednesday 6:07 PM GMT

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 460 words
Byline: By GRAHAM DUNBAR, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: COPENHAGEN 
Body




The proven winning tactic of bringing top politicians to lobby for Olympic hosting votes could be reaching an end, senior IOC members said Wednesday.
The comments by Dick Pound and Jim Easton who share 46 years' experience on the International Olympic Committee came as Brazilian president Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva arrived in Copenhagen to press Rio de Janeiro's case for being awarded the 2016 Games.
President Barack Obama flies in Friday to spend just a few hours in Denmark, and be part of Chicago's final presentation before IOC members vote later in the day.
Pound said the visits would enhance the campaigns but was perhaps "going over the top a bit" given Obama's busy schedule.
"You've got the leader of the free world flying halfway round the world to show up to make sure everybody understands he is supporting his country," Pound said. "Is that a good use of his time?"
The four bidders are all represented. Spain's King Juan Carlos will join Madrid's team and new Japanese prime minister Yukio Hatoyama joins Tokyo's push Thursday.
All are following the example of Tony Blair, the former British Prime Minister, and former Russia president Vladimir Putin. Their persuasive powers at previous IOC voting sessions helped land the 2012 Games for London and get Sochi the 2014 Winter Olympics.
Both Easton and Pound wondered if the 2016 vote Friday could be the last time heads of state play a decisive role in person.
"I think it will play well for a while," Easton, a U.S. delegate to the IOC since 1994, told The Associated Press. "I don't know how many (host city) votes it will play well with before it becomes expected. Then you need a superstar like Tony Blair to move audiences."
Pound, a Canadian representative since 1978, questioned the cost in time of high-level lobbying efforts.
"Whether we should be doing that, when you see how difficult it is for some of these leaders to do it, is something we should wrestle with after this session," he said.
Pound said the IOC needed assurance of government support for bid cities, but that could be achieved with a video message.
IOC president Jacques Rogge said in a recent interview that heads of state had no obligation to attend Olympic hosting votes.
"They have an influence by their charisma, but it is not something the IOC is seeking and going after," Rogge told the AP this month.
Pound said he had no appointment with first lady Michelle Obama, who arrived Wednesday and was meeting with IOC members at their hotel, or with Silva on Thursday.
One-to-one meetings in a hotel suite is a tactic popularized by Blair when his arrival in Singapore four years ago was thought to be decisive in getting London ahead of rival bidder Paris.
"Nobody has called me," Pound said. "They just don't bother with me."
 Load-Date: October 1, 2009

 

End of Document
