

Judge probing Pinochet fortune abroad suspended from the case
Associated Press International
August 29, 2006 Tuesday 9:15 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 290 words
Dateline: SANTIAGO DE CHILE 
Body




An appeals court effectively suspended a legal probe into the source of former dictator Augusto Pinochet's foreign fortune on Tuesday by temporarily removing the judge handling the case.
The Santiago Court of Appeals removed Judge Carlos Cerda after Pinochet's lawyers accused him of having "a personal bias" against the 90-year-old former dictator.
Pinochet's chief lawyer, Pablo Rodriguez, argued that Cerda showed his prejudice against Pinochet by voting against him in another case.
Cerda may be reinstated if the appeals court decides that the accusation against him is baseless. The court has no deadline for that ruling.
The suspension is tantamount to suspending the trial because the temporary replacement judge, Carlos Gonzalez, would have to read thousands of pages of documents accumulated by Cerda before taken any action.
Cerda was appointed to investigate Pinochet's secret bank accounts abroad that were disclosed by a U.S. Senate investigative committee in 2004. The judge has estimated Pinochet's fortune at US$28 million (euro21.9 million).
The judge has Pinochet under indictment on tax evasion and use of false passports. He has also indicted Pinochet's wife, Lucia Hiriart, and two of his children, Lucia and Marco Antonio, as accomplices in the tax evasion.
Pinochet's lawyer and associates have insisted that the money is legitimate, coming from savings, investments and donations.
The plaintiffs, including the State Defense Council, a government agency in charge of defending the state's interests, have said Pinochet may have taken bribes on arms sales operations.
Pinochet also is also under indictment in a human rights cases and has lost his immunity from prosecution in two others.
Pinochet, 90, ruled from 1973 to 1990.
 Load-Date: August 30, 2006

 

End of Document
