

Kaka, Messi, Cannavaro nominated for FIFA Player of the Year award
Associated Press International
October 10, 2007 Wednesday 11:29 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 289 words
Dateline: ZURICH Switzerland
Body




Brazil playmaker Kaka and Argentina forward Lionel Messi are among the leading contenders to challenge Italy defender Fabio Cannavaro for this year's FIFA World Player of the Year award.
Cannavaro, who last year became the first defender to earn the honor, will also face competition from two-time winner Ronaldinho of Brazil and Ivory Coast striker Didier Drogba, who are among 30 players nominated for the award Wednesday.
On the women's side, Brazil striker Marta can win the title for a second year in a row, but is competing against Germany goalkeeper Nadine Angerer who didn't concede a single goal at this year's Women's World Cup and United States striker Abby Wambach.
Coaches and captains of men's and women's national teams around the world will be eligible to vote, and soccer's world governing body will announce the three male and three female players with the most votes in early December. The winners will be chosen from those finalists and presented with the awards at the Zurich Opera House on Dec. 17.
The men's list is dominated by players who play in Europe's four biggest leagues England, Italy, Spain and Germany. Juninho, who plays for French champion Lyon, is the only exception.
Chelsea stars Michael Ballack and Andriy Shevchenko were both left off the list after struggling this year at the Premier League club, while Inter Milan's Zlatan Ibrahimovic and Juventus' David Trezeguet who lead the Serie A in scoring this season were also omitted.
Last year, Cannavaro, who plays for Real Madrid, beat Zinedine Zidane and Ronaldinho, while Marta was named best women's player with United States forward Kristine Lilly second.
This year's shortlist was drawn up by international experts sitting on various FIFA committees.
 Load-Date: October 11, 2007

 

End of Document
