

Karzai says terrorism is rebounding in Afghanistan; decries increased 'Islamaphobia' in the West 
Associated Press International
September 20, 2006 Wednesday 4:45 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 1341 words
Byline: By KIM GAMEL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS 
Body




Afghan President Hamid Karzai on Wednesday warned that terrorism is rebounding in his country, but he said military action is not enough to stop it as the problem stems from "terrorist sanctuaries" beyond its borders.
The appeal came as other leaders, wearied of the labels lumped on them by Washington, took aim at the United States, with Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez likening President George W. Bush as "the devil" and deriding what he described as U.S. imperialism.
The devil came here yesterday," Chavez said, referring to Bush's address on Tuesday and making a sign of the cross. "He came here talking as if he were the owner of the world."
The leftist leader, who has joined Iran in opposing U.S. influence, accused Washington of "domination, exploitation and pillage of peoples of the world."
"We appeal to the people of the United States and the world to halt this threat, which is like a sword hanging over our head," he said.
Karzai, a close ally of Bush, sounded an equally heartfelt appeal, though his was for aid in combating the terrorism that has grown in intensity recently.
Karzai said efforts to build democracy in Afghanistan had suffered setbacks over the past year as violence increased, especially in the volatile south where NATO forces have been battling Taliban militants in some of the fiercest battles since the hardline government was toppled in 2001.
"We have seen terrorism rebounding as terrorists have infiltrated our borders to step up their murderous campaign against our people," Karzai said in a speech to the U.N. General Assembly, adding that the violence had rendered some areas inaccessible to health care workers, leading to a rise in some commonly treatable diseases.
But he said the problem had to be fought beyond Afghanistan's borders as well as within.
"We must look beyond Afghanistan to the sources of terrorism," Karzai said. "We must destroy terrorist sanctuaries beyond Afghanistan."
The Afghan president did not name any countries in particular. But Afghan officials have repeatedly accused Pakistan of not doing enough to stem the flow of insurgents and weapons across the border an area where al-Qaida leader Osama bin Laden is believed to be hiding.
Pakistan, which has deployed 80,000 troops along the porous border, rejects the accusation and says it does all it can.
Karzai also expressed concern about "the increased incidents of Islamophobia in the West," saying it does not "bode well for the cause of building understanding and cooperation across civilizations."
Karzai spoke on the second day of the annual ministerial meetings, which were overshadowed by a military coup in Thailand.
The Mideast peace process was also taking the spotlight at the United Nations on Wednesday, with ministers from the Quartet that drafted the stalled road map the U.S., the U.N., the European Union and Russia planning to meet. The Security Council also was scheduled to hold a ministerial meeting Thursday that Arab leaders hope will help revive the Mideast peace process.
Jordan's King Abdullah II said Tuesday that until Israel ends its occupation of Palestinian lands and gives Palestinian their rights, the cycle of violence will continue in the region and its effects will be felt throughout the world.
"I come before you today with a deep sense of urgency," Abdullah told the assembly. "Never has it been more important for the world community to act decisively for peace in my region."
Bush on Wednesday met with Palestinian leader Mahmoud Abbas Wednesday and described him as "a man of peace" who can help move forward the stalled peace process.
A day earlier, trying to advance his campaign for democracy in the region, Bush told the General Assembly that extremists were trying to justify their violence by falsely claiming the U.S. is waging war on Islam. He singled out Iran and Syria as sponsors of terrorism.
Speaking just hours apart, Bush and Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad sparred over Tehran's disputed nuclear program but managed to avoid any personal contact.
Bush pointed to Tehran's rejection of a Security Council demand to stop enriching uranium by Aug. 31 or face sanctions. But he addressed his remarks to the Iranian people in a clear insult to the government.
"The greatest obstacle to this future is that your rulers have chosen to deny you liberty and to use your nation's resources to fund terrorism and fuel extremism and pursue nuclear weapons," the U.S. leader said.
"Iran must abandon its nuclear weapons ambitions," he said. "Despite what the regime tells you, we have no objection to Iran's pursuit of a truly peaceful nuclear power program."
He said he hoped to see "the day when you can live in freedom, and America and Iran can be good friends and close partners in the cause of peace."
Ahmadinejad took the podium hours later, denouncing U.S. policies in Iraq and Lebanon and he accusing Washington of abusing its power in the U.N. Security Council to punish others while protecting its own interests and allies.
The hard-line leader insisted that his nation's nuclear activities are "transparent, peaceful and under the watchful eye" of inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency, the U.N. nuclear watchdog. He also reiterated his nation's commitment to the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.
Earlier this month, Ahmadinejad proposed a debate with Bush at the General Assembly's ministerial meeting after the White House dismissed a previous TV debate proposal as a "diversion" from serious concerns over Iran's nuclear program.
Although the two leaders spoke from the same podium, they skipped each other's addresses and managed to avoid direct contact during the ministerial meeting.
Providing an unusual backdrop, Thailand's military staged a bloodless coup while Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra was in New York for the ministerial meetings highlighting the threats to global security. Thaksin initially switched speaking slots so he could make his speech on Tuesday evening, a day earlier than planned, but later canceled the address.
Pakistan's President Gen. Pervez Musharraf, a staunch U.S. ally who spoke shortly after Bush, also urged the world to confront the plague of terrorism head-on and end conflicts in the Islamic world to eliminate the "desperation and injustice" that breed extremism.
"Unless we end foreign occupation and suppression of Muslim peoples," he said, "terrorism and extremism will continue to find recruits among alienated Muslims in various parts of the world," he said, and the top priority should be ending "the tragedy of Palestine."
But as speaker after speaker expressed concern about the rise of terrorism in the world, Costa Rican President Oscar Arias, a Nobel Peace Prize winner, warned that military spending was not the answer.
He said that more than US$200 billion had been added to global military spending since the Sept. 11 attacks 500 years ago.
"There is not a single indicator that suggests that this colossal increase is making the world more secure and human rights more widely enjoyed," he said. "On the contrary, we feel more and more vulnerable and fragile."
The crisis in the ravaged Sudanese region of Darfur also was on the sideline agenda Wednesday at the United Nations, with the African Union's Peace and Security Council holding discussions to break the deadlock over a plan to replace an AU force with U.N. peacekeepers.
The Sudanese president said his country will not allow the United Nations to take control of peacekeepers in Darfur under any circumstance, claiming that rights groups have exaggerated the crisis there in a bid for more cash. But Omar al-Bashir did say that the African Union, which now runs the peacekeeping mission in Darfur, should be allowed to augment its forces with more logistics, advisers and other support.
"We want the African Union to remain in Darfur until peace is re-established in Sudan," al-Bashir said at a news conference. Those comments suggest that the African Union will not face any resistance in renewing the peacekeeping force's mandate, which expires on Sept. 30.
 Load-Date: September 21, 2006

 

End of Document
