

Kenyan court orders the destruction of the largest cocaine cache ever seized in Africa
Associated Press International
March 21, 2006 Tuesday 10:25 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 306 words
Byline: By ROB JILLO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NAIROBI Kenya
Body




A Kenyan magistrate ordered the destruction of the largest cocaine cache ever seized in Africa, and said authorities took too long to seek permission to dispose of more than a ton of drugs seized over a year ago.
In his order Tuesday, Nairobi Chief Magistrate Aggrey Muchelule ordered the cocaine to be destroyed on Friday.
Authorities confiscated the 1,141 kilograms (2,515 pounds) of cocaine in December 2004 in both the capital, Nairobi, and the coastal resort town of Malindi. Investigators said they suspected the drugs originated in Latin America.
Kenya's prosecution chief has said police investigations into the trafficking operation were shoddy, and the alleged ringleaders were still at large.
Director of Public Prosecution Keriako Tobiko had told the court that the cocaine was a major headache for security officials who had to ensure it was not stolen or sold.
"It is unfortunate that the application was made this late. It ought to have been made immediately, it shouldn't have waited for this long," Magistrate Muchelule said in court. "I direct that necessary arrangements be made for destruction in accordance with international practice and standards."
On Jan. 31, the government spokesman said Kenya has invited the U.N. anti-drugs agency to oversee the destruction, hoping to end speculation that the drugs were being held under insecure conditions.
In November, a Kenyan court cleared seven people of cocaine smuggling charges, saying prosecutors had failed to produce evidence linking the suspects to 295 kilograms (650 pounds) of the seized drugs.
Seven suspects, including an Italian couple cleared in November, were expected to appear in court on separate charges.
Kenya is seeking the extradition from the Netherlands of a man it believes is the prime suspect. The suspect is serving a five-year sentence in a Dutch prison.
 Load-Date: March 22, 2006

 

End of Document
