

Key issues on the table at the EU-US summit
Associated Press International
June 21, 2006 Wednesday 12:11 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 566 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




A rundown of issues at the EU-US summit:
 ENERGY: The European Union and the United States want to boost cooperation in securing future supplies for themselves and encourage Russia and other producers to let in investors to upgrade their oil and gas markets so they can produce energy more cheaply, efficiently, durably and safely. Energy also tops the agenda of the G-8 summit in Moscow next month. The emergence of energy-hungry China, India, Brazil and others means global energy demand will rise by 50 percent by 2030. To secure affordable future supplies worldwide and avoid disruptions investments of some euro16 trillion (US$20.2 trillion) are needed to find, develop and transport energy over the next 20 years.
 FOREIGN AFFAIRS: The EU and the U.S. will assess the Middle East, Afghanistan and their bid to get Iran to drop the secrecy over its nuclear activities. Iran has been offered economic incentives by the five permanent U.N. Security Council members and Germany in return for talks and a long-term enrichment moratorium until the international community is sure its nuclear aims are peaceful, as Iran asserts.
 TERRORISM: There will be a renewed pledge to fight terrorism. But the EU wants U.S. President George W. Bush to commit to an early closure of the Guantanamo Bay detention center in Cuba, where the U.S. holds hundreds of terrorist suspects without due legal process. The EU calls Guantanamo "an anomaly."
 VISAS: U.S. citizens can travel throughout the 25-nation EU without a visa. But Washington requires EU nationals from 10 nations the Czech Republic, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Hungary, Poland, Slovakia, Greece, Malta and Cyprus to have a visa to visit America. It cites weak law enforcement. Unless the U.S. drops the visa requirement, the EU says it may retaliate and start asking Americans to get visa to come to Europe.
 ECCONOMY and TRADE: The two sides are deadlocked over a new deal to liberalize world trade which has already missed several deadlines. The EU and the U.S. argue over agricultural subsidies, trade in textiles and jointly insist that fast- developing nations such as India, China and Brazil drag their heels in opening up to their farm products or liberalizing their industrial and services sectors.
 AVIATION: Chances of a trans-Atlantic deal designed to boost air travel, create jobs and lower fares look weak. The EU says the US does not work harder enough for an "open skies" agreement that would allow European and American airlines to fly to wherever they want and charge whatever they want on trans-Atlantic flights. Currently, European airlines can fly to any U.S. airport from their home country and risk losing U.S. landing rights if they merge. An "open skies" deal is held up by U.S. concerns Europeans may gain a disproportionate say in the running of U.S. airlines and about limits to the number of airlines that can use London Heathrow Europe's busiest airport.
 CLIMATE CHANGE: The summit will announce the formation of a joint panel to debate "climate change, clean energy and sustainable development." The EU sees this as progress. It has criticized the Bush administration for abandoning a U.N. accord meant to cut global greenhouse gas emissions although it accounts for a quarter of those emissions. Washington questions scientific proof of global warming and says the U.N. accord exacts an unfair price from the U.S. economy.
 Load-Date: June 21, 2006

 

End of Document
