

Key dates in the kidnappings of Ingrid Betancourt and 3 Americans by Colombian rebels
Associated Press International
November 30, 2007 Friday 9:16 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 591 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Dateline: BOGOTA Colombia
Body




A look at key dates in the kidnapping and captivity of three U.S. defense contractors and French-Colombian politician Ingrid Betancourt, held by Colombia's largest rebel force, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC:
Feb. 23, 2002 French-Colombian politician Ingrid Betancourt is kidnapped as she campaigns for president in a rebel-stronghold in southern Colombia. Her campaign chief, Clara Rojas, is abducted with her.
July 23, 2002 A video of Betancourt and Rojas airs on Colombian television. Betancourt, dressed in what looks like a military jacket says, "I believe in the (peace negotiations) ... I continue to defend them now."
Feb. 13, 2003 An aerial counter-drug surveillance flight goes down in the Southern department of Caqueta. Aboard the single-engine Cessna are four American defense contractors: Thomas Howes, Marc Gonsalves, Keith Stansell, Thomas Janis; a Colombian army sergeant Luis Alcidez Cruz is also aboard. Rescue teams find Janis and Alcidez Cruz shot to death.
Feb. 24, 2003 In a statement, the FARC claims responsibility for bringing down the plane and announce they have the three Americans, whom they call "prisoners of war."
July 2 to 22, 2003 Betancourt's sister, Astrid, and husband Juan Carlos Lecompte, wait in the Brazilian town of Tabatinga for Ingrid's release. The FARC had told the family that it would hand her over because of her poor health, Lecompte says. There is no hand-over.
Aug. 28, 2003 FBI officials say they are studying a video of the three Americans, recorded by a Colombian journalist. "It shows the men alive," said a U.S. official on condition of anonymity. It is the first "proof of life" of the three.
Aug. 30, 2003 Colombia's Noticias Uno shows a video of Betancourt, the first images of the politician in over a year.
Oct. 8, 2003 CBS' 60 Minutes II shows footage of the three Americans urging authorities to negotiate their release and not risk a rescue, saying they would likely die in the attempt.
Oct. 13, 2003 The U.S. government offers a reward of up to US$5 million for information leading to the arrest and conviction of those involved in the kidnapping of the three and the killing of Janis.
Jan. 2, 2004 Ricardo Palmera, better known as FARC commander "Simon Trinidad", is arrested in Quito, Ecuador and later extradited to the U.S. to face charges of drug-trafficking and kidnapping the three Americans.
May. 2, 2006 FARC spokesman Raul Reyes says that Clara Rojas has had a baby boy after a relationship with a guerrilla.
Oct. 16, 2006 Palmera goes on trial in Washington DC for conspiracy to kidnap the three Americans but a judge declares a mistrial after the jury cannot reach a verdict.
July 9, 2007 In a second trial, Palmera is convicted of conspiracy to commit hostage-taking in connection with three Americans.
Aug. 16, 2007 Venezuela's President Hugo Chavez announces he will meet with the families of hostages held by Colombia's largest rebel group and says he is willing to help mediate peace talks between the guerrillas and Colombia's Alvaro Uribe.
Sept. 25, 2007 Relatives of the three American hostages visit Venezuela to express support for Chavez's efforts.
Nov. 8, 2007 Chavez meets with a FARC representative in Caracas.
Nov. 21, 2007 Colombia's government cancels Chavez's mediation role after Chavez spoke directly with the head of Colombia's army, disobeying an order from Uribe.
Nov. 30, 2007 Colombian authorities reveal videos of the three Americans and Betancourt, confiscated during a raid on three suspected members of the FARC's urban militias in Bogota.
 Load-Date: December 1, 2007

 

End of Document
