

Lawmakers seek to curb trade in illegal timber around the world
Associated Press International
March 13, 2007 Tuesday 10:00 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 588 words
Byline: By MATTHEW DALY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




Timber for furniture is being illegally harvested in places such as Honduras, Indonesia or Peru, labor and environmental groups say.
Now a group of Republican and Democratic congressmen want to crack down on illegal logging around the world. Led by Rep. Earl Blumenauer, a Democrat, the group is seeking support for a bill to ban U.S. imports of wood products derived from illegally harvested timber.
Much like the movie "Blood Diamond," which portrays diamonds as fueling a brutal civil war in Africa, lawmakers hope to make U.S. consumers more aware of where their new furniture or hardwood floor comes from, Blumenauer said.
"Illegal logging is a problem that crosses national boundaries to affect communities, companies and ecosystems alike," he said.
As much as 30 percent of U.S. hardwood imports are from suspicious or illegal sources, according to the U.S. International Trade Commission. Much of the wood is sent to China, where it is processed at low cost and then exported to the United States and other countries.
Illegal logging costs U.S. companies as much as $1 billion (euro760 million) a year in lost exports and reduced prices for timber products, according to the American Forest and Paper Association, a trade group that represents the wood products industry.
"I can't stress enough how pervasive this problem is," Blumenauer said at a news conference Tuesday. "It's destabilizing the environment, destabilizing trade opportunities and literally robbing national governments" of millions of dollars in lost taxes.
The problem can also be deadly.
Two activists were shot and killed in December in Honduras, allegedly by four police officers in front of several townspeople.
The men were local leaders in the Environmental Movement of Olancho, or MAO, which opposes illegal logging by timber companies. About 50 percent of timber in Honduras is illegally harvested, much of it bound for the United States.
The logging bill would extend the Lacey Act which prohibits importation of wildlife taken in violation of conservation laws to apply to wood and timber products. The measure would ban the import, export or sale of timber products made in violation of domestic or foreign law or international treaty.
The forest and paper association stopped short of endorsing the bill, but said it welcomes increased interest shown by Congress in the issue.
Earlier this month, Democratic Senate Finance Committee Chairman Max Baucus asked the International Trade Commission to investigate Chinese trade practices he said are hurting U.S. hardwood plywood manufacturers. Last month, the U.S. Trade Representative filed a complaint with World Trade Organization targeting Chinese subsidies of illegally harvested hardwood.
The Environmental Investigation Agency, an advocacy group, conducted undercover investigations in several countries to learn the extent of illegal logging. A man in Singapore told the group that timber smuggling is more lucrative than drug smuggling.
"Profits are high and there's no risk of being caught," he said, according to Alexander von Bismarck, campaigns director for the environmental group.
Such syndicates "are making the U.S. consumer an unwitting accomplice to brazen corruption, violence and natural resource theft," von Bismarck said.
On the Net:
American Forest & Paper Association: http://www.afandpa.org
Investigation Agency: http://www.eia-international.org/
On the Net:
American Forest & Paper Association: http://www.afandpa.org
Environmental Investigation Agency: http://www.eia-international.org/
 Load-Date: March 14, 2007

 

End of Document
