

Leader of the Coptic church flown for treatment in United States after fall
Associated Press International
June 11, 2008 Wednesday 12:40 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 280 words
Byline: By SALAH NASRAWI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO Egypt
Body




The leader of Egypt's Coptic Orthodox Church was flown to Cleveland on Wednesday for treatment after breaking his thigh in an accident, the church announced.
Pope Shenouda III, 84, fell in his bedroom on Monday evening and was later diagnosed with a fractured thigh, according to a statement issued by the church, saying he required surgery.
President Hosni Mubarak ordered his government to provide a special ambulance plane to fly the patriarch to the United States, reported the official MENA news agency.
"He has high morale and we pray to God for his cure," said Health Minister Hatim el-Gibly at the Cairo International Airport.
A close associate said Shenouda fell as he was trying to go the bathroom late Monday night.
"He slipped on a carpet and fell," said Tharwat Bassily, a member of the Coptic Council.
In 2006, the pope had spinal surgery at the Cleveland Clinic and last year he made several trips to the U.S. for further back surgery.
Shenouda has long suffered from chronic cholecystitis, or gall stones, that can cause a high fever and severe pain, and was hospitalized in November in Cairo.
The Coptic Church is one of the Middle East oldest churches. Like the Greek Orthodox and Russian Orthodox churches it has no theological links with the Roman Catholic or the Anglican churches.
Shenouda has led the church since 1971. Copts are believed to make up about 10 percent of Egypt's population of 77 million, making them the largest Christian community in the Middle East.
Under his leadership, the church has established congregations in the United States, South America, New Zealand and Australia. It has more than 100 North American congregations, up from four in 1971.
 Load-Date: June 12, 2008

 

End of Document
