

Leaders keeping one eye on the World Cup during EU summit
Associated Press International
June 15, 2006 Thursday 8:18 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 429 words
Byline: By DAVID STRINGER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BRUSSELS Belgium
Body




Britain and Sweden's prime ministers arrived at the EU summit Thursday preoccupied by a key concern not the future of Europe, but their nations' progress in the soccer World Cup, continuing a tradition of sport competing with politics at summits.
Ten EU members are among the 32 nations competing in the World Cup in Germany.
Blair had planned to miss parts of the summit's first session opting instead to watch England play Trinidad and Tobago, British diplomats said. He did, however, join other leaders for the traditional group photograph, despite aides having said earlier that he planned to skip the photo to watch the game.
Sweden's Goran Persson acknowledged he would struggle to focus on Thursday's working dinner, which clashed with the Swedish team's game against Paraguay.
"Who said that I will attend the dinner?" Persson said coyly, before adding that he would dine with the other leaders, but would keep up with game through mobile phone text messages.
Spanish and German leaders have previously skipped summit sessions to follow crucial soccer games. A 2002 summit in Seville, Spain, was delayed for an hour to allow diplomats to watch Spain lose to South Korea in the World Cup.
The EU's midyear summits traditionally clash with the World Cup or soccer's European Championship, prompting leaders to slip away from meetings in search of a television screen.
Blair watched the last 10 minutes of the first half of Thursday's game in the British delegation room before briefly joining the summit's opening session. His official spokesman said the prime minister left the session for the final 35 minutes of the game which England won 2-0.
At the 2002 Seville summit, then Spanish Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar admitted to feeling sour after his country lost.
A decade earlier, Denmark's then-foreign minister, Uffe Elleman-Jensen, wore a hat and scarf in his country's red-and-white colors to a summit in Lisbon, Portugal to celebrate Denmark's 2-0 victory over Germany in the European Championship final.
Speaking on the sidelines of pre-summit talks, German Chancellor Angela Merkel said Thursday she had been pleased with Germany's 1-0 victory over neighboring Poland on Wednesday.
"The way it was earned, is I believe psychologically and incredibly important," said Merkel, who attended the game in Dortmund, Germany.
Wolfgang Schussel, chancellor of Austria which holds the EU presidency said he regretted that his own nation had failed to qualify for the tournament.
"Interestingly, the real favorites have disappointed in the first round Brazil and France," he said.
 Load-Date: June 16, 2006

 

End of Document
