

Madrid laments the Olympic fiesta that nearly was
Associated Press International
October 2, 2009 Friday 6:45 PM GMT

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 503 words
Byline: By PAUL LOGOTHETIS, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: MADRID 
Body




For thousands of Madrid supporters, the 2016 Olympics will probably be remembered as the fiesta that nearly was.
Rio de Janeiro edged Madrid in the International Olympic Committee's final voting session at Copenhagen to make it two straight misses for the Spanish capital, which finished third behind winner London and Paris for the 2012 games.
Crowds gathered in front of the Royal Palace in anticipation of celebrating, with huge multicolored hands the city's bid symbol waving in the air alongside 6,000 cheering supporters before the painful final announcement.
Tokyo and Chicago were eliminated in the first two rounds, but that didn't matter in the end to the dejected crowd.
"We lost because the others are in London and they needed to make a change," a disappointed 19-year-old Lara Perez said before the crowd quickly filed out of the Plaza de Oriente square as images of Brazilian delegates celebrating victory played on the huge television screens.
Spanish prime minister Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero said Madrid left with "dignity" and didn't rule out a 2020 run.
"We were nearly there, but Rio won," Zapatero told Spanish reporters. "Now is not the moment to talk about 2020. Madrid is always a strong candidate, but it depends on the city, not me."
And it had all started so well, as crowds cheered images of the city and danced to the sounds of hip-hop, swing and, of course, flamenco, before the nerves kicked in as voting began.
Supporters thought they had a good chance once Chicago was eliminated in the first round despite United States President Barack Obama flying into Copenhagen to personally lobby for his home city.
Chicago native Nancy Parman, who has lived in Madrid for a year working as an English teacher, was shocked by the city's early exit.
"Everything seemed to be going in its favor. I thought Obama would have had more pull," the Lincoln Park native said. "A lot of people hated the (1996) Atlanta Games, so there you go."
Public support had been one of Madrid's strongest points it had the highest rating of any of the four candidates amid a golden era of Spanish sport that has seen major international tennis, basketball, cycling and football victories.
Organizers had been confident that Madrid's readiness, experience and reputation would help it overcome the geographical liability of trying to host the games immediately after London.
Whara Guerra, 27, was glad South America will get to host its first games, but had been pulling for Madrid, where she has lived since arriving from Bolivia two years ago.
"I think Madrid had the better overall package and the best sport ambiance, so it's painful," said Guerra. "This place has always welcomed me, it's like home."
Despite the setback, several media outlets backed another bid.
"We should try again, another time, without weariness, until we get it," El Mundo newspaper wrote in an editorial.
Not all agreed.
"It's less money being spent, so that's good," 81-year-old Vicente Pintando said. "They should worry about repairing the streets first."
 Load-Date: October 3, 2009

 

End of Document
