

Mandelson: WTO draft agreement "distributed the pain fairly"
Associated Press International
July 23, 2007 Monday 11:58 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 585 words
Byline: By AOIFE WHITE, AP Business Writer
Dateline: BRUSSELS Belgium
Body




EU Trade Commissioner Peter Mandelson told European Union governments Monday that a draft agreement floated last week "distributed the pain fairly" with cuts to agricultural tariffs that Europe can accept.
The deal unveiled by the World Trade Organization's chief agriculture and manufacturing mediators calls on the United States to reduce its trade-distorting farm subsidies to a level of between US$13 billion and US$16.4 billion (euro9.4 billion and euro11.9 billion) as part of a new global commerce pact.
The European Union appeared to have largely satisfied the trade body's demands for liberalizing its farm markets.
Mandelson said the text was a "manageable situation within our red lines" if the EU could find compromise on the range of products to be cut and seek for more protection for key commodities such as beef where he described the draft as "not helpful."
"We will have to fight hard on the treatment of agricultural sensitive products and in particular on the quantities of market access we give in these products," he told EU foreign ministers meeting in Brussels.
European farmers complained Monday that the cuts the EU has already offered will see farm output fall to allow more cheap imports, particularly on beef, pork and poultry that are increasingly bought in from major food exporters such as Brazil and Thailand.
Mandelson said proposed tariff reductions by developing countries for industrial goods were not as ambitious as the EU would have liked but warned that a deal that India and Brazil would accept was conditional on the U.S. making deeper cuts to its farm subsidies.
"We need to continue to push hard on industrial tariffs. There is no reason to assume that the landing point will not move further in our favor, given the emergence of a more ambitious and vocal group amongst the developing countries," he said. "But their eventual position will be determined by the final U.S. position on farm subsidies."
He said the European Union could enjoy some new-found popularity among trade partners after offering deeper cuts to farm subsidies if matched by the U.S.
"Diplomatically Europe is in a strong position. We are seen as the main champions of this multilateral process. This is where we should be," he said.
Talks on the text will start in Geneva this week and resume after the summer vacation in September. Mandelson said he needed to see progress on other areas that would open up global trade such as reforms to trade rules that would cut costs to businesses.
He warned that there was still no guarantee that any real deal could be reached in the autumn.
Many doubt that multilateral talks in Geneva will turn out more successfully than those that involved only the U.S., EU, Brazil and India, only the latest setback in the WTO's long-struggling Doha round of trade talks.
The Doha round aims to add billions of dollars to the world economy and help poorer countries develop their economies through new trade flows. But negotiations have struggled since their inception six years ago in Qatar's capital, largely because of wrangling between rich and poor countries over eliminating barriers to farm trade and, more recently, manufacturing trade.
WTO negotiators have already abandoned hopes of agreeing on the framework of a deal by the end of July, leaving enough time for the technical work on a final accord by year-end. But they are trying to forge as many compromises as possible before 2008, when U.S. elections will be held, and 2009, when Indian elections are scheduled.
 Load-Date: July 24, 2007

 

End of Document
