

Maradona remains at the heart of Argentina's soccer show
Associated Press International
June 23, 2006 Friday 12:17 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 951 words
Byline: By STEPHEN WADE, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: HERZOGENAURACH Germany
Body




Argentinian soccer remains the Diego Maradona show.
Regarded by some as the game's greatest player, Argentina's legendary No. 10 pops up unannounced at the country's World Cup practices in northern Bavaria, often puffing on an oversized Cuban cigar as he struts in and out of the team hotel with his estranged wife and their daughter.
At Argentina's first-round matches, he upstaged coach Jose Pekerman with pregame pep talks for players young enough to be his sons.
One of them, 18-year-old striker Lionel Messi, has been dubbed the "next Maradona." He had yet to be born when Maradona led Argentina to its second World Cup title in 1986.
"Maradona inspires us and he gets our greatest respect," said Carlos Tevez, a 22-year-old striker who, like Maradona, grew up in a Buenos Aries shantytown. Stocky, with black curly hair, Tevez looks like Maradona and shares some of his playing style: swaying hips, low center of gravity, a bull-like ferocity.
"He's our idol, and an idol for the people," added Tevez, who also was billed as the "next Maradona" until Messi came along. "Every time he shows up he makes us laugh a lot, and when he leaves we feel we are stronger than we really are."
A beat-up white Volkswagen often parks at Argentina's practice field, a worship-like message scribbled on its side:
"The Pope is German. God is Argentine Diego X."
A few steps from where the car parks, near a closed gate blocking the training ground entrance, 22-year-old Ignacio Anselmo pulls up his blue Argentina shirt to show off three tattoos all Maradona-inspired.
His Buenos Aires friend, Federico D'Andrea, rolls up his right sleeve to display another Maradona image on his shoulder.
"Are you going to write something good or bad about him?" Anselmo asked.
"In Argentina, football is everything, and he is everything," Anselmo explained. "It's everything he has done in 30 years, not just the '86 World Cup. The negative things about him aren't important; those are his personal things."
The 25-year-old D'Andrea said he spent about $1,500 (euro1,200) to fly from Argentina to Germany. He echoed his friend: "Maradona is the biggest in soccer history. It's a simple as that."
Maradona used to be known as "El Peluza," literally "lint" in Spanish and a word used to describe poor street kids. Now he's more often called "El Pibe de Oro" The Golden Boy.
At 45, Maradona is a survivor.
He was near death on a respirator two years ago after suffering a heart attack attributed to a cocaine overdose. He says he's been clean since, had a gastric bypass to lose weight, and last year his Argentine talk-show, "La Noche del 10" (The Night of the No. 10), soared to unexpected popularity.
Maradona has not always obeyed the rules. Some liken him to the classic "picaro" character of 16th century Spanish literature, the rascal who lives by his wits and seeks every advantage.
In a 2-1 quarterfinal victory over England in the 1986 World Cup, Maradona scored one goal after touching it with his hand. The referee didn't spot it. He scored another 4 minutes later, weaving by five English players and then beating goalkeeper Peter Shilton. That goal was voted the greatest of the 20th century, but the English still feel Maradona cheated them.
Asked about it, Maradona cleverly attributed the goal to "La Mano de Dios" (The Hand of God). The goal's name is so famous that it appears on the back heel of shoes worn by Messi in this year's World Cup.
Last year, Maradona finally acknowledged that he touched the ball. He said the same thing this year in a BBC interview, hosted by Gary Lineker, who played on England's '86 team.
The BBC later was criticized for paying Maradona a reported $70,000 (euro55,700) to do the interview, part of which was held in Buenos Aires, where his lives in his parents' house.
His worst playing moment came in the '94 World Cup in the United States. He was expelled after the second game, testing positive for what FIFA called a "cocktail" of performance-enhancing drugs including ephedrine.
He was banned for 15 months, but still went home a hero.
"Maradona has done things that average people would love to do go out with gorgeous women or beat the English at their own game," explained Argentine Sergio Levinsky, a sociologist who has written a book entitled "Maradona: Rebel with a Cause."
"Why is winning at football so important in Argentina? Because the average Argentine loses 5-0 in everyday life. But winning 1-0 in a soccer game is revenge for a least one minute. People live Maradona's achievements and failures as if they were their own."
Brazil has Pele, a wealthy businessman who travels the world as a soccer ambassador. Germany has Franz Beckenbauer, a soccer commentator and the head of Germany's World Cup organizing committee.
Argentina has Maradona, who always seems to be tweaking authority.
He openly criticized the late Pope John Paul II, ripped into U.S. President George W. Bush on his recent visit to Argentina, and has been a harsh critic of FIFA.
In Italy earlier this month, Italian tax police confiscated two Rolex watches he was wearing one on each wrist to chip away at a $38.5 million (euro30.6 million) unpaid tax bill. Together, the watches were worth about $13,000 (euro10,000).
"We are all Maradona's in a sense," said Alejandro Apo of Radio Continental, one of Argentine's most respected radio voices. "He represents us. We have demanded so much of him, and we have examined every aspect of his life. He is the best and worst of us.
"He does and says things that transcend soccer, and what he says has weight because of the force of soccer in Argentina's popular culture. When he chooses a rival, he chooses the biggest, the most powerful. He did the same thing on the playing field."
 Load-Date: June 23, 2006

 

End of Document
