

McCain presents his economic plan, Obama is set to travel to the southern states
Associated Press International
July 7, 2008 Monday 12:55 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICAL NEWS
Length: 785 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




John McCain was promoting his economic plan Monday, taking on a tough political issue given perceptions that the Republican administration of George W. Bush has done little for the stumbling U.S. economy.
McCain acknowledged the steep drop in U.S. jobs in remarks prepared for an event in Denver on Monday, and tried to confront the issue with a can-do spirit, pledging to lower taxes.
He also restated his support of free trade, acknowledging it "is not a positive for everyone." He promised to retrain workers who lose their jobs to overseas plants, and repeated his call to build at least 45 new nuclear plants, which he said "will create over 700,000 good jobs to construct and operate them."
The political environment is tough for Republicans, with Bush's approval rating at low levels as the U.S. teeters economically and fights two wars, in Afghanistan and Iraq. National polls vary widely, but they have one common point: Nearly all show Democrat Barack Obama ahead of McCain.
But a new poll released Monday shows that Obama has not capitalized on his party's far stronger popularity than the Republican Party, while McCain is exceeding his party's miserable public perception. Obama is viewed less positively than the Democratic Party by 5 percentage points, while McCain's favorable image is 9 points better than the Republican Party's.
That suggests a lost opportunity so far for Obama, and that McCain has had some success distinguishing himself from a Republican Party that only four in 10 think of positively, according to the Associated Press-Yahoo News poll. The survey, conducted from June 13-23, has an overall margin of sampling error of plus or minus 2.3 percentage points.
McCain and Obama will be trying to appeal to Hispanic voters this week, a growing group in American politics that is expected to play a role in a number of swing states.
The two candidates, who appeared at one Hispanic-sponsored event in late June, will both be addressing the League of United Latin American Citizens' national convention on Tuesday in Washington and the National Council of La Raza on Saturday in San Diego.
The three appearances by both candidates in less than a month at Hispanic-sponsored events underscores the influence the voting bloc may have in the November election.
Hispanics were long considered part of the Democratic base, but in more recent years have become swing voters.
Colorado, Nevada, New Mexico and Florida all have a significant number of Hispanic voters. Bush narrowly won all four states in 2004, and they could all be hotly contested this year.
Although Bush did well with Hispanic voters in both of his elections, many swung back to the Democrats in 2006, after many Republicans staked out tough positions against illegal immigration. The Democrats regained control of both houses of Congress.
Obama, who is trying to become the first black president, hopes to gain many Hispanic voters who preferred his Democratic rival Hillary Rodham Clinton during the primaries by nearly 2-to-1.
McCain, who was one of the leading advocates of an immigration measure that would have given a path to citizenship to millions of illegal immigrants in the U.S., must make sure that his efforts to appeal to Hispanic voters does not put off conservatives who view immigration legislation as amnesty.
The legislation, which was also supported by Obama, died amid criticism that it offered amnesty to illegal immigrants.
That claim contributed to the near collapse of McCain's presidential candidacy last summer. After the immigration measure failed, and in the heat of the Republican nomination race, McCain emphasized the need to secure the borders first before enacting other reforms, which he said were still needed.
During their appearances in June at The National Association of Latino Elected and Appointed Officials, both candidates said immigration would be one of their top priorities if elected.
Obama will also be making campaign stops this week in North Carolina, Georgia and Virginia, all southern states that have been largely dominated by Republicans. Obama's campaign hopes he can make a dent in McCain's support in the South by appealing to the region's large black populations and moderates unhappy with the Bush administration.
Since his head-to-head battle with McCain began, Obama has repeatedly taken positions seemingly designed to appeal to centrists such as speaking supportively of the death penalty and gun rights.
Analysts are skeptical about whether he can win over conservatives, considering his support for abortion rights, gay rights and other issues. But, at the very least, Obama can force McCain to spend money and time campaigning in states Republicans had long viewed as safe.
 Load-Date: July 8, 2008

 

End of Document
