

McClaren relishes his period of grace ahead of taking up the job of England coach
Associated Press International
May 10, 2006 Wednesday 1:11 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 498 words
Byline: By RAF CASERT, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: EINDHOVEN Netherlands
Body




Steve McClaren could still hold court, flash his toothy smile and happily spar with the English reporters Tuesday. Then again, his term in office as England coach doesn't start until Aug. 1.
The outgoing Middlesbrough coach was making the most of his grace period with England's notoriously aggressive and influential newspapers, setting the scene for his farewell match on the eve of Wednesday's UEFA Cup final against Sevilla with an easy manner belying the task ahead.
After Middlesbrough players Chris Riggott and Stuart Parnaby lauded McClaren's leadership ahead of the final, he quipped "that's those two playing then." When an English reporter quipped "they'll be in the England squad next," he responded with smile and laugh "Behave!"
Chuckles all around.
An earlier candidate for England was not that lucky. Former World Cup winner with Brazil and European finalist with Portugal, Luiz Felipe Scolari pulled out a dozen days ago, almost as soon as the English news media reported he was a credible candidate.
"I don't want anything more to do with this England matter because in the space of two days ... my life was invaded, my privacy was disrupted," he said. "Today there are still 20 reporters outside my home."
A multitude of them were in Eindhoven, forming a scrum around McClaren.
He even said how happy he was his team was going to be the underdog to take the UEFA title.
"We'll relish that."
That will be the last time. When England opens up its Euro 2008 qualifying campaign against Andorra on Sept. 2, there no longer will be such an option. Only qualification for the finals in Austria and Switzerland will suffice.
For the moment though he doesn't think that far ahead.
He can only enjoy the unlikely ride he's had over the past few months.
After all, a disgruntled fan ran onto the field and threw his ticket at him because of the results and dismal play three months ago.
"A lot of people were disappointed," he said. "Our season was in tatters."
Help was on the way though. Two amazing rescues, with the team rallying from three goals down in the quarter and semifinals of the UEFA Cup and highlighted by last-gasp winners, Middlesbrough and McClaren saved their season.
"It's an old adage, and one I believe in you make your own luck and it comes with preparation and opportunity," he said.
He wouldn't mind creating some more on Wednesday.
His fame has come so sudden that the official match program still misspelled his name throughout McLaren.
McClaren began his coaching career as an assistant to Jim Smith at first-division Derby in 1995, helping the club into the Premier League. In 1999, he joined Manchester United as assistant to Alex Ferguson. In 2001, he joined Middlesbrough as manager, guiding it to the 2003 League Cup title the club's only trophy in its 130-year history.
"The Champions League (with Man United) was five, six years ago and is in the memory now," he said. "This is now and this is very exciting and very, very special because this time I'm the manager."
 Load-Date: May 10, 2006

 

End of Document
