

Methodology details about the AP-Ipsos Venezuela pre-election poll
Associated Press International
November 23, 2006 Thursday 8:56 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 428 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




The Associated Press-Ipsos poll in Venezuela was conducted Nov. 10-18 among 2,500 registered voters interviewed in person at their homes across the country, except remote Amazonas state and in cities of fewer than 10,000 inhabitants in the Amazon and Andean regions. In all, the sample covered 96 percent of the Venezuelan population.
The sample included 1,500 respondents deemed likely to vote in the Dec. 3 Venezuelan election for president.
Ipsos, which conducted the poll for The Associated Press, is an international polling firm based in Paris, with offices in Caracas and elsewhere in Latin America.
The Venezuela sample was drawn in several stages, using 2001 national census and 2004 official electoral data throughout. First, 75 municipalities were selected, stratified or grouped by region, city size, economic development and level of urbanization. Within each of the 75 municipalities, additional sampling points were selected, stratified by income of the household head, urbanization and region.
Within each census tract, households were selected using a random skip interval, such as every fifth household, in a clockwise fashion from a designated starting point. Within each household respondents were selected using a quota representative of the population by age, gender, education, and occupation. Interviews were conducted every day of the week between 9 a.m. and 7 p.m.
Sampling error was plus or minus 2 percentage points for results among all respondents, 3 points for likely voters. If repeated identical surveys were conducted, no more than one time in 20 should chance variations in the samples cause the results to vary by more than the sampling error margin.
There are other sources of potential error in polls, including the wording and order of questions and the political and social context in which interviews are conducted.
Approximately 60 interviewers and 10 field supervisors conducted the study. Field staff were free of any partisan or government affiliation. All supervisors and Caracas interviewers were trained at the Ipsos Caracas office; supervisors then trained regional interviewing staffs.
Likely voters were screened using several questions about past voting frequency and intention to vote Dec. 3. The poll assumed a 60 percent turnout based on past elections and determined the most likely voters based on their answers. In most cases, the results varied little between likely voters and other respondents.
On the Net: The complete questionnaire and results are available in English and Spanish at http://www.ap-ipsosresults.com
 Load-Date: November 24, 2006

 

End of Document
