

Mexico coach Ricardo Lavolpe tries to oust his native Argentina from the World Cup
Associated Press International
June 23, 2006 Friday 10:11 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 690 words
Byline: By STEPHEN WADE, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: LEIPZIG Germany
Body




Few people know Argentina better than Mexico coach Ricardo Lavolpe.
That could be bad news for Argentina, which faces Mexico on Saturday in the second round of the World Cup.
Lavolpe, an Argentina native, was a backup goalkeeper on the country's 1978 World Cup winning team. If he beats Argentina, he will be a national hero in Mexico but could be vilified back home.
Lavolpe can be gruff, but he's improved Mexico tactically since taking over after the 2002 World Cup. And he knows about Argentina's passing flair, and the country's hope of winning a third time.
"My players and me know how important the game is, and not because it's Argentina," Lavolpe said Friday. "And we know Argentina is a team that can do damage."
Mexico and Argentina go way back. They've played only once in the World Cup, and that was in the inaugural tournament in 1930 in Uruguay, where Argentina won 6-3.
Since then, records get a bit fuzzy.
Soccer's world governing body FIFA says they've played 14 games, and Argentina has won five, lost two and tied seven. However, the Argentine federation says the teams have played 23 times counting games that FIFA does not sanction with Argentina winning 11, losing four and drawing eight.
Two-time champion Argentina has the clear edge, but not in the last three games. They've each won one close game and a third ended in a draw.
"It's very difficult not to pay attention to the most the recent games, and they have been very even," Argentina coach Jose Pekerman said. "Teams usually play the same way, so we are expecting it to be tight."
In their most recent game, they played to a 1-1 draw in last summer's Confederations Cup an eight-team warmup for this year's World Cup with Argentina prevailing 6-5 on penalties. In the two games before that, they drew 1-1 on March 9, 2005, in a friendly in Los Angeles. Mexico won 1-0 in a Copa America game on July 10, 2004, in Peru.
Experts are picking two-time champion Argentina to meet host Germany in the quarterfinals in Berlin. But Pekerman, who won three World Youth titles coaching 17 of the 23 player now on the senior team, is cautious.
"We know errors will be costly and there is no chance of revenge," he said. "It's a game of all or nothing."
Pekerman hasn't revealed his lineup. But he said his two young strikers Lionel Messi and Carlos Tevez will not start. They got their first World Cup starts in Wednesday's 0-0 draw with the Netherlands, as starters Hernan Crespo and Javier Saviola were rested on yellow cards.
"They (Messi and Tevez) are players who did a good job and I have confidence in them," Pekerman said. "But they will have to wait a bit."
Messi will turn 19 on Saturday, and midfield playmaker Juan Roman Riquelme will turn 28.
Pekerman will use basically the same team that won the first two games with Riquelme centering the midfield and Gabriel Heinze and Roberto Ayala anchoring the defense. Roberto Abbondanzieri has started every game in goal.
Mexico was in the second round four years ago, losing 2-0 to the United States. The Mexicans have reached the quarterfinals twice when it hosted the tournament in both 1970 and '86 but have never gone further.
Lavolpe has done very little tinkering with his defense and midfield in the tournament the team's strengths.
Mexico has moved the ball well in the first two-thirds of the field, but has generated little offense since the 3-1 opening win over Iran. Top forward Jared Borgetti missed two games with a torn thigh muscle, but says he can play.
"I'm ready whenever the coach needs me," said Borgetti, Mexico leading all-time scorer with 38 goals, but none in this tournament.
Omar Bravo had two goals against Iran but hasn't scored since, missing a penalty shot in Wednesday's 2-1 loss to Portugal.
Forward Guillermo Franco, a naturalized Mexican who was born in Argentina, started the first two matches but came off the bench against Portugal. Francisco Fonseca started instead and scored.
Lavolpe will have no change his defense after the ejection of Luis Perez in the group final. Perez picked up his second yellow card for dissent, even though his teammates pleaded that Perez wasn't arguing for a penalty.
 Load-Date: June 24, 2006

 

End of Document
