

Mexican presidential campaigns close with fervent rallying calls to the left, right
Associated Press International
June 29, 2006 Thursday 2:56 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 799 words
Byline: By MARK STEVENSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MEXICO CITY 
Body




Mexico's presidential candidates made their final, fervent calls for votes on the last day of campaigning, with leftist Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador rallying the poor with an almost religious zeal and conservative Felipe Calderon warning that his rival would return Mexico to boom-and-bust economic cycles.
Locked in a tight race marked by mudslinging, Lopez Obrador, a former Mexico City mayor, chose the capital's main square for his final rally Wednesday, while Calderon of President Vicente Fox's National Action Party went to one of his party's strongholds, conservative Jalisco state.
Lopez Obrador promised historic change similar to Mexico's 1910 Revolution and vowed that Sunday's elections "will demonstrate that money doesn't always win out over the morality and dignity of the people."
But he also sought to reassure markets by pledging financial restraint and to control inflation.
"The economy will be handled with technical policies, not ideology. ... We will not cause any (economic) crisis," he told over 100,000 supporters in Mexico City's main square.
Calderon, who trusts markets to keep living standards rising, waved a Mexican flag in the rain as he wrapped up his campaign in the staunchly Roman Catholic western state of Jalisco, where he first announced his candidacy.
"There is no tomorrow gentlemen, tomorrow will be decided on Sunday," said Calderon from Guadalajara, the country's second-largest city. "I invite Mexico to think of the future."
At the center of the election are dueling economic realities: Mexico is home to widespread poverty even as newfound stability has allowed many families to have homes, mortgages and new cars for the first time. The outcome could decide whether Mexico will join Latin America's rising tide of leftist leaders or continue to bet on fiscal conservatism and free trade.
The stark choices "are the result of an economic model that, even if it isn't worn out yet, has caused social tensions" between the rich and the poor, political analyst Oscar Aguilar said.
Those contrasts were on display at rallies Wednesday, the last legal campaign day before a four-day "reflection" period in which candidates are prohibited from making public statements.
The last polls allowed published last week showed Calderon running about even with Lopez Obrador, of the leftist Democratic Revolution Party.
Calderon on Wednesday promised to unify the country after a campaign that had split the nation by class.
"I will be an inclusive president," he said, promising to meet with his adversaries.
He said he would encourage investment by creating a trade route from the Gulf of Mexico to the Pacific, making it easier to receive raw materials from Asia and assemble products for U.S. and European markets.
Calderon has spent much of the campaign accusing Lopez Obrador of offering a return to the overspending and big government that caused frequent economic crises of the past.
"Lopez Obrador is a danger to Mexico" was a favorite Calderon campaign slogan.
Lopez Obrador promised "to put the poor first" by establishing universities with open enrollment, creating pensions and cash-support programs for the poor and elderly and protecting the country's agriculture sector by refusing to follow a clause of the North American Free Trade Agreement with the United States and Canada.
"This clause will not take effect," he repeated on Wednesday.
Countering accusations he wants to return to the past, Lopez Obrador said "we are in favor of modernity, but only when it is from ground up and available to all."
For months, Lopez Obrador has sought to distance himself from the "leftist tide" in the region and resisted the Calderon campaign's frequent efforts to compare him to Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez, an anti-American socialist known for his angry rhetoric.
Running third in polls is Roberto Madrazo, of the Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI, which governed Mexico from 1929 to 2000, when Fox became the first opposition candidate to break the party's stranglehold on power.
More than 50,000 supporters arrived for his late-night campaign closing along the sweltering waterfront in the port of Veracruz, on the Gulf of Mexico. The event had a carnival-like atmosphere, with five different stages supporting bands playing salsa music and dancers swaying their hips.
Madrazo is hoping the PRI's still-strong political machine can attract voters as he paints the party as a sensible middle ground between what he calls the radical left and the intolerant right.
"We are going to win because people don't want adventures, either from the left or the right," Madrazo said in the state of Coahuila. "People want results. And the PRI knows how to deliver."
Associated Press writers Will Weissert in Guadalajara and Ioan Grillo in Veracruz contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: June 29, 2006

 

End of Document
