

Microsoft translation helps bring Inca language into the digital age
Associated Press International
August 25, 2006 Friday 7:21 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 836 words
Byline: By DAN KEANE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SUCRE Bolivia
Body




You have to press "Qallariy" to begin.
Pronounced "KAH-lyah-ree," the word replaces "Start" on Microsoft Windows' familiar taskbar in a new Quechua translation of the program, which got its Bolivian debut Friday.
President Evo Morales, the South American nation's first Indian leader, has found an ally in the U.S. software giant as he promotes the native tongues of his country's indigenous majority.
There are an estimated 10 to 13 million Quechua speakers through South America, and Morales hopes to empower the marginalized speakers of this and other indigenous languages in Bolivia.
Among the first users of Quechua software will be Indian members of a constituent assembly meeting in this colonial city to rewrite the nation's constitution. The native language's role in the new constitution is an occasional source of tension assembly members nearly came to blows Thursday in a dispute over whether Quechua should be spoken on the assembly floor.
Unveiling the software Friday at a gathering of Quechua Indians in striped red and black ponchos and colorful hats, a Microsoft executive and Bolivian Foreign Minister David Choquehuanca spoke mostly Spanish, with a little Quechua mixed in.
"Anchay agradeseiki ("Thank you" in Quechua) for trusting in us," said Nelson Cuentas, chief of Microsoft's Bolivian operations, told the gathering. "Microsoft Bolivia wants indigenous culture to form a part of the information age, thanks to this truly new digital vision."
Choquehuanca said Microsoft is helping Bolivia launch a new era of inclusion after centuries of prejudice faced by Quechua-speakers.
"It was not so many years ago that Quechua was considered backward," Choquehuanca said, "but in these last few years our people are in a full process of emergence, and the world knows we are individuals."
First launched in Peru in June and now freely available for download online, the software is a simple patch that translates the familiar Microsoft menus and commands. Microsoft Corp. teamed up with several universities in Peru's Quechua-speaking south to create the translation program, joining 47 other versions of Windows in such languages as Kazakh, Maori and Zulu.
"More than anything, I was surprised," said 21-year-old Dilma Arancibia, a Quechua speaker invited to a Thursday preview of the program. "If they hadn't done this with Quechua, and if we don't teach it to our children, the language would definitely cease to exist."
And while relatively few South American Indians have regular access to a computer, the project is already paying dividends for Microsoft: The company recently won a contract from the Peruvian government for 5,000 Quechua-equipped computers.
"Technology should be available to all," Microsoft said in a statement in response to e-mailed questions about the translation. "It helps improve the lives of people."
In Peru, the new translation has already become a popular education tool. Alvaro Chambi Quispe, principal of the Bernado Tambohuasco school in the scenic Andean town of Pisac, said when his students see their native language on a computer screen "it is more motivation for them to continue" learning to read and write and chat online with friends.
Linguistics professors spent nearly three years reconciling 22 dialects of the language many without a formal written form to compile a vocabulary fit for Microsoft's programs.
For "file," they chose "kipu" (KEE-poo), borrowing the name of an ancient Inca practice of recording information in an intricate system of knotted strings. "Internet" became "Llika" (LEE-ka), the Quechua word for spider web.
The Quechua translation also includes many English words, as well as a few in Spanish.
The greatest challenge was likely finding a balance between the use of foreign words and the creation of new terms, said Serafin Coronel-Molina, a linguist at Princeton University and native Quechua speaker.
Borrowed words "are one way that a language evolves," he said. "But you can't just fill up a language with borrowed words, because then what have you got?"
While Microsoft's new translation will make its essential computer programs more user-friendly for Bolivia's Quechua speakers, it can only reach those few who have regular access to computers.
Student Wilver Vedia, 16, dressed in a round black felt hat hung with pink and yellow tassels, was part of a delegation of students from the small village of Tarabuco who turned out for Friday's event to deliver a letter asking Morales to provide more computers for their school. But Morales canceled his appearance at the last minute.
Vedia pointed out that the translation program would be of only limited value in Tarabuco, where 240 students share eight computers, and the nearest internet connection is an hour away.
"It would be a great help if they gave us Internet access. And computers," he shrugged. "Because with just eight of them, what are we going to do?"
Associated Press writers Leslie Josephs in Cuzco, Peru, and Allison Linn in Seattle, Washington, contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: August 26, 2006

 

End of Document
