

More than 10,000 mourners bury former guerrilla leader of the 1980s
Associated Press International
January 29, 2006 Sunday 8:21 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 362 words
Byline: By DIEGO MENDEZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN SALVADOR El Salvador
Body




More than 10,000 mourners went to the funeral Sunday of former guerrilla leader Shafik Handal who led the fight against a string of U.S.-backed Salvadoran governments in the 1980s.
Carrying the red and white flags of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, or FMLN, the leftist party that Handal helped found in 1980, the mourners marched with the coffin through the streets of San Salvador to a large Roman Catholic cemetery where the body was laid to rest.
Images of Latin American revolutionary Che Guevara and Palestinian flags lay side by side with flowers on the tomb of Handal, a hero of the Latin American left who died of a heart attack on Tuesday aged 75.
Among the mourners were former Nicaraguan president Daniel Ortega and Adan Chavez, brother of Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez.
Handal "fought for the Central American people, for Latin America, for the human race," Ortega said. "He was an unquestionable universal fighter."
In Venezuela, Hugo Chavez said that Handal was happy seeing the recent electoral victories of the left across Latin America, like that of Evo Morales in Bolivia.
"He died seeing the rebirth of hope," Chavez said on his weekly television show Sunday. "I saw him in La Paz (Bolivia) and he had a smile from ear to ear."
Backed by Cuba and the Soviet Union, the FMLN waged a powerful insurgency against various conservative military and military-influenced administrations that were supported by U.S. presidents Ronald Reagan and George H.W. Bush.
Handal had led the Communist faction of the coalition before it became a legal political party in 1992, after a peace treaty was reached. He was one of the signers of the accord.
In 2004, Handal made an unsuccessful bid as the FMLN candidate for the Salvadoran presidency, presenting a reformist liberal platform.
Handal was born to immigrant Palestinian parents from Bethlehem in the city of Usulutan, El Salvador, on Oct. 13, 1930. He became a communist student activist as a young man and went into exile in the 1950s during a string of Salvadoran military dictatorships. He became a leader of the Salvadoran Communist Party in 1972.
Handal and his wife Tania de Handal had four children.
 Load-Date: January 30, 2006

 

End of Document
