

Nations renew global commitment to stop the use of child soldiers
Associated Press International
October 1, 2007 Monday 10:19 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 567 words
Byline: By LINDSAY HOLMWOOD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS 
Body




France's deputy foreign minister in charge of human rights encouraged U.N. member states Monday to "break the vicious circle of violence and indifference" concerning the use of child fighters in armed conflict.
Uganda and Darfur were specific examples given by Rama Yade as regions that had problems with the conscription of children into armed conflict during opening remarks at a U.N. meeting on the sidelines of the General Assembly.
The meeting was meant to reinforce political support for the Paris Principles, a February pledge by nearly 60 nations not to use children to wage war and to disarm and rehabilitate underage soldiers. The agreement, which is seen as a strong moral step against the problem, carries no legal weight.
The Paris Principles are the biggest step yet in two decades of international efforts to stop the use of child soldiers. At least 250,000 children are believed to be fighting in about a dozen conflicts worldwide, according to the United Nations. Often they are used not only as fighters but as messengers, spies, porters and sexual servants.
"I was very happy to see that many countries of the child soldiers were here," Yade told The Associated Press, singling out Sri Lanka, Nepal, Ivory Coast, Chad and Sudan.
"They were not obliged to be here. It's an important step and we hope that next time the countries that didn't sign for the Paris commitment will sign," she said.
Delegates from seven countries that did not attend the meetings in Paris pledged support for the agreement on Monday, including Guatemala, Ukraine, Croatia, Laos, Argentina, Mauritania and Morocco.
Yade opened the discussion saying that resources for costly reinsertion programs to help child soldiers reintegrate into society were insufficient.
She also emphasized that increasing access to reinsertion programs specifically for girls, who account for nearly 40 percent of recruits in certain armed groups, needed to be a top priority.
She said mobilization of the Paris agreement is taking place, with substantial progress in Chad and Ivory Coast. Both countries are known to have child soldiers.
She also cited the re-emergence of child soldiers in Sri Lanka as an impetus for continued support of the Paris agreement.
Countries including Austria, Chad, Ivory Coast and Haiti reiterated the importance of implementing the recommendations in the Paris report in separate speeches.
While many nations reaffirmed their commitment to the Paris agreement Monday, others have said in the past that more than words are needed to rehabilitate children mentally and physically scarred by war.
"Every country say that they sustain the commitments, the principles of Paris," Yade told AP. "The problem is some accept to sign and the others don't. Not because they don't support. They don't sustain because there is ... one principle that does not work for them."
She cited the United States, which did not participate in the Paris conference in February or the U.N. meeting on Monday. The State Department said the administration objected to some of the wording of the documents, but added that the U.S. remained committed to its treaty obligations to prevent the use of children in combat.
Signatories in Paris included countries notorious for child fighters such as Sierra Leone, Liberia and Congo. Several other countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America, and all 27 nations of the European Union, also signed.
 Load-Date: October 2, 2007

 

End of Document
