

New project looks at repeating Democrats' success in the U.S. West
Associated Press International
December 7, 2006 Thursday 12:09 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 299 words
Byline: By CATHERINE TSAI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: DENVER 
Body




Prominent Democrats in the western U.S. who have snatched Senate seats and governorships from Republicans in recent years are joining forces with the hope of spreading their party's success to the White House.
The New West Project, to be formally announced Dec. 18, would outline strategies for reaching Western voters in a region rapidly being changed by immigration from Latin America and Asia.
Colorado Governor-elect Bill Ritter said Wednesday he had agreed to be a co-chair. Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid of Nevada, Senator Ken Salazar of Colorado and other Western senators have agreed to provide expertise and guidance on the region, said Jon Summers, Reid's spokesman.
Other Western governors also were expected to participate.
The changing face of the West has made it a battleground for both parties.
Immigration from Latin America and Asia has affected the makeup and politics of the Rocky Mountains, Pacific Northwest and Southwest, said Margaret O'Mara, associate director of The Bill Lane Center for the Study of the North American West at Stanford University.
O'Mara said voters are mobilizing around social issues and foreign policy.
"The West is the home of the independent voter," she said.
She predicted political trends starting in the West will continue to spread elsewhere.
"I'd make the argument that as goes the West, so goes the nation," O'Mara said.
Democrats are taking other steps to focus on the West. They awarded Nevada an early presidential caucus and are considering Denver for their 2008 national convention.
Democrats have long held governorships in Oregon and Washington state, while Republicans maintained a grip elsewhere in the West. Since 2002, however, Democrats have won governorships in Montana, Kansas, Wyoming, Oklahoma, New Mexico, Arizona and now Colorado.
 Load-Date: December 7, 2006

 

End of Document
