

New habits in Europe, celebrations in Baghdad and bombs in Thailand mark the start of 2008
Associated Press International
January 1, 2008 Tuesday 3:39 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 1003 words
Byline: By ANGELA DOLAND, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS 
Body




New Year's revelries in Thailand were marred by bombings that wounded 27 people. In French cafes, smokers puffed on their last cigarettes in the run-up to a Jan. 1 smoking ban. People in Cyprus and Malta welcomed the euro currency.
Beijing started 2008 with singing and dancing displays hosted by Summer Olympics organizers. Rare celebrations resounded in war-torn Baghdad.
In Sydney one of the first cities to celebrate the New Year one million revelers cheered as fireworks sprayed from the iconic Harbor Bridge. Fireworks displays were being repeated at the stroke of midnight in cities around the world.
In Brazil, about 2 million people gathered at Copacabana Beach in Rio de Janeiro to celebrate the New Year, witnessing a fireworks display that lasted nearly 20 minutes. In Sao Paulo, South America's biggest city, local media said 2.3 million people celebrated at the Avenida Paulista, Brazil's financial center.
Security was often tight. Traditional fireworks in central Brussels were canceled because of a terror threat after police last week detained 14 people suspected of plotting to help an accused al-Qaida militant break out of jail. In Paris, where festivities centered on the famous Champs-Elysees avenue and the Eiffel Tower, about 4,500 police and 140 rescue officials patrolled the streets.
In Thailand, an army spokesman said he believed that five bombs set off by suspected Muslim insurgents in a Thai-Malaysian border tourist town likely targeted New Year's revelers.
The bombs, which wounded 27 people, exploded in the hotel and nightlife area of Sungai Kolok, including two inside a hotel discotheque and one hidden in the carrying basket of a motorcycle outside a hotel, spokesman Col. Akara Thiprote said.
Baghdad witnessed something Iraq had not seen since before the invasion of 2003 people publicly partying to welcome in a new year.
The ballrooms of two landmark hotels the Palestine and the Sheraton were full of people for New Year's Eve celebrations. After years of car bombings, mortar fire and suicide attacks, Iraq's capital was sufficiently calm to warrant the two high-end parties in the once-posh hotels.
In France, President Nicolas Sarkozy gave the first traditional New Year's greeting of his presidency, with a "message of hope, faith in life and in the future." In Russia, Vladimir Putin delivered the last New Year's Eve address of his eight-year presidency, boasting of economic improvements and claiming to have restored a sense of unity among Russians, who are likely to see him stay in power as prime minister after he steps down in a few months.
Thousands gathered in Moscow's Red Square to ring in the New Year, watching a concert on a stage beneath the colorful onion domes of St. Basil's Cathedral, and fireworks above. A skating rink was set up on the cobblestone square, with tickets on New Year's Eve costing 2,008 rubles (US$82; euro56).
Several European countries rang in the new year with new habits.
Starting Tuesday, one of France's most iconic institutions the smoke-filled cafe was to become a memory. Following up on a ban last year on smoking in many indoor locations, cigarettes will now be off-limits in discotheques, restaurants, hotels, casinos and cafes.
People can still smoke in their homes, hotel rooms and sealed smoking chambers at establishments that decide to provide them. Smokers were enjoying a last night out: Health Minister Roselyne Bachelot has said the ban would not be enforced starting at midnight, but the next day.
Fabienne Simon, a 27-year-old smoker, said the ban was "not that bad."
"There is nothing better than to go to a nightclub, a coffee place where there are no cigarettes," she said. "You come out, it's great, you aren't smelling of cigarettes."
Two EU newcomers, Cyprus and Malta, started using the euro at the stroke of midnight. The Mediterranean islands, both former British colonies, were scrapping the Cyprus pound and Maltese lira to bring the number of countries using the shared currency to 15. Maltese Prime Minister Lawrence Gonzi had a hard time getting his hands on the new currency: An automated teller machine did not work when he tried to withdraw euros, and he had to use another one.
Along with the innovations, old European traditions were maintained.
In London, people gathered in Trafalgar Square and along the banks of the River Thames to watch a fireworks display and hear Big Ben Parliament's iconic bell welcome the New Year with 12 resounding bongs.
Alex Buck, a 28-year-old accountant sitting outside a London nightclub, said he had no plans to quit anything next year.
"Nothing to give up, something to take up," Buck said, taking a drag from his cigarette as he cradled his drink.
Berlin hosted a massive fete: In a stretch leading from the city's famous Brandenburg Gate along Tiergarten park to the western part of town, officials set up three stages, 13 bands, a 40-meter (40-yard) tall Ferris wheel and over 100 beer stands and snack joints.
In Vatican City, Pope Benedict XVI took a somber note, lamenting what he called the "trivialization" of sexuality and lack of faith among young people during a vespers' service in St. Peter's Basilica.
Across the ocean, revelers in New York converged on Times Square to watch the dropping of a new energy-efficient ball, while gay couples in New Hampshire awaited the stroke of midnight to take advantage of a new law allowing civil unions.
More than 300,000 people were expected to crowd the Las Vegas Strip and downtown resorts for the countdown to midnight. They were expected to spend more than $200 million (euro135.86 million) in restaurants, theaters and clubs.
China's party, put on by the organizers of the Summer Olympics, saw Beijingers flock in the cold to the Millennium Monument, capping a year in which frenzied construction of ultramodern Olympic venues and other projects changed the face of Beijing. From Jan. 1, there will be 220 days until the start of the Aug. 8-24 Olympics.
Associated Press writers around the world contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: January 1, 2008

 

End of Document
