

News media in the Americas said under attack by organized crime, governments
Associated Press International
March 21, 2006 Tuesday 3:44 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 600 words
Byline: By ELOY O. AGUILAR, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: QUITO Ecuador
Body




Attacks by drug-trafficking gangs in northern Mexico and harassment by the governments of several countries are having a chilling effect on the news media in the Americas, the Inter American Press Association said.
In its midyear report on press freedom in the hemisphere, the IAPA denounced hostility toward independent news media by the governments of Argentina and Venezuela and lamented the jailing of journalists in Cuba.
"Although the news media continue to carry out their public-service missions robustly in other countries, individual newspapers and journalists have faced a variety of direct and indirect efforts by governments, politicians and powerful interests to constrain them," the IAPA said on Monday.
The IAPA said it was particularly concerned about threats and attacks from drug gangs, most notably in northern Mexico, that have forced some newspapers into self-censorship, avoiding any reference to drug activities.
The organization noted a recent attack in Nuevo Laredo, across the border from Laredo, Texas, where armed men shot up the newsroom of the El Manana newspaper and wounded a reporter. The IAPA asked the Tamaulipas state government to protect journalists from drug traffickers.
Mexican Interior Secretary Carlos Abascal responded to the report by saying that the government is using all its resources to combat drug traffickers. The federal government recently named a special prosecutor to investigate attacks on journalists.
"Organized crime has clearly not overtaken our public institutions," Abascal said. "We are waging a frontal struggle ... against the common enemy."
In a related resolution, the IAPA asked the Mexican government not to drop investigations of current and past killings of journalists, including that of Hector Felix Miranda, editor of the weekly Zeta, who was killed in 1998.
Across the region, three journalists were slain as a direct result of their work in the past six months, and another is missing and presumed dead, the IAPA said.
The IAPA cited the "inability or unwillingness of some governments to investigate, prosecute and punish those who have perpetrated crimes against journalists."
The report also criticized Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez's government for "harassing and punishing the independent news media through the use of arbitrary taxation, mob intimidation and implementation of a so-called law of social responsibility for radio and television."
The law, IAPA said, characterizes dissent as tantamount to criminal conduct.
The Chavez government had denied it is harassing the media, saying it is committed to free speech but that it also respects citizens' right to protect their reputations from false claims.
Newly appointed Venezuelan Information Minister Willian Lara rejected the report's findings on Monday, calling the IAPA "exploiters of journalists and traffickers in lies."
"Venezuela is the Latin American country that respects freedom of expression the most," Lara told reporters, saying that journalists facing criminal charges in the country were "citizens who have systematically defamed other citizens, not martyrs for journalism."
"They are being prosecuted because they have committed crimes," said Lara, a leader in Chavez's governing party and a former journalist himself.
In Cuba, the IAPA noted, 25 independent journalists are imprisoned.
Argentina's President Nestor Kirchner, meanwhile, "has stepped up his hostility to independent media employing verbal denunciations and governmental power raising taxes on newspapers and withholding government advertising to newspapers to punish critics," the IAPA said.
 Load-Date: March 21, 2006

 

End of Document
