

Nicaraguans in the U.S. wait to see if Sandinistas make comeback 
Associated Press International
November 7, 2006 Tuesday 9:59 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 792 words
Byline: By LAURA WIDES-MUNOZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MIAMI 
Body




Nicaraguans living in the U.S. kept radios on at work and gathered in local markets to watch television news reports as they awaited confirmation of early presidential election results that former Sandinista leader Daniel Ortega was sailing toward a comeback.
Sunday's election marks Ortega's fifth run for the country's presidency the last three ended unsuccessfully.
Many Nicaraguans who fled the country during the Sandinista rule, and even those who left later, said they feared Ortega's return would mean a return to the chaos the country suffered during the 1980s, when U.S.-backed insurgents waged a civil war against Ortega's socialist government. But some also said they hoped Ortega's election would be a wake-up call to the Central American country's opposition parties to better respond to the needs of Nicaraguans.
"They are talking that there will be more problems again, more violence, but you have to hope that that won't happen. You have to hope that there will be a change," said Managua native Josefa Ortega, 49, as she sold avocados and fruit outside a shopping center in Miami.
Ortega said she left Nicaragua after the Anastasio Somoza dictatorship accused her of helping the Sandinistas but the violence that followed in the country turned her against Ortega.
Expats were angered that Ortega would be able to win the presidency with just over a third of the country's votes. Since his last campaign, the Sandinista-dominated Congress has changed the constitution, allowing a candidate to win the presidency in the first round with at least 35 percent of the vote and a 5 percentage point lead.
"It's absurd. In what country where there are two rounds can you win in the first by 35 percent?" said Julio Velazquez, vice president of the Nicaraguan American Chamber of Commerce in Miami.
Marta Cantillano, who moved to Los Angeles with her son from Managua in 2001, said her mother and brother were murdered by Sandinistas in 1985 after being accused of collaborating with the U.S.-backed Contras.
"For me, this news is very difficult," she said of Ortega's apparent victory, "If he has changed his heart, the situation could change. But if he still is a communist, then there could be problems."
At La Chipiona Nicaraguan Bakery in Miami, half a dozen people gathered in the early afternoon, buying sweet breads and discussing the election.
"It doesn't surprise me that Ortega would win after three consecutive governments that have fomented corruption in this nascent democracy," said Miami community activist Deborah Centeno, 47, who came to the U.S. from Nicaragua 22 years ago. "The people of Nicaragua have repeatedly asked for democracy, but the leaders have not responded."
With more than 60 percent of the vote counted, Ortega had 39 percent, an eight-point lead over wealthy banker Eduardo Montealegre. Three other challengers were trailing, and former Contra rebel Eden Pastora bowed out after results showed him in last place.
Centeno said she did not support Ortega, who left office in 1990. And she is skeptical of the alliances he has made with former political opponents, as well as his recent spiritual reawakening and his promises not to return to his Marxist past.
"Still, everybody deserves a second chance," she said. "But be careful. We are going to be watching you."
The U.S. Census puts the number of Nicaraguans in the U.S. at about 227,000, with about 40 percent in Florida. Nicaraguan immigrant groups says the number is closer to half a million.
In recent weeks, hundreds of Nicaraguans packed planes to fly home and cast their vote, but most living in the U.S. could not participate in the elections.
While the Nicaraguan Constitution guarantees all its citizens equal political rights, no mechanism exists to permit voting outside the country. And because many expats have been vocal opponents of the Sandinistas, they are unlikely to get the vote as long as Ortega retains power.
Still, Nicaraguans living abroad believe the money they send home means they are entitled to a political voice. Expatriates sent home an estimated US$850 million (euro670 million) a year in remittances in 2005, according to the Inter-American Development Bank, representing about 17 percent of the country's gross domestic product.
Opponents of Ortega have said he would likely take control of remittances if he won power. Ortega has denied the allegations, but Centeno said if that happens, Nicaraguans abroad will likely stop sending anything that doesn't go directly into the pockets of relatives.
"The opposition in Nicaragua has to unite, but so do we here in exile. We are a mirror of the situation back there," Centeno said.
Associated Press Writers Andrew Glazer and Traci Carl contributed to this report from Los Angeles and Managua.
 Load-Date: November 8, 2006

 

End of Document
