

Nine students among the 12 dead in collision of truck and bus carrying Argentine high schoolers
Associated Press International
October 9, 2006 Monday 5:57 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 342 words
Byline: By OSCAR SERRAT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES Argentina
Body




A bus carrying high school students back from a charity mission collided head-on with a truck on a rural highway in Argentina, killing at least 12, officials said Monday as the mayor declared three days of mourning in Argentina's capital.
The dead included nine students aged 17 and 18, the drivers of both vehicles and a passenger in the truck. Forty-one others were injured Sunday evening when the double-decker bus crashed into a truck carrying a load of leather some 420 miles (700 miles) north of Buenos Aires.
"We are just destroyed by this news," said Buenos Aires Mayor Jorge Telerman, who went to the Ecos school to meet tearful classmates and victims' relatives. "Kids such as these go out year after year on these 'solidarity' missions and to see this happen is so very upsetting."
Telerman declared three days of mourning in the capital.
Such charity campaigns are commonplace among Argentine high school students, who travel from the capital to far-flung, impoverished communities on multi-day missions to repair and repaint rural schools and restock supplies not easily obtained in poor areas of the north.
Television images on Monday showed investigators poking through the demolished bus, with crumpled seats and twisted metal scattered across the roadside.
"The entire scene was just horrendous. There were people laying dead in and around the bus, most of them kids and a lot of them had lost their legs," said Miguel Sotelo, speaking with local news agency Diarios Y Noticias.
A referee who was returning from a soccer match, he said he was in a car about 200 yards (meters) behind the bus at the time.
Students said their classmates had organized a charity drive to take foodstuffs, school supplies and other donations to a rural school they had been helping in the impoverished Chaco area.
Silvia Simoncini, a spokeswoman for the Santa Fe province health ministry, said 50 people were aboard the bus.
Authorities had no immediate comment on local television reports claiming a witness saw the truck traveling at high speed just before impact.
 Load-Date: October 10, 2006

 

End of Document
