

Nomadic Amazon tribe returned to the wild and perils of Colombia's civil war
Associated Press International
August 16, 2006 Wednesday 6:03 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 559 words
Byline: By DARCY CROWE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN JOSE DEL GUAVIARE Colombia
Body




Authorities have returned dozens of nomadic Indians to the Amazonian rain forest in southern Colombia after the country's four-decade old civil war forced them to flee their ancestral homeland.
But the some 200 Nukak Maku tribal members face an uncertain future.
Barreling down a pothole-filled dirt road, huddled in six cargo trucks that normally carry earth and rock, the tribe needed to look no farther than the army helicopters flying overhead to recall why they fled in the first place and the deadly dangers they still face upon their return.
The tribe's exodus began three years ago. In March, the last remaining tribal members decamped to a squalid tenement outside San Jose del Guaviare, a small city 280 kilometers (170 miles) southwest of Bogota, trading in their peripatetic lifestyle for a sedentary one.
Instead of hunting, young adults, wearing sunglasses and Colombian soccer jerseys, smoked cigarettes and drank beer while riding motor scooters or dancing to accordian-heavy vallenato music. Their children could be seen begging for food around town.
The 20,000 hectares (49,400 acres) of jungle provided by the government is not part of the tribe's ancestral homeland and represents just 2 percent the size of their own reserve, which, like their new home, remains engulfed in violent conflict between leftist rebels and government troops.
Puerto Ospina, a hamlet at the entrance to the land, was all but abandoned by frightened residents in 2000 after rebels massacred a six-person family.
"We don't want to have any problems," said Mao-be, a tribal leader who speaks broken Spanish. "We're afraid of coming across the guerrillas."
The government insists they'll protect the Nukaks. But a delegation of local and national government officials accompanying the tribe on their voyage quickly returned to San Jose del Guaviare once the army advised them that it could no longer guarantee their safety.
In addition to rebels, tribal members must contend with health problems that have arisen from contact with the outside world, which they had been isolated from for centuries.
"Their immune systems can't event protect them from a small flu," said Javier Maldonado, a doctor who's worked with the Nukak Maku for almost two years.
Despite having embraced many western habits, the majority of Indians said they wanted to return to the forest.
But that's no guarantee they'll resume their former ways.
Before abandoning the forest, the Nukak Maku lived in clans of 15-40 people that moved every few weeks while fishing, collecting fruits and hunting monkeys with two-meter (six-foot) long blowguns. Anthropologists believe some 300 still live this way dispersed throughout the jungle.
That's unlikely to be the case of Mao-be and his brethren, who he says "are tired of walking."
Anticipating they won't venture too deep into the jungle, authorities plan to teach the Indians how to farm part of the US$250,000 (euro195,000) it's spending to guarantee their well-being and safety.
"A cycle of dependancy on others for food that has formed will be difficult to break," said Jorge Restrepo, an anthropologist who has studied the tribe.
Of special concern are the 80 tribal members under the age of 12. "They haven't learned the survival techniques of their fathers," said Maldonado. "They are the future of this culture and nobody knows what will happen to them."
 Load-Date: August 17, 2006

 

End of Document
