

Official: Venezuela does not want to cut off oil exports to the United States
Associated Press International
March 17, 2006 Friday 8:59 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 338 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER TOOTHAKER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARACAS Venezuela
Body




Venezuela does not want to cut off oil exports to the United States, but is looking for new markets in case Washington decides to stop buying its petroleum, the vice president said Friday.
Jose Vicente Rangel said officials in Washington have discussed reducing U.S. dependence on Venezuelan oil, meaning that the administration of President Hugo Chavez must have a contingency plan.
"We are preparing for this possibility," Rangel said in a statement. "We are looking for new markets in the world ... We don't want to deliberately cut off oil to the United States."
Chavez has warned that he could stop exporting crude to the United States if Washington goes "over the line" in what he has said are attempts to destabilize his government. He says his left-leaning administration has contacted other potential buyers.
Venezuela the world's fifth-largest oil exporter ships 1.5 million barrels of oil a day to the United States. The South American nation is quickly becoming an important supplier to the Caribbean and other parts of Latin America.
Relations between Caracas and Washington have been tense, with U.S. officials voicing concerns over the health of Venezuela's democracy and Chavez accusing the United States of conspiring to topple him or invade his country to take control of its all-important oil industry.
Rangel said he could not rule out the possibility of a U.S. invasion.
"The United States cannot be trusted," he said. "The United States is unpredictable because it is currently governed by a group of crazy and irresponsible people."
A report issued by U.S. President George W. Bush on Thursday called Chavez a "demagogue" who is trying to destabilize Latin America and undermine democracy.
Bush's national security report touched only briefly on Venezuela, listing the situation in the country among regional challenges that "demand the world's attention."
Rangel said relations with Washington could be improved.
"There's no problem on our side," he said. "If the problem is political, let's sit down and discuss it."
 Load-Date: March 18, 2006

 

End of Document
