

Olympics head says IOC won't 'cross the line' and push China on Tibet, other political issues
Associated Press International
April 12, 2008 Saturday 12:08 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 353 words
Byline: By STEPHEN WILSON, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: BEIJING 
Body




The International Olympic Committee will not intervene to pressure China on Tibet or other political issues in the countdown to the Beijing Games.
IOC president Jacques Rogge reiterated that stance Friday, saying it was not up to the Olympic body to get involved in the host country's political affairs.
"This is the line we do not have to cross," he said at the close of a two-day IOC executive board meeting in the Chinese capital.
China's recent crackdown in Tibet has fueled protests that have disrupted the global torch relay for the Beijing Games. Rogge has expressed hope for a peaceful resolution of the turmoil in the Himalayan region. But he said Thursday he would not press China to open talks on Tibet, calling that a "political matter in which the IOC cannot enter."
"This is a sovereign matter for China to decide," he added.
Also Friday, China expressed indignation at a U.S. congressional resolution calling on Beijing to stop cracking down on Tibetan dissent and talk to the Dalai Lama, Tibet's exiled spiritual leader.
Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Jiang Yu labeled the resolution passed Wednesday by the House of Representatives anti-Chinese, saying it "twisted Tibet's history and modern reality ... seriously hurting the feelings of the Chinese people."
In Tibet, the recent demonstrations against 50 years of Chinese rule have been the largest and most sustained in almost two decades. The Dalai Lama said he has always supported China's hosting of the Olympics, but Beijing cannot suppress protests in Tibet with violence.
Despite the torch protests, the Olympic relay will go through Tibet as planned, Rogge said. The flame is scheduled to be taken to the summit of Mount Everest in May and return in June to the Tibetan capital of Lhasa.
The relay encountered anti-China protests in London, Paris, San Francisco and elsewhere. The torch was carried through Buenos Aires, Argentina, on Friday amid heavy security.
Rogge played down the prospect of world leaders skipping or boycotting the opening ceremony in a show of protest against China's policies.
"The sport movement says no to a boycott," Rogge said.
 Load-Date: April 12, 2008

 

End of Document
