

Opposition lawmakers walk out of Morales' state of the nation speech
Associated Press International
January 23, 2007 Tuesday 1:14 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 568 words
Byline: By ALVARO ZUAZO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LA PAZ Bolivia
Body




Opposition lawmakers marched out of Congress during a four-and-a-half-hour speech by Evo Morales marking his first year in office as South America's first indigenous president.
In Monday's address, Morales recalled being expelled from Congress in 2002 on charges he'd promoted violent disorder as leader of Bolivia's coca growers' union, a post he still holds.
He slyly called Sen. Luis Vasquez, who was president of the House when it voted to expel him, "my best campaign manager." Deputies of Vasquez's party, the main opposition group Podemos, then got up and filed out in silence.
Their leaders said Morales had violated an agreement not to verbally attack them in Congress.
Later Monday, at an anniversary rally attended by some 15,000 supporters in La Paz, Morales declared that while 2006 was the year of natural gas "nationalization," this is the year the state will take control of the mining sector.
Bolivia's exports of zinc alone jumped 173 percent in value to $548US million (euro423.62 million) last year and Morales has stated his desire to give the Bolivian people a greater share of the mining industry's revenues.
The sector is, however, a complicated mishmash of state- and privately owned mines and mines owned by worker cooperatives and its "nationalization" is expected to be much more difficult than that of natural gas..
In the speech to Congress, Morales praised and catalogued his government's achievements chiefly the renegotiation of natural gas contracts to give the state the lion's share of revenue while criticizing preceding administrations as crooks who bilked the nation.
He boasted that in boosting the government's share of annual gas revenues from $240US million (euro193 million) when he took office to $1US.6 billion (euro1.24 billion), he'd obliged foreign oil companies to "line up, signing the contracts ... like an employee of the state."
Morales also remarked that it would be difficult to oust him before his five-year term ends. Morales' opponents, he said, "should be worried because this little Indian won't be leaving easily."
An opposition initiative for recall referendums would apply to governors, mayors and the president himself. Morales said last week that he would accept such a referendum under certain conditions including that no one who had won office with a simple majority could be voted out with a vote percentage inferior to that by which they were elected.
Morales, who won office in December 2005 with 54 percent of the vote, remains popular among Bolivia's poor mostly indigenous majority. However, a new poll in the newspaper La Razon found his popularity has dropped in cities to 59 percent from 74 percent when he was elected.
Morales made repeated references to aid received from his leftist allies Venezuela and Cuba, whose leaders are also known for long-winded speeches, but also mentioned aid from the United States.
And he also noted that his government has destroyed 5,070 hectares (20 square miles) of coca, the basis of cocaine but also a plant with traditional religious and medicinal uses locally.
He did not mention his recent decision to increase coca cultivation in his political base, the central Chapare region, which upset the U.S. government.
The U.N. estimates Bolivian coca production at 26,000 hectares (101 square miles), just over twice the area permitted by Bolivian law.
AP writer Frank Bajak in La Paz contributed to this report.
 Load-Date: January 23, 2007

 

End of Document
