

Opposition-aligned TV station to be forced off the air in Venezuela
Associated Press International
May 27, 2007 Sunday 7:58 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 647 words
Byline: By IAN JAMES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARACAS Venezuela
Body




Television personalities embraced, wept and chanted "freedom!" before the cameras Sunday as Venezuela's most widely watched channel prepared to go off the air at midnight, shut down under a decision by President Hugo Chavez that opponents called an assault on free speech.
Radio Caracas Television, the sole opposition-aligned TV station with nationwide reach, was being forced off the airwaves because Chavez refused to renew its broadcast license.
Staffers at Venezuela's oldest private TV station mixed an emotional on-air goodbye with denunciations of the government.
"We are living an injustice," said Eyla Adrian, a 35-year-old presenter, her eyes welling with tears. "I wish that tonight would never come."
Chavez said Saturday he was democratizing the airwaves by turning RCTV's signal over to a public service channel.
"That television station became a threat to the country so I decided not to renew the license because it's my responsibility," Chavez said.
RCTV's top executive, Marcel Granier, said Sunday that Chavez decision "marks a turn toward totalitarianism."
The socialist president and his supporters accuse RCTV of supporting a failed 2002 coup, violating broadcast laws and regularly showing programs with excessive violence and sexual content.
In 2002, RCTV and other private channels broadcast opposition calls for protests to overthrow Chavez while giving little coverage to Chavez's return to power amid protests by his supporters.
Andres Izarra, who now heads the state-financed channel Telesur, said he quit his job as a newsroom manager at RCTV because he was disgusted with the way "everything was censored" during the coup.
"The order was 'zero Chavismo on the screen.' Nothing related to Chavez, his allies, his congressmen, members of his party," Izarra told The Associated Press in an interview. "When I hear the owners of RCTV talk about freedom of expression, it seems to me a great hypocrisy."
Granier insisted his channel has never sought to destabilize the government.
Hundreds of protesters gathered at the station's headquarters to protest the shutdown.
"I want to live in a free country," said Elianna Castro, a 17-year-old student who hopes to be a journalist.
But red-clad government supporters gathered elsewhere to show support for the measure.
"RCTV was exclusionist; you never saw blacks or Indians on its screens, and its programming promoted violence," said Gerardo Sanchez, 52, a student in a state cultural program.
RCTV has regularly been the top channel in viewer ratings, but Chavez calls its soap operas "pure poison" that promote capitalism.
Venezuela's Supreme Court has ordered that the replacement station can use RCTV's broadcasting equipment and told the military to guard it.
"We're prepared for any attempt at sabotage," Communications Minister Willian Lara said Sunday.
Most Venezuelan news media are in private hands, including many newspapers and radio stations that remain critical of Chavez. But the only other major opposition-sided TV channel is Globovision, which is not seen in all parts of the country.
The president of the Miami-based Inter American Press Association, which represents 1,400 publications, said Sunday he was "very worried that press freedom could perish completely" in Venezuela.
"The concession of radio electric frequencies should not serve to reward or punish media outlets for their editorial line," Rafael Molina told a news conference. He noted that less-critical stations were able to renew licenses that also expired Sunday.
Lara argued that RCTV was rejected because "it systematically violates the constitution. It is strictly a legal case."
Miguel Angel Rodriguez, host of an anti-Chavez talk show on RCTV, suggested that viewers fly the country's flag upside down in protest.
"If all of Venezuela does it today, it would be telling the world: We are in a catastrophic situation. We need help," he said.
 Load-Date: May 28, 2007

 

End of Document
