

Paris designers pull out the stops
Associated Press International
October 4, 2008 Saturday 11:42 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 759 words
Byline: By JOELLE DIDERICH, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS 
Body




Paris designers sought a balance between showmanship and substance in their ready-to-wear displays on Saturday, as the fashion industry seeks new revenue sources to make up for the millions in Wall Street bonuses that have gone up in smoke.
With Western economies mired in a financial crisis, all eyes are turning to Brazil, Russia, India and China the so-called BRIC economies, with an expanding middle class that is developing an appetite for luxury.
To capture these markets, brands must first spend thousands of dollars on high-profile catwalk shows that will generate acres of press coverage.
"Companies are hedging their bets by making certain that their sales are going up in the new markets," said Hilary Alexander, fashion editor of Britain's Daily Telegraph. "The Russian clients, the Indian clients, the Middle Eastern clients they want glamour, they want pizzaz."
HERMES
French luxury brand Hermes pulled out the stops, opening its Far West themed show with a rare catwalk appearance by 1990s supermodels Naomi Campbell and Stephanie Seymour but these cowgirls were like nothing you've seen in Texas.
The models ambled down a fine sand runway dotted with giant cacti in outfits that had fashion editors silently scribbling wish lists.
Sheer poncho-style dresses, supple leather flared pants and fluid draped jersey dresses were the height of luxury, as were the cropped jeans in a perfect indigo denim hue.
Campbell, wearing a va-va-voom black gypsy dress, closed the show by tossing her straw hat into the audience with a flourish.
Front row guests included British actress Jane Birkin, who famously designed the Birkin bag, which has become a global byword for luxury. Hermes donates a portion of its profits to charitable causes on her behalf.
"They give a certain amount of money per year to the things I care about most, and that's really precious," Birkin told The Associated Press.
CHLOE
French label Chloe is hoping for third time lucky with Hannah MacGibbon, its third creative director in as many years, after parting company with Swedish designer Paulo Melim Andersson, who failed to capture the subtle femininity of the brand.
MacGibbon showed a light, flirty collection of crisp cotton apron dresses and blouses with leg-o'-mutton sleeves trimmed with scalloped fins.
Chloe chairman and CEO Ralph Toledano said he was confident in the British designer, noting that she has been a member of the studio team since 2001 working alongside Phoebe Philo, who doubled the brand's sales before leaving to spend time with her family.
"Chloe has always been a brand that speaks to women, so it is very plausible that one is better off having a woman speak to women than a man," he told The AP.
A word to MacGibbon: shorts with gathered paper-bag waists are not what women want.
JOHN GALLIANO
"This is where they kill the chickens," said a male guest, only half-jokingly, as he walked past a group of men huddling around an abandoned shopping cart on his way to the John Galliano show, held in a warehouse in a working class Paris suburb that was the scene of rioting in 2005.
It was just as well local residents could not see Galliano's models parade in their towering Marie Antoinette wigs, or there might have been a second French Revolution.
The extravagant coifs and plumed headgear did a good job of distracting attention from the clothes, which were largely forgettable.
Galliano, whose pendulum has swung back to slick commercialism after several seasons of theatrically unbridled shows, showed anoraks with drawstring pleating and military trims. Only when the evening gowns came out did one perceive a glimmer of the British designer's unparalleled romance.
The choice of venue was a sign that Galliano has lost touch with the street, which in the past fed his fertile imagination. Why else orchestrate such an insensitive confrontation between the haves and have-nots?
KENZO
At Kenzo, Italian designer Antonio Marras showed outfits in botanical prints swarming with ribbons, pearls and shells inspired by the Lewis Carroll novel "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland."
Sprigs and blossoms in Victorian watercolor shades bloomed on a floorlength cream chiffon gown that was draped over one shoulder.
Tunics and jackets made from a patchwork of patterned silks sprouted folds in the back, while silver sequins nestled in the fuzzy mohair petals of a knitted dress.
For the finale of the show, the oversized books that formed the backdrop opened to reveal giant flower pop-ups, to the delight of the children that several guests had brought with them to the show.
 Load-Date: October 5, 2008

 

End of Document
