

Placido Domingo lends his voice to the hearing-impaired
Associated Press International
November 25, 2006 Saturday 5:21 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 520 words
Byline: By VERENA DOBNIK, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




Placido Domingo's latest project is music to the ears of hearing-impaired people.
The tenor, paired with the Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra, is speaking for a global effort called "Hear the World" to raise awareness about hearing loss and to offer the latest technology to those in need especially in developing countries.
Hearing aids will be delivered to poor children in the Guatemalan jungle and hearing-challenged youths in Pretoria, South Africa, will be taught how to function alongside classmates who hear. Youths in remote parts of the island of Fiji will be hearing tested for the first time.
"Music is my emotional need. I therefore feel sad for anyone who cannot hear music," Domingo told The Associated Press. "Science has made incredible strides in helping people with hearing trouble, but the majority of the world's population is still unaware of this fact."
Domingo and members of the Vienna orchestra were expected at a Carnegie Hall news conference on Tuesday to announce the new, non-profit Hear the World Foundation, based in Zurich, Switzerland. The effort is sponsored by the Swiss company Phonak, a leading high-tech hearing device manufacturer.
An estimated 1 in 10 Americans is hearing-impaired, according to the American Academy of Audiology, and abroad, the World Health Organization says at least 160 million people in developing countries are affected.
The foundation, whose activities start in January with an initial capital of about $400,000 (euro305,900), will focus on educating the public about the social and emotional implications of hearing loss. A key issue is some people's reluctance to use a hearing-enhancing device for fear of appearing elderly or handicapped, or being ridiculed.
"There seems to be a stigma about being hard-of-hearing," Domingo told the AP. "Let's consider the difference between seeing trouble and hearing trouble. No one gives a second thought to wearing glasses in order to improve sight, but too many people would rather ask five times, 'What did you say?' than wear a hearing aid."
Domingo said he found that especially ironic at a time when "millions of people have little devices sticking out of their ears in order to listen to something pre-recorded while on a train, or a bus, or walking on the street."
Phonak will donate 1,000 hearing aids in January, targeting adults as well as children in areas of China, India and South America. In addition, exams will be offered to people 65 or older in those countries whose hearing has never been tested.
Last year in Guatemala City and Guatemala's Peten jungle, 95 children were fitted with hearing aids. In Pretoria, Phonak South Africa is providing resources to The Eduplex private school, where children with hearing loss attend class with others who hear well.
"Sound has been the basis of everything which was been important in my life," said Domingo, whose parents were musicians and who met his wife, Marta, through their mutual singing careers. "By speaking out, maybe I can steer someone in the right direction."
On the Net:
Placido Domingo's Web site: http://www.placidodomingo.com
Phonak: http://www.phonak.com
 Load-Date: November 26, 2006

 

End of Document
