

Presidents confront divisions in the Andean Community trade bloc 
Associated Press International
June 12, 2006 Monday 8:02 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 449 words
Byline: By GONZALO SOLANO, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: QUITO Ecuador
Body




Members of a four-nation Andean trade alliance are charting a new course without President Hugo Chavez's Venezuela and with uneven U.S. relations as foreign ministers gathered Monday in this South American capital.
"The idea is to harmonize criteria and relaunch the Andean Community of Nations so it can constitute a solid bloc," said Francisco Carrion, Ecuador's foreign minister, a day before the meeting of presidents from Ecuador, Peru, Colombia and Bolivia.
Bolivia's Evo Morales, Ecuador's Alfredo Palacio, Colombia's Alvaro Uribe and Peru's Alejandro Toledo all confirmed their attendance.
Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez was not invited, said Ecuador's presidential secretary, Jose Modesto Apolo.
"We have not asked for the presence of any president who is not part of the Andean Community," Apolo told Channel 8 television, adding that it would be up to the other four leaders whether to seek Venezuela's return to the trade bloc.
Chavez, a fierce critic of U.S.-backed trade liberalization, announced in April he was abandoning the Andean bloc, saying it had been "fatally wounded" after Colombia and Peru signed individual free trade pacts with Washington. Those deals have yet to be ratified by those nations' legislatures.
Carrion said a primary agenda item will be pursuit of a free trade pact with the European Union. Another, he said, will be seeking an extension of trade preferences granted by Washington since 1991 in part to help Andean countries diversify from the production of coca leaf, the raw material used for producing cocaine.
The preferences covering thousands of products are scheduled to end later this year.
Free trade talks between Washington and Ecuador stalled last month over Ecuador canceling U.S.-based Occidental Petroleum Corp.'s contract and seizing its facilities following a long-standing contract dispute.
Morales and Chavez contend that country-by-country free trade deals with the U.S. would flood the region with heavily subsidized U.S. food products and undercut the Andean Community's goal since its inception in 1969 of regional integration.
The Bolivian and Venezuelan leaders have joined with communist Cuba in a trade pact promising a socialist version of regional cooperation.
Morales initially said he was considering pulling Bolivia from the Andean Community, but later relented and urged Chavez to reconsider.
Former Ecuadorean Vice President Blasco Penaherrera said it is necessary to recognize the importance of the United States as a principal market for the Andean Community.
"What this is about is consolidating the Andean Community of Nations ... through sensible agreements, if good sense is possible," Penaherrera told The Associated Press.
 Load-Date: June 13, 2006

 

End of Document
