

Pressure situation distorts the view
Associated Press International
June 23, 2006 Friday 3:27 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 621 words
Byline: By RAF CASERT, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: FREIBURG Germany
Body




From the penalty spot, the goal can look as wide and open as the sky. Not in a shootout, though.
Just ask David Beckham, or Roberto Baggio.
With the second round of the World Cup opening Saturday, the penalty shootout is likely to feature again. Whether luck or skill, it is sure to provide some of the most tense moments of the monthlong tournament.
The ball is placed 11 meters (12 yards) out and the goal is 7.32 meters wide (8 yards) and 2.44 meters (8 feet) high. What could be easier for the world's greatest players?
As the great player and soccer sage Johan Cruyff once said: "A penalty seems easy. That's why it is so difficult."
It applies to no one better than to his own countrymen. After all, the Dutch missed five penalties in one match and were eliminated by Italy in the semifinal of Euro 2000, a tournament the Dutch hosted no less.
Add to that penalty shootout losses in the 1992 and 1996 European Championships and the 1998 World Cup semifinal against Brazil and you have a serious national shootout trauma.
"We have to deal with it. It is of course a lot of pressure on your shoulders," said Dutch coach Marco van Basten. He should know. He started the rut in 1992 by missing in the European championship semifinal against outsider Denmark.
In the Netherlands, books have been written about it. Web sites exist trying to figure out the ineptitude. Universities make serious studies about it.
If not the Dutch, the penalty problem is bound to happen to some team sometime during the World Cup.
"We know it's probably going to come to penalties in one of the knockout games, if we're going to go far in this tournament. And we've got to deal with it," said England's Gary Neville.
England lost a heartbreak penalty shootout against Argentina in the second round of the 1998 World Cup and one in the semifinal of Euro 1996 against arch rival Germany at Wembley.
And two years ago, a spectacular quarterfinal against Portugal at Euro 2004 was capped by 14 penalties.
That shootout will always be remembered for Beckham's spectacular fly ball, a penalty kick sent so high over the bar it seemed impossible.
"We've had so many bad experiences with penalties," Neville said.
The most important penalty miss was surely produced by Baggio, one of Italy's most gifted players, sending his shot over the bar in the only World Cup that was decided by a shootout the 1994 final against Brazil.
It is the visions like that of a distraught Baggio, slumping in the arms of team officials and teammates that tend to stick.
While it was long considered a game of luck, only marginally better than the toss of a coin, teams are now fully preparing for the shootout.
"It's not just about luck, penalties, it's about quality, the nerve and the quality," said Neville.
"If u watch a tennis player," said Van Basten. "He already has thousands of services practiced and every day he is practicing. You have to train yourself. You have to have a better routine. The more you train, the better you become."
Goalkeepers usually are the best prepared for it.
"The goalkeepers will know exactly the history of which player is going to take them and which side they go, too," said Neville
And in that fraction of a second, the goalkeeper watches everything.
"You look how he is running, how does he put his foot down? Is it open or closed? Is he a regular penalty taker? You look at those sort of things. You wait till he shoots or you go earlier."
Van der Sar had never stopped a single penalty in a shootout for the Netherlands until he slapped one out from Sweden two years ago, helping get his country into the semifinals of Euro 2004.
For him it was a watershed moment.
"We had a couple of bad experiences but the last one was good. We turned a corner," he said.
 Load-Date: June 24, 2006

 

End of Document
