

Problem with Canadian nuclear reactor forces the cancellation of medical tests worldwide
Associated Press International
December 7, 2007 Friday 2:02 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 771 words
Dateline: TORONTO 
Body




Thousands of cancer patients in Canada, the United States and other countries have had their medical tests postponed because of a problem with a Canadian nuclear reactor that produces medical isotopes used to diagnose and treat such cases.
The isotope shortage is the result of a prolonged shutdown of the reactor in Chalk River, Ontario, which supplies about two-thirds of the multibillion-dollar medical isotopes market to hospitals around the world.
Harried doctors warned that a shortage of nuclear material due to a prolonged shutdown of the federally owned reactor is getting worse with each passing day, causing many patients to worry.
"Last week, I guess you could describe it as struggling. This week it's devastating, and next week potentially catastrophic," said Dr. Chris O'Brien, president of the Ontario Association of Nuclear Medicine.
When injected into patients the isotopes allow medical imaging equipment to track the spread of cancers within the body. The isotope is also used in about 90 percent of all imaging studies in nuclear medicine
More than 20 million patients in Canada and the U.S., most of them with cancer or heart disease, undergo nuclear medicine procedures every year.
Most of those procedures, in which doctors make critical treatment decisions, depend on the technetium isotopes which are now in short supply.
The isotope shortage is also being acutely felt as far away as the Far East and South America, both of which also depend on Canada for medical isotopes.
"A lot of places are typically operating at 20 to 40 percent capacity," said Dr. Alexander McEwan, president of the Virginia-based Society of Nuclear Medicine.
"It's approaching very dire. Within the next one to three weeks, there will be very real adverse impact on patient care."
O'Brien estimated that Ontario is now down to about half of its normal nuclear scan capacity, and even less in some smaller centers. As a result, about 1,000 patients a day are having their tests put off.
In addition, pressure is also building on the alternatives: certain drugs that are being used instead of the isotopes are beginning to run out.
Canada's Health Minister Tony Clement said the government's "three-point plan" to deal with the situation involves looking for supply sources abroad, looking at alternative isotopes and considering alternative procedures.
Other countries will undoubtedly start seeking out other suppliers, both McEwan and O'Brien said.
The unplanned, indefinite shutdown of the federally owned Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd. reactor has crippled Ottawa-based MDS Nordion, which supplies as much as 45 percent of the world's medical isotopes used in diagnostic tests.
Nordion held top-level talks Thursday with suppliers around the world in hopes of sourcing emergency supplies of the reactor-produced molybdenum, which is used to make the technetium isotopes.
Two of those companies said they were scrambling to help, but warned they are limited in what they can do.
"We are working hard to be able to provide some quantities to Nordion from the end of next week," said Bernard David, head of production at Belgium's Institut National des Radioelements in Brussels.
"We'll try to increase our production by about 30 percent. It's not so easy. We have to irradiate targets for at least one week. We have to organize all the transport and so on. It's not an easy job."
David said he's been fielding 20 calls a day since the shortage began Nov. 30, 12 days after the AECL facility shut down for what was supposed to be five days of safety-related maintenance.
"They are coming from the U.S., they are coming from Japan, they are coming from everywhere."
A subsidiary of the Nuclear Energy Corp. of South Africa, another producer of molybdenum, said it was able to provide Nordion with some material this week, but its reactor is scheduled to shut down for maintenance next week as well.
Nordion spokeswoman Shelley Maclean was "pleased" that AECL, which appeared before nuclear regulators Thursday, still appeared to be on track to get its reactor up by "early to mid-January."
Nordion informed its customers as soon as it learned about the reactor outage, and AECL told Nordion of the problem as soon as it could, she added.
Late in the day, the Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission said it would try to expedite import requests for isotopes and is willing to convene on short notice as required to approve the startup of the AECL reactor.
Natural Resources Minister Gary Lunn, who is responsible for AECL and the safety agency, said he is concerned about the safety issues surrounding the reactor and urged a quick resolution to the shutdown.
 Load-Date: December 7, 2007

 

End of Document
