

Putin says Sochi Olympic bid chances are strong, if the voting is honest
Associated Press International
July 1, 2007 Sunday 12:42 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 561 words
Byline: By JIM HEINTZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NOVO-OGARYOVO Russia
Body




A few hours before leaving for a summit in the United States, Russian President Vladimir Putin on Sunday had another high-level meeting on his mind the International Olympic Committee's session that will decide who hosts the 2014 Games.
Putin met with an array of Russia's Olympics stars at his residence outside Moscow to express his confidence in the Russian city of Sochi's bid for the winter games. The session came just before he was to leave for a summit with U.S. President George W. Bush in Kennebunkport, Maine.
After the summit ends Monday, Putin is to fly to Guatemala City for the IOC session that on Wednesday will decide between Sochi, South Korea's Pyeongchang and Salzburg, Austria, for the games.
The trip to Guatemala is a rare case of Putin taking the risk of putting himself at the scene of an embarrassment Sochi is generally seen as the least likely of the three candidates to win.
The meeting with some of Russia's most renowned and glamorous sports stars, including figure skater Tatiana Navka and gymnast Svetlana Khorkina, may have been intended as a form of preliminary damage-control in the event of Sochi's losing the bid, which Putin has vigorously promoted. In his remarks, he appeared to hint at suspicions that a Sochi loss would be driven by politics.
"We count on the competition in Guatemala being honest, and if it is, then we have all chances to win," Putin said.
He also drew a parallel between the summit with Bush and the IOC's vote.
"In politics, as in sports, there is always competition. It's important for these competitions to be conducted under certain rules and with respect for each other," he said.
Putin's increasingly acidic rhetoric toward the United States and the West in recent months has raised wide speculation that many IOC delegations would find it politically impossible to vote for Sochi even if they regard Russia's bid plan as the best of the three.
"The current level of mistrust between Russia and the West doesn't allow one to expect victory for Sochi, strictly on political grounds. The West can't give Putin and the Russian people the possibility to celebrate," the newspaper Nezavisimaya Gazeta commented on Friday.
IOC votes are seen as often driven by political considerations. The vote for Beijing to host the 2008 Summer Games was regarded by many as a move to encourage China's liberalization. However, Russia under Putin has been widely criticized for backsliding on democratic reforms, for smothering opposition and for growing state control of news media.
But Putin played a version of the encouragement gambit by pointing out that facilities built for the Sochi Olympics would become national training facilities. Russia's athletes often live and train overseas because of the post-Communist collapse of the Soviet Union's extensive sports programs.
"After the breakup of the USSR, there remained for our teams not one proper place for training," Putin said. "This is a stimulus for the IOC to push Russia to develop new facilities for its athletes and those of its neighbors."
Sochi's bid plan calls for far more construction than its competitors, the bid's most obvious weak point.
But observers give the plan high marks for its exotic landscape the ice sports would be held adjacent to a subtropical Black Sea beach for its compactness and for the firm government support including financial guarantees.
 Load-Date: July 2, 2007

 

End of Document
