

Robben's class shines through for the Netherlands, Mexico scores 3 against Iran
Associated Press International
June 11, 2006 Sunday 6:37 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 523 words
Byline: By SIMON HAYDON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: BERLIN 
Body




Arjen Robben has an old-looking head on young shoulders.
His maturity despite his 22 years shone through Sunday when the Netherlands opened its World Cup campaign with a 1-0 victory over Serbia-Montenergo and Robben scored the only goal.
Prematurely balding, the Chelsea winger showed slid Robin van Persie's pass into the net in front of a 43,000-strong crowd at Leipzig's Zentral Stadion, half of which wore Orange shirts in support of their team.
Omar Bravo scored twice for Mexico in his team's 3-1 Group D win over Iran in Nuremberg.
Bravo turned quickly to score from close range in the 16th minute and added a second in the 76th after Iran had equalized.
Mexico's Brazilian-born striker Antonio Naelson, known as Zinha, headed in a third for Mexico in the 79th.
Later Sunday, Angola played Portugal in the other Group D match.
The Netherlands' win put it in first place along with Argentina in Group C, considered to be the toughest of the first round. Argentina beat Ivory Coast 2-1 Saturday.
"If half the stadium is orange again in Germany, you feel it is an honor again to play for your country. It is special to play," Netherlands captain Edwin van der Sar said.
Besides scoring the only goal, Robben was uncatchable under a scorching sun and made sure the opponents always had to keep plenty of people back. Little surprise he was chosen Man of the Match.
"I was lucky he was on our side today," Netherlands coach Marco van Basten said. "We always create a lot of chances but not a lot of goals."
Serbia's players were less than impressed by coach Ilija Petkovic's defensive tactics. Midfielder Ognjen Koroman called them "cowardly."
"I don't see any logic starting an opener at the World Cup with such a closed formation." Koroman said. "If we attacked them from the start, we could have scored. We also might have lost by several goals, but at least it wouldn't be in such a cowardly fashion."
In Nuremberg, about 1,200 German Jews and politicians protested Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's denial of the Nazi Holocaust as Iran kicked off against Mexico, declaring that he would be unwelcome at the tournament.
On the field, Iran and Mexico struggled through a chaotic first half played at a frantic pace. Bravo's first goal was canceled out by defender Yahya Golmohammedi, but Mexico dominated the second half as Iran faded.
Mexico goalkeeper Oswaldo Sanchez, who flew to Mexico on Thursday for his father's funeral and rejoined the team in Nuremberg, was tested early when he had to dive to his left to stop a header and looked composed apart from the Iranian goal.
The turmoil surrounding Togo's World Cup soccer team continued after Winfried Schaefer, the coach expected to succeed Otto Pfister, said he would only accept the job if the federation agreed to certain conditions.
After more than three hours of talks at the team hotel, Schaefer announced that he was going home.
In Cambodia, the chief of the country's Buddhist monks is cutting his charges some slack for the duration of the World Cup. He is allowing them to watch matches on television, but cheering and getting excited are still forbidden. Betting is also a no-no.
 Load-Date: June 12, 2006

 

End of Document
