

Robinho gets his chance in the Premier League
Associated Press International
September 2, 2008 Tuesday 4:22 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 431 words
Dateline: MANCHESTER England
Body




Opposition coaches have struggled to contain Robinho's dazzling skills ever since he scored 73 futsal goals in a single season as a 9-year-old.
Now 24, the Brazil striker hopes for further success in the new setting of the Premier League after becoming the most expensive signing in the history of British football on Monday.
Manchester City beat Chelsea by agreeing to pay Real Madrid a 32.5 million pound (euro40 million; $58US.5 million) transfer fee for Robinho on the final day of the European transfer window, saving the forward from what he claimed would be further unhappiness at the Spanish club.
Robinho began his career with Santos' youth academy and entered the first team in 2002.
In three seasons in the Brazilian league, he scored 44 goals in 104 appearances. His form only dipped when his mother was kidnapped in November 2004, though she was released unharmed 40 days later.
Robinho made his debut for Brazil in 2003 but proved unimpressive at the 2006 World Cup, making four substitute appearances and starting only one group game when Brazil beat Japan 4-1.
Robinho compensated at the 2007 Copa America, winning the golden boot award as Brazil beat Argentina 3-0 in the final. He has scored 11 times in 42 international appearances.
Courted by Madrid, Robinho then lost interest in Santos and he was eventually reunited with former Santos coach Vanderlei Luxemburgo at the Spanish powerhouse in 2005. He helped Madrid win league titles in the past two seasons under different coaches, Fabio Capello and Bernd Schuster, but then again decided his future lay elsewhere.
This time, attracted by a large hike in salary and the chance to join former Brazil coach Luiz Felipe Scolari, Chelsea was his choice.
Many Madrid fans were infuriated by Robinho's stance, carrying banners criticizing the Brazilian and jeering when his name was read over the loudspeaker before Madrid's 4-2 victory which won the team the Spanish Supercup on Aug. 24.
Robinho then made several emotional pleas to Madrid to allow him to move to Chelsea but, faced with the London club's refusal to pay its asking price, was met with a refusal.
However, City, boosted by a windfall from a takeover by a United Arab Emirates business group, came to Robinho's rescue Monday by mounting a dramatic bid.
Madrid president Ramon Calderon said Robinho's depressed mental state had played a part in the decision to sell him to Manchester City.
"The boy was in a terrible way," Calderon told radio station Cadena SER late Monday. "When he spoke of his situation, he physically cried and asked to leave Spain. He was desperate."
 Load-Date: September 3, 2008

 

End of Document
