

Rock legends the Rolling Stones hit Shanghai for first mainland China concert
Associated Press International
April 6, 2006 Thursday 10:16 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 468 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER BODEEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SHANGHAI China
Body




Having played before millions of fans worldwide over a four-decade career, there aren't many firsts left for rock icons the Rolling Stones. By the end of this week, there'll be one less, after their debut concert in mainland China.
The band arrived in Shanghai on Thursday, three years after the SARS epidemic forced them to call off an earlier visit to the country.
Mick Jagger, Keith Richards, Ron Woods and Charlie Watts smiled and waved at reporters after stepping off a chartered flight from Japan, the latest stop on their marathon "A Bigger Bang" tour.
A sellout crowd was expected for Saturday night's show in the relatively intimate setting of the 8,000-seat Shanghai Grand Stage in the heart of China's biggest and brashest city.
The concert marks another milestone in the authoritarian communist state's opening to Western pop culture, although a host of limitations remain.
The Rolling Stones' 2002 greatest hits collection, "40 Licks," was cut by the censors to just 36 after "Brown Sugar," "Honky Tonk Woman," "Beast of Burden," and "Let's Spend the Night Together," were cut from the mainland Chinese release, apparently due to their suggestive lyrics.
It wasn't clear if the tracks would be featured in the playlist Saturday.
Though famous around the world for such classics as "Satisfaction" and "Jumpin' Jack Flash," the Stones are relatively unknown in China, which was mired in Maoist isolation at the height of the band's fame in the 1960s and 1970s.
Since then, relaxed cultural restrictions and the rise of a Chinese middle class have attracted many international acts to the country. Recent years have seen performances in Shanghai by Elton John, Whitney Houston and heavy-metal group Deep Purple, among others.
Shanghai was a late addition to the tour's schedule, but singer Mick Jagger was quoted in the Shanghai Daily newspaper last week as saying the band considered the city a must-see.
"We all know that Shanghai is a big important city, so we wanted to make sure it's on our itinerary," Jagger said.
The Stones were booked for a pair of concerts in 2003, just as China's outbreak of the deadly virus severe acute respiratory syndrome was raging.
Those shows were called off, though the Stones did play in Hong Kong late in 2003 in a concert series meant to lift spirits following the end of the outbreak.
The band's current tour started in the U.S. in August, and has wound its way through Central and South America and Japan, including a free concert for more than 1 million people on Copacabana Beach in Rio de Janeiro.
Despite their famed loyalty to the band, some Stones fans couldn't help tweaking them over their Shanghai visit.
A suggested setlist posted on the group's Web site, including such twisted takes on Stones classics as "Let's Spend the Night Together in a Workers' Paradise."
 Load-Date: April 7, 2006

 

End of Document
