

Ronaldo says he wants to play in the United States in the future 
Associated Press International
May 29, 2006 Monday 3:53 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 352 words
Byline: By TALES AZZONI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WEGGIS Switzerland
Body




Brazil striker Ronaldo said Monday he plans to play in the United States later in his career.
"Right now I have a contract with Real Madrid and I'm only thinking about the World Cup, but without a doubt, the American market is one of my goals for the future," Ronaldo said.
Ronaldo reportedly recently turned down a US$120 million (euro94 million), 10-year offer to play for the New York Red Bulls in Major League Soccer.
Ronaldo's manager, Fabiano Farah, told the Estado de Minas newspaper that Ronaldo refused the offer because he is very happy playing in Europe, where he intends to stay for several years.
"A transfer to the United States right now would not make sense," Farah said. "He still has several challenges in European soccer."
The 29-year-old Ronaldo will start in Brazil's attack when the defending champions debut in Germany against Croatia on June 13.
"I consider myself very useful for the national team, I still have a lot to contribute," Ronaldo said.
The striker, who is tied with Pele with 12 World Cup goals and is only three shy of becoming the World Cup's leading scorer, also said he has not been bothered by comments that he is overweight.
"I don't care about them. People who are saying this are not well-informed," he said. "I'm coming off an injury and didn't play for almost a month."
Ronaldo had various injuries at the start of the year and played sparingly for Real Madrid, scoring only five goals in the team's first 19 matches.
Brazil coach Carlos Alberto Parreira has been constantly saying Ronaldo will be motivated and in good condition to begin playing in the World Cup.
Ronaldo also gave some advice to help teammate Ronaldinho cope with the media and fan attention.
"I'd tell him not to accept more responsibility than he already has. He needs to enter the field and forget (about everything), just play," Ronaldo said.
Ronaldo will be playing in his fourth World Cup. He was 17 years old when Brazil won the tournament in 1994 in the United States.
In 97 matches with the national team, Ronaldo has scored 61 goals. When the striker is on the field, Brazil has lost only eight times.
 Load-Date: May 30, 2006

 

End of Document
