

Sagnol: France can defy the critics again and succeed at Euro 2008
Associated Press International
June 12, 2008 Thursday 6:18 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 459 words
Byline: By JEROME PUGMIRE, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: BERN Switzerland
Body




France defender Willy Sagnol believes his team can overcome its lackluster start at the European Championship and defy the critics in a repeat of the 2006 World Cup campaign.
Just like two years ago, France needs to improve after a 0-0 draw against Romania on Monday. Doubts are mounting over the quality and age of the team, and the criticism back home is increasingly stinging.
"Our objective is still to go all the way," Sagnol said ahead of Friday's Group C match against the Netherlands. "For several years, whether it is in qualifying or in the major tournaments themselves, we are used to a somewhat laborious start."
France was pilloried after it opened its 2006 World Cup campaign, also a 0-0 draw, against Switzerland. Rather than caving in under the pressure, Sagnol thinks the French are pacing themselves for a comeback.
"We weren't the most spectacular team at the World Cup, but then neither were Italy," Sagnol said. "And at the end we both reached the final."
France hardly created a chance against Romania three days ago, while the Netherlands thrashed Italy 3-0. Now, the French need a win over the Dutch in Bern to get back on track before facing Italy four days later.
Sagnol, playing in his fourth consecutive major tournament, is a big fan of coach Marco van Basten's Dutch team.
"They were impressive, they attacked well," Sagnol said of the Netherlands' win over Italy. "They found solutions against an Italy team which normally has defense as its strongest point. But I think this will be a different match.
"We don't play like Italy, and I don't think the Dutch will play the same way against us, either."
Sagnol expects the Dutch to be far more attacking than the Romanians, and thus leave spaces at the back.
"Holland likes to play more football than the Romanians," Sagnol said. "With players like (Karim) Benzema, (Thierry) Henry, (Frank) Ribery and (Nicolas) Anelka, I am sure we will have some chances to score."
Henry, France's record scorer with 44 goals, missed the Romania match with a thigh strain, but has since returned to full training.
France coach Raymond Domenech says that all 23 players are fit enough to play some part against the Netherlands. Getting Henry back into the team would be a welcome boost to its flagging attack.
"Thierry Henry is the best scorer ever for France," Sagnol said. "So, for sure he is very important for us. Even though he had a hard time in Barcelona, he is very motivated."
Henry failed to impress the FC Barcelona fans last season, and was also whistled by French supporters at Stade de France on June 3 after he was substituted against Colombia.
"He wants to show to the French people, and also to the Spanish people, that Thierry Henry is still one of the best players in the world," Sagnol said.
 Load-Date: June 13, 2008

 

End of Document
