

Samaranch asks IOC to give Madrid the Olympics
Associated Press International
October 2, 2009 Friday 2:38 PM GMT

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 310 words
Byline: By JAN M. OLSEN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: COPENHAGEN 
Body




Former IOC president Juan Antonio Samaranch asked the International Olympic Committee on Friday to consider his age and award Madrid the 2016 Games.
"Dear colleagues, I know that I am very near the end on my time," Samaranch said to the 100-plus IOC members toward the end of Madrid's presentation. "I am, as you know, 89 years old. May I ask you to consider granting my country the honor and also the duty to organize the games and Paralympics in 2016."
Samaranch spoke ahead of a secret ballot to choose between the Spanish capital, Chicago, Rio de Janeiro and Tokyo for the right to host the 2016 Olympics.
Samaranch was the IOC president for 21 years before Jacques Rogge took over in 2001. He still has influence with some members and could swing a few crucial votes in Madrid's favor.
Spanish Prime Minister Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero, who was part of the team that presented the Madrid bid in Copenhagen, said the city was "a sure candidate," and called the bid "reliable."
Madrid which is competing with Rio for Latin American votes, stressed that the city is embracing the world.
"It is a country that believes in the European ideal but it also belongs in Spain and Latin America," Zapatero said.
The Madrid team that lined up King Juan Carlos, Real Madrid striker Raul Gonzalez, Juan Antonio Samaranch Jr., city and regional officials, reiterated that 77 percent of its venues are ready or under construction.
Mayor Alberto Ruiz-Gallardon said the city's "efficient infrastructure" was an asset and the Olympics would also help to improve the Spanish capital.
"It will transform the city into a better place," Ruiz-Gallardon said.
Madrid, which also bid for the 2012 Olympics that went to London, also has hosted countless top sporting events and is familiar to many IOC members.
"It's a project that has my wholehearted support," Juan Carlos told the members.
 Load-Date: October 3, 2009

 

End of Document
