

Sandinista leader Daniel Ortega, who spent the 1980s fighting off U.S.-backed rebels, tries to return to Nicaragua's presidency
Associated Press International
November 5, 2006 Sunday 2:05 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 497 words
Byline: By TRACI CARL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MANAGUA Nicaragua
Body




Nicaraguans decide Sunday whether to return to power Sandinista leader Daniel Ortega, a former revolutionary who spent the 1980s fighting off a U.S.-backed war to oust him from office.
The hotly contested race is being watched closely by Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez, who is hoping to find a new ally in Ortega.
U.S. Commerce Secretary Carlos Gutierrez, for his part, has warned that U.S. aid and trade programs "will be endangered" if "anti-democratic forces prevail."
The vote will be watched over by 17,000 electoral observers including three former presidents: the United States' Jimmy Carter, Peru's Alejandro Toledo and Panama's Nicolas Ardito Barletta. Armed soldiers guard polling stations, while the independent Nicaraguan nonprofit agency Civic Group for Ethics and Transparency is carrying out a quick count of votes from a sample of voting stations that will serve as a gauge of possible problems.
Ortega's main opponent is Harvard-educated Eduardo Montealegre of the Nicaraguan Liberal Alliance, a party that broke from the Constitutionalist Liberal Party of former President Arnoldo Aleman, who was convicted of corruption during his 1997-2002 term.
During his campaign, a balding, 60-year-old Ortega said he wasn't the same man who allied with the Soviet Union, left the Nicaraguan economy in shambles and fought off U.S.-backed Contras in a war that killed 30,000 people.
In fact, his vice presidential candidate was once one of his biggest enemies: Jaime Morales, who served as the spokesman for the Contras.
As Sandinista leader, Ortega seized Morales' six-bedroom estate and still uses it as his campaign headquarters. They reconciled after Ortega offered to pay Morales for his former home.
Morales said he decided to join Ortega's campaign because he preferred "the strange to the unknown."
The race was Ortega's fourth consecutive presidential campaign. He lost his first election in 1990 to Violeta Chamorro, ending Sandinista rule and the Contra war. His next two presidential attempts were also failures.
But this election could be different. Nearly six years ago, the Sandinistas helped push through Congress a new electoral law that allows candidates to win the first round with just 35 percent of the vote if they beat their closest opponent by five percentage points. Before, they were required to get 45 percent of the vote.
Recent polls showed Ortega with a comfortable lead over Montealegre, but just short of the 35 percent he needs to avoid a second round.
If Ortega doesn't win outright, he will likely face Montealegre in a December runoff that will be much more difficult to win, mostly because the votes won't be splintered between five different candidates as they are now.
Results will begin to trickle in late Sunday, but officials might not declare a winner until Monday or later. Voters will also be voting in a new Congress.
Nicaraguan presidents can't run for re-election, and President Enrique Bolanos will step down Jan. 10 after a five-year term.
 Load-Date: November 5, 2006

 

End of Document
