

Saudi-based al-Qaida wing urges militants to stop oil flow to the United States
Associated Press International
February 15, 2007 Thursday 12:31 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 399 words
Byline: By MAAMOUN YOUSSEF, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CAIRO Egypt
Body




A Saudi Arabian terrorist faction affiliated with al-Qaida has urged Muslim militants to attack oil facilities all over the world, including Canada, Mexico and Venezuela, to stop the flow of oil to the United States, according to an article by the group posted on the Internet.
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula said in its monthly magazine posted on an Islamic Web site that "cutting oil supplies to the United States, or at least curtailing it, would contribute to the ending of the American occupation of Iraq and Afghanistan." The group said it was making the statements as part of Osama bin Laden's declared policy.
It was not possible to verify independently that the posting was from the terror faction.
Al-Qaida claimed responsibility for last year's attacks on oil installations in Saudi Arabia and Yemen after bin Laden called on militants to stop the flow of oil to the West. The group also was behind the 2002 attack on a French oil tanker that killed one person in the Gulf of Aden.
The article in the online magazine Sawt al-Jihad, or Voice of the Holy War, said the United States would always need more oil.
"In the long run, America might be able to lessen its dependence on Middle East oil and would be satisfied with oil from Canada, Mexico, Venezuela and other new customers or double its dependence on alternative energy resources; therefore, oil interests in all regions that serve the U.S. and not only in the Middle East, should be attacked," said the article.
The Canadian Security Intelligence Service declined to comment on the report.
Ray Lord, a spokesman for Chevron Corp., told the Canadian media company CanWest News the company was not aware of the threat but it takes security threats seriously. "It is a top priority for us. Ever since 9/11 our entire company has been on an elevated alert," he said.
In Mexico, presidential spokesman Maximiliano Cortazar told reporters that President Felipe Calderon's government was trying to confirm the veracity of the threat. Venezuela's Foreign Ministry said it had no immediate comment.
Al-Qaida, in a statement claiming responsibility for attacks in November on oil installations in Yemen, said "these operations were carried out upon the directive of our emir (leader) Osama bin Laden, may God protect him, in which he ordered Muslims to strike at the Western economy and drain it, and to halt the robbing of Muslims' wealth."
 Load-Date: February 15, 2007

 

End of Document
