

Scolari comes up against the one that got away
Associated Press International
September 12, 2008 Friday 12:36 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 645 words
Byline: By STUART CONDIE, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: COBHAM England
Body




Luiz Felipe Scolari turned down an offer to join Manchester City before taking charge of Chelsea and on Saturday he faces a player he could not talk into making the same decision.
Robinho had looked set to join Chelsea after a lengthy courtship by the west London club that even included the premature sale of shirts bearing the Brazil striker's name.
But, newly rich after agreeing to a takeover by Abu Dhabi investors, Manchester City jumped in with a British record offer of 32.5 million pounds (euro40 million; $58US.5 million) to sign him from Real Madrid and plans to give him his debut against the Blues.
The transfer surprised most in English football, not least Scolari, who had instructed the club to hire a player he had long admired.
Scolari, though, said he was still happy to have spurned City's advances when he was Portugal manager even though Chelsea's position as the most affluent club in England is now being challenged.
"I came to Chelsea not because it was the richest in the world, but because they offered me a job and it is a fantastic job," Scolari said Friday. "I don't think about who is the richest in the world.
"If I am happy in my house, I do not look at another house. Chelsea is my house."
Madrid was reluctant to sell Robinho to its Champions League rival, particularly after Chelsea angered it with its short-lived online shirt offer. And Robinho seemed to have been swayed by City's lucrative offer despite publicly stating that his heart was with Chelsea.
The about-face could be just the first indicator of a shift in power in the Premier League as City joins Chelsea in the ranks of football's mega rich.
With striker Didier Drogba still only "60 or 70 percent" fit from a knee injury, Scolari had been banking on Robinho to boost his forward line. Drogba could return on Saturday, but most likely as a substitute a role that Robinho is also likely to fill after flying back to England following a midweek World Cup qualifier in Brazil.
Drogba, though, is just one of Scolari's worries. His midfield is decimated by injuries.
Joe Cole could miss the match because of the blow to his head he sustained during England's 4-1 win at Croatia on Wednesday, while Michael Essien is out of about six months because of a cruciate knee ligament injury.
And Michael Ballack is still out after pulling up with an ankle injury in Chelsea's Premier League opener.
"It's important I say to the fans that we have little problems but the players try to solve these problems," Scolari said. "We respect Manchester City but we are men."
City, meanwhile, is on a high after its transfer coup and unusually confident ahead of the visit of the Premier League leaders. Manager Mark Hughes is likely to start the match with Robinho's countrymen Elano and Jo up front, but can call upon his star arrival if necessary.
"One of the first things he said was that he can't wait for the game because he can't wait to play against Chelsea," Hughes said. "The intention is that he plays a part on Saturday. The one impression everyone has of Robinho is that as soon as he gets the ball you sense something is going to happen and I think everyone will see that at the weekend."
Defending champions Manchester United are at Liverpool in Saturday's other big match, with the hosts hampered in their attempts for a first home win over the Red Devils since 2001. Striker Fernando Torres and captain Steven Gerrard are carrying injuries, while United will give a debut to Dimitar Berbatov following his club-record transfer from Tottenham.
Also Saturday, Newcastle takes on Hull in its first game since Kevin Keegan quit as manager, while West Ham starts life under Gianfranco Zola with a trip to West Brom.
Arsenal is at Blackburn, Bolton is at Fulham, Middlesbrough is at Portsmouth, and Sunderland is at Wigan.
Everton is at Stoke on Sunday, while Tottenham hosts Aston Villa on Monday.
 Load-Date: September 13, 2008

 

End of Document
