

Sevilla feels no heat as it looks to extend its lead atop the Spanish League
Associated Press International
January 4, 2007 Thursday 10:48 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 615 words
Dateline: MADRID Spain
Body




Despite leading the Spanish league as it resumes after the winter break, Sevilla still doesn't think it can win the title.
"Sevilla hasn't raised its objective to winning the league, we don't want that pressure," Sevilla president Jose Maria Del Nido said Wednesday. "We aspire to play in the Champions League, so the obligation stays with FC Barcelona and Real Madrid, who have put millions into winning the league title."
Sevilla leads with 37 points, three more than Barcelona and five in front of Madrid.
Sevilla plays No. 5 Zaragoza and Barcelona is at No.9 Getafe on Saturday, while Madrid plays No. 15 Deportivo La Coruna on Sunday.
New signing Alexander Kerzhakov could make his debut for Sevilla after joining the UEFA Cup champions from Zenit St. Petersburg in a euro5-million (US$6.6-million) deal on Thursday.
Del Nido didn't rule out signing more players during the monthlong transfer window, saying he'll do whatever he can for the club "to arrive as far it can in the three competitions we're playing in."
Madrid has been busiest club in the transfer market, acquiring three South Americans as it bids for its first trophy in four years.
Madrid paid a combined euro39 million (US$51.3 million) for Boca Juniors midfielder Fernando Gago and River Plate striker Gonzalo Higuain and both are expected to make an immediate impact. It also signed defender Marcelo from Brazilian club Fluminense.
Madrid manager Fabio Capello is expected to start Gago alongside Emerson in midfield, which was outplayed as Recreativo Huelva won 3-0 at the Santiago Bernabeu Stadium in the last league game.
Higuain could start on the bench with Ruud van Nistelrooy still injured and not yet training.
"I've felt good ever since coming here," Higuain said. "I am very proud to be part of this great team. If they see an opportunity for me to play against Deportivo, I'll be there."
That could signal the exit of Antonio Cassano, who has trained on his own for the past two days.
David Beckham is expected to start for only the eighth time this season, after the former England captain's agent said he would be negotiating a new two-year contract with the club next week.
Barcelona is unbeaten in eight league matches, last losing 2-0 at Madrid on Oct. 22.
"It is very important to be leaders," Barcelona striker Eidur Gudjohnsen said. "We have a game in hand on Sevilla, but there are a lot of games this month which will use up a lot of our energy. But if we win those games, we will be leaders again."
The Catalan club appreciated the 12-day winter break, especially after completing a one-week trip to Japan to compete in the World Club Championship.
"We were very tired at the end of the year after so many matches and trips," forward Ludovic Giuly said. "The holidays were great for recovering a bit. Now we are keener than ever to start the New Year well."
The Spanish and European champions will be without forwards Samuel Eto'o and Lionel Messi and defender Lilian Thuram all January due to long-term injuries. Defender Gianluca Zambrotta is expected to return next week from a torn muscle in his left thigh.
Sixth-place Valencia heads into its match at No. 11 Villarreal on a three-game winning streak, knowing it can ill-afford to lose any more ground on the top four.
"We can't lose or draw many games if we want to finish the season in the Champions League places," defender Miguel said.
Valencia is tied with Zaragoza on 27 points, one behind fourth-place Atletico Madrid, which hosts last-place Gimnastic Tarragona.
Also this weekend, No. 18 Real Betis hosts Celta Vigo; No. 19 Real Sociedad plays Osasuna; Levante faces Racing Santander; Athletic Bilbao travels to Mallorca; and Espanyol welcomes Recreativo.
 Load-Date: January 5, 2007

 

End of Document
