

Shares in BetOnSports suspended following arrest of CEO in the U.S.
Associated Press International
July 18, 2006 Tuesday 9:00 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 407 words
Dateline: LONDON 
Body




Online gambling company BetOnSports PLC asked for trading in its shares to be suspended Tuesday following the arrest of its chief executive in the United States.
The company's chief executive, David Carruthers, was being held in Fort Worth, Texas, after he was detained while trying to make a connecting flight Sunday from the United Kingdom to Costa Rica, where BetOnSports is based.
U.S. authorities said an arrest warrant was issued for Gary Stephen Kaplan, the founder of the company.
Kaplan, was charged with 20 felonies. The indictment seeks forfeiture of US$4.5 billion (euro3.6 billion) and various properties from Kaplan and the co-defendants.
His brother, Neil Scott Kaplan, was arrested in Fort Pierce, Florida, U.S. officials said.
A federal court in St. Louis also issued a temporary restraining order Monday to prevent BetOnSports from accepting bets from the United States, which is reported to be the company's biggest market.
Shares in BetOnSports fell as much as 24 percent Monday following news of Carruthers' arrest, but they recovered to close 17 percent lower at 122.50 pence (euro1.78; US$2.24)
The indictment charges Kaplan with failing to pay federal wagering excise taxes on more than US$3.3 billion (euro2.6 billion) on U.S. wagers. It also says undercover agents took bets from some of the defendants' companies, which allegedly transported equipment used in transmitting betting information across state lines and from Florida to Costa Rica.
Authorities also charged that Kaplan's group fraudulently claimed that Internet and phone wagering on sporting events was legal and licensed.
Kevin Smith, a spokesman for Betonsports, said Carruthers and other company officials had no idea that there was an indictment.
"Certainly had they told us, we would have been more than willing to negotiate with them and work on whatever these charges are," Smith said. "There wouldn't have been any need to nab him while he's waiting on a layover for a flight."
Last week, the U.S. House of Representatives passed a bill that would make it illegal for American banks and credit card issuers to make payments to online gambling sites. The bill's fate in the Senate is uncertain.
In the year ending Feb. 5, BetOnSports reported a 65 percent gain in operating profit on continuing operations to US$20.1 million (euro16 million) for the year. The company said it handled US$1.77 billion (US$1.4 billion) worth of bets for the year, up 25 percent.
 Load-Date: July 19, 2006

 

End of Document
