

Sharon's chief surgeon surgeon meets the press
AP Worldstream
January 9, 2006 Monday

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 361 words
Byline: ARON HELLER; Associated Press Writer
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body




Dressed in his white doctor's coat, the flash of cameras bouncing off his forehead, neurosurgeon Dr. Felix Umansky made his first public appearance Monday since operating on Prime Minister Ariel Sharon three times in two days.
The Argentinean-born Umansky, 62, told reporters in heavily accented Hebrew that his famous patient was breathing on his own for the first time since his massive stroke last week, and that he had moved his right hand a leg slightly. However, Umansky remained cautious, saying the prime minister was not yet out of danger.
While the soft-spoken surgeon may be a new name to the general public, he has long been considered a heavyweight in his field.
Born in the Argentinean town of Rosario, he began his medical training in Argentina before moving to Israel in 1973. After a stint as a neurosurgery resident at the Beilinson Medical Center near Tel Aviv, he completed completed post-residency training as a clinical and research fellow in neurosurgery and microneurosurgery at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston and Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit.
Umansky has been a lecturer at the medical schools of Tel Aviv University and the Hebrew University in Jerusalem.
Since 1993, he has headed the Department of Neurosurgery at Hadassah, where he has established what is known informally around the hospital as the "Argentinean Junta." Among the department members is Dr. Jose Cohen, also of Rosario, who assisted in Sharon's brain surgery.
Rosario is the third largest city in Argentina, with a population of 1.2 million. It has a Jewish community that has been present in the city for more than a century and currently numbers around 7,000 people.
A reporter for Israel TV's Channel 2, sent to Rosario to track the doctors' roots, said the two surgeons were making headlines in the local press. Reporter Smadar Peled said Cohen's relatives were at pains to say they had no inside information on Sharon's condition and "don't even ask".
Cohen's mother proudly said her other son is a dentist.
The other members of Sharon's team are Dr. Yoram Weiss, and the Moroccan-born brothers, Dr. Yaakov Gozal and Dr. David Gozal, both anesthesiologists.
ah-kl<
 Load-Date: January 9, 2006

 

End of Document
