

Silva to portray himself as champion of the poor in re-election bid
Associated Press International
June 25, 2006 Sunday 3:13 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 599 words
Byline: By ALAN CLENDENNING, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAO PAULO Brazil
Body




A campaign push by Brazilian President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva to portray himself as a champion of the poor as he seeks re-election will probably resonate with voters and give him a convincing victory in October, analysts said Sunday.
Silva officially declared his candidacy on Saturday, saying he will push harder in a second term to eradicate poverty, while acknowledging criticism that he didn't go far enough during his first term to ease grinding misery for tens of millions in Latin America's largest country.
But his widespread popularity and steady hand shepherding Brazil's economy toward slow and steady economic growth will likely pay off at the ballot box unless an unexpected crisis strikes between now and the Oct. 1 election, Latin American experts said.
Anti-poverty programs by Silva, known popularly as Lula, "have been largely symbolic, but Lula's promises to do more for the poor will sound credible and will have great appeal," said Michael Shifter, a Latin America analyst at the Inter-American Dialogue think tank in Washington.
Silva, a former shoeshine boy and radical union leader during Brazil's military dictatorship, was hit hard politically last year by a bribes-for-votes scandal that resulted in a wave of resignations from his inner circle.
But he denied any knowledge of the scheme, and it will probably have no impact on his re-election chances, said Riordan Roett, director of Western Hemisphere studies at Johns Hopkins University.
Despite the scandal, polls show Silva is within reach of beating his top challenger, former Sao Paulo state Gov. Geraldo Alckmin of the centrist Social Democratic Party,in the first round of voting on Oct. 1. If no candidate gets 50 percent in the first round, a second round of voting will be held Oct. 29.
"Incredible as it may seem, Lula is the teflon president," Roett said. "Corruption allegations, who cares?"
Silva insisted most of Brazil's poor have improved their lives considerably since he took office in January 2003 through poverty alleviation programs.
Among them is the "Bolsa Familia," which gives poor families monthly money for food to keep children in school and in after-school activities, instead of going to work.
Silva has been criticized by leftist elements of his party for adopting conservative economic policies to cut inflation by keeping interest rates sky-high.
The fiscal policy reduced double-digit inflation to less than 5 percent annually while limiting the expansion of Brazil's economy, and Finance Minister Guido Mantega said Silva in a second term would try to speed up economic growth.
But experts doubted Silva would make any big changes in economic policy, because he's already had success in making Brazil's boom and bust economic cycles with hyperinflation a distant memory.
And altering the government's economic policies could spook foreign investors who have been pumping tens of billions of dollars into Latin America's largest economy, allowing companies to expand and add jobs.
"Though Lula may be tempted to increase social spending during his next term, he is at the same time determined to keep the fiscal situation under control," Shifter said. "He knows that if inflation begins to increase and becomes an issue, that can be politically fatal."
Despite declaring his candidacy Saturday, Silva had no public events scheduled Sunday. He plans to visit his power base in Sao Paulo Monday.
But the campaign won't go into high gear until after the World Cup ends in July because few in the soccer-crazed nation will pay attention to politics as Brazil's national team seeks a record sixth title.
 Load-Date: June 26, 2006

 

End of Document
