

Soccer fans fear blight on the beautiful game in World Cup countdown
Associated Press International
February 28, 2006 Tuesday 12:51 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 800 words
Byline: By ROBERT MILLWARD, AP Soccer Writer
Dateline: LONDON 
Body




With soccer having been plagued by cheats, betting scams and racist crowd trouble over the past year, fans of the game are fearing the World Cup could be shamed by the same problems.
Hopes, dreams and anxieties will increase as the final 100-day countdown to the June 9 kickoff in Munich, Germany, begins Wednesday, when the first batch of World Cup warm-up games gives everyone a taste of the quadrennial championship.
Coaches and players from 32 nations are dreaming of getting their hands on the famous trophy at the July 9 final in Berlin and organizers hope for a trouble-free championship full of thrills and goals.
Now comes the reality.
Although fans can't wait to see Brazil's Ronaldinho, Thierry Henry of France, Argentina's Lionel Messi and England's Wayne Rooney displaying their skills at Germany 2006, the world's most popular sport is plagued by problems on and off the field.
The game's ruling bodies are struggling to deal with violent, racist fans, match-fixing, betting scams, players who cheat, unscrupulous owners, coaches and agents and a widening chasm between the game's rich and poor.
FIFA president Sepp Blatter has been saying for months that soccer has the impact to "make the world a better place."
Despite a history of bringing political foes to the same soccer field and overcoming social disadvantages, soccer also has been the excuse for the worst in human behavior.
World Cup organizers know there is the potential for major violence across Germany if the notorious fan elements from England, the Netherlands and the host nation clash, or if the supporters groups responsible for Nazi salutes and other racial provocations at games show up from Spain, Italy and eastern Europe.
Fan organizers estimate 100,000 English supporters will travel to the World Cup, although police have issued travel bans on more than 3,000 known troublemakers to ensure they don't go.
Barcelona's Cameroon striker Samuel Eto'o was on the brink of walking off the field after Real Zaragoza fans berated him with racial taunts on Saturday. In the latest outbreaks of violence on Sunday, rioting fans forced the referee to abandoned a game in Turkey and supporters threw rocks and started fires during a match in Greece.
On the field, soccer appears to have been hit by an epidemic of cheating.
Players dive to get penalties or opponents sent off and, with referee standards seemingly at an all time low, the match officials are being blamed for the chaos on the field.
Pierluigi Collina, a retired match official most people wish was still in the game, says it's not the fault of the men with the whistles.
"A player who dives does not offend the referee," he said. "He offends his fellow professionals because he is cheating on them. If he manages to win a penalty and it changes the result of a whole season, even a career, that is a disaster for the players."
Collina believes unless FIFA gives referees a clear mandate to show the red card to the cheats, they will continue to get away with it.
The host nation also was hit by a major match-fixing scandal a year ago when German referee Robert Hoyzer admitted taking bribes from Croatian gambler Ante Sapina and was jailed for 29 months.
The Hoyzer case was a major embarrassment to the German federation, which will be dreading a repeat at the World Cup. Gambling syndicates in Europe and the Far East make huge amounts of cash out of the game and the World Cup could be a target.
Whatever happens on the field, the fans should enjoy top-quality facilities at 12 grounds that have been either upgraded or newly constructed.
The 80,000-seat Olympic Stadium in Berlin has had a major refurbishment and will stage the final. The opening game will be at Bayern Munich's new 70,000-capacity Allianz Arena.
Although a consumer group came reported that four of the grounds lacked adequate fire safety measures and escape routes, organizers said the findings were unreliable.
Five of the grounds were used at last year's Confederations Cup and, although the moveable roof leaked during a thunderstorm at the final in Frankfurt's Waldstadion, the fans were impressed.
Getting into them may be more of a problem.
In Germany, famed for efficiency, ticketing always seems to stumble.
This time, the 3.3 million tickets will be personalized, creating the threat of long queues at the stadiums with organizers planning checks to see if the person with the ticket is the person on the ticket.
The idea is to eliminate stolen or counterfeit tickets, as well as keeping ticket brokers or others from exorbitantly inflating the price.
A lawsuit has been filed in Frankfurt by one ticket holder who bought his on eBay. World Cup organizers, who have warned that sales on internet sites could turn out to be fraudulent, have refused to put his name on the ticket making it unusable.
 Load-Date: February 28, 2006

 

End of Document
