

Soccer prompts ethnic tensions in Mostar but the real reason are the forthcoming elections, expert says
Associated Press International
June 16, 2006 Friday 4:39 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 487 words
Byline: By MIRSAD BEHRAM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MOSTAR Bosnia-Herzegovina
Body




Ethnic tensions that erupted after a World Cup match in the southern Bosnian city of Mostar prompted many students of the only multiethnic high school in the divided town to skip classes Friday even with police standing guard.
Fans clashed shortly after the end of the World Cup match Tuesday between Brazil and Croatia, leaving one person seriously wounded by a gunshot and several others, including six special police officers, injured even though Bosnia is not even playing at the World Cup.
The Croats in Mostar usually support the team of neighboring Croatia even if it plays against Bosnia. In return, Bosniak soccer fans usually support whoever plays against Croatia in Tuesday's case Brazil.
Croatia lost to Brazil and Croat hooligans focused their anger overnight on Mostar's multiethnic high school, located in a downtown square that served as the front line during the Bosnian 1992-95 war.
The rioters demolished 59 windows, according to school principal Ankica Covic.
On Wednesday, about 30 young Croats gathered in front of the school, harassing and threatening Bosniak students until police dispersed them. The school also received telephone threats on Thursday.
Covic said school management requested police protection.
"We will not allow a handful of people who are out of control to come here and provoke the children." Police deployed about 10 officers to permanently guard the school, established in the years after the war to encourage attendance by children of all ethnic backgrounds.
Soccer is just a mask, said one sociologist, Slavo Kukic. He said the entire political system in Bosnia was generating ethnic divisions, and more such incidents can be expected ahead of the October elections.
More ethnic incidents, more fear; more fear, more votes for nationalist parties, he said.
"The glorification of ethnicity is present in the family and in school. That's where the children pick up the message that the 'others' are to blame for all of our problems and one should not hang around with them since they are very dangerous," Kukic said.
"All this is exploited by nationalist political establishments since we see such ethnic clashes always ahead of elections," he said.
Bosnia used to be an ethnically mixed republic of former Yugoslavia but the country broke up into several little states.
The war in Bosnia broke out in 1992 when Bosnia's Serbs tried to prevent the republic from becoming independent from Serb-dominated Yugoslavia. A year later, Bosnia's Catholic Croats and Muslim Bosniaks begun fighting each other as well, with the Croats trying to claim a chunk of Bosnia for neighboring Croatia.
The brutal war ended with a peace agreement in 1995 that established Bosnia as an independent country but divided into a Serb republic and a Bosniak-Croat federation. However, both are run by the same three nationalist parties who led their people into the war.
Mostar is divided between Croats and Bosniaks.
 Load-Date: June 17, 2006

 

End of Document
