

South Korean, U.S. negotiators go down to the wire in free trade talks
Associated Press International
March 29, 2007 Thursday 10:58 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 696 words
Byline: By KELLY OLSEN, AP Business Writer
Dateline: SEOUL South Korea
Body




Elite negotiators square off for days in a finely calibrated high-stakes showdown. National economic interest is on the line with a deadline for a deal just hours away.
One false step, one push too hard and months of effort could disappear, with one party potentially walking away from an agreement both sides say they want to seal.
South Korea and the United States have been negotiating an ambitious free trade accord for almost 10 months. Both sides have said they want a "win-win" deal to cut tariffs and other trade barriers to boost both countries' economic growth although Korean opponents claim an influx of cheaper U.S. goods will hurt livelihoods and hope the talks collapse.
Now, as the negotiators approach a Friday deadline with key issues such as trade in automobiles and agriculture still unresolved, the heat is on.
"I would say it's pretty tense," Brian Peck, a former negotiator with the Office of the United States Trade Representative, said in an interview Thursday. "There's fatigue. They go on for hours and hours and hours."
For South Korea, excluding its rice market from any deal is its highest priority. Seoul's chief negotiator warned Monday that the U.S. risked scuttling the deal if it pushes too hard on that issue.
For Washington, removing restrictions on American beef imports put in place by South Korea after mad cow disease was discovered in the U.S. in 2003, though not technically part of the negotiations, are of supreme importance and have become an ominous cloud hanging over the deal.
Peck, now a California-based international trade attorney, negotiated intellectual property issues in U.S. trade deals with Panama, Colombia and Peru and was involved in talks on the South Korea agreement before negotiations formally began.
He said that free trade deals always go down to the last minute, dictated by the toughness of the issues but also by the needs of negotiators for political cover.
"At least for domestic purposes each side has to at least appear that they are digging in to the bitter end," he said, suggesting that negotiators will get less and less sleep as the final deadline nears.
The two sides need to wrap up a deal by the end of the business day Friday in the U.S. or early Saturday South Korean time a deadline dictated by the approaching expiration of special U.S. presidential authority that makes getting trade deals passed by Congress easier.
Make-or-break talks that began this week were kicked up a level after chief negotiators for the two sides failed to bridge final gaps last week in Washington.
South Korean Trade Minister Kim Hyun-chong and Deputy U.S. Trade Representative Karan Bhatia are leading the talks, which a South Korean official Wednesday likened to a "tug of war."
In an apparent bid to push the stalled talks forward, the leaders of the two countries spoke by telephone Thursday, the South Korean president's office said.
U.S. President George W. Bush and South Korean President Roh Moo-hyun spoke by telephone for about 20 minutes, said Roh's spokesman, Yoon Seung-yong, according a posting on the Web site of Roh's office.
Besides reaffirming their commitment to achieving a balanced deal, the leaders also "instructed their respective chief trade negotiators to hold negotiations with maximum flexibility," Yoon said.
Among issues they discussed were automobiles, agriculture and textiles, Yoon said. Roh spoke to Bush from Qatar, where the South Korean president was wrapping a series of summits in the Middle East. He was due to return to Seoul on Friday.
Government officials on both sides say an agreement would boost economic ties between two countries that already do more than $75US billion (euro56 billion) in trade a year.
South Korean opponents, however, fear an agreement will cost jobs.
Negotiating sessions in South Korea have been dogged by demonstrations, with thousands of protesters marching, chanting and praying that the effort will fail.
On Tuesday, a group of protesters managed to breach heavy security and enter the lobby of the swank hilltop hotel where the talks are under way, unfurling a banner and denouncing the deal within in sight of some U.S. negotiators before being dragged away.
 Load-Date: March 30, 2007

 

End of Document
