

Start the samba lessons Rio gets 2016 Olympics
Associated Press International
October 2, 2009 Friday 8:53 PM GMT

 Copyright 2009 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 754 words
Byline: By GRAHAM DUNBAR, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: COPENHAGEN 
Body




Let the Olympic carnival begin. And the crying, too.
The International Olympic Committee's announcement Friday that Rio de Janeiro will host the 2016 Games reduced Brazilian President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva to tears.
The popular and populist politician known as Lula sobbed into a handkerchief at the official news conference after Rio won a comprehensive 66-32 victory over Madrid in a third and final round of voting putting the Olympics in South America for the first time.
He wept with emotion while sitting with Rio bid's team on the main stage during a final presentation of the city's case to IOC voters earlier Friday. And the tears also flowed when he was hugged and kissed by football great Pele minutes after the city was confirmed as 2016 host by IOC president Jacques Rogge.
"From the bottom of my heart I can say that this is the most exciting day of my life," said Silva, a two-time presidential election winner. "I can say that I cried during the presentation. Suddenly I was crying so much more than anyone."
Pele also sobbed as he exalted his president in a joyous melee of Brazilian bodies and flags, within touching distance of smiling rows of IOC members.
"His heart is in sport," the three-time World Cup winner told The Associated Press, the green, blue and yellow national flag draped around his shoulders. "We are together so we hugged. He is another person who always plays in a good team."
Rio's victory was undoubtedly a shared effort, though the winning team all honored their captain.
Rio 2016 secretary general Carlos Osorio described how Silva calmed his side's pre-match nerves before facing the IOC and a global television audience Friday.
"We were in a locker room before a final match," Osorio told the AP. "Instead of 11 we had 12 players that were going to be on stage, on the pitch."
Rio's team, the third of the four candidate cities to make its 45-minute appeal for votes, prepared to exit the green room and march into the arena.
It was the second half of a match that began with an attention-grabbing appeal to IOC members in Switzerland in June.
"We were ready in line, exactly like in the FIFA World Cup," Osorio explained. "Then President Lula as the captain of the team gave the last words, words of encouragement. And let's roll."
The captain's message? "Let's stay calm, and stick with our plan."
That plan was to persuade voters that the 31st Olympiad should come to South America for the first time.
"I honestly believe it is Brazil's time," Silva said during the presentation. "It is time to light the Olympic cauldron in a tropical country."
Brazil's emerging status as a world power predicted as the world's fifth-largest economy by 2016 demanded the country be rewarded for its hard work, and its growing importance in the changing landscape of global politics, he told Olympic voters.
"It will boost the self-esteem of Brazil, it will consolidate recent achievements, it will inspire new ones," Silva said.
The president had traveled the world in recent months telling all who would listen that Brazil needed the 2016 Games, while rivals Chicago, Madrid and Tokyo merely wanted them.
Chicago needed them so badly that its most famous resident, President Barack Obama, flew into Denmark for just a few hours to take the same stage shortly before his political ally.
Silva sat in his suite at the downtown Hotel Nimb early Friday watching live pictures of Air Force One landing soon after 8 a.m. local time.
"I saw him everywhere. I thought we had lost, we had lost because Obama came," Silva said. "I want to say that I am not the one who knocked down Obama. It wasn't Lula that won and Obama that lost, it was Rio that won."
The Rio bid team also had watched Obama's arrival from its designated room at the convention center where Silva would soon join them.
On hearing Rogge read out Rio de Janeiro's name, the tight-knit organizing team leapt to mob their captain, whose serene expression eventually emerged as the calm center of a hugging, shouting mass.
The former trade union leader did not forget Rio's pledge to the IOC that it would start work Saturday on delivering its promises.
Rio will spend $14.4 billion (euro9.9 billion) on operating costs and necessary upgrades to venues, accommodation and transport links. And to make safer a city that has a reputation for high urban crime levels.
"Our slogan is now: work, work, work," said Silva, whose presidential term ends in 15 months. "It is a historical challenge for us. We're not a second rated country, we're a first-rate country."
 Load-Date: October 3, 2009

 

End of Document
