

Suez, Gaz de France merge to form one of the world's third-largest quoted utilities
Associated Press International
September 3, 2007 Monday 3:14 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 859 words
Byline: By EMMA VANDORE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PARIS 
Body




United, Suez SA and state-owned Gaz de France will form a global energy giant that the companies claim will be better placed to compete against players such as Russia's OAO Gazprom.
The outlines of the new company, to be called GDF Suez after nuptials expected in 2008, was approved by Suez and GDF boards late Sunday after active brokering by President Nicolas Sarkozy.
With a combined market value of euro90 billion (US$123.3 billion) and revenue of euro72 billion (US$98.7 billion), it will be one of the top three listed utilities worldwide, GdF and Suez said in a joint statement. The deal includes a spin-off of Suez' environment activities, and would leave the French state as the new company's largest shareholder.
GDF Suez "will play an essential role in the consolidation of the energy market in Europe," Suez CEO Gerard Mestrallet, who will head the new group, said in joint press conference Monday.
GDF Chief Executive Jean-Francois Cirelli, who will become the new company's No. 2, spoke about "strong growth prospects" of the group, to be based in Paris.
The merger gives France a second global player in the politically sensitive energy market, along with Electricite de France, Europe's largest power generator. It comes at a time when Europe is seeking to lessen its dependence on Russian gas and protect energy security.
The new company will be the second-largest electricity producer in France, and the largest gas importer and buyer in Europe, they say.
Jostling for a bigger share of the world's oil and gas resources is increasing as energy prices soar. Research by investment bank Goldman Sachs suggests four countries Brazil, Russia, India and China, or the so-called BRIC countries are grabbing the most market share.
The BRIC's share of the industry's market value has grown from virtually nothing 15 years ago to more than one-third today.
Moscow sent alarm bells ringing across Europe in 2006 when it cut off gas supplies to Ukraine in a price war, curtailing supplies to the EU that were only reinstated after pressure from western Europe.
The French Finance Ministry noted in a statement that the deal "will boost the energy supply security, notably in gas, of France and furthermore of Europe."
Mestrallet will be chairman and chief executive of the new entity, while Cirelli will become vice chairman and president. The board will be composed of around 20 members, balanced between both companies, Mestrallet said.
Cirelli said representatives of the French state will occupy one-third of the seats on GDF Suez's board.
The new company will seek to grow its businesses outside of Europe, particularly in fast-growing markets, Mestrallet said.
GDF Suez will enjoy synergies of at least euro1 billion (US$1.37 billion) per year by 2013.
The new entity will have an EBITDA or earnings before interest taxes, depreciation and amortization of more than euro11 billion (US$15 billion), Mestrallet said.
Addressing the French consumer, Cirelli said the merger won't affect gas prices which "depend on oil prices, and not on the organizational set-up of our company."
With 35 percent of the combined entity, the French government will be the largest shareholder. Prime Minister Francois Fillon hailed the merger and said the state would "keep control" of the new group.
After earlier casting doubt on the merger, President Nicolas Sarkozy gave it new life last week. The project has been mired in political, legal and financial problems since it was arranged by the previous government 18 months ago.
Controversially for Sarkozy, who promised as finance minister in 2004 not to privatize GDF, the government will reduce its stake from 79.8 percent.
French unions oppose the merger both the original and updated versions because it requires privatizing GDF.
Shareholders of both companies must approve the deal, and GDF and Suez said they had support from the major shareholders of both groups.
European Union competition authorities who gave the green light to the original deal will also be consulted on changes from the 2006 plans as will the labor unions.
As part of the deal, Suez will spin off its environment activities in an initial public offering.
Around 65 percent of Suez Environment a major player in North American and other global water and waste markets will be returned to Suez shareholders, allowing Suez and GDF to merge on the basis of a share exchange ratio of 21 GDF shares for 22 Suez shares.
After the deal, GDF Suez will hold 35 percent of Suez Environment, with another 12 percent held by a coalition of shareholders including banking giant Credit Agricole and state-run nuclear manufacturer Areva.
In the original deal, Suez agreed to be acquired by GDF in a one-for-one stock swap, including a euro1 (US$1.36) special cash dividend paid to Suez holders if the deal went through. Since then, Suez' share value has risen steadily, turning shareholders off the merger.
Shares in GDF were down 3.17 percent at euro35.63 (US$48.57), while Suez shares fell 3.73 percent to euro40.18 (US$54.77).
Critics outside France call the merger protectionist, since it was originally designed to fend off a hostile bid for Suez from Italy's Enel SpA.
 Load-Date: September 4, 2007

 

End of Document
