

The third suspect in the theft the Picasso and Portinari paintings is arrested
Associated Press International
January 24, 2008 Thursday 9:04 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 273 words
Byline: By STAN LEHMAN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAO PAULO Brazil
Body




A former television chef the third suspect in last month's brazen theft of paintings by Pablo Picasso and Candido Portinari turned himself in on Thursday, authorities said.
Accompanied by his attorney, 25-year-old Moises Manoel de Lima Sobrinho arrived at the Sao Paulo Police Department's Organized Crime Department, where he was immediately arrested.
A spokeswoman for the Sao Paulo Public Safety Department said Lima Sobrinho is suspected of helping plan the theft. Citing departmental regulations, she declined to be identified.
Police said that Lima Sobrinho, who once briefly hosted a cooking show on a local TV channel, could provide the information needed to catch those who ordered the theft.
Picasso's "Portrait of Suzanne Bloch" and "O Lavrador de Cafe" by Portinari, an influential Brazilian artist, were stolen on Dec. 20 from the Sao Paulo Museum of Art by three men who used a crow bar and car jack to force open one of the museum's steel doors.
The framed paintings were found on Jan 8., covered in plastic and leaning against a wall in a house on the outskirts of Sao Paulo.
Two other suspects are in custody, one of them an escaped convict. Still at large are the owner of the house where the paintings were found and the person or persons who ordered the heist.
Art experts estimate the value of the Picasso at about US$50 million (euro34 million) and the Portinari at US$5-6 million (about euro4 million).
The thieves ignored other important works in the Sao Paulo museum, including Pierre-Auguste Renoir's "Bather with a Griffon Dog," Vincent Van Gogh's "L'Arlesienne" and Henri Matisse's "Plaster Torso and Bouquet of Flowers."
 Load-Date: January 25, 2008

 

End of Document
