

There is no way to get around the World Cup at the Euro 2008 draw
Associated Press International
January 27, 2006 Friday 1:41 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS NEWS
Length: 628 words
Byline: By RAF CASERT, AP Sports Writer
Dateline: MONTREUX Switzerland
Body




For Juergen Klinsmann and Sven-Goran Eriksson, Friday's draw at the 2008 European Championship was almost an out-of-body experience.
"To be honest, it is not that easy to focus on the draw, looking ahead past the World Cup," said Klinsmann, the Germany coach. "The focus right now is on the World Cup."
Playing the Czech Republic and Slovakia could be even irrelevant if Germany's World Cup campaign is less than sterling.
Klinsmann's contract runs through this year's World Cup, and like many of his colleagues at the Euro 2008 draw, his future beyond that is uncertain.
While Klinsmann might stay, Eriksson has already decided he will step down no matter what happens to England in Germany. So there was no reason to make England's qualifying job look any tougher than it was after being drawn with Croatia, Russia and Israel in Group E.
"There are groups which are much more difficult than the England group so I think it's very good," Eriksson said, even though he might not necessarily be involved in the preparations. "If they want me in the meetings talking about the fixture list then I will give my opinion."
Most of the work will be done by Eriksson's unnamed replacement. Australia coach Guus Hiddink and Portugal coach Luiz Felipe Scolari are rumored possibilities.
"England coach is a very interesting job but so is coaching Portugal," said Scolari, the Brazilian who led Portugal to the 2004 final against Greece.
France coach Raymond Domenech also didn't want to have anything to do with Euro 2008 right now.
"For the moment I don't want to know anything. My focus is on the World Cup," Domenech said.
Sweden coach Lars Lagerback, however, insisted that the World Cup could have an immediate impact on the European competition, especially if a country goes far in the World Cup. The first Euro 2008 qualifying matches are barely two months after the World Cup final.
"They will have some smaller problems to restart the competition. Perhaps it is more a question of mental fatigue," Lagerback said.
Friday's draw on the shores of Lake Geneva sought to take away the attention of the World Cup for a fleeting moment, but it proved impossible.
Europe is sending 14 countries to the World Cup, by far the most of any continent, and debate has long been raging which tournament is tougher to win the European Championship or the World Cup.
Even though he won the World Cup with Brazil in 2002, Scolari put the European showcase ahead of everything else.
"The level of the Euro is higher than the level of the World Cup," Scolari said.
Some of his colleagues disagreed, arguing the universality of the World Cup made the difference.
"To say a tournament is better without Brazil, Argentina or South Korea is going a bit far," France coach Raymond Domenech said.
"Both tournaments have a high standard. It would be wrong to compare them," Klinsmann said. "You have the same mindset. You want to do well in both. ... You don't want to make a bad impression, no matter what."
Fifty European countries will vie for 14 places in the finals along with co-hosts Switzerland and Austria.
Greece surprisingly won the 2004 title but failed to maintain its momentum and could not reach the World Cup finals. Despite his failure to get to Germany, coach Otto Rehhagel saw his contract extended until after qualifying for the tournament in Switzerland and Austria.
Rehhagel found out the hard way that success breeds adversity. Nowadays, everyone wants to beat the reigning European champion.
"It is as in real life. If you are successful then you have to live with it," Rehhagel said.
Despite their uncertain future, it is important for coaches to be at the draw because it will start off negotiations between teams who are in the same group on who will play where and when over the next two years.
 Load-Date: January 28, 2006

 

End of Document
