

Thousands of Venezuelans protest TV station's removal from the air
Associated Press International
June 6, 2007 Wednesday 6:17 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 385 words
Byline: By FABIOLA SANCHEZ, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARACAS Venezuela
Body




Thousands of Venezuelans filled the streets Wednesday to protest a decision by President Hugo Chavez that forced an opposition-aligned TV channel off the air.
The protesters, mostly university students, chanted "We want freedom!" as they marched to the attorney general's office in the capital. Some flew the Venezuelan flag upside down as a symbol of protest while hundreds of riot police and National Guard troops watched.
"We've decided to stay in the streets until our rights are respected," said Cesar Felizzola, a 22-year-old university student. "We're fighting for freedom to be respected."
Chavez says he will not go back on his refusal to renew the license of Radio Caracas Television, which he accused of a key role in backing a short-lived 2002 coup against him. He says the student protesters are being manipulated by his foes and are standing up for Washington, which has condemned Venezuela for the move.
RCTV, the country's oldest and most-watched private channel, went off the air May 27. Its license was turned over to a state-funded public channel.
Some of RCTV's programs are still making their way to viewers on the Internet or by satellite to stations abroad. Other shows reach no audience at all, but actors, cameramen and sound engineers continue to produce them in hopes they may once again be seen, if only by cable.
Surveys since May 14 have shown that 78 to 83 percent of the public disagrees with the removal of RCTV, said Oscar Schemel, president of Caracas-based pollster Hinterlaces.
The results are based on phone interviews with about 900 people in 15 states using a random sample of fixed-line and cellular numbers, Schemel said. The poll, commissioned by private banks, has a margin of error of about 5 percentage points, he said.
Government officials have questioned the financing and methods of some recent polls, saying they appear to be propaganda issued by Chavez opponents. But the government has not provided alternative figures recently.
RCTV talk show host Miguel Angel Rodriguez told reporters in Peru that the government is trying to "annihilate any kind of criticism."
"As a journalist, I'm very worried about the possibility that this will unleash a wave of repression," he said, "because instead of rectifying, (Chavez) is turning his back on what the people are telling him."
 Load-Date: June 7, 2007

 

End of Document
