

Tin leads rebound in base metals prices, while gold slips before the close
Associated Press International
August 20, 2007 Monday 8:52 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 802 words
Byline: By LAUREN VILLAGRAN, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




Industrial metals regained strength Monday, adding to a recovery that started Friday after a turbulent week in the financial and commodities markets.
Other commodities trended lower, with gold and silver falling slightly and energy futures down as a major hurricane steered away from U.S. oil operations along the Gulf Coast. Agriculture futures finished mixed.
The commodities markets have been battered in recent days as the shrinking availability of credit led investors to cash out of highly liquid markets like copper and oil. On Friday, the Federal Reserve's decision to lower by a half percentage point its discount rate, or the interest it charges on its loans to banks, to 5.75 percent encouraged a belief that problems in the credit market could be contained and may not hurt economic growth or curb demand for the raw materials necessary to sustain that expansion.
Industrial metals rose Monday on the London Metal Exchange, with tin leading the recovery from the steep declines of early last week. UBS metals analysts suggested in a note that "the complex will remain a hostage to how asset and credit markets behave this week."
Tin, nickel and lead all made gains on the back of falling inventories held by the LME, which are seen as an indicator of world supply levels. Copper prices also edged higher, although inventories were up slightly and labor negotiations at copper mines in Latin America were ongoing.
On the New York Mercantile Exchange, September copper rose 1.3 cents to settle at $3.1595 a pound.
Gold prices closed lower after a choppy session that saw the metal spike after the open of the U.S. stock market when equities climbed, but scale back its early gains as major stock indexes began to waver.
Wall Street on Monday appeared unconvinced that the Fed's discount rate cut would be enough to assuage investor uncertainty about the extent of credit market troubles. Before the close of the major commodities exchanges, the major stock indexes had pulled back, while Treasury prices rose as investors sought the stable gains of government bonds.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 42.27, or 0.32 percent, at 13,121.35 after trading erratically throughout the day.
Jon Nadler of Kitco Bullion Dealers said in a note that if the Fed's gesture on Friday "will be deemed to be too little too late," speculators may well hold out for a cut in the Federal funds rate "and their money may not be thrown at stocks or commodities just yet."
Investors will likely remain on edge leading up to the central bank's regularly scheduled meeting on Sept. 18, when officials will decide whether to raise, lower or leave steady the benchmark interest rate.
The Fed has repeatedly said inflation is its primary concern a reason to keep rates steady or move them higher but the discount rate cut last week was coupled with a statement indicating that credit market turmoil was also of concern and suggesting the bank could do more to stimulate business growth. The Fed's key rate has been stagnant at 5.25 percent for more than a year.
Nymex gold for December delivery slipped 30 cents to settle at $666.50 an ounce, while September silver ended down 6.5 cents at $11.735 an ounce.
Meanwhile, energy prices sagged as powerful Hurricane Dean hurled its way toward Mexico's Gulf Coast, out of the way of major U.S. oil and natural gas installations.
The Category 4 storm, swirling 150-mile-per-hour winds over the Caribbean, was forecast by AccuWeather.com to cross over Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula early Tuesday and continue west. Last week, prospects that the developing storm could threaten the U.S. Gulf Coast led traders to push oil prices up over $73 a barrel.
But for the storm's short-term jolt, the energy market hasn't been spared the investment fund liquidation that other commodities have seen as tightening credit in some corners forces investors to cash in holdings elsewhere. Long positions or bets on rising prices held by funds and other noncommercial participants on oil and petroleum products plummeted 17 percent in the week ended Aug. 14, according to the latest data from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
Light, sweet crude for September delivery fell 86 cents to settle at $71.12 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange. Gasoline futures lost 10.23 cents to $1.9365 a gallon.
In Chicago, agriculture prices ended mixed after bouncing in a narrow range.
"We should expect plenty of volatility in all markets as traders try to get their arms around the evaluation of credit risks and the yield prospects of our crops," said John Roach of Roach Ag. Marketing in a report.
December corn gained 3 cents to close at $3.4875 a bushel on the Chicago Board of Trade. December wheat rose 2.5 cents to finish at $6.91 a bushel, while November soybeans closed a half-cent lower at $8.2725 a bushel.
 Load-Date: August 21, 2007

 

End of Document
