

Treasury secretary Paulson says Japan allows the yen's value to be set by markets
Associated Press International
February 6, 2007 Tuesday 9:52 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 396 words
Byline: By MARTIN CRUTSINGER, AP Economics Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson said Tuesday he was not concerned about the lows being set by the Japanese currency against the U.S. dollar because those values are being set in open markets.
Paulson was pressed on the issue by Rep. Sander Levin during a hearing of the House Ways and Means Committee. Levin questioned why the U.S. administration was not doing more to encourage the Japanese government to halt the slide in the yen against the dollar.
American automakers believe that decline has given their Japanese competitors a tremendous price advantage.
Levin said European auto companies were complaining about the yen's decline against their currencies. He suggested that Paulson should join forces with European finance ministers to lobby Japanese officials on the issue when the countries meet this weekend for the Group of Seven finance ministers meeting in Essen, Germany.
Paulson, however, said the Japanese government has not intervened to influence the value of its currency since 2004.
"This is a currency that is trading on a competitive, open market place," Paulson told Levin. "Some people may not like where it is trading, but it is my job to fight for a free and open market."
Paulson noted that the administration has been encouraging China to allow its currency, the yuan, to be set by market forces. American manufacturers contend the Chinese government is unfairly keeping the yuan undervalued against the dollar by as much as 40 percent to give Chinese companies a price advantage over U.S. firms.
The meeting of finance ministers and central bank presidents of the Group of Seven rich industrial nations the United States, Japan, Germany, France, Britain, Italy and Canada will begin with a dinner Friday and conclude with the release of a joint statement on Saturday after the second day of talks.
The G-7 countries will be joined at the dinner by finance officials from Russia, China, India, Brazil, South Africa and Mexico.
Officials said a review of the global economy, discussions of reforms to the International Monetary Fund and currency rates will be among the topics discussed.
The Bush administration has gotten support over the past three years from the other G-7 countries in its campaign to get China to move more quickly to allow its currency to rise in value against the dollar as America's trade deficit with China has soared to record levels.
 Load-Date: February 7, 2007

 

End of Document
