

U.N. Security Council puts Myanmar on the agenda as U.S. moves to increase pressure on military dictatorship
Associated Press International
September 15, 2006 Friday 7:48 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 524 words
Byline: By KIM GAMEL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS 
Body




The U.N. Security Council put Myanmar on its agenda Friday in what the U.S. said was a "major step forward" in its bid to increase on pressure the country's military dictatorship, accused of widespread human rights abuses and political repression.
The council voted 10-4 to adopt the measure, a formality that is vital to any future action against the country, which has drawn international condemnation for imprisoning hundreds of political opponents, including pro-democracy leader Aung San Suu Kyi.
China led Russia, Qatar and Congo in opposing the move, saying Myanmar, which also is known as Burma, has made strides in solving its own problems and does not pose a threat to international security the requirement for council consideration.
Tanzania abstained, while the United States, Britain, France, Argentina, Denmark, Greece, Japan, Ghana, Peru and Slovakia voted in favor of the decision.
"This a major step forward for President Bush's effort to bring to the attention of the international community the situation inside Burma and its effects in its region and around the world," U.S. Ambassador John Bolton said.
He also cited a refugee crisis and problems with drug smuggling and HIV/AIDS in his contention that Myanmar threatens to destabilize the region and therefore poses a "threat to international peace and security."
"It's fundamentally important that the regime in Burma recognize that it's the other member government of the U.N., other nations in the world, that are concerned about their practices," he told reporters after the vote.
The council also requested a formal briefing by U.N. envoy Ibrahim Gambari, who was allowed to visit Myanmar earlier this year and meet with Suu Kyi.
The United States has long sought to get Myanmar formally onto the council agenda to bring more scrutiny to its government and the plight of the South Asian nation's people.
The council cannot take up issues that are not on its agenda, a procedural rule that allows nations to block discussions of issues and nations they do not want to draw attention to. Conversely, once an item has been formally placed on the council's agenda, it can be repeatedly brought up by any nation that requests it.
Myanmar's military junta took power in 1988 after crushing a pro-democracy movement. In 1990, it refused to hand over power when Suu Kyi's political party won a landslide victory in general elections.
Suu Kyi, a Nobel Peace Prize winner, has spent nearly 11 of the last 17 years in detention, mostly under house arrest, despite worldwide calls for her freedom along with hundreds of other political prisoners in the country.
China's U.N. Ambassador Wang Guangya, however, said it was "preposterous" to put a country on the Security Council's agenda because of issues such as human rights, refugees, drugs and AIDS that he said do not affect regional security.
"To force the Security Council intervention is not only inappropriate but will further complicate the situation," he said.
China and Russia have business ties with Myanmar, and have competed with one another for more trade deals there. Human rights groups report that China sells weapons to Myanmar.
 Load-Date: September 16, 2006

 

End of Document
