

U.S. has not issued visas to three Iranians including adviser to the president, U.N. diplomat said
Associated Press International
September 19, 2006 Tuesday 4:53 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 420 words
Byline: By EDITH M. LEDERER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS 
Body




The United States has not issued visas to a senior adviser to Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad and two deputy foreign ministers, a U.N. diplomat said.
The three Iranians applied for visas at the same time as the president, about three weeks ago, the diplomat said Monday, speaking on condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the issue.
Ahmadinejad arrived in New York from Caracas, Venezuela, on Monday and will address the U.N. General Assembly's ministerial meeting on Tuesday evening, about eight hours after U.S. President George W. Bush speaks to the 192-nation world body.
U.S. State Department deputy spokesman Tom Casey was asked Monday if Ahmadinejad's visa had been issued, and if anybody in his entourage had their visa denied.
"My understanding is that his visa has been issued," Casey said. "To the best of my knowledge, no one in his party has had their visa denied."
"I do understand there were some late applications that were put in as recently as today. And clearly we will have to work through those. There is a procedure that we have to go through to comply with U.S. law in terms of approving visas for Iranians as well as for nationals of other countries of which we don't have diplomatic relations," Casey said.
But Casey said he believes "everything's moving forward in accordance with our obligations" under an agreement with the United Nations, which requires the U.S. government to grant visas to government officials and diplomats from U.N. member states attending U.N. meetings.
The U.N. diplomat said Iran's U.N. Mission was still hoping for visas for the three government officials and had been given no explanation for the delay.
U.S. Ambassador John Bolton said one Iranian who has a visa has not arrived yet top nuclear negotiator Ali Larijani who was expected to meet in New York with the European Union's foreign policy chief Javier Solana.
Larijani and Solana have been discussing a package of incentives offered to Iran by the West if it suspends uranium enrichment, as demanded by the U.N. Security Council.
If the talks go well, European diplomats are considering a meeting with Iran on the sidelines of the U.N. General Assembly's annual ministerial meeting which starts Tuesday, in hopes of de-escalating the standoff over Tehran's nuclear program.
"The discussions with Iran appear to have come to a stop in the sense that Mr. Larijani, whom we expected in New York, is not here," Bolton told reporters. "He has a visa, and as of right now I am informed that he is not here."
 Load-Date: September 20, 2006

 

End of Document
