

U.S. decides to avoid potentially losing fight for a seat on the new U.N. Human Rights Council
Associated Press International
April 7, 2006 Friday 6:20 AM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 901 words
Byline: By EDITH M. LEDERER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS 
Body




The United States has decided to avoid a potentially losing fight for a seat on the new U.N. Human Rights Council this year, but 42 countries have announced their candidacy, including Cuba and Iran.
The four other veto-wielding permanent members of the U.N. Security Council Russia, China, Britain and France are among those seeking seats on the 47-nation council.
But State Department spokesman Sean McCormack said Thursday the United States would not be a candidate in the May 9 election though it will support and finance the new council, and will likely seek a seat next year.
The United States was virtually alone in voting against the establishment of the council to replace the highly politicized and often criticized Human Rights Commission, arguing that the new body was only marginally better and wouldn't prevent rights-abusing countries from sitting on the council.
The 53-member commission was discredited in recent years because some countries with terrible human rights records used their membership to protect one another from condemnation. Commission members in recent years included Sudan, Libya, Zimbabwe and Cuba.
A key sticking point during the negotiations was U.S. insistence that members be elected by two-thirds of the 191-nation General Assembly a step aimed at keeping out rights abusers. The U.S. effort failed, and members of the new council must be elected only by an absolute majority 96 member states.
U.S. Ambassador John Bolton said the United States concluded that since the council has "fundamental flaws" Washington would skip this year's election and concentrate on other priorities including the overhaul of U.N. management. But he indicated that the United States was also concerned about whether it could win a contested election.
President George W. Bush's administration has been strongly criticized in many countries for invading Iraq and for the U.S. treatment of prisoners at Guantanamo Bay and at Abu Ghraib prison in Baghdad.
During a U.S. National Security Council meeting earlier this week, U.S. officials had raised the possibility of U.S. defeat, said one person who was at the meeting and spoke on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak about the closed session.
Speaking to reporters on Thursday, Bolton recalled the U.S. defeat for a seat on the Human Rights Commission in a contested election in 2001 and said the United States would face another contested election if it ran this year.
"I think that a decision by us to run had to be a decision that we were going to win, and that would mean either defeating other Western candidates or getting some of the rest of them to withdraw," Bolton said. "I think our leverage this year in terms of trying to get the right kind of council, flawed as we think it is, is greater by not running ... but considering it next year."
Some human rights groups and members of the U.S. Congress were dismayed at the U.S. decision.
Tom Lantos, the ranking Democrat on the House International Relations Committee, called it "a major retrenchment in America's long struggle to advance the cause of human rights around the world."
Kenneth Roth, executive director of Human Rights Watch, said "it's unfortunate that the Bush administration's disturbing human rights record means that the United States would hardly have been a shoe-in for election to the council. Today's decision not to run seems like an effort to make a virtue of necessity."
The council was endorsed by key human rights groups, a dozen Nobel Peace Prize winners including former U.S. President Jimmy Carter, and 170 countries who voted "yes" on the resolution creating it including a surprise endorsement from Cuba.
Under the rules for the new council, any U.N. member can announce its candidacy any time until the vote is completed. Countries can serve a maximum of two three-year terms and must leave the council before running again.
To ensure global representation, Africa and Asia would have 13 seats each; Latin America and the Caribbean eight seats; Western nations, seven seats; and Eastern Europe, six seats.
There are already eight candidates for the seven Western seats where the United States would have to run Britain, Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Portugal and Switzerland.
Nine countries are seeking the eight Latin American and Caribbean seats Argentina, Brazil, Cuba, Guatemala, Mexico, Nicaragua, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela.
In a statement appealing for support for its candidacy, Cuba said its people have made "tremendous achievements" in human rights, most importantly in exercising the right of self-determination against "the unilateral policy of hostility, aggression and blockade imposed on it by the superpower."
So far, there are three African candidates Algeria, Mauritius, and Morocco. The nine Asian candidates to date are Bangladesh, Bahrain, China, India, Iran, Jordan, Pakistan, South Korea and Sri Lanka. There are 13 candidates for the six East European seats Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, the Czech Republic, Georgia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Russia, Slovenia and Ukraine.
McCormack said that "since the credibility of the council depends on its membership, the United States will actively campaign on behalf of candidates genuinely committed to the promotion and protection of human rights and ... will also actively campaign against states that systematically abuse human rights."
 Load-Date: April 8, 2006

 

End of Document
