

UN condemns attacks in the Serbian capital, Belgrade
Associated Press International
February 22, 2008 Friday 12:32 AM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 388 words
Byline: By JOHN HEILPRIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS 
Body




The U.N. Security Council has strongly condemned the attacks by protesters on embassies in the Serbian capital, saying host governments like Belgrade must honor their obligation to protect diplomatic premises.
The council on Thursday unanimously condemned "in the strongest terms the mob attacks against embassies in Belgrade" and said that it welcomed "the steps taken by the Serbian authorities to restore order and protect diplomatic property and personnel, according to a statement read by the current council president, Panama's U.N. Ambassador Ricardo Arias.
"The members of the Security Council recall the fundamental principle of the inviolability of diplomatic missions and the obligations of host governments, including under the 1961 Vienna Convention on diplomatic relations, to take all appropriate steps to protect embassy premises," he said on behalf of the council.
An earlier draft that Russia, Serbia's traditional ally, had sought included language that would have praised Serbia for the protection it was providing before the attacks.
U.S. Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad said before the council meeting that he was "outraged" at Thursday's attack on the U.S. Embassy, where masked men set fire to an office, sending flames shooting up the side of the building. After the fire was put out, a charred body was found in the U.S. Embassy. Officials said the victim appeared to have been a protester.
The neighboring Croatian Embassy also was targeted by the same group of protesters and smaller groups attacked police posts outside the Turkish and British embassies in another part of the city but were beaten back.
The attacks came while at least 150,000 people rallied in Belgrade to protest Kosovo's bid to create its own state. Serbians waved flags, burned U.S. flags and looted stores denouncing Kosovo's ethnic Albanian majority and its move to secede from Serbia's southernmost province, taking with it an area that is at the heart of Serbian culture.
John Sawers, Britain's U.N. ambassador, said after the meeting the council had a full discussion on the violence in Belgrade and "we gather order has now been restored."
U.S. President George W. Bush's spokeswoman, Dana Perino, strongly criticized Serbia's government and said the U.S. embassy was attacked by "thugs" whom Serbian police had not done enough to stop.
 Load-Date: February 22, 2008

 

End of Document
