

UN responds to record number of emergencies in the Americas in 2007
Associated Press International
December 26, 2007 Wednesday 8:09 PM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 441 words
Byline: By EDITH M. LEDERER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS 
Body




The United Nations sent a record number of disaster assessment teams to emergencies in the Americas in 2007, offering a potential glimpse at the future of climate change, U.N. humanitarian officials said Wednesday.
Nine of the 14 teams dispatched this year by the U.N. went to Central and South America, the highest number in history, including the first ever to Mexico, according to the U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, known as OCHA.
Previously, the highest number of missions to the Americas was eight, after Hurricanes Mitch and Georges in 1998, OCHA said.
This year, U.N. teams were sent to Mexico, Uruguay and Bolivia twice to deal with severe floods. Teams were also dispatched to the Dominican Republic following Tropical Storm Noel, Honduras after Hurricane Felix, Belize and Jamaica after Hurricane Dean, and Peru following an earthquake in August, OCHA said.
The five other U.N. teams went to Madagascar, Pakistan, and Ghana in response to floods, the Solomon Islands following an earthquake and tsunami in April, and Laos to help the country's disaster preparedness efforts, OCHA said.
"Fourteen missions in one year is a higher number than usual for the emergency teams," OCHA said in a statement. "Moreover, 10 out of the 14 missions, or 70 percent of the total, were in response to hurricanes and floods possibly a glimpse of the shape of things to come given the reality of climate change."
The U.N. Disaster Assessment and Coordination system, which is managed by OCHA, is designed to support the 192 U.N. member states in coordinating the initial response to disasters. It also helps countries strengthen their ability to respond to national and regional disasters.
According to OCHA, since the U.N. Disaster Assessment and Coordination system was established in 1993, teams have carried out 167 missions.
The largest number were in late 2004 and early 2005 in response to the tsunami and earthquake on Dec. 26, 2004 that killed around 230,000 people in 12 Indian Ocean nations. The second largest deployment was in October 2005 following the earthquake in Pakistan, OCHA said.
"The 160 members of the United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination system collectively possess literally thousands of years of experience in managing the response to disasters of all kinds and in all parts of the world," said Arjun Katoch of OCHA, who is in charge of the system.
"With their duffel bags perpetually packed, and their travel papers ever ready, these are the men and women who leave their homes within hours of a tragedy to respond to needs of their fellow human beings around the globe," he said in a statement.
 Load-Date: December 27, 2007

 

End of Document
