

UN treaty to protect the rights of the world's disabled to take effect
Associated Press International
April 4, 2008 Friday 8:48 PM GMT

 Copyright 2008 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 539 words
Byline: By JOHN HEILPRIN, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS 
Body




The first human rights treaty of the 21st century, creating an international bill of rights for the world's 650 million people with disabilities, has won enough signatures to go into effect.
With Ecuador's ratification on Friday, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities is now set to enter into force on May 3. The treaty had needed 20 countries to ratify it for that to happen; Jordan, Tunisia and Ecuador also ratified it earlier this week.
Louise Arbour, the U.N.'s high commissioner for human rights in Geneva, Switzerland, said the legally binding treaty "fills an important gap in international human rights legislation."
More than 100 other nations also have signed the treaty, agreeing to follow its requirements, but have not ratified it. The United States and some other nations will not sign it because they say that would dilute the strength of their own laws.
"While we certainly recognize that other states will consider the Convention a useful tool in developing their own national laws, the U.S. has had a strong commitment to the rights of persons with disabilities, as evident in the 1991 passage of the historic Americans with Disabilities Act, granting equal access and protection to all persons with disabilities," said Richard Grenell, spokesman for the U.S. Mission to the United Nations.
The treaty's purpose is to encourage the integration of physically and mentally disabled people into the daily lives of communities, rather than excluding them from education, jobs, and everyday life.
The treaty requires countries that sign onto it to guarantee freedom from exploitation and abuse for the disabled, and to protect rights they already have such as voting for the blind and wheelchair-accessible buildings.
It also guarantees that the disabled have the inherent right to life on an equal basis with the able-bodied, and requires countries to guarantee equal legal protection and to prohibit discrimination on the basis of disability.
Countries must also ensure the equal right of the disabled to own and inherit property, to control their financial affairs, and to privacy over their personal lives.
"It aims to promote respect for their inherent dignity," said Sha Zukang, the U.N.'s undersecretary-general for economic and social affairs.
About 10 percent of the world's population lives with a disability, and the number is increasing with population growth. They constitute the world's largest minority, and 80 percent live in developing countries, many in poverty, according to the U.N. Development Program.
The campaign for the treaty's adoption was led by disability rights activists and the governments of New Zealand, Ecuador and Mexico.
"Out of 30 million people, Ecuador has 1.6 million disabled people. Therefore, we believe it's a state responsibility to insure their rights," said Ecuador's U.N. Ambassador Maria Fernanda Espinosa. "I think it's not a coincidence that our vice president is a disabled person."
The other 19 countries that have ratified the treaty are: Bangladesh, Croatia, Cuba, El Salvador, Gabon, Guinea, Hungary, India, Jamaica, Jordan, Mexico, Namibia, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru, San Marino, South Africa, Spain and Tunisia.
On the Net:
UN: http://www.un.org/disabilities/
 Load-Date: April 5, 2008

 

End of Document
