

Varying visions of the left emerge at World Social Forum in Venezuela
Associated Press International
January 28, 2006 Saturday 2:42 PM GMT

 Copyright 2006 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 760 words
Byline: By JORGE RUEDA, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARACAS Venezuela
Body




Notable differences have emerged among Latin American leftists meeting at the World Social Forum, pointing to a region with varying visions of what the left should stand for and how best to help the poor.
While many activists said they agree with Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez that Latin America needs a shift away from capitalism, others argued free-market approaches can be harnessed to help lift millions out of poverty. Still others urged a more radical turn toward socialism.
"What it means to be of the left is in full debate in Latin America, and there is no consensus," said Venezuelan historian Margarita Lopez Maya, one of many speakers at the six-day forum, which ends Sunday.
Some of the differences were on display as about 1,000 marchers paraded through Caracas Friday calling attention to a variety of causes, from land reform to anti-globalization campaigns.
The crowd was dominated by Chavez supporters, but one small group calling itself Radical Critics held a sign accusing Chavez and other leaders of not taking a hard-enough stance against corporate capitalism.
Chavez has used a windfall in oil profits to funnel millions of dollars into programs for the poor while extending preferential oil deals to countries from China to Argentina in an effort to line up alternative trade partners to the United States, the No. 1 buyer of Venezuelan oil.
Some radical leftists argue Chavez's government should stop working with transnational oil companies altogether.
"Real social fighters like us cannot be indifferent," said Maria Aparecida Barros, a 21-year-old Brazilian.
Yorlys Alvarez, a Venezuelan watching from the sidewalk, was visibly irritated by that message. "It's wrong for them to come here and talk badly about my president. If they don't like Chavez, they should go home."
A number of seminars during the six-day World Social Forum focused on diversity within the Latin American left. Some 70,000 people were signed up, including participants, speakers and volunteers from Venezuela and abroad, organizer Moises Lares said.
Many strongly agreed in rejecting "neoliberal" economic policy and the American plan for a Free Trade Area of the Americas. But while some discussed cooperatives and Soviet-style communism, others suggested the free market can be fair if guided by a social conscience.
Chavez, for his part, called capitalism a global scourge on Friday and urged activists to do "battle" against U.S. imperialism. His message drew thundering applause, but some said they were more concerned about other issues.
"The forum definitely has a pro-Chavez spin, and I think some of the issues, like women's rights, homosexuality and domestic violence haven't received enough focus," said Ibrivria Fried, an 18-year-old student from the University of Vermont in the U.S. "A lot of people at the forum are careful about how they speak about Chavez because it's being hosted here."
The gathering, timed to coincide with the market-friendly World Economic Forum in Switzerland, has featured hundreds of panel discussions on subjects including poverty, U.S. imperialism, Marxism and racism.
"It's great to hear the different points of view," said Jose Mejias, 22, a Quechua Indian from Bolivia. "After all the debates, I still don't know whether there is one left, or two lefts or more. The only thing I know is there are many people concerned and working to change the world."
The forum comes as leftist leaders appear on the rise in Latin America, capitalizing on disillusionment with old political classes seen as corrupt and incompetent. However, several intellectuals noted the rise to power by leaders such as Chavez, Bolivia's Evo Morales and Chile's Michelle Bachelet came in response to vastly different factors.
The socialist Bachelet, for instance, was once a political prisoner under former dictator Augusto Pinochet and will soon assume leadership of a government with policies much more centrist than those of Chavez or Cuba's Fidel Castro.
"She symbolizes forgiveness" between the left and the right, said Luis Abendano, 35, a Chilean activist.
He said Bachelet now "has the job of guiding the destiny of a country that has the free market as its main engine of prosperity."
Chavez, in contrast, called for resistance against U.S. free trade schemes and said revolutionary changes are needed to help the poor.
Among the activists, differences also appeared in how they chose to spend their time. Hundreds of young people camped out in parks, sharing food and music, while some older, generally wealthier visitors dined on sushi at the Hilton.
 Load-Date: January 29, 2006

 

End of Document
