

Venezuelan TV channel turns to the Web while thousands protest
Associated Press International
June 2, 2007 Saturday 3:00 AM GMT

 Copyright 2007 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 412 words
Byline: By IAN JAMES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CARACAS Venezuela
Body




Forced off the air by President Hugo Chavez, an opposition-aligned Venezuelan TV channel has begun taking its news shows to popular video-sharing Web site YouTube.
Since it went off the airwaves Sunday, Radio Caracas Television has kept taping programs and is uploading its news show "The Observer" each day to YouTube, RCTV vice president Maribel Morales said Friday. YouTube listed the program as its most-subscribed feed of the week.
In one segment Thursday, announcer Isnardo Bravo pledged that "RCTV will continue to keep people informed in defense of free speech."
Chavez refused to renew the channel's license, accusing it of inciting a failed coup in 2002 and violating various broadcast laws. The decision has been condemned by several foreign governments, press freedom groups and international organizations.
On Friday U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice urged Venezuela to return the station to the air and "cease these attacks on the free press."
Meanwhile thousands of Venezuelan university students returned to the streets to protest what they call an abuse of power by Chavez, facing off with riot police in the streets while waving flags, blowing whistles and chanting, "We are students, not coup-plotters!"
Jonas Calaforra, 27, said the protesters wanted to send the message that "democracy is not a dictatorship of the majority," and that although Chavez won elections in December, "he has to govern for 100 percent" of Venezuelans.
Elsewhere in the capital, police kept students from entering a pro-Chavez slum where hundreds of his supporters rallied in a plaza.
Many of the pro-Chavez demonstrators accused the largely middle-class and wealthier students of trying to provoke conflict.
"What they want is to mount a coup d'etat because they have money and think that they have privileges," said 35-year-old Jose Gregorio Marquez. "They have to accept that Venezuela has changed."
Foreign Minister Nicolas Maduro called the protesters arrogant "students of the Venezuelan upper class," in comments broadcast by state televsion. The protests are being manipulated by "politicians, the owners of private television channels who have always backed coups, the CIA and other sectors," he said.
During a failed 2002 coup against Chavez, RCTV and other private channels broadcast opposition calls for protests to overthrow Chavez while giving scant coverage to his return to power amid protests by his supporters.
On the Net:
http://www.youtube.com/elobservadorenlinea
 Load-Date: June 2, 2007

 

End of Document
